Take Good Care of
This Textbook
This textbook is the property of your school.
Take good care not to damage or lose it.
Here are 10 ideas to help take care of the book:
1.  Cover the book with protective material, such as plastic, old
newspapers or magazines.
2.  Always keep the book in a clean dry place.
3.  Be sure your hands are clean when you use the book.
4.  Do not write on the cover or inside pages.
5.  Use a piece of paper or cardboard as a bookmark.
6.  Never tear or cut out any pictures or pages.
7.  Repair any torn pages with paste or tape.
8.  Pack the book carefully when you place it in your school bag.
9.  Handle the book with care when passing it to another person.
10.  When using a new book for the first time, lay it on its back. Open
only a few pages at a time. Press lightly along the bound edge as
you turn the pages. This will keep the cover in good condition.
CHEMISTRY
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
GRADE 9
Authors, Editors and Reviewers:
J.L. Sharma (Ph.D.)
Nell Angelo (M.A.)
Stella Johnson (B.Sc.)
Solomon Tekleyohannes (B.Sc.)
Taye Hirpassa (B.Sc., M.A.)
Merid Tessema (Ph.D.)
Evaluators:
Nega Gichile
Mahtot Abera
Solomon Haileyesus
FEDERAL DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF ETHIOPIA
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION
Unit1
Unit 2
Unit 3
Page
Structure of the Atom  ............  1
1.1  Atomic Theory  ...........................................  3
1.2  Discoveries of the Fundamental Subatomic
Particles and the Atomic Nucleus ...............  6
1.3  Composition of an Atom and the Isotopes  12
1.4  The Atomic Models ................................... 21
Check List ......................................... 31
Unit Summary .................................. 31
Review Exercise ............................... 33
Periodic Classification
of the Elements ............ 35
2.1  Introduction  ............................................... 36
2.2  The Modern Periodic Table  ...................... 38
2.3  Periodic Properties in the Periodic Table  .. 47
2.4  Advantages of Periodic Classification  ...... 59
Check List ......................................... 61
Unit Summary .................................. 62
Review Exercise ............................... 62
Chemical Bonding and
Intermolecular Forces ... 65
3.1  Chemical Bonding  ..................................... 67
3.2  Ionic Bonding  ............................................ 69
3.3  Covalent Bonding  ..................................... 77
3.4  Metallic Bonding  ....................................... 87
3.5  Intermolecular Forces ................................ 89
Check List ......................................... 92
Unit Summary .................................. 92
Review Exercise ............................... 93
III
IV                                 Content
IV
Unit 4
Unit 5
Chemical Reaction and
Stoichiometery  ............ 95
4.1  Introduction  ............................................... 96
4.2  Fundamental Laws of Chemical
Reactions  ................................................... 97
4.3  Chemical Equations  ................................. 102
4.4  Energy Changes in Chemical Reactions  .. 108
4.5  Types of Chemical Reactions  .................. 113
4.6  Stoichiometery  ......................................... 123
4.7  Oxidation and Reduction Reactions  ......... 136
4.8  Rate of Chemical Reaction and Chemical
Equilibrium  .............................................. 144
Check List ........................................ 160
Unit Summary ................................. 160
Review Exercise .............................. 161
Physical States of
Matter  ........................ 163
5.1  Introduction  .............................................. 165
5.2  Kinetic Theory and Properties of Matter  . 166
5.3  The Gaseous State  .................................... 169
5.4  The Liquid State  ....................................... 189
5.5  The Solid State .......................................... 195
Check List ........................................ 198
Unit Summary ................................. 199
Review Exercise .............................. 200
T
I
N
1U
Structure of the Atom
Bohr’s Model
Unit Outcomes
After completing this unit, you will be able to:
E comprehend Dalton’s atomic theory and modern atomic theory;
E understand the discovery of the electron and the nucleus;
E know the terms like atomic number, mass number, atomic mass, isotope, energy
level, valence electrons, and electron configuration;
E understand the Dalton, Thomson, Rutherford, Bohr and the quantum mechanical
atomic models;
E develop skills in:
–
–
determining the number of protons, electrons, and neutrons of atoms from
atomic numbers and mass numbers,
calculating the atomic masses of elements that have isotopes,
– writing the ground-state electron configurations of atoms using sub-energy
levels and drawing diagrammatic representations of atoms; and
E demonstrate scientific inquiry skills: observing, comparing and contrasting,
communicating, asking questions, and applying concepts.
MAIN CONTENTS
1.1 Atomic theory
1.2 Discoveries of the fundamental subatomic particles and the atomic nucleus
1.3 Composition of an atom and the isotopes
1.4 The atomic models
–Unit Summary
–Review Exercise
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Start-up Activity
Scientists have been able to gather information about atoms without actually seeing
them. Perform the following activity to get an idea about the structure of the atom.
Take an onion. It looks solid. Peel off a layer, and you will find another layer
underneath. Layer after layer surfaces as the onion is peeled off. Keep on peeling
to its core.
Analysis
1. How do you compare this with the atomic model?
2. What do the layers represent in the atomic model?
3. What does the core represent in the atom?
Two thousand years ago, ancient Greek philosophers developed a theory of matter
that  was  not  based  on  the  experimental  evidences. A  notable  Greek  philosopher,
namely, Democritus, believed that all matter was composed of very tiny, indivisible
particles. He called them atomos. Hence, the word ‘atom’ came from the Greek word
atomos, which means uncuttable or indivisible.
Aristotle was part of the generation that succeeded Democritus. He did not believe in
atomos. Aristotle thought that all matter was continuous. That is, if one proceeded on
breaking down a substance, it would be impossible to reach to the last indivisible
particle.  In  other  words,  it  would  continue  to  divide  infinitely.  His  opinion  was
accepted for nearly 200 years.
The early concept of atoms was simply a result of thinking and reasoning on the part
of the philosophers, instead of experimental observations. In 1803, however, John
Dalton proposed a completely different theory of matter. His theory was based on
scientific experimental observations and logical laws. These scientific assumptions were
Figure 1.1   Dalton’s atomic symbols.
2
STRUCTURE OF THE ATOM
very closely related to what is presently known about the atom. Due to this, John
Dalton is often referred to as the father of modern atomic theory.
Dalton  also  worked  on  the  relative  masses  of  atoms  and  gave  symbols  to  some
elements as illustrated in Figure 1.1.
1.1    Atomic  Theory
Competencies
By  the  end  of  this  section,  you  will  be  able  to:
• describe Dalton’s atomic theory;
• describe modern atomic theory; and
•
compare and contrast Dalton’s atomic theory with modern atomic theory.
Activity 1.1
Form a group and discuss  the following idea: Dalton’s contribution was different from that
of  the  ancient  Greeks  who  postulated  the  existence  of  atoms.  Point  out  the  differences
between the two ideas. Present your discussion to the class.
Even  though  the  idea  of  the  existence  of  atoms  and  atomic  theory  dates  back  to
classical times, as discussed earlier, only Dalton's atomic theory ideas were the basis
for the new era of science.
1.1.1    Dalton’s  Atomic  Theory
Historical Note
British  physicist  and  chemist  John  Dalton  is  best  known  for
developing  the  atomic  theory  of  elements  and  molecules,  the
foundation  of  modern  physical  science.  While  pondering  the
nature  of  the  atmosphere  during  a  meteorological  study  in  the
early 1800s, Dalton deduced the structure of carbon dioxide and
proposed  that  an  exact  number  of  atoms  constitute  each
molecule. He held that all atoms of a given element are identical
and different from the atoms of every other element. The first to
classify  elements  according  to  their  atomic  weights,  Dalton  set
the stage for a revolution in scientific thought.
John  Dalton
3
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
In 1804, John Dalton developed the first modern theory of atoms and proposed their
existence. Dalton's atomic theory was based directly on the ideas of elements and
compounds, and on the three laws of chemical combination. The three laws are:
i) The  law  of  conservation  of  mass  states  that  matter  is  neither  created  nor
destroyed. This law is also called the law of indestructibility of matter. It means
that the mass of the reactants is exactly equal to the mass of the products in
any chemical reaction. A chemical reaction involves only the separation and union
of atoms.
ii) The  law  of  definite  proportions  states  that  a  pure  compound  is  always
composed  of  the  same  elements  combined  in  a  definite  ratio  by  mass.  For
example, water (H2O) is composed of hydrogen and oxygen only. These elements
are always in the proportion of 11.19% hydrogen to 88.81% oxygen by mass
and in the proportion 2 : 1 by volume.
iii) The law of multiple proportions states that when two different compounds are
formed from the same elements, the masses of one of the elements in the two
compounds, compared to a given mass of the other element, is in a small whole-
number ratio. For example, carbon and oxygen form two compounds: carbon
monoxide and carbon dioxide. Carbon monoxide contains 1.3321 g of oxygen
for each 1 g of carbon, whereas carbon dioxide contains 2.6642 g of oxygen
for each 1g of carbon. Hence, carbon dioxide contains twice the mass of oxygen
as does carbon monoxide.
Activity 1.2
Activity 1.2
Form a group and perform the following task. Present your findings to the class.
Using two chemical compounds as an example, describe the difference between the law
of definite proportions and the law of multiple proportions.
Dalton proved that these laws are entirely reasonable if the elements are composed of
tiny particles, which he called atoms. An atom is the smallest fundamental particle of
an element.
The  basic  postulates  of  Dalton’s  Atomic  Theory  are  summarized  as  follows:
1. All elements are made up of small particles called atoms.
2. Atoms are indivisible and indestructible.
3. All atoms of a given element are identical in mass and in all other properties.
4. Atoms are neither created nor destroyed in chemical reactions.
5. Compounds are formed when atoms of more than one element combine.
6.
In a given compound, the relative numbers and types of atoms are constant.
4
STRUCTURE OF THE ATOM
Although some of these postulates, like postulate number 2 and number 3, have been
shown  to  be  incorrect  by  later  work,  Dalton's  theory  was  a  brilliant  and  logical
explanation of many experimental discoveries and laws that were known at that time.
Activity 1.2
Activity 1.3
Form a group. Discuss  the following laws and present to the class.
Use Dalton’s atomic theory to explain:
a The law of conservation of mass
b The law of definite proportions
c The law of multiple proportions.
1.1.2    Modern  Atomic  Theory
Towards the end of the 19th century, various experimental discoveries revealed the
existence  of  subatomic  particles,  isotopes,  and  so  on.  In  light  of  these  findings,
Dalton's Atomic Theory was modified.
The Modern Atomic Theory can be summarized as follows:
1. Atoms are the smallest particles of all elements that can take part in a chemical
reaction.
2. An atom is divisible. It can be subdivided into electrons, protons, and neutrons.
An atom is also indestructible i.e., atoms can neither be created nor destroyed
during ordinary chemical reactions.
3. Atoms of the same element may not be identical in mass because of the existence
of isotopes.
4. Atoms of the same elements have identical chemical properties.
5. Atoms of different elements have different chemical properties.
6. Atoms of two or more elements combine in simple whole-number ratios to form
compounds.
Exercise 1.1
1. Name the postulates of Dalton’s atomic theory.
2. Compare and contrast Dalton’s atomic theory with modern atomic theory.
5
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
1.2   DISCOVERIES  OF  THE  FUNDAMENTAL  SUBATOMIC
PARTICLES  AND  THE  ATOMIC  NUCLEUS
Competencies
By  the  end  of  this  section,  you  will  be  able  to:
•
•
•
explain the discovery of the electron;
explain the discovery of the nucleus;
explain the discovery of the neutron.
Activity 1.4
Activity 1.3
Form a group and discuss the following ideas.  Present your discussion to the rest of the
class.
1.
In  your  grade  7  chemistry  lesson,  you  have  learned  that  atoms  consist  of  three
fundamental subatomic particles. What are these? Where is their location in the atoms?
What are their charges?
2. What  were  the  consequences  of  the  discoveries  of  subatomic  particles  on  Dalton’s
atomic theory?
In the late 1880’s, John Dalton thought atoms were indivisible. However, a series of
investigations and astounding discoveries clearly demonstrated that atoms are made up
of smaller particles, called subatomic particles. The three fundamental subatomic
particles of an atom are electrons, protons, and neutrons.
1.2.1    Discovery  of  the  Electron
Do  you  think  that  there  is  a  similarity  between  cathode  rays  and  electrons?
The electron was the first subatomic particle to be identified. In 1879, William
Crooke  studied  electrical  discharges  in  partially  evacuated  tubes  called
discharge tubes.
Two electrodes from a high-voltage source are sealed into a glass tube from which air
has been evacuated. The negative electrode is the cathode and the positive one is the
anode. When the high-voltage current is turned on, the glass tube emits a greenish
light and a beam of light is seen at the anode. These rays flow from the cathode
towards the anode in a straight line. They are called cathode rays. Later on, in 1897,
J.J. Thomson found that the beam was deflected by both electrical and magnetic
6
STRUCTURE OF THE ATOM
fields. In an electric field, they bend toward the positive plate. From this he concluded
that the cathode rays are made up of very small negatively charged particles, which he
named electrons. He concluded that electrons are constituents of all matter, because
he obtained the same results when he changed the gas and the electrode in the tube.
Figure 1.2   A simple cathode-ray tube.
Properties  of  Cathode  Rays
Cathode  rays  possess  the  following  properties:
1. An  object  placed  between  the  cathode  and  the  opposite  end  of  the  tube,
casts a shadow on the glass. This shows that the cathode rays travel in a
straight line.
2. A paddle wheel placed in the path of cathode rays rotates. This indicates that
cathode rays are of particle nature-the particles strike the paddle and therefore
move the wheel.
Cathode
Gas at low pressure
Paddle wheel
Anode
Rail to support
paddle wheel
Figure 1.3   A paddle wheel placed in the path of cathode ray.
3. When an electric or magnetic field is applied in the path of cathode rays, they
are  deflected  towards  the  positive  plate.  This  shows  that  cathode  rays  are
negatively charged.
7
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
4. The properties of cathode rays (like charge to mass ratio, e–/m ratio) do not
depend on the nature of the gas in the discharge tube or on the material of the
cathode. This shows that electrons are present in the atoms of all elements.
Thus, cathode-ray experiments provided evidence that atoms are divisible into small
particles,  and  that  one  of  the  atom’s  basic  constituents  is  the  negatively  charged
particle called electron.
PROJECT WORK
Produce a model of cathode ray tube from simple and locally available materials
such as glass tube, copper wire and rubber stoppers. Using your model show how
cathode rays are generated and explain their properties.
Charge  and  Mass  of  an  Electron
J.J. Thomson studied the deflection of cathode rays under the simultaneous application
of  electric  and  magnetic  fields,  that  are  applied  perpendicular  to  each  other.  His
experiment led to the precise determination of the charge-to-mass ratio (e–/m) of an
electron, and this ‘e–/m’ value was found to be 1.76 × 108 coulomb/g. Coulomb is a
unit of electric charge.
Activity 1.5
Form a group and discuss how J.J Thomson's determination of the charge-to-mass ratio of
the electron led to the conclusion that atoms were composed of sub atomic particles.
Present your findings to the class.
In 1909, Robert Millikan determined the charge of an electron (e–), using the oil drop
experiment. He found the charge of an electron to be 1.60 × 10–19 coulombs.
Combination of e–/m and e– values are used to determine the mass of an electron,
which is found to be 9.11 × 10–31 kg.
From Thomson’s experiment, e–/m = 1.76 × 108 C/g
From Millikan’s experiment, e– = 1.60 × 10–19 C
\  Mass of the electron = m =
−
e
−
e m
/
=
1.60 × 10  C
-19
1.76 × 10  C/g
8
From the above discussion, it follows that:
=  9.11  ×  10–28  g  =  9.11  ×  10–31 kg
An electron is a fundamental particle of an atom carrying a negative charge and having
a very small mass. The mass of an electron is approximately  1
1837  times the mass
of a hydrogen atom.
8
STRUCTURE OF THE ATOM
Exercise 1.2
1. Explain how the electron was discovered.
2. Give explanation on the works of J.J. Thomson and R. Millikan.
1.2.2    Discovery  of  the  Atomic  Nucleus
Radioactivity
In 1895, the German physicist, Wilhelm Röntgen noticed that cathode rays caused
glass and metals to emit very unusual rays. This highly energetic radiation penetrated
matter, darkened covered photographic plates, and caused a variety of substances to
fluoresce. Since these rays could not be deflected by a magnet, they could not contain
charged particles as cathode rays do. Röntgen called them X-rays.
Not long after Röntgen’s discovery, Antoine Becquerel, a professor of physics in
Paris, began to study fluorescent properties of substances. He found that exposing
thickly wrapped photographic plates to a certain uranium compound caused them to
darken, even without the stimulation of cathode rays. Like X-rays, the rays from the
uranium compound were highly energetic and could not be deflected by a magnet.
Also, these rays were generated spontaneously. One of Becquerel's students, Marie
Curie, suggested the name radioactivity to describe this spontaneous emission of
particles  and/or  radiation.  Consequently,  any  element  that  spontaneously  emits
radiation is said to be radioactive.
Further investigation revealed that three types of rays are produced by the “decay”, or
breakdown of radioactive substances such as uranium, polonium, and radium. These
are alpha, beta, and gamma rays.
Alpha (α) rays consist of positively charged particles called α-particles. They are
deflected by positively charged plates. Beta (β) rays or β-particles are electrons of
nuclear  origin  that  are  deflected  by  negatively  charged  plates.  The  third  type  of
radioactive radiation consists of high-energy rays called gamma (γ) rays. Like X-rays,
γ-rays have no charge and are not affected by an external electric or magnetic field.
Activity 1.6
Form a group and discuss the following ideas. Present your discussion to the class.
Scientists  discovered  the  three  subatomic  particles  (electrons,  protons  and  neutrons).
Compare and contrast these fundamental sub atomic particles with alpha particles, beta
particles and gamma rays in terms of the nature of the particles.
More  details  about  the  structure  of  an  atom  were  provided  in  1911  by  Ernest
Rutherford  and  his  associates,  Hans  Geiger  and  Ernest  Marsden.  The  scientists
9
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
bombarded a thin gold foil with fast moving alpha particles. Alpha particles are positively
charged  particles  with  about  four  times  the  mass  of  a  hydrogen  atom.  Geiger  and
Marsden assumed that mass and charge were uniformly distributed throughout the atoms
of the gold foil. Therefore, they expected the alpha particles to pass through the gold foil
with only a slight deflection. However, when the scientists checked for the possibility of
wide-angle deflections, they were shocked to find that roughly 1 in 8000 of the alpha
particles had actually been redirected back toward the source.
After thinking about the observations for two years, Rutherford finally came up with
an  explanation.  He  reasoned  that  the  rebounded  alpha  particles  must  have
experienced some powerful force within the atom. He concluded that the source of
this force must occupy a very small amount of space because very few of the total
number of alpha particles had been affected by it. He also concluded that the force
must be caused by a very densely packed bundle of matter with a positive electric
charge. Rutherford called this small, dense, positive bundle of matter the nucleus.
Figure 1.4    Rutherford’s a – particles experiment.
Rutherford’s  Conclusion
1. Since most of the α-particles passed through the gold foil undeflected, most of
the space in an atom is empty.
2. Some of the α-particles were deflected by small angles. This indicated the presence
of a heavy positive centre in the atom, which Rutherford named the nucleus.
3. Only a few particles (1 in about a million) were either deflected by a very large
angle or deflected back. This confirmed that the space occupied by the heavy
positive centre must be very small.
10
STRUCTURE OF THE ATOM
Activity 1.7
Form a group and perform the following task. Present your findings to the class.
Predict what Rutherford might have observed if he had bombarded copper metal instead
of gold metal with alpha particles.
From the angles through which alpha particles are deflected, Rutherford calculated
that the nucleus of an atom has a radius of about 10–15 m. The radius of the whole
atom is about 10–10 m. Therefore, the nucleus is about 1/10,000 (one ten-thousandth)
of the size of the atom as a whole. Thus, if we magnified an atom to the size of a
football stadium (about 100 m across), the nucleus would be represented by a pea
placed at the centre of the pitch.
Rutherford suggested that the negatively charged electrons surrounding the positively
charged nucleus are like planets around the sun revolving. He could not explain,
however, what kept the electrons in motion around the nucleus.
1.2.3    Discovery  of  Neutrons
In 1932, an English scientist, James Chadwick, identified the existence of neutrons.
He bombarded a thin foil of beryllium with α-particles of a radioactive substance. He
then observed that highly penetrating rays, consisting of electrically neutral particles of
a  mass  approximately  equal  to  that  of  the  proton,  were  produced.  These  neutral
particles are called neutrons.
A neutron is a subatomic particle carrying no charge and having a mass of 1.675 ×
10–24 g. This mass is almost equal to that of a proton or of a hydrogen atom.
Exercise 1.3
1. Which experimental evidence indicates that:
i) electrons are negatively charged particles?
ii) electrons are the constituents of all atoms?
2.
3.
In Rutherford’s experiment, most of the alpha particles passed through the
gold foil undeflected. What does this indicate?
In Rutherford’s experiment, some of the α-particles were deflected by small
angles. What does this indicate?
4. What was determined from Millikan’s oil drop experiment?
5. Three particles are fired into a box that is positively charged on one side and
negatively charged on the other side. The result is shown in Figure 1.5.
11
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Figure 1.5 particles fired into a box.
a Which particle is a proton?
b Which particle is an electron?
c Which particle is a neutron?
Activity 1.8
Hydrogen  is  the  most  abundant  element  in  the  universe.  It  is  the  fuel  for  the  sun  and
other  stars.  It  is  currently  believed  that  there  are  roughly  2,000  times  more  hydrogen
atoms than oxygen atoms. There are also 10,000 times more hydrogen atoms than carbon
atoms.
Make  a  model  of  a  hydrogen  atom,  using  materials  of  your  choice,  to  represent  a
hydrogen  atom,  including  the  proton  and  electron.  Present  the  model  to  the  class,  and
explain in what ways your model resembles a hydrogen atom.
1.3 COMPOSITION  OF  AN  ATOM  AND  ISOTOPES
Competencies
By  the  end  of  this  section,  you  will  be  able  to:
• write the relative charges of an electron, a proton, and a neutron;
•
•
tell the absolute and relative masses of an electron, a proton, and a neutron;
tell the number of protons and electrons in an atom from the atomic number of
the element;
• determine the number of neutrons from given values of atomic number and mass
number;
12
STRUCTURE OF THE ATOM
•
•
explain the terms atomic mass and isotope, and
calculate the atomic masses of elements that have isotopes.
Activity 1.6
Activity 1.9
Based on your previous knowledge discuss  the following concepts in groups, and share
your ideas with the rest of the class.
1. Would you think that it is possible for someone to discover a new element that would
fit between magnesium (atomic number 12) and aluminum (atomic number 13)?
2. You are given the following three findings:
a An atom of calcium has a mass of 40 a.m.u. Another atom of calcium has 44 a.m.u.
b An  atom  of  calcium  has  a  mass  of  40  a.m.u.  An  atom  of  potassium  has  a  mass
of  40  a.m.u.
c An  atom  of  calcium  has  a  mass  of  40  a.m.u.  An  atom  of  cobalt  has  a  mass  of
59  a.m.u.
Are these findings in agreement with Dalton’s atomic theory? Discuss your conclusions in
your group.
All atoms have two regions. The nucleus is a very small region located at the center of
an atom. Except for the nucleus of the simplest type of hydrogen atom, all atomic
nuclei are made of two kinds of particles, protons and neutrons. Surrounding the
nucleus, there is a region occupied by negatively charged particles called electrons.
This  region  is  very  large  compared  with  the  size  of  the  nucleus. A  proton  has  a
positive charge, which is equal in magnitude to the negative charge of an electron.
Atoms are electrically neutral because they contain equal numbers of protons and
electrons.
Figure 1.6  A simple representation of an atom.
A proton has a mass of 1.673 × 10–27 kg, and a neutron has a mass of 1.675 × 10–27
kg. Hence, protons and neutrons have approximately the same mass. Most of the
mass of the atom is concentrated in the nucleus, assuming the mass of an electron to
be negligible or almost zero.
13
STRUCTURE OF THE ATOM
1.3.1    Atomic  Number  and  Mass  Number
Activity 1.12
Form a group and perform the following task. Present your findings to the class.
The table below gives the number of electrons, protons and neutrons in atoms or ions for
a  number  of  elements.
Atom  or  ion  of  elements
Number  of  electrons
Number  of  protons
Number  of  neutrons
A
5
5
5
B
7
7
7
C
9
10
10
D
12
10
10
E
7
7
8
F
6
5
6
G
9
9
10
Based on the table, answer the following questions:
i) Which of the species are neutral?
ii) Which of them are negatively charged?
iii) Give the symbolic representations for 'B' , 'D' and  'F'
All atoms are composed of the same basic particles. Yet all atoms are not the same.
Atoms of different elements have different number of protons. Atoms of the same
element have the same number of protons.
The Atomic  Number  (Z)  of  an  element  is  equal  to  the  number  of  protons  in  the
nucleus of an atom. It is also equal to the number of electrons in the neutral atom.
Z = p+  or  Z = e–    (in a natural atom)
For different elements, the nuclei of their atoms differ in the number of protons they
contain.  Therefore,  they  differ  in  the  amount  of  positive  charge  that  their  atoms
possess. Thus, the number of protons in the nucleus of an atom determines the identity
of an atom.
Each atom of an element is identified by its atomic number. In the periodic table, the
atomic number of an element is indicated below its symbol. Notice that the elements
are placed in order of increasing atomic number. Hydrogen, H, has atomic number 1,
hence, atoms of the element hydrogen have one proton in the nucleus. Next is helium,
He, which has two protons in its nucleus. Lithium, Li, has three protons. Beryllium,
Be, has four protons, and so on.
Mass Number (A) is the sum of the number of protons and neutrons in the nucleus of
an atom. Collectively, the protons and neutrons of an atom are called its nucleons.
Mass Number (A) = Number of protons + Number of neutrons
A  =  p+  +  n°
15
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
The name of an element, its atomic number and mass number can be represented by
a shorthand symbol. For example, to represent neutral atoms of magnesium with 12
protons and 12 neutrons, the symbol is  24 12Mg. The atomic number is written as a
subscript to the left of the symbol of magnesium. The mass number is written as a
superscript to the left of the symbol. This method can be represented in general by
the following illustration, in which X stands for any chemical symbol.
Mass Number
Atomic Number
X or X
A
Z
24
12
Mg can be read as “Magnesium-24”, and “Magnesium-25” represents
25
12
Mg. In a
similar manner,
Na can be read as “Sodium-23”.
11
23
The number of neutrons in an atom is found by subtracting the atomic number from
the mass number. For example, the number of neutrons for a silver atom (108
47Ag) is:
Mass number – Atomic number = Number of neutrons
108  –  47  =  61
The number of neutrons is 61.
∴
Example 1
How many protons, electrons, and neutrons are found in an atom of bromine-80
if its atomic number is 35?
Solution:
Atomic number of bromine is 35.
Mass number of bromine is already given as 80.  Now we can write bromine,
Br in the form of:
XA
Z
as
BrA
Z
=
80
35
Br
Mass number – Atomic number = Number of neutrons
80  –  35  =  45  neutrons
For a neutral atom: number of protons = number of electrons = atomic number.
\   Number of protons = Number of electrons = 35
Activity 1.13
Discuss the following idea in groups and present your discussion to the class.
Why  do  all  atoms  of  a  chemical  element  have  the  same  atomic  number  although  they
may have different mass numbers?
16
STRUCTURE OF THE ATOM
Exercise 1.4
Determine the atomic number, mass number, and number of neutrons in
a
P
b
39
19 K
c
56
26 Fe
1.3.2  Isotopes  and  Atomic  Mass
The simplest atoms are those of hydrogen. Each hydrogen atom contains one proton
only. However, hydrogen atoms contain different numbers of neutrons.
Three types of hydrogen atoms are known. The most common type of hydrogen is
called protium. It accounts for 99.985% of the hydrogen atoms found on Earth. The
nucleus of a protium atom consists of one proton only, and it has one electron moving
around it. The second form of hydrogen atom is called deuterium, which accounts for
0.015% of the Earth's hydrogen atoms. Each deuterium atom has a nucleus containing
31
15
Activity 1.14
Form a group and discuss the following idea and present your discussion to the class.
Nitrogen  has  two  naturally  occurring  isotopes,  N-14  and  N-15.  The  atomic  mass  of
nitrogen is 14.007. Which isotope is more abundant in nature? Explain.
one proton and one neutron. The third form of hydrogen atom is known as tritium,
and it is radioactive. It exists in very small amounts in nature, but it can be prepared
artificially.  Each  tritium  atom  contains  one  proton  and  two  neutrons.    Protium,
deuterium and tritium are the three isotopes of hydrogen.
Isotopes are the atoms of the same element that have the same atomic number but different
masses number. The isotopes of a particular element have the same number of protons and
electrons but different number of neutrons. Isotopes of an element may occur naturally, or
they may be made in the laboratory (artificial isotopes). Since isotopes have the same
number of protons and electrons, they have the same chemical properties.
Designating  Isotopes
Isotopes  are  usually  identified  by  specifying  their  mass  number.  There  are  two
methods for specifying isotopes.  In the first method, the mass number is written
with a hyphen after the name of the element. Tritium, for example, is written as
Hydrogen-3. We will refer to this method as hyphen notation. The second method for
17
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
designating an isotope is by indicating its isotopic nuclear composition. For example,
Hydrogen-3  is  written  as  3
isotopes for hydrogen and helium.
1
H.  The  following  table  illustrates  this  designation  of
Table 1.2   Isotopes of Hydrogen and Helium.
Isotope
Nuclear
symbol
No. of
protons
No. of
electrons
No. of
neutrons
Hydrogen-1 (protium)
Hydrogen-2 (deuterium)
Hydrogen-3 (tritium)
Helium-3
Helium-4
H
1
1
H
2
1
H
3
1
He
3
2
He
4
2
1
1
1
2
2
1
1
1
2
2
0
1
2
1
2
Z
1
1
1
2
2
A
1
2
3
3
4
Exercise 1.5
1. Write the nuclear symbol for carbon-13 and carbon-12.
2. The three atoms of elements X, Y and Z are represented as:
23
13 Y and  31
11 X,  27
the neutral atoms indicated.
15 Z. Determine the number of protons, electrons, and neutrons in
Relative Atomic  Masses
Actual masses of atoms, measured in grams, are very small.  An atom of oxygen-16,
for example, has a mass of 2.657 × 10–23g. For most chemical calculations, it is more
convenient to use relative atomic masses. In order to set up a relative scale of atomic
mass, one atom has been arbitrarily chosen as the standard and assigned a relative mass
value. The masses of all other atoms are expressed in terms of this defined standard.
The standard used by scientists to determine units of atomic mass is the carbon-12
atom. It has been arbitrarily assigned a mass of exactly 12 atomic mass units, or 12
a.m.u. One atomic mass unit, or 1 a.m.u, is exactly 1/12 the mass of a carbon-12
atom,  or  1.660  ×  10–24  g.  The  atomic  mass  of  any  atom  is  determined  by
comparing it with the mass of the carbon-12 atom. The hydrogen-1 atom has an
atomic mass of about 1/12 of that of the carbon-12 atom, or about 1 a.m.u. The
precise value of the atomic mass of a hydrogen-1 atom is 1.007 a.m.u. An oxygen-
16  atom  has  about  16/12  (or  4/3  the  mass  of  a  carbon-12  atom).  Careful
measurements show the atomic mass of oxygen-16 to be 15.994 a.m.u. The mass
of a magnesium-24 atom is found to be slightly less than twice that of a carbon-12
atom. Its atomic mass is 23.985 a.m.u.
18
STRUCTURE OF THE ATOM
The masses of subatomic particles can also be expressed on the atomic-mass scale.
The mass of an electron is 0.0005486 a.m.u, that of the proton is 1.007276 a.m.u,
and that of the neutron is 1.008665 a.m.u. Note that the proton and neutron masses
are close to 1 a.m.u but not equal to 1 a.m.u. You have learned that the mass number
is the total number of protons and neutrons in the nucleus of an atom. You can now
see that the mass number and relative atomic mass of a given nucleus are quite close
to each other. They are not identical because the proton and neutron masses deviate
slightly from 1 a.m.u.
Activity 1.15
Form a group and perform the following task, based on the given information:
Magnesium has three naturally occurring isotopes, namely Mg-12, Mg-13, and Mg-14.
Make models of three isotopes of magnesium using locally available materials such as clay,
colours and sticks, and depict the nucleus, the positions of protons, electrons and neutrons.
Present your model to the class.
Average Atomic  Masses  of  Elements
Most elements occur naturally as mixtures of isotopes, as shown in the examples in
Table 1.3. The percentage of each isotope in the naturally occurring elements is nearly
always the same, no matter where the element is found. The percentage at which each
isotope of an element occurs in nature is taken into account when calculating the
average atomic mass of the element. Average atomic mass is the weighted average of
the atomic masses of the naturally occurring isotopes of an element.
Table 1.3   Atomic masses and abundances of some natural occurring isotopes.
Isotopes
Hydrogen-1
Hydrogen-2
Oxygen-16
Oxygen-17
Oxygen-18
Mass
number
% natural
abundance
Atomic mass
(a.m.u)
Average atomic mass
of element (a.m.u)
1
2
16
17
18
99.985
0.015
99.762
0.038
0.200
1.6078
2.0141
15.994
16.999
17.999
1.00794
15.9994
* Since tritium is radioactive and exists in a very small amount in nature, it is not
included in the calculation of atomic mass of hydrogen.
19
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
The average atomic mass of an element is calculated by summing up the products of
relative atomic mass and percentage abundance of each isotope and dividing by 100.
Example 2
Chlorine has two isotopic compositions: 75.77 % of  35
17 Cl and 24.23 % of
37
17 Cl.  Determine the average atomic mass of chlorine.
Solution:
75.77 % of natural chlorine exists as chlorine 35, and the rest 24.23 % as
chlorine 37.
The average atomic mass of chlorine is calculated as follows:
=
(75.77 × 35) + (24.23 × 37)
100
=  35.45
Thus, the average atomic mass of chlorine is 35.45 a.m.u
Example 3
Calculate the average atomic mass of boron, using the following data:
Isotope
10
5 B
11
5 B
Relative
masses
10.0134
11.0094
Percent
abundance
19.70
80.30
Solution:
The average atomic mass of boron is obtained by taking the sum of the products
of the relative atomic mass and the percentage abundance of the first and the
second isotopes of boron and dividing by 100.
)
(
(
10.0134 × 19.70  +  11.0094 × 80.30
100
Average atomic mass of B =
)
= 10.813 a.m.u
Exercise 1.6
Give appropriate answers for the following questions.
1. What are isotopes? Explain their symbolic designation using the isotopes of
hydrogen.
20
STRUCTURE OF THE ATOM
2. The three isotopes of uranium are:  234
92 U,  235
92 U and  238
92U. How many protons,
neutrons and electrons are present in each isotope?
3.
Indicate the number of fundamental particles present in an atom of  206
82Pb.
4. The  metal  thallium  occurs  naturally  as  30%  thallium-203  and  70%
thallium-205. Calculate the atomic mass of thallium.
Critical  Thinking
5. Why is the gravitational force in the nucleus so small?
6. Could a nucleus of more than one proton but no neutron exist? Explain.
1.4 ATOMIC  MODELS
Competencies
By  the  end  of  this  section,  you  will  be  able  to:
• name the five atomic models,
• describe Dalton’s, Thomson’s and Rutherford’s atomic models,
•
state Bohr’s postulates,
• describe Bohr’s model,
• describe the quantum mechanical model,
• describe main-energy level and sub-energy level,
• define the term electronic configuration,
• write the ground state-electronic configuration of the elements,
• draw diagrams to show the electronic configuration of the first 18 elements,
• write the electronic configuration of the elements using sub–energy levels,
• write electronic configuration of elements using noble gas as a core and
• describe valence electrons.
Activity 1.16
Discuss  the  following  concept  in  groups  and  present  your  conclusion  to  the  class.  Have
you heard the word “model” in your everyday life? Car makers produce different models as
time passes. What is your understanding about the atomic model?
Atoms are too small to be observed directly. Hence, it is better to develop a tentative
mental picture (model) of the atomic concept. The ideas about atoms have changed
21
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
many times. But, at present we can reduce these ideas into five models: Dalton’s
Model, Thomson’s Model, Rutherford’s Model, Bohr’s Model, and the Quantum
Mechanical Model.
i)      Dalton’s  Atomic  Model
This  model  of  atoms  was  accepted  for  100  years  without  serious  challenge.  He
thought of atoms as solid indestructible spheres. He called it the billiard ball model.
Figure 1.7   Dalton’s model of an atom.
ii)    Thomson  Model
After learning that atoms contain electrons, Thomson proposed a new model of the
atom, which is shown in Figure 1.8. It is sometimes called the plum-pudding model. In
his model of an atom, Thomson proposed thought that electrons were embedded
inside a positively charged sphere, just like plums in a pudding. Today we might call
Thomson’s model the chocolate chip ice-cream model.
Figure 1.8   Thomson’s model of an atom.
Activity 1.17
Perform the following tasks in groups and present your findings to the class.
1. Draw a sketch diagram of a carbon atom using Thomson's atomic model.
2. What was incorrect about Thomson's model of the atom?
iii)      Rutherford  Model
Why  was  Thomson’s  model  of  atom  discarded  and  replaced  by
Rutherford’s  model?
22
STRUCTURE OF THE ATOM
By 1911, evidence was collected that allowed scientists to modify Thomson’s model
of an atom. Ernest Rutherford (1871–1937), a former student of Thomson, performed
one of the classic experiments of scientific history. As indicated earlier in this unit, he
bombarded  different  types  of  matter  with  high-energy,  positively  charged  alpha
particles. Based on the Thomson’s model of an atom, Rutherford hypothesized that
the alpha particles should go through very thin metal foils undeflected. However, after
performing an experiment on gold leaf, he found that a small but significant number of
the alpha particles were deflected through large angles by the gold atoms. These
results showed Rutherford that the Thomson model of the atom was not valid. A
uniform  positive  charge  with  embedded  negatively  charged  electrons  would  not
interact with the alpha particles in such a manner.
The Rutherford model of the atom has a small, dense, positively charged nucleus
around which electrons whirl at high speeds and at relatively long distances from it.
He compared the structure of an atom with the solar system, saying that the nucleus
corresponds to the sun, while the electrons correspond to the planets. This picture of
the atom is also called the planetary atom. In other words, Rutherford gave us the
nuclear model of the atom.
Even though Rutherford showed that the atom has a nucleus, he did not know how
the electrons were arranged outside the nucleus. This was the major drawback of
Rutherford’s model of an atom.
Figure 1.9   Rutherford model.
Historical Note
A  Nobel  Prize  winner,  Niels  Bohr,  was  known  not  only  for  his
own theoretical work, but also as a mentor to younger physicists
who  themselves  made  important  contributions  to  physical
theory. As  the  director  of  the  Institute  for Theoretical  Physics  at
the University of Copenhagen, Bohr gathered together some of
the  finest  minds  in  the  physics  community,  including  Werner
Heisenberg and  George Gawow. During the 1920’s, the Institute
was the source of many important works in quantum mechanics
and in theoretical physics in general.
23
Niels  Bohr
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
iv)      Bohr  Model
In 1913, the Danish physicist Niels Bohr (1885–1962) proposed an atomic model in
which the electrons moved around the nucleus in circular paths called orbits. He
assumed the electrons to be moving around the nucleus in a circular orbit as the
planets move around the sun. Based on the Rutherford's atomic model, Bohr made
the following modifications.
• The electrons in an atom can exist only in a restricted number of stable orbits
with energy levels in which they neither absorb nor emit energy. These orbits
designated by a number called the principal quantum number, n. The principal
quantum number has the values of 1, 2, 3, . . . The energy levels are also called
shells. They are represented by K, L, M, . . . etc. The K-shell is the first shell,
the L-shell is the second shell, the M-shell is the third shell, etc.
• When an electron moves between orbits it absorbs or emits energy. When an
electron jumps from lower to higher states it absorbs a fixed amount of energy.
When an electron falls from a higher (excited) state to a lower (ground) state it
emits a fixed amount of energy.
• The electrons move around the nucleus in energy levels.
Figure 1.10   The first six energy levels in the Bohr model of an atom.
• According to Bohr, for each element, the number of energy levels or shells is
fixed. Also, each different energy level or shell of an atom can only accommodate
a certain number of electrons. The maximum number of electrons that the main
energy level can have is given by the general formula 2n2, where n is equal to
the main energy level.
Therefore, the maximum number of electrons in each shell in the Bohr model is:
first energy level
(n = 1) is 2(1)2 = 2 electrons
second energy level
(n = 2) is 2(2)2 = 8 electrons
third energy level
(n = 3) is 2(3)2 = 18 electrons
fourth energy level
(n = 4) is 2(4)2 = 32 electrons
24
STRUCTURE OF THE ATOM
It can also be summarized in the form of Table 1.4.
Table 1.4   Energy levels and electrons for the first four main energy levels.
Principal quantum number  (n)
Shell
Maximum possible number of electrons
1
K
2
2
L
8
3
M
18
4
N
32
• When electrons fill the various energy levels in an atom, they first occupy the
shell with the lowest energy level. When the lowest energy level is filled, according
to the 2n2 rule, then the electrons enter the next higher energy level.
The outermost shell of an atom cannot accommodate more than eight electrons, even
if it has the capacity to hold more electrons. This is because having more than eight
electrons in the outermost shell makes the atom unstable.
For  example,  let  us  write  the  electron  configuration  of  magnesium  that  has  12
electrons. The first 2 electrons occupy the K-shell (the first energy level). The L-shell
(the second energy level) is occupied with 8 electrons. The remaining 2 electrons
enter  the  M-shell  (the  third  energy  level).  Hence,  the  electron  configuration  of
2 L
magnesium atom becomes K
8 M
2.
Bohr’s diagrammatic representation, using shells, in some atoms are given below.
Note that p = proton, n = neutron, and
= electron.
Figure 1.11   Diagrammatic representation of Bohr’s model.
25
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Activity 1.18
Form a group and try to compare Rutherford’s atomic model with Bohr’s atomic model?
Present your discussion to the class.
Exercise 1.7
Draw Bohr’s diagrammatic representations for the following atoms:
a Nitrogen (atomic number = 7)
b Sulphur (atomic number = 16)
c Potassium (atomic number = 19)
d Calcium (atomic number = 20)
v)    The  Quantum  Mechanical  Model
During the 1920’s, the discovery of the wave-like properties of electrons led to the
wave-mechanical model or quantum-mechanical model of atoms. In this model, the
electrons are associated with definite energy levels, but their locations cannot be
pinpointed. Instead, they are described in terms of the probability of being found in
certain regions of space about the nucleus. These regions of space are called orbitals.
An orbital is a particularly shaped volume of space where the probability of finding an
electron is at a maximum.
According to this model, the electrons in an atom are in a series of energy levels or
shells.  Each  energy  level  or  shell  is  described  by  a  number  called  the  principal
quantum number, n, which is related to the size of the energy level. The larger the
energy value of n, the farther the electrons are found from the nucleus.
The quantum mechanical model introduces the concept of sublevel for each main
energy level. For atoms of the known elements, there are four types of sublevels
designated by the letters s, p, d, and f. The number of sublevels within each energy
level or shell is equal to the numerical value of n.
26
STRUCTURE OF THE ATOM
Table 1.5  The principal quantum number specified with shell,  sublevels and
maximum number of electrons.
Principal  quantum
number (n)
Shell
Number and type of
sublevels
each shell (2n2)
Maximum number
of electrons in
1
2
3
4
5
6
K
L
M
N
O
P
1 (s)
2 (s, p)
3 (s, p, d)
4 (s, p, d, f)
5 (s, p, d, f, g)
6 (s, p, d, f, g, h)
2
8
18
32
50
72
Any orbital can accommodate a maximum of two electrons. Accordingly,
s-sublevel has only 1 orbital and can hold a maximum of 2 electrons,
p-sublevel has 3 orbitals and can hold a maximum of 6 electrons,
d-sublevel has 5 orbitals and can hold a maximum of 10 electrons, and
f-sublevel has 7 orbitals and can hold a maximum of 14 electrons.
Electron  Configurations
The arrangement of electrons in an atom is known as the electron configuration of the
atom. Because atoms of different elements have different numbers of electrons, a
distinct electronic configuration exists for the atoms of each element. Like all systems
in  nature,  electrons  in  atoms  tend  to  assume  arrangements  that  have  the  lowest
possible energies. The lowest energy arrangement of the electrons in an atom is called
the  ground  state  electron  configuration. A  few  simple  rules,  combined  with  the
quantum number relationships discussed below, allow us to determine these ground-
state electron configurations.
The quantum mechanical model is designated by the following notation: a coefficient
which shows the main energy level, a letter that denotes the sublevel that an electron
occupies, and a superscript that shows the number of electrons in that particular
sublevel.
The designation is explained as follows
1s 2
Number of electrons
Sublevel
Main energy level
27
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
For example, the electron configuration of lithium ( 5
3Li) is: 1s22s1.
This indicates that there are 2 electrons in the first s-sublevel and 1 electron in the 2nd
s-sublevel.
11 Na) atom is: 1s22s22p63s1. This indicate that there
The configuration for sodium ( 23
are 2 electrons in the first s-sublevel, 2 electrons in the second s-sublevel, 6 electrons
in the second p-sublevel, and 1 electron in the third s-sublevel.
Activity 1.19
Form a group and perform the following task in groups and present your findings to the
class.
The following ground state electron configurations are incorrect. Identify in each case the
mistakes that have been made and write the correct electron configurations.
i) 1s2  2s2 2p4 3s2
ii) 1s2  2s1 2p6
iii) 1s2  2s2 2p6  3p3 3s2
iv) 1s2  2s2 2p6   3s2 3p3 4s2 3d4
The following table lists the first 14 elements in the periodic table and shows the
electron configuration of each.
Table 1.6  The ground state electron configuration of the first 14 elements.
Element
Electron  Configuration
Hydrogen
Helium
Lithium
Beryllium
Boron
Carbon
Nitrogen
Oxygen
Fluorine
Neon
Sodium
Magnesium
Aluminium
Silicon
28
1s1
1s2
1s2 2s1
1s2 2s2
1s2 2s2 2p1
1s2 2s2 2p2
1s2 2s2 2p3
1s2 2s2 2p4
1s2 2s2 2p5
1s2 2s2 2p6
1s2 2s2 2p6 3s1
1s2 2s2 2p6 3s2
1s2 2s2 2p6 3s2 3p1
1s2 2s2 2p6 3s2 3p2
STRUCTURE OF THE ATOM
Exercise 1.8
Write the ground state electron configuration for the following elements.
a Phosphorus (atomic number = 15)
b Sulphur  (atomic number = 16)
c Chlorine (atomic number = 17)
d Argon (atomic number = 18)
Rules  Governing  Electron  Configuration
Most of the electronic configuration of an atom can be explained in terms of the building-up
principle, or also known as the Aufbau principle. According to the Aufbau principle, an
electron occupies the lowest energy orbital available before entering a higher energy orbital.
The atomic orbitals are filled in order of increasing energy.  The orbital with the lowest energy
is the 1s orbital. The 2s orbital is the next higher in energy, then the 2p orbitals, and so on.
Beginning with the third main energy level, n = 3, the energies of the sublevels in the different
main energy levels begin to overlap.
In Figure 1.12, for example, the 4s sublevel is lower in energy than the 3d sublevel.
Therefore, the 4s orbital is filled before any electrons enter the 3d orbitals. Less energy is
required for two electrons to pair up in the 4s orbital than for a single electron to occupy a 3d
orbital. Which sublevel will be occupied after the 3d sublevel is fully occupied?
The electrons are arranged in sublevels according to Aufbau principle which is also known as
the diagonal rule. The diagonal rule is a guide to the order of filling energy sublevels. It is
particularly helpful for atoms with atomic numbers higher than 18. This is because for atoms
with higher atomic numbers their sublevels are not regularly filled.
Figure 1.12  Diagonal rule for writing electron configuration.
29
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
If you list the orbitals following the direction of arrows, you can obtain the electron
configuration of most atoms. Therefore, the order of filling the sublevels is given as:
1s2  2s2  2p6  3s2  3p6  4s2  3d10  4p6  5s2  4d10  5p6  6s2  4f 14  5d10  6p6...
The outermost occupied energy level of an atom is called the valence shell and the
electrons that enter into these energy levels are referred to as valence electrons.
Example 1
What is the electron configuration of magnesium,  24
12 Mg?
Solution:
24
12 Mg  =  1s2  2s22p6  3s2   ﬁ in sublevel
2     8      2   ﬁ in main energy level
(cid:78) (cid:8)(cid:9)(cid:10) (cid:78)
From this, we can write the configuration of elements by using a noble gas as
a core and the electrons outside the core. Note that noble gases have complete
outer  electron  shells,  with  2  or  8  electrons.  Therefore,  the  above  electron
configuration can be written as follows:
24
12 Mg  =  1s22s22p6  3s2
[Ne]
=  [Ne]  3s2
Example 2
Write the electron configuration of copper (Z = 29).
Solution:
Following the diagonal rule, we can fill the sublevels, in order of increasing
energy, until all its electrons are filled. Therefore, the configuration will be:
Cu  =  1s22s22p63s23p6  4s13d10
[Ar]
=    [Ar]  4s13d10
Exercise 1.9
1. Write the electron configuration of the following elements using noble gases as
a core.
a O
30
b Al
c Cl
d Ca
STRUCTURE OF THE ATOM
2. Write the electron configuration of the following elements.
a
84
36 Kr
b 56
26 Fe
c
65
30 Zn
Check list
Key  terms  of  the  unit
• Atom
• Atomic  Model
• Aufbau principle
• Average  atomic  mass
• Bohr's Model
• Cathode  ray
• Dalton's  atomic  theory
• Dalton's Model
• Electron
• Electron configuration
• Electron configuration
•
Isotopes
• Main energy level
• Modern  atomic  theory
• Neutron
• Nucleus
• Proton
• Quantum Mechanical Model
• Radioactivity
α  -  particles
β  -  particles
γ - particles
• Rutherford's Model
• Sub-energy level
• Thomson's Model
Unit Summary
The Greek philosopher Democritus proposed what we consider as the first atomic
theory. He believed that all matter consists of very small, indivisible particles. He
named the particles atoms (meaning uncuttable or indivisible).
John  Dalton’s  work  in  atomic  theory  marked  the  start  of  modern  chemistry.  His
concept of an atom was far more detailed and specific than Democritus'.
Dalton did not try to describe the structure or composition of atoms – he did not
know what an atom really looked like. But he did realize that the different properties
shown by elements such as hydrogen and oxygen can be explained by assuming that
hydrogen atoms are not the same as oxygen atoms.
In our current view of atomic theory, atoms consist of smaller particles – electrons,
protons, and neutrons. The structure of an atom is basically a cloud of electrons
31
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
surrounding a small, dense region, called the nucleus. An electron is a negatively
charged particle with negligible mass.
The nucleus was discovered by Ernest Rutherford. Rutherford suggested that the
charge and mass of an atom are concentrated in its nucleus, and that the nucleus has
positive charge.
In current views, the nucleus of an atom contains protons and neutrons. Protons have
positive charge, and neutrons have no charge. Each element has a unique number of
protons  in  its  atoms.  This  number  is  the  atomic  number  of  the  element,  and  is
designated by Z. The total number of protons and neutrons in the nucleus of an atom
is the mass number of the element. Mass number is designated by A. Atomic number
and mass number for an atom of an element, X, is designated by:
For a neutral atom,
A
Z X
•
•
the number of protons = the number of electrons = atomic number.
the number of protons + the number of neutrons  = mass number.
Over centuries, scientists have developed these main atomic models:
• Dalton’s Model: an atom is a solid, indestructible sphere.
• Thomson’s Model: an atom is a sphere with a uniform positive charge. Negatively
charged electrons are embedded in the positive charge.
• Rutherford’s Model: Rutherford discovered that atoms are mostly empty space
with a dense, positive nucleus.
• Bohr’s Model: in an atom, electrons follow circular orbits around the nucleus.
The Bohr Model was the first quantum mechanical model of the atom.
• The Quantum Mechanical Model: in an atom, the orbits of electrons around
the nucleus are elliptical. This theory is a modification of the Bohr model.
The quantum mechanical description of an atom is the electron configuration of the
atom – the arrangement of electrons in the atom. The maximum number of electrons in
a main energy level is 2n2, where n is the principal quantum number.
The quantum mechanical model is governed by this principle:
The Aufbau principle is a guide to the order of filling energy levels and sublevels.
According  to  this  principle  lower  energy  sub  levels  are  completely  filled  before
electrons enter higher energy sublevels.
32
STRUCTURE OF THE ATOM
REVIEW  EXERCISE  ON  UNIT  1
Part  I:   True/False  type  questions
1.
Identify whether each of the following statement is correct or incorrect. Give
your reasons for considering a statement to be false.
a Atoms of the same element have the same number of protons.
b Atoms of different elements can have the same number of protons.
c Atoms of the same element have the same number of electrons.
d Atoms of the same element have the same number of neutrons.
e The s- sublevel contains 2 electrons.
f The d-sublevel contains 5 orbitals.
g The 4s-sublevel comes before the 3d sublevel.
h The fundamental particle not present in a hydrogen atom is the proton.
i
j An alpha particle is composed of He2+ ions.
k The mass of an electron is almost equal to the mass of a proton.
Isotopic elements contain the same number of neutrons.
Part  II:    Write  the  missing  words  in  your  exercise  book
2. The mass of an atom is mainly concentrated in ______________.
3. The diameter of an atom is ___________ times that of the nucleus.
4. The energy level in the third principal quantum number can accommodate
_______electrons.
Part  III:    Give  the  appropriate  answers  for  the  following  questions
5. Draw diagrammatic representation of the following atoms by using shell or energy
level.
a
9
4 Be
b
19
9 F
c
28
14 Si
d
39
19 K
6. Write the electron configuration of the elements: (use quantum mechanical model)
a
32
16 S
b
52
24 Cr
c
56
26 Fe
d
64
29 Cu
7. For the elements in question number 6,
a give the valence electrons for each.
b give the number of neutrons for each.
33
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
8.
In a certain atom, the last electron has a 3d2 electron configuration. On the
basis of this:
a write the electron configuration of the element using a noble gas as a core.
b write the electron configuration using the main energy levels.
c what is the atomic number of the atom?
d what are the valence shell electrons of the atom?
e how many protons does the atom have?
9. What is the relative atomic mass of an element whose isotopic composition is
90% of  20X and 10% of  22X?
Part  IV:  Short  answer  type  questions
10. Comment on Dalton’s atomic theory and the areas in which modifications were
made.
11.
John Dalton made a number of statements about atoms that are now known to
be incorrect. Why do you think his atomic theory is still found in science text
books?
12.
If scientists had tried to repeat Thomson's experiment and found that they could
not, would Thomson's conclusion still have been valid?  Explain your answer.
34
T
I
N
2U
Periodic Classification of the
Elements
Unit  Outcomes
After completing this unit, you will be able to:
(cid:40) understand  the  periodic  classification  of  the  elements;
(cid:40) develop  skills  in  correlating  the  electron  configuration  of  elements  with  the
periodicity of the elements, and in predicting the trends of periodic properties
of  elements  in  the  periodic  table;
(cid:40) appreciate  the  importance  of  classification  in  chemistry;  and
(cid:40) demonstrate scientific inquiry skills: observing, inferring, predicting, classifying,
comparing and contrasting, making models, communicating, measuring, asking
questions,  interpreting  illustrations,  drawing  conclusions,  applying  concepts,
and problem solving.
MAIN  CONTENTS
2.1
Introduction
2.2 The Modern Periodic Table
2.3
Periodic properties in the Periodic Table
2.4 Advantages of periodic classification
– Unit Summary
– Review Exercises
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Start-up Activity
How  can  you  use  a  table  of  repeating  events  to  predict  the  next  events?
Table 2.1 shows a familiar table of repeating properties. What is it?
Of course, it is a calendar, but it is a calendar with a difference – it is missing
some information. You can determine what is missing and fill in the blanks.
1. Look at the calendar again. The calendar has columns of days, Sunday through
Saturday. The calendar also has horizontal rows. They are its weeks.
2. Examine the information surrounding each empty spot. Can you tell what
information is needed in each empty spot?
3. Fill in the missing information.  For example:
Conclude and Apply
1. One day in column 3 is marked X, and a day in column 4 is marked Y. What
dates belong to these positions? Discuss your answers in your group.
2. Column 5 does not have a name. What is the correct name of this column?
3. What dates are included in the third row of the table?
4. Assuming that the previous month had 30 days, what day would the 28th of
that month have been? What row of this table would it appear in?
5. How do you relate this periodicity with the periodic classification of elements?
Table  2.1 Periodicity in time.
Sun
Mon
Tues
Wed
4
11
18
25
5
12
19
26
6
X
20
27
7
Y
21
28
1
8
15
22
29
Fri
2
9
16
23
30
Sat
3
10
17
24
31
2.1 INTRODUCTION
Competencies
By  the  end  of  this  section,  you  will  be  able  to:
• Describe periodicity.
36
PERIODIC CLASSIFICATION OF THE ELEMENTS
Activity 2.1
Form a group and discuss  the following concepts. Present your discussion to the rest of
the  class.
What  was  the  basis  for  the  early  attempts  in  classifying  the  elements?  Outline  the
contributions of some scientists you have read about in classfying the elements.
Before the beginning of the 18th century, it was easy to study and remember the
properties of the elements because very few were known.  However, in the middle of
the  19th  century,  many  more  elements  were  discovered.  Scientists  then  began  to
investigate possibilities for classifying the known elements in a simple and useful
manner. After numerous attempts, the scientists were ultimately successful. They
grouped elements with similar properties together. This arrangement is known as the
classification of elements.
Early  Attempts  in  classifying  the  elements
What  is  meant  by  the  term  periodicity?  Can  you  give  some  periodic  events  in
nature?
Early attempts to classify elements were based merely on atomic mass. Then scientists
began  to  seek  relationships  between  atomic  mass  and  other  properties  of  the
elements.
i) Dobereiner's Triads:  One of the first attempts to group similar elements was
made in 1817 by the German chemist J. Dobereiner. He put together similar
elements in group of three or triads. According to Dobereiner, when elements in
a triad are arranged in the order of increasing atomic masses, the middle element
had the average atomic mass of the other two elements. For example, because
the  atomic  mass  of  bromine  is  nearly  equal  to  the  average  atomic  mass  of
chlorine and iodine, he considered these three elements to constitute a triad when
arranged in this order: chlorine, bromine, iodine see Table 2.2.
Table  2.2  Dobereiner's  Triads.
Triads
Atomic  Masses
Chlorine  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
Bromine  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
Iodine  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
Average  atomic  masses  of  chlorine  and  iodine  =
35.5 127
+
2
=  81.25
35.5
80
127
Reading  Check
Do you think that this classification works for all elements?
37
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
ii) Newlands's Law of Octaves:  In 1864, John Newlands, an English chemist,
reported the law of octave, which is also known as the law of eight.  He stated
that when elements are arranged in increasing order of their atomic masses,
every eighth element had similar properties to the first element.
Newlands  first  two  octaves  of  eight  elements  are  shown  below:
Li
Na
K
Be
Mg
Ca
B
Al
C
Si
N
P
O
S
F
Cl
However, the law of octaves could not be applied beyond calcium.
Reading  Check
With the aid of an encyclopedia, reference books or other resources, write a report
on:
a
b
J. Dobereiner and
J. Newlands works in organizing the elements.
In your report include the merits and demerits of their works.
Exercise 2.1
1. Decide whether the principle of Dobereiner’s triad can be applied in the following
groups of three elements.
a Be,  Ca,    Sr
b Li,    Na,      K
2. Newlands stated that there was a periodic similarity in properties of every
eighth element in his system. However, today we see that for periods 2 and 3,
the similarity occurs in every ninth element. What is the reason? Explain.
2.2 The  Modern  Periodic  Table
Competencies
By  the  end  of  this  section,  you  will  be  able  to:
state Mendeleev’s and  modern periodic law;
•
• describe period and group;
•
explain the relationship between the electronic configuration and the structure of
the modern periodic table;
• describe the three classes of the elements in the modern periodic table;
•
explain  the  four  blocks  of  the  elements  as  related  to  their  electronic
configuration in the modern periodic table;
38
PERIODIC CLASSIFICATION OF THE ELEMENTS
•
tell the block of an element from its electronic configuration;
• give group names for the main group elements;
•
•
•
classify the periods into short, long, and incomplete periods;
tell the number of groups and periods in the modern periodic table;
tell the number of elements in each period;
• predict the period and group of an element from its atomic number; and
•
tell the block and group of an element from its electronic configuration.
Activity 2.2
Form  a  group  and  perform  the  following  tasks.  Share  your  findings  with  the  rest  of  the
class.
1. Make a list of the symbols for the first eighteen elements. Beside each symbol, write
its electronic configuration.
2. Draw sets of vertical boxes. In order of increasing atomic number, fill into each set the
symbol of all elements having the same outer electron configurations. How many sets
are there? Record your answer.
3. Draw sets of horizontal boxes. In order of increasing atomic number, fill into each set
the  symbols  of  all  elements  having  the  same  number  of  shells.  How  many  sets  are
there?  How  many  elements  are  there  in  each  set?  Record  your  answers.
4. Do you see any regular patterns that you created in Steps 2 and 3?
5. Draw one complete table which shows all elements;
a with the same number of outermost electrons in a vertical column
b filling the same outer electron shell in a horizontal row.
Historical Note
While  attempting  to  group  the  elements  according  to  their
chemical  properties  and  atomic  weights,  Dimitri  Mendeleev
developed  the  periodic  table  and  formulated  the  periodic  law.
Because  his  classification  revealed  recurring  patterns  (periods)  in
the  elements,  Mendeleev  was  able  to  leave  spaces  in  his  table  for
elements that he correctly predicted would be discovered.
Dimitri Mendeleev
39
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
2.2.1 The  Periodic  Law
A.  Mendeleev’s  Periodic  Law
In 1869, the Russian chemist Dimitri Mendeleev and the German scientist Luthar
Meyer  independently  published  periodic  arrangements  of  the  elements  based  on
increasing atomic mass.
Mendeleev observed that, when elements are arranged according to increasing atomic
mass, the chemical and physical properties of the elements recur at regular intervals.
This periodic variation and the recurrence of the properties of the elements led to the
formulation of the Periodic Law.
Mendeleev's  periodic  law  states  that  the  properties  of  the  elements  are  periodic
functions of their atomic masses. Only 63 elements were known when Mendeleev
constructed his table in 1871. Mendeleev organized his table in columns, with each
column  containing  elements  that  have  similar  chemical  properties. Accordingly,
elements in the same column gave family or groups of elements.
How did Mendeleev know where to leave gaps for undiscovered elements in his
periodic  table?
Mendeleev left blank spaces for the undiscovered elements and also predicted masses
and  other  properties  of  these  unknown  elements  almost  correctly.    For  example,
neither gallium nor germanium were discovered when Mendeleev constructed his
periodic  table.    But  he  predicted  the  existence  and  properties  of  these  unknown
elements.
Mendeleev  left  two  blank  spaces  for  these  two  elements  in  the  table,  just  under
aluminium and silicon.  He called these unknown elements 'eka-aluminium' and 'eka-
silicon.' ('eka' means 'first'). What he meant by 'eka-aluminium' is "a currently known
element (galium) following aluminium".
Later on, in 1874, the element Gallium (eka-aluminium in Mendeleev's system) was
discovered.  In  1886,  the  element  Germanium  (eka-silicon)  was  discovered.  The
observed  properties  of  these  elements  were  remarkably  very  close  to  those  in
Mendeleev’s predictions. Table 2.3 shows the properties of eka-silicon predicted by
Mendeleev and compares them to the observed properties of Germanium.
40
PERIODIC CLASSIFICATION OF THE ELEMENTS
Table 2.3 Comparison of Mendeleev's predictions for the properties of Eka-silicon with
Germanium.
Property
Mendeleev's
Observed  Properties  for
Predictions  for
Germanium  (Ge)  in  1886
eka-silicon  (Es)  in  1871
Atomic  mass  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
Density  (g/cm3)    .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
72
5.5
72.6
5.47
Colour  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
Dark Gray
Light Gray
Oxide  formula  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
Density  of  oxide  (g/cm3)  .  .  .  .  .
Chloride  formula  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
Density  of  chloride  (g/cm3)  .  .  .
EsO2
4.7
EsCl4
1.9
Boiling point of chloride . . . . .
<  100°C
Defects  in  Mendeleev's  periodic  table
GeO2
4.7
GeCl4
1.887
86°C
1. Position of isotopes: The isotopes were not given separate places in Mendeleev's
periodic table.  Since elements are arranged in order of increasing atomic masses,
the isotopes belong to different groups (because isotopes have different masses).
2. Wrong order of atomic masses of some elements: When certain elements are
grouped on the basis of their chemical properties, some elements with higher
atomic masses precede those with lower atomic masses.  For example, argon,
with atomic mass of 39.95, precedes potassium with atomic mass of 39.1.
B The Modern Periodic Law
What  was  Mosley's  contribution  to  the  modern  form  of  the  Periodic  Table?
In 1913, the English physicist Henry Mosley determined the atomic number of each of
the elements by analyzing their X-ray spectra. He observed that when each element
was  used  as  a  target  in  an  X-ray  tube,  it  gave  out  X-rays  with  a  characteristic
wavelength. The wavelength depends on the number of protons in the nucleus of the
atom and was constant for a given element. By arranging the elements in order of
decreasing wavelength, Mosley was able to assign atomic number to each element.
The atomic number of every element is fixed, and it clearly distinguishes one element
from another.  'No two elements can have the same atomic number.' For example,
atomic number 8 identifies the element oxygen. No other element can have atomic
number 8.
41
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Therefore,  the  atomic  number  of  an  element  is  the  fundamental  property  that
determines the chemical behavior of the element.  The discovery of atomic number led
to the development of the modern periodic law. The modern periodic law states that:
‘‘the properties of the elements are periodic function of their atomic numbers.’’ This
means  that  when  elements  are  arranged  according  to  increasing  atomic  number,
elements with similar physical and chemical properties fall in the same group.
2.2.2  Characteristics  of  Groups  and  Periods
Many different forms of the periodic table have been published since Mendeleev's
time. Today, the long form of the periodic table, which is called the modern periodic
table, is commonly in use. It is based on the modern periodic law. In the modern
periodic table, elements are arranged in periods and groups.
What are the basis for classifying the elements into groups and periods?
What  are  the  similarities  and  differences  in  the  electron  configuration  of  S
and Cl?
Periods: The horizontal rows of elements in the periodic table are called periods or
series.
Elements in a period are arranged in increasing order of their atomic numbers from left
to right.
There are 7 periods in the modern periodic table, and each period is represented by
an Arabic numeral: 1, 2 . . . and 7.
• Elements in the same period have the same number of shells.
• Periods  1,  2,  and  3  are  called  short  periods  while  periods  4,  5,  and  6  are
known as long periods.
• Period 1 contains only 2 elements, hydrogen and helium. Period 2 and period 3
contain 8 elements each.
• Period 4 and period 5 contain 18 elements each. Period 6, the longest period,
has 32 elements. Period 7, which is an incomplete period, contains more than
24 elements.Period 7 element is radioactive and/or an artificial element.
• Except for the first period, all periods start with an alkali metal and ends with a
noble gas.
42
PERIODIC CLASSIFICATION OF THE ELEMENTS
Table 2.4  The number of elements in a given period and the orbitals being filled.
Period  number
Orbitals  occupied
Number  of  elements
1
2
3
4
1s
2s,  2p
3s,  3p
4s,  3d,  4p
2
8
8
18
and so on
The position of an element in a given period can be determined by the number of
shells occupied with its electrons. Accordingly, the number of shell is equal to the
number of period to which the element belongs.
Example
Electronic configuration of  23
11 Na  = 1s22s22p63s1 (2, 8, 1). Sodium has 3 main
shells. Hence, sodium is found in period 3.
What  are  the  similarities  and  differences  in  the  electron  configuration  of  F
and Cl?
Groups or families: are the vertical columns of elements in the periodic table.  There
are 18 columns or groups in the modern periodic table.
• Group numbers are usually designated with the Roman numerals I to VIII each
followed by the letter A or B.
These are:
IA . . . . . . . . . VIII A     Main groups (A groups)
IB . . . . . . . . . VIIIB       Sub groups (B groups)
• Elements in a given group have the same number of outermost shell electrons.
• Elements in the same group have similar chemical properties.
• For the main group elements the group number equals the number of valence
electrons.
Example
Electronic configuration of  35
17 Cl  = 1s22s22p63s23p5 (2, 8, 7). The number of
valence electrons of chlorine is 7. Hence chlorine is found in Group VIIA.
43
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
E
L
B
A
T
C
D
O
R
E
P
I
I
44
PERIODIC CLASSIFICATION OF THE ELEMENTS
Exercise 2.2
Give appropriate answers for the following questions.
1. Which group of elements was missing from Mendeleev's periodic table as
compared to the modern periodic table?
2. Why does the first period contain only two elements?
3. To which group and period do the following elements belong?
a carbon
b neon
c aluminium
d potassium
e calcium
f sulphur
2.2.3  CLASSIFICATION  OF  THE  ELEMENTS
Activity 2.3
Perform the following tasks in groups and present your conclusion to the class.
For  the  following  elements,  determine  the  valence  electrons,  and  identify  the  sub–shell
(s,  p,  d  or  f )  in  which  the  last  electron  of  each  element  enters.
a Nitrogen
(atomic  number  =  7)
b Sodium
c Silicon
d Iron
e Zinc
f Krypton
(atomic  number  =  11)
(atomic  number  =  14)
(atomic  number  =  26)
(atomic  number  =  30)
(atomic  number  =  36)
g Cerium
(atomic  number  =  58)
Elements in a periodic table can be classified into three distinct categories based on
their  electron  configuration  and  the  type  of  sub-level  being  filled.  These  are  the
representative elements, the transition elements, and the rare-earth elements.
1. Representative Elements: s-and p-block elements
These  are  elements  in  which  valence  electrons  are  filling  the  s-  or  p-orbitals.
Representative  elements  are  also  known  as  Main  Group  Elements.  They  include
elements in groups IA through VIIIA.
s-block elements are elements in which the last electron enters the s-orbital of the
outermost shell. Their general valence shell configuration is ns1 and ns2, where n
represents the outermost shell.  They are found on the left side of the periodic table
45
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
and  contain  the  first  two  groups:  Group  IA  and  Group  IIA.    These  two  groups
contain very reactive metals.
p-block Elements are elements in which the last electron enters the p-orbital of the
outermost shell. They have the general valence shell electron configuration of ns2np1–
ns2np6. p-block elements are located at the right hand side of the periodic table and
they include six groups-Group IIIA to VIIIA. Most of these elements are non-metals.
Table 2.5  Valence electron configuration, blocks and common names for the
representative elements.
Group
Number
Common name
General valence
shell electron
configuration
Number of
valence
electrons
IA
IIA
IIIA
IVA
VA
VIA
VIIA
VIIIA
Alkali metals
Alkaline earth metals
Boron family
Carbon family
Nitrogen family
Oxygen family (Chalcogen)
Halogens
s-block
p -block
ns1
ns2
ns2np1
ns2np2
ns2np3
ns2np4
ns2np5
Noble gases (Inert gases)
ns2np6
except  He
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Why  is  helium  classified  as  a  noble  gas?
2. Transition Elements: d-block elements
These  elements  are  found  in  the  periodic  table  between  the  s-block  and  p-block
elements. In these elements, the valence electrons are being added to the d-orbital of
the outermost shell. They are also known as d-block elements.  They are designated
as 'B' group, and they consist of groups IB – VIIIB. The transition elements are found
in periods 4, 5, 6, and 7. They include common elements such as iron, gold, and
copper. d-block elements are also called transition metals.
3. Rare-Earth Elements: f-block elements
These elements are also known as inner-transition elements.  They are elements in
which the last electrons are being added to the f-orbital of the outermost shell. The
inner transition elements are in periods 6 and 7. The period 6 inner transition series
fills the 4f-orbitals. It is known as the Lanthanide series because it occurs after the
element lanthanum and its elements are similar to it.  The period 7 inner transition
series fills the 5f-orbitals and appears after the element actinium. Its elements are
similar to actinium, thus it is known as the Actinide series.
46
PERIODIC CLASSIFICATION OF THE ELEMENTS
Figure 2.1 presents a scheme to show the basic structure of the periodic table. On the
basis of the electron configuration of the elements the table is divided into s, p, d and
f-blocks.
Figure 2.1 Division of the modern periodic table.
Reading  Check
In the periodic table, you have seen a section called rare earth elements. Find this
term in an encyclopedia, in reference books, or in other resource material. Read
and analyze the information you find. Write a report on these elements.
Exercise 2.3
Give appropriate answers for the following questions:
1. For the following elements, write their electron configurations and determine
the group and period number of each element.
a Na, Ca, Al
b Cl,  S,  Ar
2. Bromine is a Group VIIA and period-4 element. What is the valence shell
configuration of bromine?
3. Deduce the group, period, and block of the elements with atomic numbers:
a  37
b  24
c  32
Critical  Thinking
4. Why is hydrogen, a non-metal, usually placed with Group I elements in the
periodic table, even though it does not show a metallic property like the alkali
metals?
2.3 PERIODIC  PROPERTIES  IN  THE  PERIODIC  TABLE
Competencies
By  the  end  of  this  section,  you  will  be  able  to:
•
explain the general trends in properties of the elements as they move down a
group of the periodic table;
47
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
•
explain the general trends in properties of elements across a period;
• deduce the properties of an element from its position in the periodic table; and
• make a chart to show the trends in properties of elements in the periodic table.
Activity 2.4
Refer  any  chemistry  book  and  look  up  values  for  atomic  size,  ionization  energy,
electronegativity and other properties of elements. Enter the values in the periodic table,
and see if there any obvious trends in the properties as you go across a period or down a
column of the table. Report your findings to the class.
In the periodic table the properties of the elements such as atomic size, ionization
energy, electron affinity, and electronegativity show a regular variation with in a group
or across a period.
2.3.1  Periodic  Properties  within  a  Group
Elements in the same group have the same number of valence electrons and also
exhibit similar chemical properties.  For example, group IA elements have 1 valence
electron; those in Group IIA have 2 valence electrons, and so on. Generally, it is
possible  to  conclude  that  the  number  of  valence  electrons  determines  the  group
number of an element.
Table 2.6 Electron configuration and number of valence electrons of Group IA elements.
Element
Electron
Configuration
Number of
Valence electron
Group Number
Li
Na
K
Rb
Cs
2,  1
2,  8,  1
2,  8,  8,  1
2,  8,  18,  8,  1
2,  8,  18,  18,  8,  1
1
1
1
1
1
IA
The periodic properties of the elements can be explained on the basis of nuclear
charge and effective nuclear charge.
Nuclear charge (Z): is the total positive charge in the nucleus of an atom.
Effective  Nuclear  charge  (Zeff):  In  an  atom,  the  outermost  shell  electrons  (or
valence electrons) are attracted to the nucleus and simultaneously repelled by the inner
shell electrons. The attraction of the nucleus for the valence electrons is also reduced
because inner electrons shield (or screen) the valence electrons. As a result, these
48
PERIODIC CLASSIFICATION OF THE ELEMENTS
inner electrons reduce the attraction of the nuclear charge. The resulting net-positive
nuclear charge attracting the valence electrons is called effective nuclear charge, Zeff .
Effective nuclear charge relates the nuclear charge to the number of shells (size) of the
atom.
The effective nuclear charge is the difference between the nuclear charge (Z) and the
inner electrons (S) that shield the valence electrons. The effective nuclear charge is
always less than the actual nuclear charge.
Zeff = Z – S
Let us consider the sodium atom with its 11 electrons: 1s22s22p63s1 (2, 8, 1).  The 10
inner electrons of sodium completely cancel the 10 units of nuclear charge on the
nucleus. In this way, the inner electrons shield the valence electrons from the full
attractive force of the nucleus and leave an effective nuclear charge of + 1 (Zeff = + 1).
The fact that the inner electrons shield or screen the outer electrons from the full
charge of the nucleus is known as shielding or screening effect.
Activity 2.5
Form a group and perform the following task:
Draw Bohr's model for the following elements and indicate the shielding shells, shielding
electrons and effective nuclear charge:
a beryllium, magnesium and calcium;
b lithium, carbon and fluorine.
Present your findings to the class.
The  following  properties  of  elements  vary  in  a  regular  periodic  manner.
1. Nuclear Charge
On moving down a given group of the periodic table, nuclear charge progressively
increases, but effective nuclear charge remains nearly constant.
2. Atomic Size/Atomic Radius
Where  in  a  group  do  you  find  atoms  with  the  largest  atomic  radius?  Why?
It is difficult to measure the size of an atom directly. The electron cloud enveloping the
nucleus  does  not  have  a  clear  boundary  because  its  electrons  do  not  have  fixed
distances from the nucleus. Therefore, atoms do not have definite outer boundaries.
The size of an atom is defined in terms of its atomic radius. For metals, atomic radius
is defined as one-half the distance between the nuclei of the two adjacent atoms. For
49
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
elements that exist as diatomic molecules (such as chlorine), atomic radius is equal to
one-half of the distance between the nuclei of the atoms in the molecule. Figure 2.2
illustrates the atomic radius of chlorine in a chlorine molecule.
Chlorine
nucleus
Atomic
Atomic
radius
radius
99 pm
99 pm
198 pm
198 pm
Distance between
nuclei
Chlorine
nucleus
Figure 2.2 The representation of atomic radius in a chlorine molecule.
In  moving  down  a  group,  atomic  radius  of  the  elements  mainly  depends  on  the
number of shells.
Activity 2.6
Form a group and perform the following task; present your findings to the class.
The  following  values  are  given  for  atomic  radii  (in  Å)  of  group  IA  elements:
1.54,  1.34,  2.35,  2.16  and  1.96
Based on the given information;
1.
fill the following table with the number of shells and the appropriate values for atomic
radii corresponding to the symbols of the elements.
2. explain the reason for the observed trend.
Elements
Number of Shells
Atomic Radius  (Å)
Li
Na
K
Rb
Cs
3. Ionization Energy
In  which  region  of  the  periodic  table  do  you  find  elements  with  the:
a  lowest  tendency  to  lose  electrons,  and
b  highest  tendency  to  lose  electrons?
Ionization energy is the minimum energy required to remove the outermost shell
electron from an isolated gaseous atom or ion.
50
PERIODIC CLASSIFICATION OF THE ELEMENTS
Ionization energy is represented by the following equation (where M denotes any
metal).
M (g) + energy ––––→ M+ (g) + e–
The electrons in an atom can be successively removed, one after another. Thus, the
first ionization energy is the energy needed to remove the first valence electron, the
second ionization energy is the energy needed to remove the second valence electron,
and so on.
⇒ First ionization energy
M (g) + energy ––––→ M+ (g) + e–
M+ (g) + energy ––––→ M2+ (g) + e– ⇒ Second ionization energy
For a given element, the second ionization energy is higher than the first one.
Ionization energy is always a positive value (and therefore is an endothermic process)
because energy is required to remove an electron from an atom. Ionization energy is
measured in electron volts (eV) or kiloJoules per mole (kJ/mol).
Ionization energy is a measure of the tendency of an atom to lose an electron. Metals
easily lose electrons and thus have low ionization energy. Non-metals have high
ionization energy because they do not easily lose electrons.
Activity 2.7
Form a group and perform the following task. Present your findings to the class.
Rank  each  set  of  the  following  elements  in  order  of  decreasing  ionization  energy  and
explain the trend in ionization energy of the elements down a group.
i)
ii)
iii)
Ca,    Sr,    Mg,    Be
K,    Li,    Rb,    Na
Cl,    F,    I,    Br
Generally,  ionization  energy  is  affected  by  the  following  factors:
i) Atomic size: As atomic size increases, the valence electrons are less tightly
held by the nucleus. Thus, less energy is required to remove these electrons.
For example, the energy needed to remove an electron from a cesium atom is
lower than from a lithium atom.
ii) Effective nuclear charge: The smaller the effective nuclear charge of an atom,
the lower is the energy needed to remove an electron from the atom.
iii) Types of electrons: The closer an electron is to the nucleus, the more difficult
it is to remove the electron. In a given energy level, s-electrons are closer to
51
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
the nucleus than p-electrons. Similarly, p-electrons are closer than d-electrons,
and  d-electrons  are  closer  than  f-electrons.  Hence,  ionization  energy
decreases in the order of:  s > p > d > f.
iv) Screening  effect  by  the  inner  electrons: As  described  earlier,  inner  shell
electrons shield the valence electrons from the nuclear charge. The more inner
electrons there are, the higher the screening effect, and therefore the easier it
is to remove the valence electrons. Screening decreases ionization energy.
v) Electron configuration (stability): It is easier to remove electrons from unstable
sublevels than from stable ones. Half-filled (p3,  d5, f 7) and completely-filled
(d10,  p6,  f 14)  sublevels  are  more  stable.  For  example,  more  energy  is
required to remove a p3 electron than a p4 electron. As a result of it,  the first
ionization energy of nitrogen is higher than that of oxygen.
Generally, with the increasing atomic number, the first ionization energy decreases
down the same group.
Activity 2.8
After  studying  the  given  information,  identify  the  elements  represented  by  X,  M,  and  Y;
discuss the findings in your group, and then share your conclusion with the other groups.
Element  X
(cid:127) has a relatively high ionization energy.
(cid:127)  generally  forms  an  ion  with  a  –  2  charge.
(cid:127) has an outermost electron configuration of 3s23p4.
Element  M
(cid:127) reacts with oxygen to form M2O.
(cid:127) has a very low ionization energy.
(cid:127) is in the fourth period of the periodic table.
Element  Y
(cid:127) is a transition element.
(cid:127) is used in Ethiopian coinage.
(cid:127) has 10 electrons in the 3d orbital
4. Electron Affinity (EA)
To  which  group  it  is  easier  to  add  electrons;  alkali  metals  or  halogens?
Non-metals gain electrons and therefore form negative ions. The tendency of an atom
to form a negative ion is expressed in terms of electron affinity (EA).
52
PERIODIC CLASSIFICATION OF THE ELEMENTS
Electron affinity is defined as the energy released in kilojoules/mole, when an electron
is added to an isolated gaseous atom to form a gaseous ion.  It is a measure of the
attraction or ‘affinity’ of the atom for the extra added electron.
X(g) + e– ––––→ X– (g) + energy
Since  energy  is  liberated  during  the  process,  electron  affinity  is  expressed  as  a
negative value.  For example, when an electron is added to a fluorine (F) atom, 328
kJ/mol of energy is released to produce a fluoride ion (F–), and EA is – 328 kJ/mol.
F(g) + e– ––––→ F– (g) + EA = – 328 kJ/mol
Electron  affinity  is  a  measure  of  the  strength  of  an  atom  to  attract  an  additional
electron. The smaller is the atomic size of an element, the stronger is the tendency to
form  negative  ions,  and  consequently  the  higher  the  electron  affinity.  Generally,
electron affinity depends on atomic size and effective nuclear charge of the elements.
Activity 2.9
Form a group and discuss the following concepts.
1. Why  does  the  electron  affinity  of  Cl  is  higher  than  that  of  F?
2. Explain why noble gases have extremely low (almost zero) electron affinities?
3. Explain why halogens have the highest electron affinities?
Present your findings to the class.
5. Electronegativity
Where  do  you  find  the  most  electronegative  element  in  the  periodic  table?
Electronegativity is the ability of an atom in a molecule to attract the shared electrons
in the chemical bond. The American chemist Linus Pauling (1901-1994) developed
the most widely used scale of electronegativity values based on bond strength. The
Pauling scale ranges from 0.7 to 4.0. Fluorine, the most electronegative element, is
assigned  a  value  of  4.0,  and  the  least  electronegative  element,  cesium,  has  an
electronegativity value of 0.7.  The electronegativity values for all the rest elements lie
between these extremes.
The electronegativity of an atom is related to its ionization energy and electron affinity.
53
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
An atom with high ionization energy and high electron affinity also tends to have a high
electronegativity value because of its strong attraction for electrons in a chemical
bond.
Activity 2.10
Form a group and perform the following task:
Arrange  each  set  of  the  given  elements  in  order  of  decreasing  electronegativity  and
explain the observed trend.
a
b
c
Ba, Mg,  Be, Ca
C,      Pb,    Ge,    Si
Cl,    F,        I  ,    Br
Present your findings to the class.
6. Metallic Character
In  which  region  of  the  periodic  table  do  you  find  metals  and  non-metals?
Metals have the tendency to lose electrons and form positive ions.  As a result, metals
are called electropositive elements.
In moving down a group, atomic size increases progressively, and it becomes easier
for elements to lose their valence electrons and form positive ions. Therefore, metallic
character increases down a group.
In the periodic table, metals and non-metals are separated by a stair step diagonal
line, and elements near this border line are called metalloids. Metals are found on the
left side of the line and nonmetals on its right side.
Activity 2.11
Form a group, perform the following task and present your findings to the class:
1.
The  members  of  group  IVA  of  the  periodic  table  are:  Ge,  Sn,  C,  Pb  and  Si.
Classify these elements into metals, non-metals and metalloids.
2.
Explain  the  differences  between  silicon  and  lead  in  terms  of:
a Atomic size
b Ionization energy
c
Electron affinity
d Electronegativity
54
PERIODIC CLASSIFICATION OF THE ELEMENTS
Exercise 2.4
Part I:  Choose  the  correct  answer  from  the  given  choices
1. Which of the following properties of the elements remain unchanged down a
group?
a
Ionization energy
b Nuclear charge
c Electron affinity
d Valence electrons
2. Which of the following elements has the largest atomic size?
a Be
b Ba
c Ca
d Mg
3. Which of the following elements has the lowest electronegativty?
a  F
b Br
c I
d Cl
Part  II:  Give  short  answers  for  the  following
4. What is screening effect? How does it relate to effective nuclear charge?
5. What  is  the  relationship  between  first  ionization  energy  and  the  metallic
properties of elements?
2.3.2  Periodic  Properties  within  a  Period
Activity 2.12
Form a group and draw a rough sketch of the periodic table (no details are required). Based
on this, perform the following activities and present your findings to the class.
1.
Indicate  the  regions  where  metals,  non-metals,  and  metalloids  are  located  in  the
periodic table. (Use different colours).
2. Where do you find the most active metal and the most active non-metal? .
As we move from left to right across a period, the number of valence electrons of the
elements increases.  But the number of energy levels or main shells remains the same
in a given period and electrons are filling the same energy level until stable noble gas
configuration is achieved. The additional electrons from Li (2, 1) to Ne (2, 8) are
added to the second shell. In fact, the period number equals the number of energy
level being filled.
55
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Table 2.7 Electron configuration and number of shells for period-2 elements.
Elements
Atomic number
Li
3
Be
4
B
5
C
6
N
7
O
8
F
9
Ne
10
Electron configuration
2,  1
2,  2
2,  3
2,  4
2,  5
2,  6
2,  7
2,  8
Number of shells
(period number)
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
Let us now consider periodic properties of elements across a period.
1. Atomic Size:  From left to right in a given period, nuclear charge or atomic
number progressively increases by one for every succeeding element. However,
increasing number of valence electrons is being added to the same shell. This
results in an increase in effective nuclear charge.
Activity 2.13
Form a group and perform the following task. Present your findings to the class.
The  following  values  are  given  for  atomic  radii  (in  Å)  of  period  2  elements:
0.77,  1.34,  0.69,  0.75,  0.73,  0.82,  0.90,  and  0.71.
Based on the information given;
1.
fill  the  table  given  below  with  the  appropriate  values  for  atomic  radii  of  the
elements.
2. explain the reason for the observed trend.
Element
Li
Be
B
C
N
O
F
Ne
Atomic radii (Å)
2.
Ionization Energy: Two factors account for the general trend in ionization
energy across a given period. These are nuclear charge and atomic size.
Activity 2.14
Form a group and perform the following task, and present your findings to the class.
The following table lists ionization energy values of period 3 elements
Elements
Na
Mg
Al
Si
P
S
Cl
Ar
Ionization energy (kJ/mol)
496
738
578
787
1012 1000 1251 1521
56
PERIODIC CLASSIFICATION OF THE ELEMENTS
1. Explain why there is a general increase in the first ionization energy across
the  period  from  Na  to  Ar.
2. Explain why the first ionization energy of:
i)
aluminium is lower than that of magnesium.
ii) sulphur is lower than that of phosphorus.
(Hint: Use sublevel configurations for the elements).
3. Electron Affinity: The variation in electron affinity of elements in the same
period is due to changes in nuclear charge and atomic size of the elements.
A cross a period from left to right, electron affinity increases due to an increase
in effective nuclear charge. The elements show a greater attraction for an extra
added electron.
4. Electronegativity: Across a period, a gradual change in nuclear charge and
atomic size determine the trends in the electronegativity of the elements.
Activity 2.15
Form a group and perform the following task. Present your findings to the class.
The following values are given for electronegativity of period 3 elements:
2.1,  0.9,  1.5,  3.0,  1.8,  2.5  and  1.2
Based on the information given;
1. Draw  a  table  of  period  3  elements  and  fill  with  the  appropriate  electronegativity
values corresponding to the symbols of the elements.
2. Explain the reason for the observed trend.
5. Metallic character: From left to right in a period, metallic character of the
elements decreases. Elements on the left end of a period have a higher tendency
to form positive ions. Those at the right end have a greater tendency to form
negative ions. In any period, elements on the left side are metals and those on
the right side are nonmetals.
Consider the following period-3 elements and observe how the elements become
more non-metallic on moving from left to right in the periodic table:
Elements
Character
Na
Mg
Al
Si
P
S
Cl
Ar
Metals
Metalloid
Non-metals
Metallic character decreases
57
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Project work
Model  of  a  periodic  table
The following table shows a section of a periodic table. It is incomplete. According to the
data given in table 2.8,
a Construct  a  model  of  this  section  of  the  periodic  table  using  locally  available
materials to show the trends in atomic radii of the elements.
b Complete  the  section  of  the  periodic  table  with  the  elements  in  the  appropriate
position.
Table 2.8 Atomic number and atomic radii of some selected elements.
Element
Atomic
number
Atomic
radii (nm)
Element
Atomic
number
Atomic
radii (nm)
Li
Be
B
C
N
O
F
Ne
Na
Mg
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
0.123
0.089
0.080
0.077
0.074
0.074
0.072
-
0.157
0.136
Al
Si
P
S
Cl
Ar
K
Rb
Cs
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
37
55
0.125
0.117
0.110
0.104
0.099
0.099
0.203
0.216
0.235
(Hint:    Be  innovative.  Use  cheap  local  material  available  to  you.  Your  teacher  will  help  you
whenever necessary.)
Questions:
Give reasons for the increase or decrease in atomic radii that you observe in your model:
i from lithium to fluorine and sodium to chlorine
ii from lithium to cesium
Present your findings to your class teacher.
58
PERIODIC CLASSIFICATION OF THE ELEMENTS
Exercise 2.5
Give appropriate answers for the following questions.
1. The element with the electron configuration of 1s2 2s22p6 3s23p6 is a:
d noble gas
b non-metal
c metalloid
a metal
2. Which of the main groups in the periodic table has the elements with the
most negative value of electron affinity?
a halogens
b noble gases
c Alkali metals
d none
3. Which of the following is the correct increasing order of atomic size for the
elements: Al, Ar, Na, Si?
a Si, Na, Al, Ar
b Na, Al, Si, Ar
c Ar, Si, Al, Na
d Al, Si, Ar, Na
Critical  Thinking
4. Explain  why  the  first  ionization  energy  of  nitrogen  is  the  highest  as
compared to that of carbon and oxygen.
5. Compare  the  elements  fluorine  and  chlorine  with  respect  to  their
electronegativity and electron affinity values.
2.4 ADVANTAGES  OF  PERIODIC  CLASSIFICATION
Competencies
By  the  end  of  this  section,  you  will  be  able  to:
• describe the advantages of periodic classification in studying chemistry.
Activity 2.16
Form a group and discuss the importance of the periodic table for predicting the atomic
size and ionization energy of the elements. Share your idea with the class.
Why  do  we  need  the  classification  of  elements?
The main advantages of using the periodic table are:
1. The periodic table is useful for predicting the formulas of compounds. The
elements  in  a  given  group  form  compounds  with  the  same  atomic  ratio
59
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
because of their similar electron configuration. For example, if the chemical
formula of sodium oxide is Na2O, then we can predict the formulas of the
other oxides of alkali metals. These are Li2O, K2O, Rb2O, and Cs2O.
2. The periodic table is useful for predicting the physical and chemical properties
of  elements.  For  example,  radium  is  a  rare  and  radioactive  element  and
therefore difficult to handle in many experiments. Since its properties can be
predicted from the general trends of group IIA elements, sometimes we do
not need to analyze it directly.
3. The  periodic  table  is  also  useful  for  predicting  the  behaviour  of  many
compounds. For example, oxides of the elements become more acidic across
a period and more basic in character down a group. The trends in the oxides
of period-3 elements vary from strongly basic oxides to amphoteric and then
acidic oxides as we move across a period.
Table 2.9 Oxides of period 3 elements.
Na2O
MgO
Al2O3
SiO2
P4O10
SO3
Cl2O7
Basic oxide
Amphoteric
oxide
Acidic oxide
For a given element, the important information indicated below, in i, ii and iii can be
read, deduced or stated from the periodic table.
( )i
Read the
( )ii
Deduce the
Name
Symbol
Atomic number
Atomic mass
Number of protons
and electron
s
Electron configuration (
valence electrons
)
number of shells and of
Character (behavior) as metal, non metal, or metalloid
Nature (property) of the oxides to form
acids, bases
...
Based on the information in i and ii, we can:
Period number
)iii
(
State the
Group number and
Block type ( ,
or  )
s  p  d f
,
60
PERIODIC CLASSIFICATION OF THE ELEMENTS
Diagonal Relationship
How  do  you  account  for  the  unexpected  resemblance  of  the  properties  of
the  following  sets  of  elements:  Li  and  Mg,  Be  and  Al,  and  B  and  Si?
In addition to the group and period relationships, the elements of s and p block
also exhibit diagonal relationship. On moving diagonally across the periodic table, the
elements show certain similarities. Though clear upon examination, these diagonal
relationships are far less pronounced than the similarities within a group.
Diagonal relationship is particularly noticeable in the elements of second and third
periods of the periodic table. The following illustrations show the diagonal relationship
between Li and Mg, Be and Al, and B and Si.
Li
Be
B
Mg
Al
Si
Check List
Key  terms  of  the  unit
• Actinide series
• Atomic  size
• Block  of  elements
• Dobereiner's traids
• Effective  nuclear  charge
• Electron  affinity
• Electron configuration
• Electronegativity
• Groups
• Law  of  octave
• Mendeleev's law
• Metalloids
• Metals
• Non-metals
• Nuclear charge
• Periodic law
• Periodic table
• Periods
•
•
Inner transition elements
• Representative elements
Ionization energy
• Shielding ( screening) effect
• Lanthanide series
• Transition elements
61
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Unit Summary
• Early attempts of classification of the elements were made by Dobereiner and
Newlands.
• Mendeleev’s law states that properties of the elements are periodic functions of
their atomic masses.
• Mendeleev arranged the elements based on increasing atomic mass.
• Modern periodic law states that the properties of the elements are periodic
function of their atomic numbers.
• Periods are horizontal rows, and groups are vertical columns of the elements in
the periodic table.
• Elements in the same group show similar chemical properties.
• Elements are classified as representative, transition, and rare-earth elements.
This classification is based on the type of sub-level (s, p, d, or f) being filled.
•
Ionization energy is the energy required to remove the outermost shell electron
from an isolated gaseous atom.
• Electron affinity of an element is the energy released when an electron is added
to an isolated gaseous atom to form a gaseous ion.
• Metallic character is the tendency to lose electrons and form positively charged
ions.
• Electronegativity of an element is its ability to attract electrons.
• Trends in atomic size determine the trends in ionization energy, electron affinity,
electronegativity, and metallic character of the elements in the periodic table.
• Atomic size itself is determined by the number of energy levels, nuclear charge,
and effective nuclear charge.
• Periodic properties of elements, such as ionization energy, electron affinity,
electronegativity, etc. show regular variation within a group or period.
REVIEW  EXERCISE  ON  UNIT  2
Part  I: Identify  whether  each  of  the  following  statements
is  true  or  false.  Give  your  reasons  when  you
consider  a  statement  to  be  false.
1. Metallic properties of the elements increase from left to right within a period.
2. Elements in a group have consecutive atomic numbers.
3. All elements with high ionization energy also have high electron affinity.
62
PERIODIC CLASSIFICATION OF THE ELEMENTS
4. All the elements that belong to s and p-blocks are metals.
5. The modern periodic law was proposed by Mosley.
6. As the atomic number of elements increases in the periodic table, their atomic
radius also increases.
7. Transition metals are found in four periods. Each corresponds to the filling of
valence electrons in the 3d, 4d, 5d, and 6d orbitals.
Part  II:    Multiple  Choices  Type  Questions
8. The element with atomic number 35 belongs to:
a s-block
b p-block
c d-block
d  f-block
9. An element with the valence electron configuration 3s23p2 belongs to group:
a IIIA
b IVA
c VIA
d VIIA
10. An element with the valence electron configuration 3s23p6 belongs to period:
a 2
b 6
c 8
d 3
11. An element with the valence electron configuration 2s22p4 belongs to:
a alkali metals
b oxygen group
c halogens
d noble gases
12. The property of the element with atomic number 18 resembles that of the element
with atomic number:
b  36
a  8
c  19
d  40
13. An element with high ionization energy and high electron affinity also tends to
have a high value of:
a electronegativity
b electropositivity
c atomic size
d metallic character
Part  III: To  which  group,  period,  and  sublevel  block  do  the
following  elements  belong?
14. Calcium
15. Sulphur
16.
Iron
17. Zinc
18. Xenon
Group
_____
_____
______
_____
______
Period
______
______
______
______
______
Block
_______
_______
_______
_______
_______
63
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Part  IV: Give  short  answers
19. Explain, with examples, the meaning of diagonal relationship.
20. From the given elements : Na, P, Ca, and Br; which one has the:
a highest first ionization energy?
b smallest atomic size?
c most metallic character?
21. On the basis of electron configuration, explain why nitrogen is less electronegative
than oxygen?
22. On the basis of electron configuration, explain why atomic size of sodium is
larger than that of chlorine?
64
T
I
N
3U
Chemical Bonding and
Intermolecular Forces
Unit  Outcomes
After completing this unit, you will be able to:
(cid:40) discuss  the  formation  of  ionic,  covalent,  and  metallic  bonds;
(cid:40) know  the  general  properties  of  substances  containing  ionic,  covalent,  and
metallic bonds;
(cid:40) develop  the  skills  of  drawing  the  electron-dot  (Lewis  structures)  for  simple
ionic  and  covalent  compounds;
(cid:40) understand  the  origin  of  polarity  within  molecules;
(cid:40) appreciate  the  importance  of  intermolecular  forces  in  plant  and  animal  life;
(cid:40) understand  the  formation  and  nature  of  intermolecular  forces;  and
(cid:40) demonstrate  scientific  inquiry  skills:  observing,  predicting,  making  model,
communicating,  asking  questions,  measuring,  applying  concepts,  comparing
and  contrasting,  relating  cause  and  effects.
MAIN  CONTENTS
3.1 Chemical bonding
3.2
Ionic bonding
3.3 Covalent bonding
3.4 Metallic bonding
3.5
Inter-molecular forces
– Unit Summary
– Review Exercises
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Start-up Activity
Objective of the Activity
Scientists have identified different types of attractive forces between atoms in forming
bonds. The strength of the forces relies on the types of bonds. For instance, in
covalent  bonds,  the  strength  of  the  bonds  depends  on  whether  the  bonds  are
single, double or triple bonds.
In this activity, you will use bundles of sticks to develop your ideas about strength
of bonds.
1. Collect the following materials and bring to school:
– Six sticks of wood of the same length and of the same thickness.
2. Place your sticks on the table in the classroom,
Your  teacher  will  place  your  sticks  in  three  groups.
– A single stick
– Pairs of sticks
– Sets of three sticks
Your teacher will assign three students and will give for each student a single
stick, a pair of sticks, and a set of three sticks.
Figure 3.1 A bundle of sticks.
Figure 3.2 Students trying to break the sticks.
66
CHEMICAL BONDING AND INTERMOLECULAR FORCES
Analysis
1. Which of your bundles of sticks was the strongest? What is the reason for the
different strengths of the bundle of sticks?
2. Draw your conclusions and present to the rest of the class.
3.1   CHEMICAL  BONDING
Competencies
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• define chemical bonding;
•
explain why atoms form chemical bonds.
Activity 3.1
Most  of  the  elements  are  not  found  free  in  nature.  Why  do  the  elements  exists  in
combined form ? Discuss in group and present your findings to the class.
A chemical bond is the attractive force that binds atoms together in a molecule, or a
crystal lattice.
After the periodic table and the concept of electron configuration were developed,
scientists  began  to  develop  ideas  about  molecules  and  compounds.  In  1916,
G.N Lewis concluded that atoms combine in order to achieve a more stable electron
configuration resulting in molecules or compounds.
Historical Note
Gilbert Newton Lewis (1875 - 1946), introduced the theory of the
shared-electron-pair  chemical-bond  formation  in  a  paper
published  in  the  journal  of  the  American  chemical  society.  In
honor  of  this  contribution,  we  sometimes  refer  to “electron-dot”
structures as “Lewis structures”.
G.N. Lewis
67
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
As independent particles, atoms are at relatively high potential energy.  Nature, favors
arrangements in which potential energy is minimized. Most individual atoms exist in a
less stable state than in their combined form.
When atoms form bonds with each other, they attain lower potential energy states.
This decrease in atomic energy generally results in a more stable arrangement of matter.
When atoms interact to form a chemical bond, only their outer regions are in contact.
In the process of the interaction, atoms achieve stable outermost shell configuration.
For this reason, when we study chemical bonding, we are concerned primarily with
the valence electrons. As described in Unit 2, valence electrons are electrons that exist
in the outermost shell of an atom.
Activity 3.2
Form a group and discuss the following:
The following table shows elements of group VIIIA and their atomic numbers. In the space
provided fill the valence shell electron configuration and number of valence electrons for
the elements. In your discussion include why helium is placed in group VIIIA even though
it  has  only  2  valence  electrons.
Elements
Helium, He
Neon, Ne
Argon, Ar
Krypton, Kr
Xenon, Xe
Radon, Rn
Atomic
Number
Valence-Shell
Electron
Configuration
Number of Valence
Electrons
2
10
18
36
54
86
Share your discussion with the rest of the class.
Noble gas atoms with eight electrons (except for, He) in the outermost shell are stable.
Thus, the ns2np6 electronic valence structure has maximum stability.  Atoms containing
less than eight electrons in their outermost shell are unstable.  To attain stability, these
atoms tend to have eight electrons in their valence shells. This leads to the explanation
of the octet rule.  The rule states that atoms tend to gain, lose or share electrons until
there are eight electrons in their valence shell.
The type or characteristic of the resulting arrangement depends largely on the type of
chemical bonding that exists between the atoms. These are ionic, covalent, and metallic
bonds.
68
CHEMICAL BONDING AND INTERMOLECULAR FORCES
Exercise 3.1
1 Why do atoms combine to form compounds?
2 How is a chemical bond formed to make a compound or molecule?
3 Which electron (s) of an atom take (s) part in bond formation?
4 How does the chemical reactivity of halogens compare with that of the noble-gas
family?
3.2 IONIC  BONDING
Competencies
By  the  end  of  this  section,  you  will  be  able  to:
explain the term ion;
illustrate the formation of ions by giving examples;
•
•
• define ionic bonding;
• describe the formation of an ionic bond;
• give examples of simple ionic compounds;
• draw Lewis structures or electron-dot formulas of simple ionic compounds;
•
•
explain the general properties of ionic compounds; and
investigate the properties of given samples of ionic compounds.
Activity 3.3
Form a group and discuss each of the following concepts. Share your ideas with the class.
1. Why do some atoms easily lose electrons and others do not?
2. Sodium  chloride,  NaCl  is  a  good  conductor  in  the  form  of  liquid  state,  but  a  non
conductor in the form of solid state.
When an atom either loses or gains electrons, it becomes an ion. An ion is an electrically
charged particles. Two different types of ions exist. These are the positive ions called
cations and the negative ions called anions.
The chemical properties of metals differ from those of non-metals. A metal has 1, 2,
or 3 electrons in its outermost shell. Metals tend to lose these electrons and become
positively charged ions. For example, if a metal (M) loses one electron, it becomes an
ion with a charge of +1.
69
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
However, if it loses two electrons it becomes an ion with a charge of +2:
A non-metal may have 4, 5, 6, or 7 electrons in its outermost shell. Non-metals tend
to gain electrons to form negatively charged ions. For example, if a non-metal (X)
gains one electron, it becomes an ion with a charge of –1.
Note that hydrogen can form both a cation, H+ (hydrogen ion) as in HCl, or an anion
H– (hydride ion) as in NaH.
Metals in Group IA, the alkali metals, tend to lose one electron when they combine
with other elements, producing cations of +1 charge.  For example, Na and K each
lose one electron to form ions of +1 charge.
Na
sodium atom
K
potassium atom
→
→
Na+
sodium ion
K+
potassium ion
+
+
e–
e–
On the other hand, Group VIIA elements, the halogens, usually gain one electron and
produce  an  ion  with  –1  charge.  For  example,  each  Cl  and  Br  atom  accepts  one
electron to produce an ion with –1 charge.
Cl
chlorine atom
Br
bromine atom
+
+
e– →
e– →
Cl–
chloride ion
Br–
bromide ion
70
CHEMICAL BONDING AND INTERMOLECULAR FORCES
Activity 3.4
Form a group and perform the following tasks:
Consider the elements:
1. Calcium  (atomic  number  =  20)
2. Barium (atomic number = 56)
3. Oxygen  ( atomic number = 8)
4. Sulphur (atomic number = 16)
a determine  whether  each  of  the  elements  gain  or  lose  electrons  in  chemical  bond
formation.
b write the type of ions they form; and
c indicate the charges on the ions formed.
Present your findings to the class.
The following table relates the position of some elements in the periodic table to the ions
they normally produce.Note that the charge is the same for each ion in a given group or
column.
Table 3.1 Selected ions in the periodic table.
Ionic  Bond  formation
When two atoms combine, one of the atoms gains electrons and becomes an anion
and the other loses electrons to form a cation. When a cation and an anion are brought
close to one another, an electrostatic force of attraction is set up between them. This
force of attraction between oppositely charged ions is called an ionic bond. It is also
called an electrovalent bond. The bond is produced when electrons are transferred
from the outermost shell of a metal atom to the outermost shell of a nonmetal atom.
To illustrate ionic bonding, let us consider the formation of the bond between sodium
and chlorine. A sodium atom has 1 valence electron. In order to attain the electron
configuration of the nearest noble gas (Ne), it has to lose its valence electron and
form a sodium ion (Na+). Chlorine has 7 valence electrons. By gaining 1 electron,
chlorine attains the electron configuration of argon (Ar) and form a chloride ion (Cl–).
71
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
In general, an ionic bond is formed by the transfer of electron from a metal to a
nonmetal- for example, sodium and chlorine.  Atoms that are bound together by an
ionic  bond  form  ionic  compounds.  For  example,  Na+  and  Cl–  ions  form  sodium
chloride, NaCl. The transfer of an electron from sodium to chlorine and the formation
of the ionic bond in sodium chloride is shown with the following shell diagrams.
Figure 3.3 Formation of sodium chloride.
Electron-dot  notation  is  often  used  to  represent  the  outermost  shell  electron
configurations of the elements. These formulas, also called Lewis formulas, consist of
the symbol of the element plus dots equal to the number of valence electrons in the
atom or ion. Since valence shells contain a maximum of eight electrons, electron-dot
symbols contain a maximum of eight dots. Electron-dot formulas of sodium and chlorine
72
CHEMICAL BONDING AND INTERMOLECULAR FORCES
are shown below. Sodium is an alkali metal with one valence electron:
Na:  1s22s22p63s1
The Lewis symbol for sodium is Na•.
Chlorine is a halogen with seven valence electrons:
Cl: 1s22s22p63s23p5
The Lewis symbol for chlorine is  Cl .
The formation of ionic bond can also be represented by using electron-dot formulas.
Therefore, the Lewis structure for the ionic compound sodium chloride will be
Na  +
Cl
Na+
Cl
–
Activity 3.5
Form a group and perform each of the following task:
Draw  Bohr's  diagrammatic  representation  and  write  the  Lewis  formula  for  the  following
ionic compounds:
a Potassium chloride
d Potassium sulphide
b Magnesium oxide
e Aluminium oxide
c Calcium chloride
Share  your  ideas  with  rest  of  the  class.
The following table illustrates the formation of ionic bonds between representative metals
and non-metals. Careful observation indicates that, in each case, both the metal and
the nonmetal acquire a noble-gas configuration. The compounds formed in each case
are electrically neutral as the sum of positive charges equals the sum of negative charges.
Table 3.2  Summary of formula of ionic-compounds.
Metal  group
Non-metal group
IA
IA
IA
IIA
IIA
IIA
IIIA
IIIA
IIIA
VIIA
VIA
VA
VIIA
VIA
VA
VIIA
VIA
VA
Note: M = metal; X = non-metal.
Formula of Ionic
Compound
MX (M+X–)
M2X (2M+X2–)
M3X (3M+X3–),
MX2 (M2+2X–),
MX (M2+ X2–),
M3X2 (3M2+ 2X3–)
MX3 (M3+ 3X–),
M2X3 (2M3+3X2–)
MX (M3+ X3–)
Examples
NaCl, KBr
Li2O, K2O
Na3N, K3P
MgCl2, CaI2
BaS, MgO, MgS
Ca3N2, Mg3P2
AlF3
Al2O3
AlN
73
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Exercise 3.2
1. Draw the Lewis structure for the nitrogen atom, nitrogen molecule and ammonia.
2. Show that the following species have the same number of electrons.
Na+, Mg2+, O2–, and Ne
How  do  you  name  ionic  compounds,  for  example  NaCl?
To name an ionic compound that is formed from a metal and a non-metal, follow the
given procedure, by considering the example of NaCl:
1. Write the name of the metal (sodium).
2. Modify the last characters of the name of the non-metal (chlorine) to end it with
ide. (Chloride).
Therefore, the name of NaCl is sodium chloride. Similarly, MgO is named as magnesium
oxide, Na3N is named as sodium nitride.
General  Properties  of  Ionic  Compounds
Activity 3.6
Form a group and perform the following task: Collect samples of ionic compounds from
your school laboratory and investigate whether the samples are:
a hard or soft
b brittle or strong
c
liquids or solids
What is your generalization about the physical properties of ionic compounds? Share your
ideas  with  the  rest  of  the  class.
Experiment 3.1
Investigating the Physical Properties of Ionic Compounds
I Melting Point and Solubility
Objective: To investigate the melting point and solubility of some ionic compounds.
Apparatus: Test -tube, Bunsen burner.
Chemicals: NaCl, CuCl2, ethanol, hexane and benzene.
Procedure:
Perform the following three experiments:
1. Put a few crystals of dry sodium chloride (NaCl) and copper (II) chloride
(CuCl2) into separate glass test tubes. Heat strongly on a Bunsen burner. What
do you observe?
74
CHEMICAL BONDING AND INTERMOLECULAR FORCES
2. Place  about  1  g  each  of  sodium  chloride  (NaCl)  and  copper  (II)  chloride
(CuCl2) in separate test tubes. Add about 5 mL of water (polar solvent) and
shake well.
3. Repeat experiment 2 using the following solvents instead of water. Ethanol
(polar solvent), hexane and benzene (non-polar solvents). These solvents are
highly flammable and should be kept away from flames.
Observations  and  analysis
a In experiment 1, do the crystals melt? Do they have high or low melting
points?
b In experiment 2 and 3, does each of the solids dissolve in the given solvents?
Why? Do they have low or high solubility in the given solvents?
Prepare a table as shown below and fill in the results of the solubility tests.
Substances
Water
Ethanol
Hexane
Benzene
NaCl (s)
CuCl2 (s)
II Conductivity
Objective: To investigate the conductivity of some ionic compounds.
Apparatus: Beaker, conductivity cell, graphite or iron rods, bulb, wire, battery.
Chemicals: Sodium chloride, copper (II) chloride, benzene and charcoal.
Procedure:
1. Put some amount of sodium chloride crystals in a beaker.
2. Place two electrodes that are made of iron or graphite in the beaker.
3. Connect  the  two  electrodes  to  a  bulb  and  a  6-volt  battery  as  shown  in
Figure 3.5.
Record your observation.
4. Now add distilled water to the beaker and stir dissolve the salt. Observe the
changes.
5. Repeat  the  experiment  using  aqueous  copper  (II)  chloride,  benzene  and
charcoal.
75
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Bulb
Dry cells
Graphite
electrodes
NaCl solution
Figure  3.5 Conductivity of sodium chloride solution.
Observations  and  analysis
a Does sodium chloride conduct electricity in its solid state?
b What do you observe in the bulb when the sodium chloride is dissolved?
What does this indicate?
c What can you conclude from this experiment?
d What are your observations for aqueous copper (II) chloride, benzene and
charcoal?
Conclusion:
What are your conclusions about:
a melting point,
b solubility in polar and non-polar solvents, and
c
electrical conductivity of ionic compounds?
A  summary  of  the  general  properties  of  ionic  compounds:
1. Ionic compounds do not contain molecules. They are aggregates of positive ions
and negative ions. In the solid state, each ion is surrounded by ions of the opposite
charge, producing an orderly array of ions called crystal.
76
CHEMICAL BONDING AND INTERMOLECULAR FORCES
Figure 3.4 Arrangement of ions.
2. At room temperature ionic compounds are hard and rigid crystalline solids.  This is due
3.
4.
5.
to the existence of strong electrostatic forces of attraction between the ions.
Ionic compounds have relatively high melting and boiling points. This is due to
the presence of strong electrostatic forces between the ions. These forces can
be overcome only by applying very large amounts of energy.
Ionic compounds can conduct electric currents when molten or in aqueous
solution. This is due to the presence of mobile ions in molten state or in solution.
However, ionic compounds do not conduct electricity in the solid state.
Ionic compounds are soluble in polar solvents such as water. They are insoluble
in non-polar solvents such as benzene.
Exercise 3.3
1. KCl is soluble in water but insoluble in benzene. Explain.
2. Which of the following substances conduct electricity?  Give reasons for your
answer in each case:
a NaCl (aq)
b NaCl (l)
c NaCl (s)
3. Name the ionic compounds formed from the following pairs of elements:
a calcium and sulphur b sodium and iodine
c silver and bromine
4. List the properties of ionic compounds.
3.3 COVALENT  BONDING
Competencies
By  the  end  of  this  section,  you  will  be  able  to:
• define covalent bonding,
• describe formation of a covalent bond,
77
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
• draw Lewis structures or electron-dot formulas of simple covalent molecules,
• give examples of different types of covalent molecules,
• make models of covalent molecules to show single, double and triple bonds
using sticks and balls or locally available materials,
explain polarity in covalent molecules,
•
• distinguish between polar and non-polar covalent molecules,
• define coordinate (dative) covalent bond,
•
•
•
illustrate the formation of coordinate covalent bond using appropriate examples,
explain the general properties of covalent compounds, and
investigate the properties of given samples of covalent compounds.
Activity 3.7
Form a group and discuss each of the following concepts.
1. What is the difference between the bond when two chlorine atoms combine to form a
chlorine molecule (Cl2) and that formed when sodium combines with chlorine to form
sodium chloride (NaCl)?
2. Carbon tetrachloride (CCl4) is a covalent compound. Would you expect it to be :
i) a conductor of electricity
ii) soluble in water.
Share your ideas with the class.
Many molecules are formed when outermost shell or valence electrons are shared
between two atoms. This sharing of electrons creates a covalent bond.
Covalent bond formation can be illustrated by the sharing of electrons between two
hydrogen atoms to form a molecule of hydrogen.
Figure 3.6 Sharing of electrons between hydrogen atoms in H2
molecule.
In the hydrogen molecule, each hydrogen atom attains the stable electron configuration
of helium.
In a covalent bond, each electron in a shared pair is attracted to the nuclei of both
atoms as shown in Figure 3.6. The shared electrons spend most of their time between
the two nuclei. The electrostatic attraction between the two positively charged nuclei
and the two negatively charged electrons hold the atoms in the molecule together. This
78
CHEMICAL BONDING AND INTERMOLECULAR FORCES
attractive force between positively charged nuclei of atoms and the shared electrons in
a molecule is known as covalent bond.
A molecule of hydrogen chloride is also formed by a pair of electrons shared between
the two atoms. Each atom in the molecule attains a stable electron configuration.
Figure 3.7 Hydrogen and chlorine share a pair of electrons in HCl.
The concept of Lewis formula representation can also be extended to covalent bonds.
The Lewis structure for a covalent compound shows the arrangement of atoms in a
molecule and all the valence electrons for the atoms involved in the compound. It is
conventional to represent the non-bonding (lone pair) electrons by dots and the pair
of electrons that are shared between atoms by a dash. For example, consider the
hydrogen molecule:
The electron-dot formula of the hydrogen molecule is:
H•  +  •H  →  H H
The covalent bond in hydrogen molecule is also written as H – H.
The formation of the covalent bond in hydrogen chloride is shown by the following
electron-dot formula. This formula must satisfy the octet rule (for chlorine) and the
doublet rule (for hydrogen). As shown in the illustration, these requirements are satisfied.
The shared pair belongs to both of the atoms (hydrogen and chlorine) in the hydrogen
chloride molecule. The resulting valence electron configuration provides two valence
electrons to hydrogen and eight to chlorine.
The chlorine atom in the molecule has three pairs of electrons, which are not used for
bonding. Pairs of electrons that is not used for bonding are called lone-pair electrons.
Pairs that are used for bonding are called bonding-pair electrons.
79
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Consider the fluorine molecule, F2. The electron configuration of fluorine is 2, 7.  Thus
each fluorine atom has seven valence electrons.  Accordingly, there is only one unpaired
electron on fluorine. Therefore, the formation of the fluorine molecule is represented as
Note that only two valence electrons participate in the formation of fluorine molecule.
The others are non-bonding electron (lone pairs).  Thus each fluorine atom in fluorine
molecule has three lone-pairs of electrons. The resulting molecule is a diatomic molecule.
A diatomic molecule consists of two atoms. All the other members of the halogen
family form diatomic molecules in the same way as fluorine does.
The maximum number of covalent bonds that an atom can form can be predicted
from the number of electrons needed to fill its valence shell. For example, each member
of Group IVA elements has four electrons in its valence shell, and it needs four more
electrons to achieve stable noble-gas electron configuration. Thus, it forms four covalent
bonds for carbon in methane, CH4 as shown below:
H
CH
H
H
or
H
H
C
H
H
Elements of Group VA need three additional electrons to achieve noble gas configuration
and they form three covalent bonds as shown below for nitrogen in ammonia NH3.
H
N H
H
or
H
N
H
H
Similarly, elements of group VIA form two covalent bonds and Group VIIA elements
form single covalent bonds.
Types  of  Covalent  Bonds
How do you compare the nature and strength of the bonds in H2 , O2 and N2?
Atoms can form different types of covalent bonds. These are single bonds, double
bonds and triple bonds.
In a single bond two atoms are held together by one electron pair.
80
CHEMICAL BONDING AND INTERMOLECULAR FORCES
How  are  the  covalent  bonds  in  H2,  Cl2  and  HCl  formed?
Many covalent compounds are held together by multiple bonds. Multiple bonds are
formed  when  two  or  three  electron  pairs  are  shared  by  two  atoms.  If  two  atoms
share two pairs of electrons, the covalent bond is called a double bond. For example,
double bonds are found in molecules of carbon dioxide (CO2) and ethene (C2H4).
C
or
C
H
H
C C
H
H
or
Carbon dioxide
H
H
H
H
C C
Ethene
A triple bond is formed when two atoms share three pairs of electrons, as in the
nitrogen molecule (N2).
The ethyne (acetylene) molecule (C2H2) also contains a triple bond. In this case the
bond is between two carbon atoms.
H
C C
H
or
H
C C
Ethyne
H
Activity 3.8
Form a group and perform the following tasks:
1. Construct a molecular model for each of the following species using locally available
materials such as toothpicks to represent bonds, and styrofoam spheres to represent
atoms.
a N2
b H2
c O2
d C2H4
2. Based on your models, identify which species contain:
i) only single bonds
ii) double bonds
iii) triple bonds
Present your models and findings to the rest of the class.
81
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Exercise 3.4
1. How many bonding pair and lone pair electrons are found in each of the
following molecules?
a  CO2
b  C2H4
c  N2
d  C2H2
2. Consider molecules of carbon disulfide, CS2, and hydrogen cyanide, HCN.
a What types of bonds do they contain?
b Draw their electron-dot formulas.
c Are there any lone-pair electrons in these molecules?
3. Why is the melting point of ionic compounds higher than that of covalent
compounds?
Reading  Check
Does the hydrogen atom form covalent as well as ionic bonds? How?
3.3.1  Polarity  in  Covalent  Molecules
Activity 3.9
Form a group and discuss the following idea:
The covalent bonds are formed by sharing of electrons. Compare covalent bonds formed
between  atoms  of  the  same  elements  and  those  formed  between  atoms  of  different
elements. (Example: H2 and HCl).
Present your conclusion to the class.
A covalent bond is formed when electron pairs are shared between two atoms.  In
molecules like H2, in which the atoms are identical, the electrons are shared equally
between the atoms. A covalent bond in which the electrons are shared equally between
the two atoms is called a non-polar covalent bond.
H – H
In other words, a non-polar bond is a covalent bond in which bonding electrons are
shared equally between identical atoms, resulting in a balanced distribution of electrical
charge.
In contrast, in the covalently bonded HCl molecule, the H and Cl atoms are of different
elements; therefore, they do not share the bonding electrons equally.
82
CHEMICAL BONDING AND INTERMOLECULAR FORCES
A chemical bond in which shared electrons spend more time in the vicinity of one
atom than the other is called a polar covalent bond, or simply a polar bond.
Polarity of bonds is caused by differences in the electronegativity of the two atoms
forming the bonds. Electronegativity is the ability of an atom to attract the shared
electrons in a chemical bond toward itself.
Elements with high electronegativity have a higher tendency to attract electrons than
elements with low electronegativity. For example, in the case of HCl, the electronegativity
of the chlorine atom is higher than that of the hydrogen atom. The shared pair of
electrons is more strongly attracted to the nucleus of the chlorine atom. As a result,
the chlorine atom acquires a partial negative charge (δ–) whereas the hydrogen atom
acquires a partial positive charge (δ+). The delta is read as "partial" or "slightly."
If a molecule has a positive end and a negative end, it is said to be polar and posses
a dipole. Dipole means 'two poles'.
Experimental evidence indicates that, in the HCl molecule, the electrons spend more
time near the chlorine atom. We can think of this unequal sharing of electrons as a
partial electron transfer or a shift in electron density as shown below:
This unequal sharing of the bonding electron pair results in a relatively higher electron
density near the chlorine atom and a correspondingly lower electron density near
hydrogen.
Exercise 3.5
1. How many electrons are shared in a:
a single bond, b double bond, and c triple covalent bond?
2. Draw Lewis structures for:
a H2
b Cl2
c  C3H6
3. Draw Lewis structures for each of the following molecules:
a HBr
Also indicate the partial charges using  δ+ and δ–.
b  CO2
c  H2O
3.3.2  COORDINATE  COVALENT  BOND
A covalent bond in which one atom donates both electrons of the bond is called a
coordinate covalent bond. It is also called a dative bond. Such a bond is hypothetically
represented as:
83
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Once formed, a coordinate covalent bond has the same properties as any other covalent
bond. The atom that contributes both electrons for the bond is the donor atom, and
the atom that shares the electron pair is the acceptor atom.
For an atom to act as a donor, it must contain lone pair of electrons in its valence
shell and the acceptor atom must have at least one vacant orbital.
For example, the ammonium ion, NH+
4, is formed by a coordinate covalent bond in
which the two non-bonding electrons on NH3 bond with a hydrogen ion, H+, which
has no electrons to contribute.
In the resulting ion, NH+
4, the four N – H bonds are identical.
Similarly, a coordinate covalent bond can be formed between a hydrogen ion and a
molecule of water, which has two lone pairs of electrons.
Carbon monoxide, CO, also has a coordinate covalent bond. In order for both carbon
and oxygen atoms to attain noble-gas electron arrangements, oxygen donates a pair of
electrons to the carbon atom. In the process a coordinate covalent bond is formed
between the two atoms.
General  properties  of  covalent  compounds
1. Covalent compounds are generally liquids or gases at ordinary temperature. For
example : water and ethyl alcohol are liquids. Hydrogen chloride, methane and
cabon dioxide are gases. Same covalent compounds are solids (e.g. sugar)
2. As compared to ionic compounds, covalent compounds have relatively lower
melting points and boiling points.
3. They do not conduct electric current when molten or in aqueous solution, because
they consist of molecules rather than of ions.
4. Covalent compounds are insoluble in polar solvents such as water. They are
soluble in non-polar solvents such as benzene and carbon tetrachloride.
84
CHEMICAL BONDING AND INTERMOLECULAR FORCES
Experiment 3.2
Investigating  the  Physical  Properties  of  Covalent  Compounds
I.  Melting  point
Objective: To investigate the effect of heat on covalent compounds.
Apparatus: Test tube, Bunsen burner.
Chemicals: Naphthalene, graphite, iodine.
1. Put  a  small  amount  of  naphthalene  into  a  dry  test  tube.  Heat  it  strongly.
Naphthalene is toxic. Do not inhale it or get it on your skin.
a What do you observe? Does the solid melt or vaporize?
b Is the melting point high or low?
2. Repeat the procedure with graphite, and iodine separately.  Iodine vapor is
toxic. Do not inhale it.
Observe and record your observation in a tabular form as shown below.
Melted, vaporized or
nothing  happened
High or low
melting  point
Substance
Naphthalene
Graphite
Iodine
II.  Solubility
Objective: To investigate the solubility of covalent compounds.
Apparatus: Test-tubes, test tube rack.
Chemicals: Naphthalene, graphite, iodine, ethanol, hexane and benzene.
3. Arrange 12 test tubes in three sets (A, B, C) of 4 test tube each. To each
test tube of set A, add 1 g of naphthalene. To each test tube of set B add 1
g of graphite and to each test tube of set C add 1 g of iodine.
4. Add about 10 mL of each the following solvents to the four test tubes of each
set separately and shake well.
• Water
• Ethanol
• Hexane
• Benzene
Caution: Ethanol, hexane and benzene are all highly flammable.
Observe and record whether the solids are very soluble, slightly soluble or insoluble.
85
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Solubility
Water
Ethanol
Hexane
Benzene
Substance
Naphthalene
Graphite
Iodine
Observations  and  analysis
Draw general conclusions on the
a melting points,
b solubility in polar and non-polar solvents of the covalent compounds given.
Exercise 3.6
1. Which of the following molecules contain a covalent bond?
a CaO
b HCl
c CO2
d SO2
e Na2O
f PCl3
g MgO
h NaH
i CH4
2. Which of the following contain a dative bond?
a H3O+
b NH3
–
c NH2
d CaO
3. Which of the following molecules are polar ?
a SO2
b CO2
c   H2O
d CS2
e BCl3
f CH4
4. Which of the following are non-polar covalent compounds?
a O2
b HCl
c CH4
d O3
e H2O
f Cl2
g CH3Cl
g Br2
Activity 3.10
Form a group and perform the following task:
Collect  samples  of  covalent  compounds  from  your  school  laboratory  and  investigate
whether the samples are:
a
liquids or solids
b hard or soft
c brittle or strong
What is your generalization about the physical properties of covalent compounds? Share
your ideas with the class.
Reading  Check
What is the difference between a coordinate covalent bond and covalent bond?
86
CHEMICAL BONDING AND INTERMOLECULAR FORCES
3.4 METALLIC  BONDING
Competencies
By  the  end  of  this  section,  you  will  be  able  to:
•
•
explain the formation of metallic bond;
explain the electrical and thermal conductivity of metals in relation to metallic
bonding; and
Activity 3.11
Form a group and discuss the following concepts and present your discussion to the class.
a Metals  are  solids.  They  contain  large  number  of  atoms  in  their  crystals.  What  kind  of
force do you think holds these metal atoms together?
b How do you account for the properties of metals, such as conductivity, malleability, and
ductility in terms of the bonds in metals?
The highest energy orbitals of most metals are occupied by very few electrons. In
s-block metals, for example, one or two valence electrons occupy s orbitals in the
outermost levels (for example Na and Mg). Furthermore, the p orbitals of the outer
most level are also occupied partially in p-block metals (example Tl, Pb and Bi).
The d-block metals contain partially filled (n–1)d levels in their atomic states or principal
oxidation states. The bonding in metals is different from that in other types of crystals.
The valence electrons of metals are not held by individual atoms. Rather, they are
delocalized and mobile (free to move throughout the structure).
The valence electrons form a sea of electrons around the metal ions and these metal
ions are organized as a crystal. Metallic bonding results from the attraction between
the metal ions and the surrounding sea of electrons.
For example, as illustrated in Figure 3.8, a sodium metal crystal is a lattice-like array
of Na+ ions surrounded by a sea of mobile bonding valence electrons.
Figure 3.8 Metallic bonding in sodium metal.
87
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
The bonding valence electrons move freely throughout the entire crystal. This freedom
of movement is responsible for the electrical conductivity of metals.
Properties  of  Metallic  Bonding
Have you ever visited a goldsmith workshop? Why are metals easily shaped into
thin  sheets  and  drawn  into  wires?
The freedom of movement of bonding valence electrons is responsible for the high
electrical and thermal conductivity that characterizes the metals. Other properties of
metallic bonding contribute to unique properties of metals. For example, most metals
are easy to shape due to their malleability and ductility.
Malleability allows a substance such as a metal to be reshaped. By hammering and
bending some metals, you can create thin sheets. Ductility allows a substance to be
drawn or pulled out into long thin pieces, such as wires.
Metals are malleable and ductile because metallic bonding is the same in all directions
throughout the solid.
When we apply a force to metal, its cations swim freely within the sea of electrons
without breaking the crystal structure. For example, when you hammer, bend, or pull
on a metal to reshape it, you shift its cations around. The force you apply moves the
atoms around, for example, around corners in the lattice. This is the basis for malleability
and ductility of metals, which allows you to change its shape.
Project work
Model  of  a  Metallic  Crystal
Put about one hundred balls (for example, marble balls or balls made from other locally
available  materials)  into  a  rectangular  glass  trough.  Shake  the  trough.  Allow  the  balls  to
settle.
a Draw  a  two-dimensional  diagram  to  show  how  the  marble  balls  are  now  arranged  in
the trough.
b If  the  balls  represent  atoms  in  a  metallic  lattice,  which  species  are  occupying  the
‘empty’ space between and around them?
Present your model and findings to the class.
Exercise 3.7
1. Describe how a metallic bond is different from those of an ionic bond and a
covalent bond.
2. Explain thermal and electrical conductivity in metals.
3.
Is metallic bonding responsible to form compounds?
88
CHEMICAL BONDING AND INTERMOLECULAR FORCES
3.5  INTERMOLECULAR  FORCES
Competencies
By  the  end  of  this  section,  you  will  be  able  to:
• define inter-molecular forces;
explain hydrogen bonding;
•
•
explain the effects of hydrogen bonding on the properties of substances;
• describe Van der Waal's forces;
•
explain dipole-dipole forces;
• give examples of molecules with dipole-dipole forces;
•
• give examples of molecules in which dispersion  force is important; and
•
compare and contrast the three types of intermolecular forces.
explain dispersion forces;
Activity 3.12
Form  a  group  and  discuss  the  following  phenomenon:  Why  do  covalent  compounds
usually exist as gases and liquids?
Share  your  views  with  the  rest  of  the  class.
Inter-molecular forces are relatively weak forces of attraction that occur between
molecules. Inter-molecular forces vary in strength but are generally weaker than the
bonds that join atoms in molecules, ions in ionic compounds, and metal atoms in solid
metals. Inter-molecular forces acting between molecules include: dipole-dipole forces,
London  dispersion  forces  and  hydrogen  bonding.  Dipole-dipole  attractions  and
London forces are collectively called Van der Waal's forces.
A Dipole-Dipole Forces
Dipole-dipole forces are strong inter-molecular forces between polar molecules. A dipole
is created by equal but opposite charges separated by a short distance. A polar molecule
acts as a tiny dipole because of its uneven charge distribution.
A dipole is represented by an arrow with a head pointing toward the negative pole
and crossed tail situated at the positive pole. The dipole created by a hydrogen chloride
molecule, which has its negative end at the more electronegative chlorine atom, is as
shown below:
Figure 3.9 Dipole-dipole interactions in HCl molecules.
89
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
The negative end in one polar molecule attracts the positive end in an adjacent molecule
in a liquid or solid. Dipole-dipole forces occur in molecules such as ethyl alcohol and
water.
B London Dispersion Forces
All molecules, including those without dipole moments, exert forces on each other. We
know this because all substances, even the noble gases, change from liquid to solid
state under different conditions.
Figure 3.10  Induced dipole-induced dipole forces between non-polar molecules.
London dispersion forces act between all atoms and molecules. They are the only
forces that exist between noble gas atoms and non-polar molecules. This fact is reflected
in the low boiling points of noble gases and non-polar molecules. Because dispersion
forces result from temporary redistribution of the electrons causing induced dipole-
dipole interactions, their strength increases with the number of electrons in the interacting
atoms or molecules. Hence, dispersion forces increase with atomic number or molar
mass. This trend can be seen by comparing the boiling points of gases (helium, He,
and argon, Ar), (hydrogen, H2, and oxygen, O2), and (chlorine, Cl2, and bromine,
Br2).
As an illustration, the boiling points of the noble gases are presented in Table 3.4.
Table 3.3  Boiling points of noble gases.
Noble gas
Boiling Point (oC)
Number of electrons
He
Ne
Ar
Kr
Xe
Rn
-269
-246
-186
-152
-107
-62
2
10
18
36
54
86
90
CHEMICAL BONDING AND INTERMOLECULAR FORCES
As you look down the column of noble gases, you note that boiling point increases.
This is because the induced dipole-dipole interaction increases.
C Hydrogen Bonding
Hydrogen bonding is a particular type of intermolecular force arising when a hydrogen
atom is bonded to highly electronegative elements, fluorine, oxygen and nitrogen.
Hydrogen bonding is a particular type of dipole-dipole interactions between polar
compounds. In such compounds, large electronegativity differences between the hydrogen
and the fluorine, oxygen, or nitrogen atoms make the bonds connecting them highly
polar. This polarity gives the hydrogen atom a positive charge. Moreover, the small
size of the hydrogen atom allows the atom to come very close to an unshared pair of
electrons on an adjacent molecule.  Hydrogen bonding is responsible for the unusual
high boiling points of some compounds such as hydrogen fluoride (HF), water (H2O)
and ammonia (NH3).
Hydrogen bonds are usually represented by dotted lines connecting the hydrogen atom
to the unshared electron pair of the electronegative atom to which it is attracted.  For
example,  the  hydrogen  bond  in  hydrogen  fluoride,  HF,  results  when  the  highly
electronegative F atom attracts the H atoms of an adjacent molecule.
Do you think that the intermolecular forces between molecules containing C-H,
N-H,  and  O-H  bonds  are  as  strong  as  the  intermolecular  forces  containing  F-H
bonds?
Exercise 3.8
1. Which of the following exists predominately in the water (H2O) molecule?
c
d
2. Which of the following has the highest induced dipole interactions in its molecule?
coordinate covalent bond
none of these
a Van der Waal's force
b hydrogen bond
a He
b Ar
Critical  Thinking
c Ne
d Kr
8( O)  and Sulphur  32
Oxygen  16
16( S)  are in the same group in the periodic table.
They form compounds with hydrogen, H2O and H2S. However, H2O is a liquid,
whereas H2S is a gas at room temperature. Give explanation?
91
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Check List
Key  terms  of  the  unit
• Anions
• Bonding-pair electrons
• Cations
• Chemical  bond
• Conductivity
• Coordinate/dative  bond
• Covalent  bond
• Delocalized electrons
• Dipole
• Dipole-dipole interaction
• Double-bond
• Ductility
• Electronegativity
• Electrovalent  bond
• Hydrogen bonding
•
•
Inter-molecular forces
Ionic bonding
Ionization energy
•
• London forces
• Lone-pair electrons
• Malleability
• Metallic bond
• Mobile electrons
• Noble gases
• Non-bonding electrons
• Octet rule
• Polar bond
• Polar  covalent  bond
• Polarity
• Sea  of  electrons
• Single-bond
• Triple-bond
• Valence electrons
• Van der Waal's forces
Unit Summary
• A chemical bond is the attractive force that binds atoms together to form a
molecule (or a crystal lattice), an ionic or metallic crystal lattice.
• An ionic bond is the electrostatic attraction between oppositely charged ions
(cations and anions).
• A covalent bond is formed by a shared pair of electrons.
• A covalent bond in which one pair of electrons is shared is known as a single
bond; for example, H2 written as H – H.
• Atoms can also share more than one pair of electrons to form a multiple bond.
• The sharing of three pairs of electrons forms a triple bond - for example, N2,
written as N≡N.
• A dative or coordinate covalent bond is a bond in which one of the atoms
supplies both of the shared electrons to the covalent bond.
• A metallic bond is the electrostatic attraction between positive metal ions and
delocalized electrons.
92
CHEMICAL BONDING AND INTERMOLECULAR FORCES
•
Inter-molecular  forces  are  forces  of  attraction  between  covalently  bonded
molecules. These include:  London forces, dipole-dipole forces, and hydrogen
bonding.
• London forces are forces of attractions between nonpolar molecules.
• Dipole-dipole forces are the attractions between dipoles of polar molecules.
• Hydrogen bonding is the attraction of covalently bonded hydrogen to lone pairs
on N, O, or F atoms in other molecules or in the same molecule (if the molecule
is large enough).
REVIEW  EXERCISE  ON  UNIT  3
Part  I:  Multiple  Choice  Type  Questions
1. Which of the following contain localized valence electrons?
a Cu
b C2H6
c C6H6
d none
2. Which of the following is a compound?
a Cl2
b HCl
c Na
d liquid oxygen
3.
In the formation of ionic bonding, valence electrons are:
a shared
b delocalized
c transferred
d not affected
4. What force is responsible for the formation of ice during the freezing of water?
a ionic
b covalent
c dipole-dipole interaction
d dative bond
5. Which of the following has the highest electrical conductivity in the solid state?
a water
b common salt
c sodium
d rubber
Part  II: Write  the  missing  words  in  your  exercise  book
6.
Ionic bonding is formed between the atoms of _____ and _____.
7. Covalent bonding is formed between the atoms of _____.
8. Metallic bonding is formed between the atoms of _____.
9. The forces that hold atoms together in molecules of compounds are called _____.
93
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Part  III: Short  Answer  Type  Questions
10. Give a simple explanation of the following, using an example:
a a covalent bond
b an ionic bond
c a dative bond
hydrogen bonding
d
e metallic bond
11. Classify the bonds that can be formed between the following pairs of atoms as
principally ionic or covalent:
a calcium and chlorine
b boron and carbon
c sodium and bromine
d magnesium and nitrogen
e
f
g
h
sodium and hydrogen
aluminium and oxygen
chlorine and oxygen
iodine and chlorine
12. Give the Lewis structures for the following:
g NH3
h CH4
i
CF4
j NO
k CaCl2
a H2S
b CaS
c Al2O3
d HF
e N2
f C2H4
13. Which of the following molecules can form hydrogen bonding?
a H2S
b CO2
c SO2
d CH4
e NH3
f HF
g CH3OH
14. Which of the following substances contain hydrogen bonding?
a hydrogen chloride
b water
ammonia
c
d methane
15. Classify the following molecules as polar or non-polar:
a CH4
b CH3Cl
c C2H2
d CO2
e H2O2
f
BCl3
g H2S
h HBr
16. What is meant by a polar molecule?
17. Explain the fact that HCl is polar, whereas Cl2 is a non-polar molecule.
18. What is the difference between intermolecular and intra-molecular attractive
forces?
94
T
I
N
4U
Chemical Reactions and
Stoichiometry
Unit  Outcomes
After completing this unit, you will be able to:
(cid:40) understand  the  fundamental  laws  of  chemical  reactions  and  how  they  are
applied;
(cid:40) develop skills in writing and balancing chemical equations;
(cid:40) understand energy changes in chemical reactions;
(cid:40) know  types  of  chemical  reactions;
(cid:40) develop  skills  in  solving  problems  based  on  chemical  equations  (mass-mass,
volume-volume  and  mass-volume  problems);
(cid:40) develop skills in determining limiting reactant, theoretical yield, actual yield,
and percentage yield;
(cid:40) understand oxidation-reduction reactions and analyze redox reactions by specifying
the oxidizing agents and reducing agents, the substance reduced or oxidized;
(cid:40) understand the rate of chemical reaction, the state of a chemical equilibrium
and  factors  affecting  them;  and
(cid:40) demonstrate scientific enquiry skills: observing, inferring, predicting, classifying,
comparing  and  contrasting,  communicating,  measuring,  asking  questions,
designing experiments, interpreting data, drawing conclusions, applying concepts,
relating  cause  and  effect,  and  problem-solving.
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
MAIN  CONTENTS
Introduction
Fundamental Laws of Chemical Reactions
4.1
4.2
4.3 Chemical Equations
4.4 Energy Changes in Chemical Reactions
4.5 Types of Chemical Reactions
4.6
4.7 Oxidation-Reduction Reactions
4.8 Rate of Chemical Reaction and Chemical Equilibrium
Stoichiometry
– Unit Summary
– Review Exercises
Start-up Activity
A chemical reaction enables a space shuttle to be launched, which is powered by a
chemical reaction between pure liquid hydrogen (serving as a fuel) and oxygen.
Assume that the fuel tank contains 32,000 litres of H2 and the oxidizer tank contains
40,000 litres of O2;
Analysis
1. What type of reaction takes place?
2. Write the balanced chemical equation for the reaction.
3. What volume of product is formed in the reaction?
4. What mass of product is formed in the reaction?
(Assume that the pressure remains constant in this process).
Submit your findings to the teacher.
4.1    INTRODUCTION
Competencies
By  the  end  of  this  unit,  you  will  be  able  to:
• define chemical reaction; and
• give some examples of chemical reactions.
Activity 4.1
Form a group and discuss  the following phenomenon:
1. When a space shuttle leaves the ground on its way into orbit, what does the brightness
and warmth of the flame indicate?
2. What are the notations that indicate a chemical change might be taking place?
Present your conclusion to the class.
96
CHEMICAL REACTIONS AND STOICHIOMETRY
Chemical reactions are the basis of chemistry. Chemical reactions occur around us all
the time. For example, the burning of fuel, the souring of milk, metabolic processes of
our body and the decay of plants are some familiar chemical reactions in daily life.
A chemical reaction is the process in which reacting substances, called reactants, are
converted to new substances, called products. The characteristics of the products are
completely different from those of the reactants. The conversion process is a chemical
change.
Reactants  Æ  Products
For example, if you burn magnesium with oxygen, the magnesium and oxygen are
completely  converted  to  magnesium  oxide.  Magnesium  oxide  is  a  soft,  white,
crumbling powder. These characteristics of magnesium oxide are completely different
from the characteristics of the original substances, magnesium and oxygen. Magnesium
and oxygen are no longer present in the elemental form.
In summary, a chemical reaction has occurred in which the reactants, magnesium and
oxygen, underwent a complete chemical change, giving the product magnesium oxide.
All chemical reactions include three types of changes in the original substances. These
are changes in composition, properties and energy.
Activity 4.2
Form a group and perform the following task.
List  some  chemical  processes  that  occur  in  your  daily  life.  Identify  the  reactants  and
products in each of these chemical processes.
Present your findings to the class.
Note  that,  in  daily  life,  we  use  different  terms  for  the  same  process  of  chemical
change. For example “the souring of milk” occurs due to the process of fermentation.
In scientific discussion we generally have a single term for each process.
4.2    FUNDAMENTAL  LAWS  OF  CHEMICAL  REACTIONS
Competencies
By  the  end  of  this  unit,  you  will  be  able  to:
state the law of conservation of mass and illustrate the law, using examples;
•
• demonstrate the law of conservation of mass, using simple experiments;
•
state the law of definite proportion and illustrate it, using examples;
• demonstrate the law of definite proportion, using a simple experiment; and
• State the law of multiple proportion and illustrate it, using examples.
97
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Activity 4.3
Form a group and discuss the following phenomenon. When wood burns, the ash weighs
much  less  than  the  original  wood. Where  did  the “lost  mass”  go?  How  can  you  estimate
the mass of the wood that is no longer present?
Present your conclusion to the class.
While investigating the quantitative relations between substances in chemical reactions,
scientists formulated the three basic laws of chemical combination. These are:
i) The law of conservation of mass
ii) The law of definite proportions
iii) The law of multiple proportions
i)    The  Law  of  Conservation  of  Mass
In 1774, the French chemist Antoine Lavoisier performed an experiment in which he
heated a sealed glass container that held a sample of tin in air. He measured the mass of
the substances before and after heating and found them to be the same. This and other
similar experimental observations became the basis of the law of conservation of mass.
Historical Note
French  chemist  Antoine  Lavoisier  is  considered  the  founder  of
modern  chemistry.  He  found  that  the  amount  of  matter  before  a
chemical reaction is equal to the amount of matter afterwards, even
though  the  matter  may  change  in  its  form.  Lavoisier  also
experimented  with  the  role  of  oxygen  in  combustion  and
respiration in both plants and animals.
Antoine Lavoisier
The law of conservation of mass states that matter is neither created nor destroyed in a
chemical reaction.  In other words, the mass of the reactants is exactly equal to the
mass of the products, within the limits of experimental error. This law is also known as
the law of indestructibility of matter.
Mass of reactants = Mass of products
There  is  no  loss  or  gain  of  substances  during  a  chemical  reaction,  and  mass  is
conserved.
For  example,  consider  the  decomposition  of  mercury  (II)  oxide.  When  100  g  of
mercury (II) oxide decomposes by heat, 92.6 g of mercury and 7.4 g of oxygen are
formed. Note that the total mass of mercury and oxygen after decomposition is 100 g:
98
CHEMICAL REACTIONS AND STOICHIOMETRY
2HgO
100g
(cid:78)
100g
Reactant
Æ 2Hg    +    O2
92.6g   7.4g
(cid:8)(cid:11)(cid:11)(cid:9)(cid:11)(cid:11)(cid:10)
100g
Products
Experiment 4.1
Investigation  of  the  Law  of  Conservation  of  Mass
Objective: To determine the mass of substances before and after a reaction.
Apparatus: Flask, test tube, thread, rubber stopper, balance.
Chemicals: Sodium chloride, silver nitrate.
Procedure:
1. Take 50 mL of silver nitrate solution in a conical flask.
2. Tie a thread around the top of a test tube. Fill the test tube with a saturated
solution of sodium chloride. Suspend the test tube in the flask by means of a
thread held by a rubber stopper, as shown in Figure 4.1.
3. Weigh the flask (and its contents). Record the result as m1.
4. Mix the liquids by tilting the conical flask so that the sodium chloride pours
into the silver nitrate solution.
5. Reweigh the conical flask and contents and record as m2. Compare m1
Observations  and  analysis
1. What was the colour of the solution after the reaction?
Is there any difference in mass between m1 and m2?
2.
3. What is your conclusion from this experiment?
4. Write the balanced chemical equation for the reaction.
and m2.
Figure  4.1 Conservation of mass.
99
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
ii)    The  Law  of  Definite  Proportions
The law of definite proportions states that a compound always contains the same
elements in the same proportion by mass.  This means that all pure samples of a
compound have the same composition regardless of the source of sample.  This law is
also known as the law of constant composition. For example, sample of water could
be obtained from different sources, such as from a river, the ground, or the ocean.
But whatever the original source, all forms of pure water contains 11.2% hydrogen
and 88.8% oxygen by mass. These percentages represent a ratio of 1.0 to 8.0 (1:8),
by mass, of hydrogen to oxygen.
This ratio is constant (fixed) for water. In other words, a compound with a different
ratio of hydrogen and oxygen is not water.
Similarly, in forming the compound ZnO, 65.0 g of zinc combines with 16.0 g of
oxygen. This is 80.2% zinc and 19.8% oxygen, by mass.  As is the case for water,
the composition of ZnO is constant. In forming ZnO, zinc combines with oxygen in a
definite proportion.
Experiment 4.2
Investigation  of  the  Law  of  definite  proportions
Objective: To determine the mass of copper from copper (II) oxide.
Apparatus: Burner, stand, combustion tube, two glass test tubes, two watch glasses.
Chemicals: Copper powder, copper (II) carbonate, hydrogen gas
Procedure:
1. Prepare samples of copper (II) oxide using the following two methods:
i) Make copper (II) oxide by heating copper powder in one of the test tubes.
ii) Make copper (II) oxide by heating copper (II) carbonate in the second
test tube.
(In this case, the heating process produces a chemical change through thermal
decomposition)
2. Take 1 g from each of the samples of copper (II) oxide (from i and ii). Place
each of these samples in a watch glass.
3. Reduce each of these samples: use the combustion tube to heat the samples in
a stream of hydrogen as shown in Figure 4.2.
4. Weigh the copper metal that remains in each case. Compare the measurements.
100
CHEMICAL REACTIONS AND STOICHIOMETRY
Observations  and  analysis
1. What is the mass of copper produced in each case?
2. Why is copper metal produced in each case?
3. What can you conclude from the experiment? Write a short report on your
observations.
Burning hydrogen
Samples of
copper (II) oxide
Hydrogen gas
Heat
Heat
Clamp
Figure 4.2   Reduction of copper (II) oxide by hydrogen.
iii)    The  Law  of  Multiple  Proportions
The law of multiple proportions states that when two elements combine to form more
than one compound, the masses of one element combined with a fixed mass of the
second element are in the ratio of small whole numbers. This law can be illustrated by
the two oxides of carbon. The two oxides of carbon are carbon monoxide (CO) and
carbon dioxide (CO2). In CO2, 1.0 g of carbon is combined with 2.67 g of oxygen;
whereas in CO, 1.0 g of carbon is combined with 1.33 g of oxygen. By comparing
2.67 g of oxygen with 1.33 g of oxygen, it is found that the masses of oxygen in the
two compounds that combine with the same mass of carbon are in the simple whole
number ratio, 2:1.
2.67 g of  oxygen in CO
2
1.33 g of  oxygen in CO
=
2
1
= 2 :1
Activity 4.4
Form a group and perform the following task:
The following table illustrates the law of multiple proportions using five oxides of nitrogen.
In the table, fill the mass ratio of nitrogen to oxygen and determine the mass of oxygen
in each compound that combine with a fixed mass (1g) of nitrogen.
Present your conclusion to the class.
101
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Compound
Dinitrogen monoxide
Nitrogen monoxide
Dinitrogen trioxide
Nitrogen dioxide
Dinitrogen pentoxide
Molecular
formula
N2O
NO
N2O3
NO2
N2O5
Mass ratio of
N to O (N:O)
Ratio of Oxygen
in  the  oxides
Exercise 4.1
Give appropriate answers for the following questions.
1. Classify the following as chemical or physical changes:
a the souring of tella
b freezing ice cream
c plant growth
e heating sugar
d boiling of an egg
f
fermentation
g the magnetization of iron
h the fading of dye in cloth
2.
Iron and chlorine form two compounds, A and B. Compound A contains 1.27
g of chlorine for each 1 g of iron whereas compound B contains 1.9 g of
chlorine for each 1 g of iron. Show that the masses of chlorine are in the ratio
2:3. Do they obey the law of multiple proportions? Explain.
3. Consider the following two chemical changes:
i) When a material made of iron rusts, its mass increases.
ii) When a match stick burns, its mass decreases.
Do you think that these two observations violate the law of conservation of
mass? Explain.
Critical  Thinking
4. Discuss how the law of conservation of matter is explained by Dalton’s atomic
theory.
4.3    CHEMICAL  EQUATIONS
Competencies
By  the  end  of  this  unit,  you  will  be  able  to:
• describe the conventions used to write chemical equations;
• balance chemical equations, using the inspection method;
102
CHEMICAL REACTIONS AND STOICHIOMETRY
• balance chemical equations, using the Least-Common-Multiple (LCM) method.
Activity 4.5
Form a group and discuss each of the following:
1. What is the difference between a chemical equation and a chemical reaction?
2. Which  law  is  satisfied  when  a  chemical  equation is  balanced? Take  a  simple  chemical
reaction to illustrate this law.
Present your conclusion to the class.
A chemical equation is a shorthand representation of a chemical reaction in terms of
chemical symbols and formulas. In a chemical equation the starting substances are
called reactants; and the new substances produced are known as products.
Reactants are written on the left side and products on the right side of the equation.
An arrow (→) is placed between the two sides to indicate transformation of reactants
into products.
Reactants  Æ  products
4.3.1    Writing  Chemical  Equation
In writing chemical equation, instead of using words, chemical symbols and formulas
are used to represent the reaction.
Steps to Write a Chemical Equation
1. Write a word equation: A word equation is stated in words. For example, the
word equation for the reaction between sodium and chlorine to produce sodium
chloride is written as:
Sodium + Chlorine  Æ  Sodium chloride (word equation)
Note that we read the ' + ' sign as 'reacts with' and the arrow can be read as
'to produce', 'to form', 'to give' or 'to yield'.
2. Write the symbols and formulas for the reactants and products in the word
equation.
Na  +  Cl2   Æ    NaCl  (Chemical  equation)
3. Balance the equation.
2Na  +  Cl2    Æ    2NaCl
103
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Generally,  any  chemical  equation  must  fulfil  the  following  conditions:
i) The equation must represent a true and possible chemical reaction.
ii) The symbols and formulas must be written correctly. The elements– hydrogen,
nitrogen,  oxygen,  fluorine,  chlorine,  bromine  and  iodine  exist  as  diatomic
molecules. These elements should be written as molecules in the equation.
iii) The equation must be balanced.
A chemical equation has both qualitative and quantitative meanings.
Qualitatively, a chemical equation indicates the types of the reactants and products
in the reaction.
Quantitatively, a  chemical  equation  expresses  the  relative  number  (amount)
of moles, molecules or masses of the reactants and products.
4.3.2 Balancing  Chemical  Equation
Which  should  be  adjusted  in  balancing  a  chemical  equation,  the  subscripts  or
the  coefficients?
According  to  the  law  of  conservation  of  mass,  atoms  are  neither  created  nor
destroyed  during  a  chemical  reaction.   As  a  result,  the  number  of  atoms  of  each
element should remain the same before and after the reaction. Therefore, the main
reason  why  all  chemical  equations  must  be  balanced  is  just  to  obey  the  law  of
conservation of mass.
To balance a chemical equation means to equalize the number of atoms on both sides
of the equation by putting appropriate coefficients in front of the formulas.
Only two methods of balancing chemical equations will be discussed under this topic.
These are the inspection and the Least Common Multiple (LCM) method.
1.    The  Inspection  Method
Most simple chemical equations can be balanced using this method.  Balancing an
equation by inspection means to adjust coefficients by trial and error until the equation
is balanced.  Follow the following four steps to balance the chemical equation.
Step 1:   Write the word equation.
Step 2:   Write the correct symbols or formulas for the reactants and products.
Step 3: Place  the  smallest  whole  number  coefficients  in  front  of  the  symbols  or
formulas until the number of atoms of each element is the same on both sides
of the equation.
104
CHEMICAL REACTIONS AND STOICHIOMETRY
Step 4: Checking:  By counting the number of atoms on both sides of the equation,
make  sure  that  the  atoms  of  all  elements  are  balanced  and  also  the
coefficients are expressed as the smallest whole number ratio.
Note:
When you balance an equation, do not change any symbol or formula of any compound.
If you change a symbol or formula, it no longer represents the element or compound
required by the equation.
Example 1
Balance  the  equation  for  the  reaction  between  magnesium  and  oxygen  to
produces magnesium oxide.
Solution:
Step 1: Magnesium + Oxygen  Æ  Magnesium oxide
Step 2: Mg  +  O2   Æ    MgO  (unbalanced)
Step 3: Put coefficients to balance the equation
• Oxygen is not balanced. There are two oxygen atoms on the left side and
one on the right side. Hence, place the coefficient 2 in front of MgO.
Mg  +  O2   Æ    2MgO  (unbalanced)
• Now Mg is not balanced. There is one Mg on the left side and two on the
right side. Thus, place the coefficient 2 in front of Mg.
2Mg  +  O2   Æ    2MgO  (balanced)
Step 4: Checking: There are two Mg and two O atoms on each side of the
equation. Therefore, the equation is correctly balanced.
2Mg  +  O2    Æ    2MgO
Exercise 4.2
Balance the following chemical equation, using the inspection method:
1.  Na  +  H2O    Æ    NaOH  +  H2
2.  CaCO3    Æ    CaO  +  CO2
3.  H2O2    Æ    H2O  +  O2
4. Al  +  H3PO4    Æ   AlPO4  +  H2
5.  HNO3  +  H2S    Æ    NO  +  S  +  H2O
105
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
2.    The  LCM  Method
In the LCM method, the coefficients for the balanced chemical equation are obtained
by taking the LCM of the total valency of reactants and products and then dividing it
by  total  valency  of  reactants  and  products. All  the  necessary  steps  to  balance  a
chemical equation by the LCM method, are shown by the following examples.
Example 2
When  aluminium  reacts  with  oxygen,  aluminium  oxide  is  formed.  Write
the balanced chemical equation for the reaction.
Solution:
Step 1: Represent the reaction by a word equation.
Aluminium + Oxygen Æ  Aluminium oxide
Step 2: Change the words to symbols and formulas for the reactants and
products.
Step 3: Place the total valency of each atom above it.
Al  +  O2    Æ   Al2O3
3
4
+
Al O
2
6
6
Al O
2
Æ
3
Now the equation shows
•  The valency of aluminium as 3.
•  The total valency of oxygen is 2 × 2 = 4.
•  The total valency of aluminium in Al2O3 is  3 ×  2 = 6.
•  The total valency of oxygen in Al2O3 is 2 × 3 = 6.
Step 4: Find the LCM of each total valency and place it above the arrow.
3
4
Al + O
2
12
→
L.C.M
6
6
Al O
2
3
Step 5: Divide the LCM by each total valency number to obtain the coefficients
for each of the reactants and products. Place the obtained coefficients
in front of the respective formulas.
4Al + 3O2   Æ  2Al2O3 (balanced)
Checking: There are 4 aluminium and 6 oxygen atoms on both sides of the
equation. Hence, the chemical equation is correctly balanced.
106
CHEMICAL REACTIONS AND STOICHIOMETRY
Example 3
When iron reacts with water, iron (III) oxide and hydrogen are produced.
Write the balanced equation.
Solution:
Step 1: Iron + water  Æ  Iron (III) oxide + hydrogen.
Step 2: Fe  +  H2O    Æ    Fe2O3  +  H2
Step 3:
3
2
2
Fe  +  H O
2
Æ
6
6
2
Fe O  +  H
2
3
2
Step 4:
2
3
2
Fe + H O
2
→6
L.C.M
6
6
2
Fe O  +  H
3
2
2
Step 5: 2Fe  +  3H2O    Æ    Fe2O3 +  3H2  (balanced)
Checking:  There are 2 iron, 6 hydrogen, and 3 oxygen atoms on each side
of the equation.  Thus, the equation is balanced.
Example 4
The reaction of ammonium sulphate with aluminium nitrate would form aluminium
sulphate and ammonium nitrate.
Solution:
Step 1: Ammonium sulphate + Aluminium nitrate   →  Aluminium sulphate +
Ammonium nitrate
Step 2: (NH4)2SO4  + Al(NO3)3  —→ Al2(SO4)3  +  NH4NO3
3
l(NO
2
Step 3: (N
6
3)3  —→  A
O3
3
2
O4  +  A
H4)2S
3
2
O4  +  A
H4)2S
3
l(NO
3)3
1
1
6
H4N
O4)3  +  N
l2(S
1
6
6
O4)3  +  N
L.C.M→   A
l2(S
6
1
H4N
O3
2
Step 4: (N
Step 5: 3(NH4)2SO4  +  2Al(NO3)3 —→  Al2(SO4)3  +  6NH4NO3  (balanced)
Checking: There are 12 nitrogen, 24 hydrogen, 3 sulphur, 30 oxygen and 2 aluminium
atoms on both sides of the equation. Thus, the equation is correctly balanced.
Exercise 4.3
1. Write the balanced chemical equation to represent the following reactions.
a Sulphur dioxide reacts with oxygen to produce sulphur trioxide.
b Potassium chlorate when heated produces potassium chloride and oxygen.
107
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
c Sodium carbonate reacts with hydrochloric acid to form water, carbon
dioxide and sodium chloride.
d Silver oxide decomposes to silver and oxygen gas.
2. Balance the following equations by the LCM method.
a PCl5  +  H2O    —→    H3PO4  +  HCl
b Mg  +  H2O    —→    Mg(OH)2  +  H2
c Zn(NO3)2    —→    ZnO  +  NO2  +  O2
d H2SO4  +  NaOH    —→    Na2SO4  +  H2O
e NH3  +  O2    —→    NO  +  H2O
4.4    ENERGY  CHANGES  IN  CHEMICAL  REACTIONS
Competencies
By  the  end  of  this  section,  you  will  be  able  to:
•
explain energy changes in chemical reactions;
• define endothermic and exothermic reactions;
• describe endothermic and exothermic reactions;
•
•
illustrate endothermic and exothermic reactions using diagrams;
conduct simple experiment to demonstrate exothermic and endothermic reactions;
• describe the importance of chemical changes in production of new substances
and energy.
Activity 4.6
Form a group and discuss each of the following phenomena:
When the bread baked, does the bread absorb or release heat energy? Justify your answer.
Present your conclusion to the class.
Almost all chemical reactions are accompanied by energy changes. These energy
changes could be in the form of heat energy, light energy, electrical energy, and so on.
108
CHEMICAL REACTIONS AND STOICHIOMETRY
On the basis of energy changes, chemical reactions can be divided into exothermic
and endothermic reactions.
4.4.1    Exothermic  and  Endothermic  Reactions
Can  heat  energy  be  considered  as  a  reactant  or  product?
Exothermic Reaction
A chemical reaction that releases heat energy to the surroundings is known as an
exothermic reaction. During an exothermic process, heat is given out from the system
to its surroundings and this heat energy is written on the right side of the equation as
shown below.
Reactants  Æ  Products + Heat
For example, the burning of carbon with oxygen produces carbon dioxide and heat is
released during the reaction.  Thus, the reaction is exothermic and written as:
Endothermic  Reaction
C  +  O2    Æ    CO2 +  Heat
A chemical reaction which absorbs heat energy from the surroundings is known as an
endothermic reaction. During an endothermic process, heat flows into the system from
its surroundings and the heat is written on the left side of the equation.
Reactants  +  Heat  →  products
For example, the reaction between carbon and sulphur to form carbon disulphide is
an endothermic reaction because heat is absorbed in the reaction.
C  +  2S +  Heat  Æ    CS2
The amount of heat energy liberated or absorbed by a chemical reaction is called heat
of reaction or change in enthalpy for the reaction. It is symbolized as ∆H.  Its unit is
expressed in kilojoules per mol(
between the energy of the products and the energy of the reactants.
mol . The change in enthalpy (∆H) is the difference
kJ
)
∆H = Hp – Hr; where Hp is the heat content (energy) of the product,  Hr is the
heat content (energy) of the reactant.
4.4.2    Energy  Diagrams
For endothermic reactions, DH is positive because the energy of the product is higher
than the energy of the reactant. As a result, the enthalpy of the system increases as
shown in Figure 4.3.
109
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
since,
Hp > Hr,
DH = positive (DH > 0)
For example, when nitrogen reacts with oxygen to form nitrogen dioxide, 66.4 kJ of
heat  energy  is  absorbed  (i.e.,  DH  =  +  66.4  kJ/mol)  and  thus  the  reaction  is
endothermic.
N2 (g) + 2O2 (g)  Æ  2NO2 (g); DH = + 66.4 kJ/mol
Figure 4.3   Energy diagram for an endothermic reaction.
For  exothermic  reactions,  DH  is  negative  because  the  energy  of  the  reactants  is
greater than the energy of the products. Thus, the enthalpy of the system decreases,
as shown in Figure 4.4.
Hp < Hr  ﬁ  ∆H = negative (DH < 0)
For example, when carbon burns in oxygen to produce carbon dioxide, 393.5 kJ of
heat energy is liberated and hence the reaction is exothermic (∆H = –393.5 kJ/mol).
C(s) + O2(g)  Æ  CO2(g):  DH = –393.5 kJ/mol
Figure  4.4   Energy diagram for an exothermic reaction.
110
CHEMICAL REACTIONS AND STOICHIOMETRY
Experiment 4.3
Investigating  the  Heat  Involved  in  a  Chemical  Reaction
Objective: To determine the exothermic/endothermic nature of the reaction between
sulphuric acid and sugar.
Apparatus: beaker and reagent bottle.
Chemicals: Concentrated H2SO4 and sugar.
Procedure:
1. Take small amount of sugar in a beaker.
2. Add a little concentrated sulphuric acid to the sugar.
3. Touch the outer surface of the beaker and record your observation.
Figure  4.5   Reaction between sulphuric acid and sugar.
Observations  and  analysis
1. Does the beaker feel hot or cold when you touch it?
2. Did you see any steam in the beaker?
3. What is the colour of the product formed?
4. Write a balanced chemical equation.
5. What can you conclude from the experiment?
[Caution-When mixing concentrated acid and water, always add the acid to
the water; never add water to concentrated acid.]
111
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Experiment 4.4
Investigating  the  Heat  Involved  in  a  Reaction
Objective: To investigate the exothermic/endothermic nature of the process when
ammonium nitrate is dissolved in water.
Apparatus: Beaker, thermometer, stirrer.
Chemicals: Ammonium nitrate and water.
Procedure:
1. Take 100 mL of water in a beaker and record its temperature.
2. Dissolve 15 g of solid ammonium nitrate (NH4NO3) in the 100 mL of water.
3. Touch the outer surface of the beaker and record the temperature of the solution
with the help of a thermometer.
Observations  and  analysis:
1. Does the beaker feel hot or cold when you touch it?
2.
3. What do you conclude from this experiment?
Is the temperature increased or decreased after the addition of NH4NO3?
Figure 4.6   Dissolution of ammonium nitrate in water.
112
CHEMICAL REACTIONS AND STOICHIOMETRY
Activity 4.7
Form a group and perform the following task.  In your daily life you encounter with many
chemical  changes  involving  energy.  List  some  of  such  changes  and  discuss  their
importance.
Share your findings with the rest of the class.
Chemical  reactions  bring  about  chemical  changes.  All  chemical  changes  are
accompanied by energy changes. This energy is usually in the form of heat, light, or
electricity.
Energy changes produced by chemical reactions have many practical applications
(uses).  For  example,  energy  lifts  rockets,  runs  cars,  and  extracts  metal  from
compounds.
Many applications involve the energy produced by fuel combustion, which liberates
large amounts of heat. The energy can be converted from one form to another. For
example, the energy that fuel combustion produces can convert water to steam.
The steam can run a turbine that creates electricity.
Respiration (breathing) creates energy for our bodies. Breathing releases the energy
our living cells produce by oxidizing glucose. This energy helps to maintain our
body temperature and body exercises.
C6H12O6  +  6O2    Æ    6CO2  +  6H2O  +  Energy
Exercise 4.4
In each of the following cases, determine the sign of ∆H. State whether the
reaction is exothermic or endothermic, and draw an enthalpy diagram.
a H2(g) + ½O2(g)          →              H2O(l) + 285.8  kJ
b H2O(I) + 40.7  kJ      →              H2O(g)
4.5    TYPES  OF  CHEMICAL  REACTIONS
Competencies
By  the  end  of  this  section,  you  will  be  able  to:
•
list the four types of chemical reactions;
• define combination reaction and give examples;
•
conduct some experiments on combination reactions in groups;
113
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
• define decomposition reaction and give examples;
•
conduct some experiments on decomposition reactions in group;
• define single displacement reactions and give examples;
•
conduct some experiments on simple displacement reactions in groups;
• define double displacement reaction and give examples; and
•
conduct some experiments on double displacement reactions in groups.
Activity 4.8
Form a group and discuss the following chemical reactions that occur during the:
a
b
c
digestion of food in our body.
fermentation of ‘tej’.
burning of kerosene in a stove.
Share your discussion with the rest of the class.
Chemical  reactions  are  classified  into  four  categories.  These  are  combination,
decomposition, single displacement and double displacement reactions.
i)    Combination  Reactions
Experiment 4.5
Investigation  of  Combination  Reaction
Objective: To investigate the reaction between sulphur and iron.
Apparatus: Test tube, stand, burner, watch glass
Chemicals: Sulphur powder, iron filings
Procedure:
1. Mix about 3 g of iron filings and 2 g of powdered sulphur in a watch glass.
2. Transfer the mixture in a glass test tube.
3. Mount the test tube in a sloping position on a stand as shown in Figure 4.7.
4. Heat the test tube until the mixture in the glass glows red hot.
5. Remove the test tube from the flame and observe the result.
114
CHEMICAL REACTIONS AND STOICHIOMETRY
Observations  and  analysis:
1. What were the colours of iron filings and sulphur before the reaction?
2. What was the colour of the resulting compound after the reaction?
3. Write a balanced chemical equation for the reaction.
4.
Identify the type of reaction.
Figure 4.7   The reaction between iron and sulphur.
A reaction in which two or more substances combine to form a single substance is
called a combination reaction. In a combination reaction, two elements, two compounds,
or  an  element  and  a  compound  react  to  form  a  single  compound.    Combination
reactions can be represented by the following general form of equation.
A + B   Æ  AB;
where the reactants A and B are elements or compounds, the product AB is a compound.
Such type of reaction is also known as synthesis or composition reaction.
Examples
• Magnesium burns in oxygen to form magnesium oxide.
2Mg        +        O2            Æ      2MgO
element      element
• Water and carbon dioxide combine to form carbonic acid.
H2O  +  CO2  Æ  H2CO3
115
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Exercise 4.5
Complete and balance the following combination reactions.
1. CO  +    O2 →
2. H2O    +    SO2 →
3. Na2O    +    H2O →
4. CaO    +    CO2 →
ii)    Decomposition  Reactions
Experiment 4.6
Investigation  of  Decomposition  Reaction
Objective:   To investigate the decomposition of copper (II) carbonate.
Apparatus: Test tube, stand, burner, cork, delivery tube.
Chemicals: Copper (II) carbonate and lime water.
Procedure:
Put copper (II) carbonate powder in a glass test-tube. Mount the test tube in
a sloping position on a stand as shown in Figure 4.8. Fit a cork and a delivery
tube to the test tube. Put another test tube containing lime water at the end of
the delivery tube. Heat the copper (II) carbonate with a burner.
Observations  and  analysis:
1. What was the colour of copper (II) carbonate before heating?
2. What was the colour during heating and after cooling?
3. What change did you observe in the lime water?
4. Write a balanced chemical equation for the reaction.
116
CHEMICAL REACTIONS AND STOICHIOMETRY
Delivery tube
Stand and clamp
Lime water
Rubber stopper
Copper (II)
carbonate
Bunsen
burner
Figure  4.8  Decomposition  of  copper  (II)  carbonate.
A decomposition reaction is a reaction that involves the breaking down of a single
compound  into  two  or  more  elements  or  simpler  compounds.  A  decomposition
reaction  can  be  carried  out  using  heat,  light,  electricity  or  a  catalyst.  But  most
decomposition reactions are carried out when heat is supplied and this heat energy is
indicated by a ‘delta’ (∆) symbol above the arrow. The general form of equation for
a decomposition reaction is:
AB  Æ  A + B
where  the  reactant AB  must  be  a  compound  and  the  products A  and  B  could  be
elements or compounds.
Examples
• Water is decomposed to hydrogen and oxygen gases when electricity is passed
through it.
2H2O
electric
current→   2H2  +  O2
• When sodium bicarbonate is heated, it decomposes to give sodium carbonate,
carbon dioxide, and water.
2NaHCO3
∆→   Na2CO3    +    CO2  +  H2O
117
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Let us consider the decompositions of nitrates and carbonates:
1.  Decomposition of Metallic Nitrates
a) Decomposition of group IA nitrates produces nitrites and oxygen.
Examples
→D
2NaNO3
2KNO3  →D
2NaNO2  +  O2
2KNO2  +  O2
b) Decomposition of all metal nitrates, except group IA metals, gives nitrogen dioxide,
metal oxide and oxygen gas.
Examples
2Ca(NO3)2    →D
2Zn(NO3)2   →D
2Pb(NO3)2    →D
2CaO  +  4NO2  +  O2
2ZnO  +  4NO2  +  O2
2PbO  +  4NO2  +  O2
2.  Decomposition of Metallic Carbonates
All metal carbonates, except sodium and potassium, decompose when heated to form
the metal oxide and carbon dioxide.
Examples
→D
ZnCO3
CuCO3    →D
ZnO  +  CO2
CuO  +  CO2
iii)  Single Displacement Reactions
Experiment 4.7
Investigation  of  Single  Displacement  Reaction
Objective: To investigate the displacement reaction between iron and copper (II)
sulphate.
Apparatus: Iron rod and beaker.
118
CHEMICAL REACTIONS AND STOICHIOMETRY
Chemicals: Copper (II) sulphate.
Procedure:
1. Clean a piece of iron rod or iron knife with emery paper to remove any rust.
2. Take copper sulphate solution in a beaker.
3. Dip the iron rod into the copper (II) sulphate solution as shown in Figure 4.9
and wait for a few minutes. What did you observe on the iron rod?
4. Allow the reactants to stand for one day and observe any change on the iron
rod.
Observations  and  analysis:
1. What did you observe on the iron rod after one day?
2. Write a balanced chemical equation for the reaction.
3. Write the conclusion for the experiment.
Figure  4.9   Reaction between iron and copper (II) sulphate.
A reaction in which one element displaces another element from its compound is
known as single displacement or replacement reaction. Such a reaction is represented
by the following two general forms.
A  +  BC    Æ    B  + AC
If A is a metal, it will displace B to form AC, provided A is a more active metal
than B.
A + BC  Æ  BA + C
If A  is  a  non-metal,  it  will  displace  C  to  form  BA,  provided A  is  a  more  active
non-metal than C.
119
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
In  general,  a  more  reactive  element  displaces  a  less  reactive  element  from  a
compound.
Examples of single-displacement reactions
a Active metals displace hydrogen from acids.
Reactive metals such as potassium, calcium, sodium, and zinc displace hydrogen
gas from dilute acids.
For example, zinc is an active metal, and it displaces hydrogen from hydrochloric
acid; but copper metal cannot do so.
Zn + 2HCl  Æ  ZnCl2 + H2
Au + HCl  Æ  No reaction
b Reactive metals, such as potassium, calcium, and sodium react vigorously with
water to displace hydrogen:
2Na  +  2H2O    Æ    2NaOH  +  H2
Ca  +  2H2O    Æ    Ca(OH)2  +  H2
Exercise 4.6
Complete and balance the following single displacement reactions:
1. Zn + CuSO4      —→
2. Cu + Zn(NO3)2      —→
3. F2 + CaCl2    —→
4. Br2 + NaCl    —→
iv)  Double Displacement Reactions
Experiment 4.8
Investigation of Double Displacement Reaction
Objective:   To observe the displacement reaction between Na2SO4  and  Ba(NO3)2.
Apparatus:  Beaker, stirrer, filter paper, filter funnel.
Chemicals:  Na2SO4 and Ba(NO3)2.
120
CHEMICAL REACTIONS AND STOICHIOMETRY
Procedure:
1. Take solution of Ba(NO3)2 into a beaker and add dropwise Na2SO4 solution.
Then stir it continuously.
2. Filter the precipitate using a filter paper and funnel. Collect the filtrate or the
solution in a clean beaker.
Observations  and  analysis:
1. Write the names of the compounds that are formed as a precipitate and as
solution at the end of the reaction.
2. What was the colour of the precipitate.
3. Write the balanced chemical equation for the reaction.
Na SO
4
2
solution
Stirrer
Ba(NO )
3 2
solution
Figure 4.10   The double displacement reaction between Na2SO4 and Ba(NO3)2.
121
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Double displacement reaction is a reaction in which two compounds react together to
form two new compounds by exchange of the positive and negative ions of each
reactant. Such a reaction is also known as double replacement reaction or metathesis.
This type of reaction can be written in the following general form of equation.
AB  +  CD    Æ   AD  +  CB
Examples
• The two soluble compounds AgNO3 and NaCl react to produce an insoluble
precipitate of AgCl and a soluble NaNO3 solution.
AgNO3  +  NaCl      Æ     AgCl  ↓    +    NaNO3
Insoluble          Soluble
• When aqueous solutions of BaCl2 and Na2SO4 react, a precipitate of BaSO4
is formed.
BaCl2  +  Na2SO4      Æ      BaSO4 ↓  +    2NaCl
Insoluble        Soluble
Exercise 4.7
Give appropriate answers for the following questions.
1. What type of reaction does usually take place in each of the following reactions?
a a metal reacting with water.
b a metal reacting with a non-metal.
c an acid reacting with a metal hydroxide.
d heating of a metal hydrogen carbonate.
2. Classify the following reactions as combination, decomposition, single or double
displacement reactions.
a FeO  +  C    Æ    Fe  +  CO
b 2NH3  +  H2SO4    Æ    (NH4)2SO4
c CaCO3  +  2HCl    Æ    CaCl2  +  CO2  +  H2O
d 2Cu(NO3)2    Æ    2CuO  +  4NO2  +  O2
e 2Na3PO4  +  3Ca(OH)  2    Æ    Ca3(PO4)2  +  6NaOH
f CuSO4.5H2O    Æ    CuSO4  +  5H2O
122
CHEMICAL REACTIONS AND STOICHIOMETRY
3. Complete and balance the following equations. If the reaction does not take
place, write “No Reaction”
a Mg  +  N2  →D
b Na2CO3    →D
c BaCO3  +  HNO3    Æ
d Zn  +  H2SO4    Æ
e FeCO3    →D
f H2CO3  +  NaOH      Æ
4.6    STOICHIOMETRY
Competencies
By  the  end  of  this  section,  you  will  be  able  to:
solve mass-mass problems based on the given chemical equation;
• deduce mole ratios from balanced chemical equations;
•
• define molar volume;
•
•
•
• define limiting and excess reactants;
• determine limiting and excess reactants of a given chemical reaction;
•
state Avogadro’s principle;
solve volume-volume problems based on the given chemical equation;
solve mass-volume problems based on the given chemical equation;
show that the amount of product formed in a chemical reaction is based on the
limiting reactant;
• define the term theoretical yield, actual yield and percentage yield; and
•
calculate the percentage yield of a chemical reaction from given information.
Activity 4.9
Form a group and discuss the following concepts:
a A bicycle mechanic has 10 frames (body parts) and 16 wheels in the shop. How many
complete bicycles can he assemble using these parts? Which parts of the bicycle are
left  over?
b Based on your conculsion in (a), do you think that the masses of reactants are always
completely converted to products in a chemical reaction?
Present your conclusion to the class.
123
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
The quantitative relationship between reactants and products in a balanced chemical
equation is known as stoichiometry. In other words, stoichiometry is the study of the
amount or ratio of moles, mass, energy and volumes (for gases) of reactants and
products. Stoichiometric calculations are based on the following two major principles.
i) The composition of any substance in the chemical equation should be expressed
by a definite formula.
ii) The law of conservation of mass must be obeyed (the mass of reactants equals
the mass of products).
4.6.1    Molar  Ratios  in  Balanced  Chemical  Equation
From a balanced chemical equation, it is possible to determine the:
• number of moles of each reactant and product; and
•
relative mass of each of the reactants and products
For example, in the reaction of hydrogen with oxygen to produce water, 2 moles of
H2 combines with 1 mole of O2 to yield 2 moles of H2O. The equation also tells us
4 g of hydrogen reacts with 32 g of oxygen to produce 36 g of water. This can be
further interpreted as follows:
2H2(g)          +      O2(g)        Æ        2H2O(l)
Mole    Æ      2  mole                    1  mole                   2  mole
Molecule  Æ   2 molecule      1 molecule      2 molecule
Mass   Æ      4  g                          32  g                      2  ×  18  g
(cid:8)(cid:11)(cid:9)(cid:11)(cid:10)
36 g product
(cid:8)(cid:11)(cid:11)(cid:11)(cid:9)(cid:11)(cid:11)(cid:11)(cid:10)
36 g reactant
Calculations based on chemical equations (stoichiometric problems) are classified
into mass-mass problem, volume-volume problems and mass-volume problems.
4.6.2    Mass–Mass  Relationships
In mass-mass problems, the mass of one substance is given, and the mass of the
second substance is determined from the same reaction.  There are two methods for
solving such types of problems:
i) Mass-ratio method
ii) Mole-ratio method
Let us see each method by using the necessary steps.
124
CHEMICAL REACTIONS AND STOICHIOMETRY
i)      The  mass-ratio  method
In this type of stoichiometric calculation, the mass of one substance is determined
from the given mass of the other substance using the following steps.
Step 1: Write the balanced chemical equation.
Step 2: Place the given mass above the corresponding formula, and x  above  the
formula of the substance whose mass is to be determined.
Step 3: Write  the  total  molar  mass  of  the  substances  below  the  formula  of  each
substance.  (Total  molar  mass  is  the  molar  mass  of  the  substance
multiplied by its coefficient).
Step 4: Set up the proportion.
Step 5: Solve for the unknown mass, x.
Example 1
How many grams of calcium chloride are formed when 15 g of calcium metal
reacts with hydrochloric acid?
Solution:
Step 1: Ca  +  2HCl    Æ    CaCl2  +  H2
Step 2:
15  g
x
Ca +  2HCl
Æ
CaCl +  H
2
2
Step 3:
15 g
Ca
40  g
+  2HCl
Æ
CaCl
x
111g
+  H
2
2
Step 4:
15 g
40 g
=
x
111
g
Step 5: x  =  41.63  g
Therefore, 41.63 g of CaCl2 is produced.
Example 2
How many grams of oxygen are produced by the decomposition of 145 grams
of potassium chlorate?
125
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Solution:
Step 1: 2KClO3    Æ    2KCl  +  3O2
Step 2:
Step 3:
Step 4:
3
145 g
2 KClO
145 g
2 KClO
3
(2 × 122.5) g
x
2KCl  +  3 O
2
Æ
Æ
x
2KCl  +   3 O
2
(3 × 32) g
145 g
245 g
=
x
96 g
Step 5: x  =  56.8  g
ii)  The mole-ratio method
The mole ratio is the ratio between the numbers of moles of any two substances in a
given reaction. In this method, the given mass is converted into moles, and the number
of moles for the required substance is calculated. If needed, convert the obtained
moles back to mass.
Follow the steps given below to solve problems of mass-mass relationships by the
mole ratio method:
Step 1: Write the balanced chemical equation.
Step 2: Convert  the  given  mass  to  moles  and  write  the  obtained  moles  and  the
required quantity, x, above the formulas of the respective substances.
Step 3: Place the coefficients as the number of moles under the formula of each
substance involved.
Step 4: Set up the proportion.
Step 5: Solve for the unknown value, x; and convert the moles obtained into mass.
How many grams of sodium metal are needed to react with 10.0 g of water?
Example 3
Solution:
Step 1: 2Na  +  2H2O    Æ    2NaOH  +  H2
Step 2: moles of H2O =
given mass
molar mass
=
10.0 g
18 g/mol
= 0.56 mol
x
0.56 mol
2 Na  +  2H O
2
Æ    2NaOH  +  H2
126
CHEMICAL REACTIONS AND STOICHIOMETRY
Step 3:
x
0.56 mol
2 N a  + 2H O
2
2 mol
2 mol
Æ    2NaOH  +  H2
Step 4:
x
2 mol
=
0.56 mol
2 mol
Step 5: x = 0.56 mol of Na
Now, convert 0.56 mole of Na to grams
mass of Na = mole × molar mass
= 0.56 mol × 23 g/mol
= 12.88 g
Therefore, 12.88 g of sodium metal is needed to react with 10 g of water.
Example 4
What mass of nitrogen dioxide is produced by the decomposition of 182 g of
magnesium nitrate?
Solution:
Step 1: 2Mg  (NO3)2    Æ    2MgO  +  4NO2  +  O2
Step 2: moles of Mg (NO3)2 =
182 g
148 g/mol
= 1.23 mol
1.23 mol
2 Mg(NO )
3
2
Æ
x
2MgO  + 4 NO  + O
2
2
Step 3:
1.23 mol
2 Mg(NO )
2 mol
3
2
x
Æ
2MgO + 4 NO + O
2
2
4 mol
Step 4:
1.23 mol
2 mol
=
x
4 mol
Step 5: x = 2.46 moles of NO2
Mass of NO2 = 2.46 mol × 46 g/mol = 113.2 g
Therefore, 113.2 g of NO2 is produced.
127
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Exercise 4.8
1. How  many  grams  of  CaCO3  are  needed  to  react  with  15.2  g  of  HCl  in
according to the following equation?
CaCO3  +  2HCl    Æ    CaCl2  +  CO2  +  H2O
2. How many grams of NaOH are needed to neutralize 50 grams of H2SO4?
3. Calculate the mass of CaCl2 formed when 5 moles of chlorine reacts with
calcium metal.
4. How  many  moles  of  H2O  are  required  to  produce  4.5  moles  of  HNO3
according to the following reaction:
3NO2  +  H2O  Æ  2HNO3  +  NO
5.
In the decomposition of KClO3, how many moles of KCl are formed in the
reaction that produces 0.05 moles of O2?
6. How many moles of CaO are needed to react with excess water to produce
370 g of calcium hydroxide?
4.6.3    Volume-Volume  Relationships
In reactions involving gases, the volume of gases can be determined on the principle
that  1  mole  of  any  gas  occupies  a  volume  of  22.4  litres  at  STP  (standard
temperature and pressure, STP, the temperature is 0°C and the pressure is 1 atm).
It is also known that 22.4 L of any gas weighs exactly its molecular mass at STP. This
volume, 22.4 litres, of a gas is known as the molar volume.
At STP, 1 mole of any gas = 22.4 L = gram volume mass of the gas
The  relationship  between  the  volume  of  a  gas  and  its  number  of  molecules  was
explained by Avogadro. Avogadro's law states that equal volumes of different gases,
under the same conditions of temperature and pressure, contain equal number of
molecules. This law can also be stated as the volume of a gas is proportional to the
number of molecules (moles) of the gas at STP.
128
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Exercise 4.9
1. What volume of nitrogen reacts with 33.6 litres of oxygen to produce nitrogen
dioxide?
2. How many litres of sulphur trioxide are formed when 4800 cm3 of sulphur
dioxide is burned in air?
3. How many litres of ammonia are required to react with 145 litres of oxygen
according to the following reaction?
4NH3  +  5O2    Æ    4NO  +  6H2O
4. Calculate the volume of oxygen produced in the decomposition of 5 moles of
KClO3 at STP?
5. How many moles of water vapour are formed when 10 litres of butane gas,
C4H10 is burned in oxygen at STP?
4.6.4    Mass–Volume  Relationships
In mass-volume problems, either the mass of one substance is given and the volume
of the other is required or the volume of one substance is given and the mass of the
other one is required. The steps to solve such type of problems are the same as the
previous steps except putting the masses on one side and the volumes on the other
side of the equality sign.
Example 6
How many grams of calcium carbonate are decomposed to produce 11.2 L of
carbon dioxide at STP?
Solution:
Step 1: CaCO3    Æ  CaO  +  CO2
Step 2:
x
CaCO
3
11.2 L
CaO +  CO
2
Æ
Æ
3
11.2 L
CaO  +  CO
2
22.4 L
Step 3:
Step 4:
x
CaCO
100 g
x
100 g
=
11.2 L
22.4 L
Step 5: x = 50 g of CaCO3 is decomposed.
130
CHEMICAL REACTIONS AND STOICHIOMETRY
Example 7
How many litres of oxygen at STP react with 72 g of aluminum to produce
aluminum oxide?
Solution:
Step 1: 4Al  +  3O2    Æ    2Al2O3
Step 2:
72 g
x
4Al  +  3O
2
Æ
2Al O
2
3
Step 3:
72 g
x
4Al   +   3O
(4×27) g
2
(3×22.4) L
Æ
2Al O
2
3
Step 4:
72 g
108 g
=
x
67.2 L
Step 5: x  =  44.8  L  of  O2
Hence, 44.8 litres of oxygen is required at STP to react with 72 g of aluminium.
Exercise 4.10
1. How many litres of oxygen are required to react with 23 g of methane according
to the following equation?
CH4  +  2O2    Æ    CO2  +  2H2O
2. What mass of aluminium would be completely oxidized by 44.8 L of oxygen to
produce Al2O3 at STP?
3. Calculate the mass of calcium carbide that is needed to produce 100 cm3 of
acetylene according to the following equation.
CaC2  +  2H2O    Æ    C2H2  +  Ca(OH)2
4. How many millilitres of sulphur dioxide are formed when 12.5 g of iron sulphide
ore (pyrite) reacts with oxygen according to the equation at STP?
4FeS2  +  11O2    Æ    2Fe2O3  +  8SO2
4.6.5    Limiting  and  Excess  Reactants
When all the reactants are completely consumed in a chemical reaction, then such
reactants are said to be in stoichiometric proportions. But, practically these types of
chemical reactions do not always occur.  In many cases, an excess of one or more
131
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
reactants is encountered in the reaction and the other reactant is completely converted
into products. Thus, the reactant that is completely consumed in the reaction is known
as the limiting reactant, because it limits or determines the amount of products that can
be formed.
For example, consider the following reaction:
H2      +      Cl2       Æ      2HCl
1 mole     1 mole       2 moles
According to the equation, 1 mole of H2 reacts with 1 mole of chlorine to produce 2
mole of HCl. Thus, all the reactants are completely consumed and only products
appear. However if 1 mole of H2 reacts with 1.5 mole of Cl2, there is insufficient H2
to react with all of the Cl2. Therefore, Cl2 will be in excess and H2 will be the limiting
reactant. Only 2 moles of HCl are formed and at the end of the reaction 0.5 mole of
Cl2 remains unreacted.
Example 8
How much ammonia is produced if 10 g of hydrogen reacts with 18 g of
nitrogen?
Solution:
3H2(g) + N2(g) Æ  2NH3(g)
First determine the number of moles;
Moles of H2 =
= 5 mol
10 g
2 g/mol
18 g
Moles of N2 =
Now, calculate the number of moles or masses of the product that would be
formed by each reactant.
= 0.64 mol
28 g/mol
The reactant that gives the smallest amount of product is the limiting reactant.
i. Using the quantity of H2
ii. Using the quantity of N2
3
2
=
Æ
x
2NH
2 mol
x
2 mol
5 mol
3 H   +  N
2
3 mol
5 mol
3mol
x  =  3.33  mol  NH3
Mass of NH3 = 3.33 mol × 17 g /mol
= 56.6 g
132
3H
2
0.64 mol
+  N
Æ
2
1 mol
x
2NH
2 mol
3
=
0.64 mol
1mol
x
2 mol
x = 1.28 mol NH3
Mass of NH3 =  1.28 mol × 17 g /mol
= 21.8 g
CHEMICAL REACTIONS AND STOICHIOMETRY
Therefore, the limiting reactant is nitrogen, because it gives less amount of
NH3, i.e., 21.8 g NH3.  In the reaction, 0.64 mole (18 g) of N2 is consumed.
Hydrogen is in excess. The amount of hydrogen consumed will be:
18g
x
3H + N
2
6g
28 g
2
Æ
2NH
or
3
x
0.64 mol
3H + N
2
3 moles
1 mole
2
Æ
2NH
3
=
18
28
x
6
x  =  3.86  g  of  H2
Therefore, 3.86 g or 1.92 moles of H2 is used in the reaction, and 6.14 g  or
3.08 moles of H2 is left unreacted.
x
3mol
x = 1.92 mol of H2
0.64 mol
1mol
=
Example 9
In the chemistry laboratory, a student performed a displacement reaction by
adding 9.5 g of zinc into 9.5 g of HCl in a beaker. What weight of ZnCl2 will
be produced?
Solution:
Zn + 2HCl  Æ  ZnCl2 + H2
Moles of Zn =
9.5 g
65 g/mol
= 0.15 mol
Moles of HCl  =
9.5 g
36.5 g/mol
= 0.26 mol
Even though the given masses of the two reactants are the same, they are not
mixed in equimolar ratio as shown above. Thus, the limiting reactant must be
determined first.
i. Using the quantity of Zn
ii. Using the quantity of HCl
0.15 mol
x
Zn +  2HCl
1 mol
Æ
ZnCl + H
1 mol
2
2
0.26 mol
Zn +  2HCl
2 mol
x
Æ
ZnCl + H
1 mol
2
2
0.15 mol
1 mol
=
x
1 mol
0.26 mol
2 mol
=
x
1 mol
x = 0.15 mol ZnCl2
x = 0.13 mol ZnCl2
Hence, the limiting reactant is HCl.
Mass of ZnCl2 = 0.13 mol × 136 g/mol = 17.68 g ZnCl2
133
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
1.
If 6.5 g of zinc reacts with 5.0 g of HCl, according to the following reaction.
Exercise 4.11
Zn + 2HCl  Æ  ZnCl2 + H2
a   Which substance is the limiting reactant?
b   How many grams of the reactant remains unreacted?
c   How many grams of hydrogen would be produced?
2. What mass of Na2SO4  is  produced  if  49  g  of  H2SO4  reacts  with  80  g  of
NaOH?
3.
If  20  g  of  CaCO3  and  25  g  of  HCl  are  mixed,  what  mass  of  CO2  is
produced?
CaCO3  +  2HCl    Æ    CaCl2  +  CO2  +  H2O
4.
If 3 moles of calcium reacts with 3 moles of oxygen, then
a   Which substance is the limiting reactant?
b   How many moles of calcium oxide are formed?
5. For the reaction:
2Al  +  3H2SO4    Æ   Al2(SO4)3  +  3H2
How many grams of hydrogen are produced if 0.8 mole of aluminium reacts
with 1.0 mole of sulphuric acid?
4.6.6    Theoretical,  Actual  and  Percentage  Yields
The measured amount of product obtained in any chemical reaction is known as the
actual yield. The theoretical yield is the calculated amount of product that would be
obtained  if  the  reaction  proceeds  completely.  The  actual  yield  (experimentally
determined yield) of a product is usually less than the theoretical yield (calculated
yield).
The percentage yield is the ratio of the actual yield to the theoretical yield multiplied by
100.
Percentage yield =
Acutal yield
Theoretical yield
× 100
134
CHEMICAL REACTIONS AND STOICHIOMETRY
Example 10
25 grams of methane gas (CH4) burns in oxygen according to the following
reaction:
CH4  +  2O2    Æ    CO2  +  2H2O
What is the percentage yield if 60.3 grams of carbon dioxide is produced?
Solution:
The actual yield is 60.3 g of CO2.
Determine the theoretical yield using mass-mass relationship
25 g
CH + 2O
4
16 g
2
→
x
CO + 2H O
44 g
2
2
25 g
16 g
=
x
44
x = 68.75 g of CO2 (theoretical  yield)
Percentage yield  =
Actual yield
Theoretical yield
× 100%
=
60.3 g
68.75 g
×  100%    =  87.7  %
Exercise 4.12
1. When 20 g of sulphur dioxide reacts with oxygen, 23 g of sulphur trioxide is
formed. What is the percentage yield?
2. When 14.5 g of SO2 reacts with 21 g of O2, what will be the theoretical
yield and percentage yield of the reaction if the actual yield is 12 g?
3.
In the reaction:
2C8H18  +  25O2    Æ    16CO2  +  18H2O
When 52.7 g of octane (C8H18) burns in oxygen, the percentage yield of
carbon dioxide is 82.5%. What is the actual yield in grams?
135
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
4.7    OXIDATION  AND  REDUCTION  REACTIONS
Competencies
By  the  end  of  this  section,  you  will  be  able  to:
• define redox reactions;
• define the terms oxidation and reduction in terms of electron transfer;
• define oxidation number (oxidation state),
•
state oxidation number rules,
• determine the oxidation number of an element in a given formula;
• describe the oxidizing and reducing agents;
•
analyze a given redox reaction by specifying the substance reduced and the
substance oxidized, and also the oxidizing and reducing agents; and
• Distinguish between redox and non-redox reactions.
Activity 4.10
Form a group and discuss the following phenomenon:
When you dry your meal dishes with a towel, the towel can be termed as a drying agent
and  the  dish  as  wetting  agent.  What  happens  to  the  towel  and  the  dish,  in  terms  of
getting  wet  and  dry,  after  cleaning?  Relate  this  idea  with  oxidizing  agent  and  reducing
agent, oxidation and reduction of substances. Present your conclusion to the class.
In our day to day activity, we are familiar with the chemical processes like rusting of
iron, burning of substances, breathing of air, digestion of food and so on. All such
types  of  processes  or  reactions  are  known  as  oxidation  and  reduction  or  redox
reactions.
4.7.1    Oxidation-Reduction
Can  oxidation  take  place  without  reduction?
Oxidation: is the process in which a substance loses electrons in a chemical reaction.
For example, in the reaction
2Na  +  Cl2    Æ    2NaCl
136
CHEMICAL REACTIONS AND STOICHIOMETRY
Each sodium atom has lost one electron and has turned to a sodium ion.
Hence, sodium is oxidized.
Na  +  1e–      Æ    Na+
Reduction: is  the  process  in  which  a  substance  gains  electrons  in  a  chemical
reaction.
For example, in the above reaction each chlorine atom has gained an
electron and has changed to chloride ion. Thus, chlorine is reduced;
Cl2  +  2e–    Æ    Cl–
The processes of oxidation and reduction always occur simultaneously because if one
substance loses electrons, the other substance must gain these electrons. Since the
process of oxidation and reduction involves the transfer of electrons, it also results in
the changes of oxidation number. Thus, oxidation and reduction can also be defined in
terms of oxidation number. Oxidation is an increase in the oxidation number of an
element and reduction is a decrease in the oxidation number. For example, in the
reaction,
The  oxidation  number  of  sodium  is  increased  from  0  to  +1  and  thus  sodium  is
oxidized. The oxidation number of chlorine is decreased from 0 to –1, and therefore
chlorine is reduced.
4.7.2    Oxidation  Number  or  Oxidation  State
Oxidation number or oxidation state is the number of electrons that an atom appears
to have gained or lost when it is combined with other atoms.
Rules  for  Assigning  Oxidation  Numbers
Rule  1: The oxidation number of all elements in free state is zero. This rule is also
applied for diatomic or polyatomic elements.
Example: The oxidation number of Na = 0, Cu = 0, Cl  in  Cl2 = 0, O  in
O3  =  0,  S  in  S8  =  0.
Rule  2: The oxidation number of a monatomic ion is equal to the charge on the ion.
Example:  Na+  =  +1,  Mg2+  =  +2,  S 2 –
=  –2.
Rule  3: The oxidation number of oxygen in a compound is usually – 2 except in the
following cases:
137
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Exceptions
The oxidation number of oxygen in:
i) peroxides is –1.
ii) superoxides is –1/2.
iii) oxygen diflouride is +2.
Example: Na2O2
Example:
2KO
Example:
2OF
Rule  4: The oxidation number of hydrogen in its entire compounds is +1 except
in  metal  hydrides,  (like  NaH,  CaH2  and  AlH3),  where  its  oxidation
number is –1.
Rule  5: The sum of the oxidation number of all the atoms in a neutral compound is
zero.
Example:
+1  +6   -2
H SO    ((+2) + (+6) + (–8) = 0)
2
4
Rule  6:
In a polyatomic ion, the sum of the oxidation numbers of the constituent
atoms equals the charge on the ion.
Example:
+6 –2
(S O )
4
–2
((+6) + (–8) = –2)
Rule  7: Elements of group IA have +1 and group IIA have +2 oxidation states in all
of their compounds.
Rule  8:
In a compound, the more electronegative element is assigned a negative
oxidation number, and the less electronegative element is assigned a positive
oxidation number.
Example :
+3
–1
3N Cl (chlorine is more electronegative than nitrogen)
Example 1
What is the oxidation number of chromium in Na2Cr2O7?
Solution:
The oxidation number of O is –2 (Rule 3)
The oxidation number of Na is +1 (Rule 7)
Let the oxidation number of Cr be x.
x
7
2
2
+1
–2
Na Cr O
Since the sum of the oxidation numbers of Na, Cr, and O in Na2Cr2O7 is 0
(Rule 5)
138
CHEMICAL REACTIONS AND STOICHIOMETRY
Then,
+1
x
–2
Na Cr O
2
2
7
(1  ×  2)  +  (x  ×  2)  +  (–2  ×  7) =  0
2  +  2x  –  14 =  0
x =  +  6
Therefore, the oxidation number of Cr in Na2Cr2O7 is +6.
Example 2
– ?
What is the oxidation number of manganese in MnO4
Solution :
Let the oxidation number of Mn be x.
x
–2
4OMn



–



The sum of the oxidation numbers of Mn and O in MnO4
– is –1 (Rule 6)
x  +  (–2  ×  4) =  –1
x  –  8 =  –1
x =  +7
Therefore, the oxidation number of Mn in MnO4
– is +7.
Example 3
Determine the oxidation number of phosphorus in Ca(H2PO4)2.
Solution:
The oxidation number of Ca is +2 (Rule 7).
Let, the oxidation number of P be x.
x
– 2
+2
+1
Ca H PO
2
4






2
+2  +  (4  ×  (+1))  +  (2  ×  x)  +  (8  ×  (–2)) =  0
2  +  4  +  2x  –  16 =  0
Hence, the oxidation number of P in Ca(H2PO4)2 is +5.
2x  –10 =  0       or          x  =  +5
139
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Exercise 4.13
1. Determine the oxidation number of the specified element in each of the following:
a C  in H2C2O4
c S  in  Na2S4O6
e H in AlH3
g Fe in K4[Fe(CN)6]
b N in NH4F
d P in Ca3(PO4)2
f N in NH4HCO3
2. Determine the oxidation number of the specified element in each of the following.
a S in S –2
+
c N in NH4
e Cr in
2
Cr O−
2
7
–
b Cl in ClO3
–3
d P in PO4
– 2
f S  in  S2O8
3. Determine whether the following processes are oxidation or reduction reactions:
a Cu2 +  2e–    Æ    Cu
b K  Æ    K+  +  e–
c O  +  2e–    Æ    O2–
d S2–    Æ    S  +  2e–
e Fe2+    Æ    Fe3+  +  e–
f N  +  3e–    Æ    N3–
4.7.3    Oxidizing  and  Reducing  Agents
In a redox reaction, the substance that causes another substance to get oxidized, but
itself gets reduced, is known as an oxidizing agent, or oxidant. In the same manner,
the substance that causes another substance to get reduced, but itself oxidized, is
referred to as a reducing agent or reductant.
• Oxidizing agents are substances that:
– are reduced (gain electrons)
– contain elements whose oxidation number decreases
• Reducing agents are substances that:
– are oxidized (lose electrons)
– contain elements whose oxidation number increases
Tests for an oxidizing agent are accomplished by mixing it with a substance which is
easily oxidized to give a visible colour change when the reaction takes place.
140
CHEMICAL REACTIONS AND STOICHIOMETRY
For example,
i) Permanganate ion (MnO4
– ) in acidic solution changes colour from purple to
colourless.
MnO4
ii) Dichromate in acidic solution changes colour from orange to green.
–   →  Mn2+
Cr2O7
2–   →  Cr3+
Other common oxidizing agents are chlorine, potassium chromate, sodium chlorate
and manganese (IV) oxide.
Similarly, certain reducing agents undergo a visible colour change with a substance
which is easily reduced.
For example,
i) A moist starch solution changes potassium iodide paper to blue-black to show
that iodine is formed, 2I– → I2. That is potassium iodide is a reducing agent.
ii) Hydrogen sulphide bubbled through a solution of an oxidizing agent forms a
yellow precipitate, S2– → S. That is H2S is a reducing agent.
Other  common  reducing  agents  are  carbon,  carbon  monoxide,  sodium
thiosulphate, sodium sulphite and iron (II) salts.
The oxidizing or reducing ability of substances depend on many factors. Some
of these are:
• Electronegativity: Elements with high electronegativity such as F2, O2, N2 and
Cl2 are good oxidizing agents. Elements with low electronegativity for example,
metallic elements like Na, K, Mg and Al are good reducing agents.
• Oxidation states: In a compound or ion, if one of its elements is in a higher
oxidation state, then it is an oxidizing agent. Similarly, if an element of a compound
or ion is in a lower oxidation state, then it is a reducing agent..
Examples
7
+
7
+
KMnO , NaClO , K Cr O
+
6
4
2
2
4
... are oxidizing agents
7
2
2
+
+
FeS, CO, Na SO
+
4
2
... are reducing agents
3
141
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
4.7.4    Analysing  Redox  Reactions
Oxidation  and  reduction  reactions  are  called  Redox  reactions.  Oxidation  and
reduction reaction take place simultaneously in a given reaction.
Activity 4.11
Form a group and discuss the following:
1. Why a reducing agent undergoes oxidation?
2. Why must every redox reaction involve both an oxidizing agent and a reducing agent?
Present your discussion to the class.
Example 4
Identify the oxidizing agent, reducing agent, the substance oxidized and reduced
in the following reaction.
Solution:
H2S  +  Br2    Æ    2HBr  +  S
Let us assign oxidation number to all the elements of the reactants and products.
In the reaction, the S atom in H2S increases its oxidation number from –2 to
0. Hence, S is oxidized and H2S is a reducing agent. The oxidation number of
Br is decreased from 0 to –1. Thus, Br2 is reduced and is an oxidizing agent.
Example 5
Write the oxidizing and reducing agents for the reaction given below:
Cu  +  HNO3   Æ    Cu(NO3)2  +  NO  +  H2O
Solution:
Write the oxidation numbers of each element and identify the substances which
undergo a change in oxidization number.
Therefore, copper is a reducing agent, and HNO3 is an oxidizing agent.
142
CHEMICAL REACTIONS AND STOICHIOMETRY
Non-redox  Reactions
So  far  we  have  discussed  oxidation  and  reduction  reaction  or  redox  reactions.
However, there are also reactions in which oxidation and reduction do not occur and
such types of reactions are known as non-redox reactions.
In non-redox reactions, no electrons are exchanged between the reacting substances.
Therefore, the oxidation numbers of the atoms do not change in the reaction. Usually such
types of reactions involve the exchange of positive and negative ions. Most of the double
displacement reactions and acid-base reactions are not oxidation-reduction reactions.
Examples
+2 –1
BaCl
2
+1   +6 –2
Na SO
4
2
+
+2 +6-2
BaSO
4
Æ
+1   –1
2NaCl
Ø
+
+1     2 +1
+1  –1
−
+
HCl NaOH
Æ
+1   –2
+1    –1
+
NaCl H O
2
Exercise 4.14
1.
In each of the following equations, identify the substance oxidized, the substance
reduced, the oxidizing agent and reducing agent.
a Fe2O3  +  3CO    Æ    2Fe  +  3CO2
b CuO  +  H2    Æ    Cu  +  H2O
c 3NO2  +  H2O    Æ    2HNO3  +  NO
d AgNO3  +  NaCl    Æ   AgCl  +  NaNO3
e Fe2+    Æ    Fe3+  +  e–
f 3Cu  +  8HNO3    Æ    3Cu(NO3)2  +  2NO  +  4H2O
g SO2–
4   +  I–  +  H+    Æ    H2S  +  I2  +  H2O
h MnO–
4  +  H+ Æ    Mn2+  +  H2O
2.
In each of the following, is the change indicated oxidation, reduction or no
change at all?
a Cl2    Æ    Cl–
c CrO2  Æ    CrO2–
4
e Cr2O2–
7    Æ    CrO2–
4
b MnO–
d SO2–
4  Æ    MnO2
4      Æ    SO2–
3
143
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
4.8 RATES  OF  CHEMICAL  REACTIONS  AND  CHEMICAL
EQUILIBRIUM
Competencies
By  the  end  of  this  section,  you  will  be  able  to:
• define rate of reaction;
• describe rate of reaction using a graph;
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
carry out an experiment to illustrate the relative rate of reactions;
list the pre-conditions for a chemical reaction to occur;
explain how collision, activation energy and proper orientation of reactants cause
a chemical reaction to occur;
list factors that affect rate of chemical reaction;
explain the effects of changes in temperature, concentration or pressure and
surface area on the rates of a chemical reaction;
explain the effect of catalysts on the rates of chemical reaction;
carry out an activity on how the factors affect the rate of chemical reaction;
• define the terms reversible reaction and irreversible reaction;
• define chemical equilibrium;
• describe the characteristics of chemical equilibrium;
• write the expression for equilibrium constant of a reversible reaction;
•
state Le Châtelier’s principle; and
• use Le Châtelier’s principle to explain the effect of changes in temperature,
pressure and concentration of reactants at equilibrium.
Activity 4.12
Discuss each of the following phenomena in groups and present your findings to the class:
1. Why do some reactions take place rapidly and others slowly? Give examples of fast
and slow reactions.
2.
Does sugar dissolve faster in hot or in cold tea?  Why?
144
CHEMICAL REACTIONS AND STOICHIOMETRY
4.8.1    Reaction  Rate
Experiment 4.9
Measuring  Rate  of  a  Reaction
Objective: To measure the rate of the reaction between HCl and CaCO3.
Apparatus: Balance, conical flask, cotton wool, stop watch.
Chemicals: HCl,  CaCO3
Procedure:
1. Take 50 mL of dilute hydrochloric acid into a conical flask.
2. Place the conical flask on a laboratory balance.
3. Add 25 g of calcium carbonate (marble chips) into the flask. Plug the cotton
wool immediately as shown in Figure 4.11. This will help to prevent escape of
the acid spray.
4. Read and record the mass of the flask and its content at one minute intervals
until the reaction is over. (Use a stop watch).
Loose plug of
cotton wool
Dilute HCl
Marble chips
Balance
Figure 4.11  Measuring the rate of the reaction between HCl and CaCO3.
Observations  and  analysis:
1. What happens to the mass during the reaction?
2. Write the balanced chemical equation.
145
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Use the following table to record your results.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Time (min)
Mass (g)
Loss in mass (g)
3. Plot  a  graph  between  time  (x-axis)  and  loss  in  mass  (y-axis),  and  draw  a
smooth curve through maximum points.
4. Why the graph is steep in the beginning but horizontal at the end of the reaction?
5. At what time does the reaction stop?
Every chemical reaction proceeds at different rates or speed. Some reactions proceed
very slowly and may take a number of days to complete; while others are very rapid,
requiring only a few seconds.
The rate of a chemical reaction measures the decrease in concentration of a reactant
or the increase in concentration of a product per unit time. This means that the rate of
a reaction determines how fast the concentration of a reactant or product changes
with time. The rate of a reaction is obtained by determining the concentration of
reactants or products during the reaction. Methods for determining the concentration
of reactants or products depend on the type of reactions. Some of the methods are:
a Colour (changes in colour)
b Pressure (increase or decrease in pressure, particularly in gases)
c Volume (increase or decrease in size, particularly in gases)
d Mass (gain or loss in weight)
e Amount of precipitate formed
Generally, the rate of a reaction can be obtained by measuring either one of the above
changes in properties of substances and consequently relating to changes in their
concentrations during the course of the reaction.
Rate of reaction =
Change in concentration of substance
Change in time
=
C
∆
t
∆
From this expression, it follows that the rate of a reaction is inversely proportional to
the time taken by the reaction.
Rate α
1
Time
Figure 4.12 illustrates the changes of the rate of a chemical reaction with time. A
reaction becomes slower as reactants are consumed. The reaction rate curve becomes
less steep until it becomes a horizontal straight line. No more reactant is used up at
this point.
146
CHEMICAL REACTIONS AND STOICHIOMETRY
Note  that  the  rate  of  a  reaction  is  the  slope  of  the  tangent  to  the  curve  at  any
particular time.
Figure 4.12   The change in concentration of product with time.
Reading  Check
When a clean piece of magnesium ribbon is added to excess dilute hydrochloric
acid, hydrogen gas is evolved. When a graph of volume versus time is drawn, show
that the total volume of the gas evolved can be measured at fixed intervals.
Pre-conditions  for  a  Chemical  Reaction
Chemical reactions are usually explained by the collision theory. The assumption of the
collision theory is that chemical reactions take place due to the collision between
molecules.
1.    Collisions  between  reactants
The first precondition for a reaction to occur is the direct contact of the reacting
substance  with  each  other.  However,  all  collisions  between  molecules  are  not
necessarily effective in bringing a reaction.
2.    Activation  energy
If the collisions between the reactant molecules do not have sufficient energy, then no
reaction will occur. Therefore, for the reaction to take place collision must always
occur with sufficient energy to break the bonds in the reactants and form new bonds
in the product. Thus, minimum amount of energy needed for the reaction is known as
activation energy.
3.    Proper  Orientation
Collision of molecules with sufficient activation energy will not bring a reaction if the
reacting molecules are poorly oriented. Thus, the collision between molecules should
have the proper orientation.
147
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Consider the reaction between H2 and Cl2 molecules:
H2  +  Cl2   Æ    2HCl
For the reaction to occur, first H2 and Cl2 molecules must collide with each other. For
the collision to be effective, these colliding molecules (H2 and Cl2) must have sufficient
energy to break the H – H and Cl – Cl bonds and consequently to form new H – Cl
bonds.
Unless, the H2 and Cl2 molecules are oriented in proper positions, there is no product
formed. Therefore, as shown in Figure 4.13(c) the H2 and Cl2 molecules rearrange
themselves so as to form a new H – Cl molecule.
a  No reaction
b  No reaction
c reaction
Figure 4.13 Molecular collisions and chemical reactions.
Factors  Affecting  the  Rates  of  Chemical  Reaction
Activity 4.13
Form a group and discuss each of the following:
1.      How  is  the  burning  of  charcoal  affected  by:
a increasing the amount of air used
b adding more charcoal.
2.      How  can  you  increase  the  rate  of  combustion  of  a  given  block  of  wood  ?
Present your findings to the class.
148
CHEMICAL REACTIONS AND STOICHIOMETRY
Activity 4.14
Form a group and compare the rate of combustion of the following substances:
a paper
b kerosene
c wood charcoal
d copper
Present your findings to the class.
The rate of a chemical reaction depends on nature of reactants, temperature, and
concentration of reactants, surface area and catalysts.
The  collision  theory  assumes  that  the  rate  of  a  reaction  depends  on  the  number
(frequency) of collisions of particles and those factors which affect the frequency of
collisions will also affect the rate of a reaction. Now let us discuss each factor.
1.    Nature  of  the  reactants
The rate of a reaction is influenced by the type and nature of the reacting substances.
For example, the following reactions have different rates due to the nature of the
reactants, Mg, Fe and Cu.
Mg + 2HCl  Æ  MgCl2 + H2
Fe  +  2HCl    Æ    FeCl2  +  H2
Cu  +  HCl    Æ    No  reaction
...  (very  fast  reaction)
... (slow reaction)
2.    Temperature
An increase in temperature increases the rate of a reaction. This is because as the
temperature increases, the average kinetic energy of the particles increases which in
turn increases the number of effective collisions.
In general, for many chemical reactions, the rate of a reaction doubles for every 10°C
rise in temperature.
3.    Concentration  of  reactants
The number of collisions is proportional to the concentration of reactants. The higher
the concentration of the reactants, the more collisions between the reacting particles
and thus the higher the rate of the reaction.
For example, if you heat a piece of steel wool in air (21% oxygen by volume) it burns
slowly. But in pure oxygen (100% oxygen by volume) it bursts in to a dazzling white
flame. This indicates that the rate of burning increases as the concentration of oxygen
is higher.
149
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Activity 4.15
Form a group and discuss the following idea. Present your discussion to the class.
If  a  certain  reaction  is  carried  out  with  water  as  a  solvent,  what  will  be  the  rate  of  the
reaction if more water is added to the reaction vessel? Explain.
Experiment 4.10
Investigating  the  effect  of  concentration  on  reaction  rate
Objective: To determine the rate of reaction of magnesium with 0.1M and 5M of
sulphuric acid.
Apparatus: Beakers.
Chemicals: H2SO4.
Procedure:
a 1. Take 20 mL of 0.1M H2SO4 into the first beaker.
2. Add 1 cm long magnesium ribbon into the beaker.
3. Note how fast the reaction occurs.
b 1. Take 20 mL of 5M H2SO4 into the second beaker.
2. Add 1cm long magnesium ribbon into the beaker as shown in Figure 4.14.
3. Observe how fast the reaction occurs.
In which of the reactions does the evolution of gas bubble faster? (a) or (b).
Observations  and  Analysis:
1.
2. Write the balanced chemical equation.
3. What do you conclude from the experiment?
Figure 4.14   The effect of concentration on the rate of a reaction.
150
CHEMICAL REACTIONS AND STOICHIOMETRY
4.    Surface  area
When the reactants are in different phases, be it solid, liquid or gas, then the surface
area of the substances affect the rate of the reaction. The higher the surface area of
reactants, the faster is the rate of the reaction. This is because more contact results in
more collisions between each small particle of reactants.
Experiment 4.11
Investigating  the  effect  of  surface  area  on  reaction  rate
Objective: To determine the rate of reaction of a lump and powdered calcium
carbonate with hydrochloric acid.
Apparatus:  Beaker, dish, and grinder.
Chemicals: Calcium carbonate and dilute hydrochloric acid.
Procedure:
a 1. Take a 5 g of calcium carbonate and put it in a beaker.
2. Add 100 mL dilute hydrochloric acid into the beaker carefully.
3. Observe how fast the reaction occurs.
b 1. Add 5 g of calcium carbonate into a dish and grind until it becomes powder.
2. Put this powdered calcium carbonate into the beaker as shown in Fig. 4.15.
3. Add 100 mL dilute hydrochloric acid carefully.
4. Observe how fast the reaction occurs.
Observations  and  Analysis:
1. Which of the reaction is faster? (a) or (b).
2. What do you conclude from the experiment?
Lump of CaCO3
Powdered CaCO3
( )a
Dilute HCl
( )b
Figure 4.15   Effect of surface area on the rate of a reaction.
151
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
5.    Catalysts
A catalyst is a substance that changes the rate of a chemical reaction without itself
being  consumed  in  the  reaction.  For  example,  the  decomposition  of  potassium
chlorate, KClO3 into KCl and O2 is made faster in the presence of MnO2 catalyst.
2KClO
2MnO
→
Heat
3
2KCl 3O
+
2
A catalyst speeds up the rate of a reaction by providing an alternative reaction path
with lower activation energy. Lower activation energy for a reaction corresponds to
the higher reaction rate. Figure 4.16 illustrates how the presence of catalysts speeds
up a reaction.
Figure 4.16 Activation energy and catalysts.
Activity 4.16
Form a group and discuss the following concept. Present your discussion to the class.
Do  the  factors  that  affect  the  rate  of  a  chemical  reaction  influence  a  physical  change  in
the same manner? Explain, by giving appropriate example.
Experiment 4.12
Investigating  the  effect  of  a  catalyst  on  the  Rate  of  a  Chemical  Reaction
Objective: To determine the effect of MnO2 catalyst on the rate of decomposition
of H2O2.
152
CHEMICAL REACTIONS AND STOICHIOMETRY
Apparatus: Test tube, test-tube rack.
Chemicals: MnO2,  H2O2.
Procedure:
1. Take 5 mL of  hydrogen peroxide in each of the two test tubes.
2. Add a small amount of coarse manganese (IV) oxide to the first test tube
(a). What do you observe?
3. Leave the second test tube (b) without adding any chemical.
4. What change do you observe in each test tube?
5. Introduce a glowing splint in the test tube and test for the evolution of a gas.
Observations  and  Analysis:
1. In which of the test tubes does the reaction occur at a fast rate? Why?
2. Which gas is evolved in the test tube?
3. What do you conclude from the experiment?
MnO2
(a)
(b)
H O2
2
Figure 4.17   Effect of a catalyst on the decomposition of H2O2.
Reading Check
What  is  the  difference  between  positive  and  negative  catalysts?  Explain  the
importance of negative catalysts by giving examples.
153
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
4.8.2    Chemical  Equilibrium
In the previous chapters, we came across chemical reactions in which all the reactants
are  completely  converted  to  products.  Such  types  of  reactions  are  known  as
irreversible reactions. Irreversible reactions proceed only in one direction (forward
direction) and expressed by a single arrow (→).
Examples
2Na  +  Cl2    Æ    2NaCl
2KClO3    Æ    2KCl  +  3O2
However, there are many chemical reactions that do not proceed to completion. The
products at the same time react to give (produce) the reactants. These are called
reversible reactions.
Reversible reactions take place in both the forward and backward directions under
the  same  conditions.  A  double  arrow  ( →← )  or  ( (cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:88)(cid:89)(cid:90)(cid:90) )  pointing  in  opposite
directions is used in such reaction equations.
Example
N2  +  3H2    (cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:88)(cid:89)(cid:90)(cid:90)     2NH3
The forward reaction proceeds from left to right and the reaction that goes from right
to left is the reverse reaction.
Does  a  reaction  stop  if  it  attains  equilibrium?
Chemical equilibrium is the state of a chemical system in which the rates of the
forward and reverse reactions are equal. At the state of chemical equilibrium, there is
no net change in the concentrations of reactants and products because the system is in
dynamic equilibrium. Dynamic equilibrium means the reaction does not stop and both
the forward and the backward reactions continue at equal rates.
At equilibrium,
Rate of forward reaction = Rate of reverse reaction
The law of chemical equilibrium can be expressed mathematically using the molar
concentrations of reactants and products at equilibrium. The concentration of species
is denoted by enclosing the formula in square bracket [ ].
Thus, for the reversible reaction:
aA+bB   (cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:88)(cid:89)(cid:90)(cid:90)    cC + d D
Rate of forward reaction = Kf [A]a [B]b
Rate of reverse reaction = Kr [C]c [D]d
where  Kf  and  Kr  are  rate  constants  for  the
forward  and  reverse  reactions  respectively.
154
CHEMICAL REACTIONS AND STOICHIOMETRY
Since at equilibrium the rate of the forward reaction equals the rate of the reverse
reaction, it follows:
Kf [A]a  [B]b  =  Kr  [C]c [D]d
K
K
f
r
[
=
[
d
b
c
] [
]
C D
a
] [
]
A B
Solving  for  the  constants,  Kf /Kr,  gives  a  new  constant,  termed  as  the  equilibrium
constant, Keq.
Therefore,
Keq  =
K
K
=
f
r
c
] [
]
C D
a
]
] [
A B
[
[
d
b
For the reaction,
Example
(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:88)(cid:89)(cid:90)(cid:90)     2NH3
N2  +  3H2
Rate of forward reaction =  Kf  [N2][H2]3
Rate of reverse reaction =  Kr  [NH3]2.
[
]
NH
3
][
N H
2
Keq =
=
[
K
K
2
r
f
2
3
]
The rates of the forward and reverse reactions are also illustrated by the following graph.
e
t
a
r
n
o
i
t
c
a
e
R
Rate of forward reaction
K =
eq
K
f
K
r
=
c
[C]
a
[A]
d
[D]
b
[B]
Rate of reverse reaction
Time
Figure 4.18   Change of the rate of the forward and reverse reactions with time.
As it is noted in the figure the rate of the forward reaction decreases with time as the
concentrations of the reactants, A and B decrease with time. The reverse reaction rate
starts  at  zero  and  increases  as  more  of  the  products,  C  and  D  are  produced.
However, at equilibrium the forward and the reverse reaction rates are equal.
155
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Example
The following equilibrium has been studied at 230°C.
2NO(g)  +  O2(g)
(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:88)(cid:89)(cid:90)(cid:90)     2NO2(g)
In one experiment, the concentrations of the reacting species at equilibrium are
found  to  be  [NO]  =  0.0542  M,  [O2]  =  0.127  M  and  [NO2]  =  15.5  M.
Calculate the equilibrium constant of the reaction at this temperature.
Solution :
The equilibrium constant is given by
2
2
]
[
NO
2
] [
NO O
]
2
K
=
[
Substituting the concentration, we find that
K
=
2
(15.5)
2
(0.0542) (0.127)
=
6.44 10 M
×
5
1
−
Exercise 4.15
Give appropriate answers to the following questions.
1. What is the reason for all collisions between reactant molecules not to lead to
products? Explain on the basis of the collision theory.
2. Explain why the rates of a reaction change with time.
3. Write the equilibrium constant expression for each of the following reactions.
a CO(g) + H2O(g)   (cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:88)(cid:89)(cid:90)(cid:90)   CO2(g) + H2(g)
b CH4(g) + Cl2(g)   (cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:88)(cid:89)(cid:90)(cid:90)   CH3 Cl(g) + HCl(g)
c 2SO2(g)  +  O2(g)    (cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:88)(cid:89)(cid:90)(cid:90)     2SO3(g)
d FeO(s)  +  CO(g)    (cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:88)(cid:89)(cid:90)(cid:90)     Fe(s)  +  CO2(g)
4. At the start of a reaction there are 0.0249 mol of N2, 3.21 × 10–2 mol H2
and 6.42 × 10–4 mol of NH3 in a 3.50 L reaction vessel at 375°C.
If the equilibrium constant, K, for the reaction:
N2(g) + 3H2(g)    (cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:88)(cid:89)(cid:90)(cid:90)     2NH3(g)
is 1.2 at this temperature, decide whether the system is at equilibrium or not. If
it is not, predict in which direction, the net reaction will proceed.
156
CHEMICAL REACTIONS AND STOICHIOMETRY
Activity 4.17
Form a group and discuss the importance of equilibrium in the study of chemical reactions.
Present your discussion to the class.
Factors  that  Affect  Chemical  Equilibrium
Activity 4.18
Form a group and try to explore at least two properties that can be utilize to determine
the state of chemical equilibrium in system.
Present your findings to the class.
A system remains at a state of chemical equilibrium if there is no change in the
external conditions that disturb the equilibrium. But the point of equilibrium could be
affected due to any external factors like temperature, pressure, concentration and so
on. How a system at equilibrium adjusts itself to any of these changes is stated by the
French chemist Henri Le Chatelier in 1888.
Le Chatelier states that if a stress is applied to a system in equilibrium, the system
will respond in such a way to counteract the stress. The stress could be change in
temperature, concentration or pressure.
The  factors  affecting  chemical  equilibrium  and  their  effects:
1.      Effect  of  temperature
The effect of temperature changes on equilibrium depends on whether the reaction is
exothermic or endothermic. An increase in the temperature of a system will favour an
endothermic reaction and a decrease in temperature favors an exothermic reaction.
For example, consider the following reaction:
H2O(g) + CO(g)      (cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:88)(cid:89)(cid:90)(cid:90)       H2(g)  +  CO2(g);  ∆H  =  –  41  kJ
Since the reaction is exothermic,
i)
if temperature is increased, the system will shift to the left.
ii)
if temperature is decreased, the system will shift to the right and a high yield of
products (H2 and CO2) is obtained.
157
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
2.    Effect  of  Pressure  or  Volume
Pressure changes only affect equilibrium reaction involving gaseous reactants and
products. The effect of pressure on liquids and solids is negligible. An increase in
pressure (or decrease in volume) on a gaseous system shifts the equilibrium in the
direction of forming smaller number of moles of gas. On the contrary, decreasing the
pressure shifts the equilibrium in the direction of forming more number of moles of the
gas. For example, in the reaction,
2CO(g) + O (g)
(cid:8)(cid:11)(cid:11)(cid:9)(cid:11)(cid:11)(cid:10)
3 moles of gases
2
(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:88)(cid:89)(cid:90)(cid:90)
2CO (g)
(cid:8)(cid:11)(cid:9)(cid:11)(cid:10)
2 moles of gases
2
There are 3 moles of reactants and 2 moles of product.
Therefore, increasing the pressure of the system shifts the equilibrium to the forward
direction. This results in a higher yield of CO2. Decreasing the pressure of the gaseous
mixture shifts the equilibrium in the reverse direction.
When  the  number  of  moles  of  reactants  and  products  are  equal,  pressure  has  no
effect on the equilibrium. For example, in the following reaction;
2
(g)
H (g) + I
(cid:8)(cid:11)(cid:9)(cid:11)(cid:10)
2 moles of gases
2
(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:88)(cid:89)(cid:90)(cid:90) (cid:8)(cid:9)(cid:10)
2HI (g)
2 molesof gases
the number of moles of reactants and products are equal (2 mol each) and hence no
effect of pressure on the equilibrium.
Exercise 4.16
For the following equilibrium system, how would the position of the equilibrium be
changed if:
a
c
the temperature is increased;
b the pressure is decreased?
the temperature is increased, and
d the pressure is decreased
1. N2(g) + O2(g)   (cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:88)(cid:89)(cid:90)(cid:90)   2NO(g) + heat
2. 2H2O(g)    (cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:88)(cid:89)(cid:90)(cid:90)     2H2(g)  +  O2(g),  ∆H  =  +  241.7  kJ
3. N2(g) + 2H2O(g) + heat   (cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:88)(cid:89)(cid:90)(cid:90)   2NO(g) + 2H2(g)
4. 2SO2(g)  +  O2(g)    (cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:88)(cid:89)(cid:90)(cid:90)     2SO3(g)  +  heat
5. N2O4(g)  +  heat    (cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:88)(cid:89)(cid:90)(cid:90)     2NO2(g)
6. PCl3(g) + Cl2(g)   (cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:88)(cid:89)(cid:90)(cid:90)   PCl5(g) + 21 kJ
158
CHEMICAL REACTIONS AND STOICHIOMETRY
3.    Effect  of  Concentration
According to Le Chatelier’s principle, any change in the concentration of a reactant or
product will lead to a change in the concentration of the substances on the other side
of the equation.
If one of the reactants is added to the equilibrium mixture, the system shifts to the
forward direction and a high yield of product is obtained. To the contrary, if more
product is added to the system, the equilibrium shifts to the reverse direction. For
example, in the reaction,
N2  +  3H2
(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:88)(cid:89)(cid:90)(cid:90)   2NH3
If the concentration of N2 or H2 is increased (i.e., if more N2 or H2 is added), the
equilibrium will shift to the right direction and more NH3 will be produced.
4.    Effect  of  catalysts
Catalysts  change  the  speed  of  both  the  forward  and  reverse  reactions  equally.
However, catalysts do not affect the state of chemical equilibrium of a reaction. This
means that the position of equilibrium will not be shifted due to the presence of a
catalyst.
How can Le-Chatelier’s principle help in maximizing the yields of products
in  industrial  production?
Many industrial reactions are reversible reactions. The Haber and contact processes
provide excellent illustrations of the effects of temperature, pressure and catalyst on
the equilibrium systems.
A
B
Haber  process  (the  industrial  production  of  ammonia).  In  the  Haber
process, ammonia (NH3) is industrially manufactured using gaseous nitrogen
and hydrogen.
N2(g) + 3H2
Fe
(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:88)(cid:89)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:90)  2NH3(g); ∆H = – 92 kJ/mol
Catalyst
High  yield  of  ammonia  is  produced  by  decreasing  the  temperature  and
increasing the pressure of the system.
However, the yield per unit time is highly increased by using an iron catalyst.
Contact process (the industrial production of sulphuric acid). Similarly, in
the contact process, sulphuric acid (H2SO4) is commercially manufactured by
the reaction of SO2 and O2. The resulting SO3 is then converted to H2SO4.
SO2(g)  +  O2
2
5V O(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:88)(cid:89)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:90)   2SO3(g)  +  heat
159
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
To get high yield of SO3, how would you adjust the temperature, pressure and
concentration in the above reaction?
Check list
Key terms of the unit
• Activation  energy
• Catalysts
• Chemical equilibrium
• Chemical reaction
• Collision theory
• Combination reaction
• Decomposition reaction
• Double displacement reaction
• Dynamic equilibrium
• Endothermic reaction
• Energy changes
• Energy diagrams
• Enthalpy
• Equilibrium constant
• Exothermic  reaction
• Heat  of  reaction
•
Irreversible reaction
• Le Chatelier's principle
• Limiting  reactants
• Oxidation
• Oxidizing agents
• Percentage yield
• Products
• Reactants
• Reaction rates
• Redox reaction
• Reducing agents
• Reduction
• Reversible reaction
• Single displacement reaction
• Stoichiometry
• Theoretical and actual yield
Unit Summary
• Chemical reactions are represented by chemical equations.
• The three basic laws of chemical reactions are: the law of conservation of
mass,  the  law  of  definite  proportion  and  the  law  of  multiple  proportions.
• A  balanced  chemical  equation  is  an  equation  in  which  all  the  number  of
atoms  of  reactants  and  products  are  equal.
• Most of the chemical reactions  are  accompanied by energy changes.
• Exothermic  reactions  release  heat  energy  to  the  surrounding.
• Endothermic  reactions  absorb  heat  energy  from  the  surrounding.
• Heat  of  reaction  or  change  in  enthalpy  is  the  amount  of  heat  energy
liberated or absorbed by a chemical reaction.
• Chemical  reactions  are  classified  into  combination,  decomposition,  single
displacement and double displacement reactions.
160
CHEMICAL REACTIONS AND STOICHIOMETRY
• Stoichiometry is the quantitative relationship between reactants and products.
• Mass-mass  problems,  mass-volume  and  volume-volume  problems  are  the
main  types  of  stoichiometric  calculations.
• Oxidation  is  the  process  where  a  substance  loses  electron  (s)  or  increases
its  oxidation  number.
• Reduction is the process where a substance gains electron (s) or decreases
its  oxidation  number.
• Oxidizing  agents  are  the  substances  reduced,  and  reducing  agents  are  the
substances oxidized.
• Rate  of  reaction  is  the  change  in  concentration  of  reactants  or  products
with  time.
• Reversible reactions take place in both the forward and backward directions.
•
Irreversible reactions proceed only in the forward direction.
• Chemical equilibrium is the state of a chemical reaction in which the rate
of  the  forward  and  reverse  reactions  is  equal.
• Le  Chatlier's  principle  states  that  when  an  equilibrium  is  subjected  to  a
stress,  the  system  will  shift  in  a  direction  so  as  to  relieve  the  stress.
• The  chemical  equilibrium  is  affected  by  temperature,  pressure,  and
concentrations.
REVIEW  EXERCISE  ON  UNIT  4
Part  I: True-False  Type  Questions
1.
2.
In any chemical reaction, each type of atoms is conserved.
In a balanced chemical equation, both sides of the equation have the same
number of moles.
3. The oxidizing agent is oxidized by the reducing agent.
4. Most metallic elements are strong reducing agents, whereas most non-metallic
elements are strong oxidizing agents.
5. The higher the percentage yield of a chemical reaction, the more successful the
reaction.
6. The rate of a reaction is directly proportional to time.
7. A catalyst increases the reaction rates by changing the reaction mechanism.
8. The concentrations of reactants and products are equal at the state of chemical
equilibrium.
161
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
9. A chemical equilibrium involves two opposite reactions, where one is endothermic
and the other is exothermic.
10. The  amount  of  product  obtained  at  equilibrium  directly  indicates  how  fast
equilibrium is attained.
Part  II: Write  the  missing  words  in  your  exercise  book
11. The oxidation number of sulphur in CuSO4.5H2O is ____________ .
12. The  value  of  the  equilibrium  constant  (K)  is  changed  or  affected
by ____________ .
13. Out of all factors, the rate of a heterogeneous reaction is highly influenced
by ____________ .
.
Part  III: Problems  to  Solve
14. How many grams of oxygen can be prepared by the decomposition of 12 grams
of mercury (II) oxide?
15. 25 g of NH3 is mixed with 4 moles of O2 in the given reaction:
4NH3(g) + 5O2(g)   (cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:88)(cid:89)(cid:90)(cid:90)   4NO(g) + 6H2O(l)
a Which is the limiting reactant?
b What mass of NO is formed?
c What mass of H2O is formed?
16. Consider the following reaction:
2N2O5(g)  (cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:88)(cid:89)(cid:90)(cid:90)     4NO2(g)  +  O2(g)
When 40 g of N2O5 decomposes, 4.5 g of O2 is formed. What is the percent
yield?
17. Consider the following equilibrium:
Increasing the temperature.
N2(g) + 2H2O(g) + heat   (cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:88)(cid:89)(cid:90)(cid:90)   2NO(g) + 2H2(g)
How would the equilibrium of the system be affected by the following changes?
a
b Increasing the concentration of N2.
c Removing all NO and H2.
d Compressing the reaction vessel.
e Decreasing the volume of the reaction vessel.
f Decreasing the amount of N2 or H2O.
162
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
MAIN  CONTENTS
5.1
Introduction
5.2 The kinetic theory and properties of matter
5.3 The gaseous state
5.4 The liquid state
5.5 The solid state
– Unit Summary
– Review Exercise
Start up Activity
Objective of the activity
Scientists have conducted different activities and experiments to describe the
different physical states of matter. The present simple activity will help you to form
an idea about the existence of different states of matter (solid, liquid and gas) by
using ice (solid form of water).
Procedure
1. Take a few pieces of ice in an evaporating dish. Ensure that the ice is present
in solid form.
2. Heat the evaporating dish gently and observe the changes.
3. Cover the evaporating dish with a watch glass and continue heating it for
more time. Record your observations.
Analysis
1. What happens to ice when it is heated?
2. When the ice is heated in the evaporating dish covered with watch glass,
some  droplets  of  water  appear  on  it.  What  do  you  conclude  from  this
observation? Can you name this phenomenon?
3. Name the different forms of water that you notice in the above activity.
4. Form a conclusion about the ice as it exists in solid, liquid, and gaseous state.
Record your observations and present to the class.
164
PHYSICAL STATES OF MATTER
5.1    INTRODUCTION
Competencies
By  the  end  of  this  section,  you  will  be  able  to:
• Name the three physical states of matter.
Activity 5.1
Discuss each of the following in your group and present your discussion to the class.
1. Name two examples for each of solids, liquids and gases.
2. What happens when you heat an ice cube?
You recall that all object around us is called matter. Matter is defined as anything that
occupies space and has mass. It can exist in the form of gas, liquid and solid. The
simplest example is the water we use in our daily life. The three physical states of
water are:
• Steam, water in the form of gas.
• Water, in the form of liquid.
•
Ice, water in the form of solid.
The changes of the states of matter are our every day experience. That is, ice melts
and water freezes; water boils and steam condenses.
The  physical  state  of  a  given  sample  of  matter  depends  on  the  temperature  and
pressure. Changing these conditions or variables may change the behaviour of the
substances as solids, liquids or gases.
Solid
A solid has a definite shape and a definite volume. Solids are almost completely
incompressible and have very high average density. A high average density reflects the
fact that the particles within solids are usually packed closer than those in liquids or
gases do. The tightly packed particles of solids are also highly organized.
The particles of a solid, whether they are atoms, ions or molecules only vibrate about
a fixed point with respect to the neighboring particles. Because of these, the particles
maintain a fixed position; for example substances like metals, wood, coal and stone,
are solids.
165
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Liquid
A liquid has a definite volume, but does not have a definite shape. Liquids take the
shape of their container. This is explained in terms of arrangement of particles. In the
liquid state, particles vibrate about a point, and constantly shift their positions relative
to their neighbours. At room temperature, water, ethanol, benzene and oil are liquids.
Gas
A gas has neither a definite shape nor a definite volume. This is because its particles
are virtually independent of one another. For example, air, hydrogen, oxygen, carbon
dioxide and nitrogen are gases.
Plasma
Besides,  solid,  liquid  and  gas,  there  exists  a  fourth-state  of  matter  at  very  high
temperature (million degrees Celsius). At such high temperatures molecules cannot
exist. Most or all of the atoms are stripped of their electrons. This state of matter, a
gaseous  mixture  of  positive  ions  and  electrons,  is  called  plasma.  Because  of  the
extreme temperatures needed for fusion, no material can exist in the plasma state.
Exercise 5.1
1. Can oxygen exist as a liquid and solid?
2. Compare and contrast the three states of matter.
3. What is dry ice?
5.2    KINETIC  THEORY  AND  PROPERTIES  OF  MATTER
Competencies
By  the  end  of  this  section,  you  will  be  able  to:
• give examples for each of the three physical states of matter;
state kinetic theory of matter;
explain the properties of the three physical states of matter in terms of kinetic
theory; and
compare and contrast the three physical states of matter.
•
•
•
166
PHYSICAL STATES OF MATTER
Activity 5.2
Form a group and perform the following task. Present your findings to the class.
1. Select any three different substances; one existing in the solid state, the second in the
liquid state and the third in the gaseous state at room temperature. Use the following
table to explain the motion, distance and attraction between particles.
Substances
Motion  of
particles
Distance between
particles
Attraction  between
particles
1
2
3
2.
In which state do the particles possess the highest kinetic energy?
5.2.1    The  Kinetic  Theory  of  Matter
The three states of matter in which substances are chemically the same but physically
different are explained by the kinetic theory of matter. The kinetic theory of matter gives
an explanation of the nature of the motion and the heat energy. According to the kinetic
theory of matter, every substance consists of a very large number of very small particles
called ions, atoms and molecules. The particles are in a state of continuous and random
motion with all possible velocities. The motion of the particles increases with a rise in
temperature.
Generally, the kinetic theory of matter is based on the following three assumptions:
1. All matter is composed of particles which are in constant motion.
2. The particles possess kinetic energy and potential energy.
3. The difference between the three states of matter is due to their energy contents
and the motion of the particles.
5.2.2    Properties  of  Matter
Activity 5.3
Form a group and discuss each of the following idea.Present your discussion to the class.
1. Compare and contrast the density of solid, liquid and gaseous forms of a substance.
2. Discuss the compressibility of solid, liquid and gaseous forms of water.
167
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
As  discussed  earlier,  matter  exists  as  gas,  liquid,  and  solid.  Their  properties  are
explained in terms of the kinetic theory as follows:
Properties  of  Gases
From the kinetic molecular theory of gases, the following general properties of gases
can be summarized.
1. Gases have no definite shape and definite volume. This is because gases assume
the volume and shape of their containers.
2. Gases can be easily compressed. By applying pressure to the walls of a flexible
container, gases can be compressed; the compression results in a decrease in
volume. This happens due to the large spaces between the particles of gases.
3. Gases have low densities compared with liquids and solids. This is due to the
fact that the particles of a gas are very far apart and the number of molecules
per unit volume is very small. A small mass of a gas in a large volume results in
a very low density.
4. Gases exert pressure in all directions. Gases that are confined in a container
exert pressure on the walls of their container. This pressure is due to collisions
between gas molecules and the walls of the container.
5. Gases easily flow and diffuse through one another.  A gas moves freely and
randomly throughout in a given space.
Properties  of  Liquids
Liquids can be characterized by the following properties.
1. Liquids have a definite volume, but have no definite shape. They assume the
shapes of their container. Lack of a definite shape for liquid substances arises
from its low intermolecular forces as compared to that of solids.
2. Liquids have higher densities than gases. Their density is a result of the close
arrangement of liquid particles. Thus, the particles of liquids are closer than
those of gases. This accounts for the higher densities of liquids as compared to
gases.
3. Liquids are slightly compressible. With very little free spaces between their particles
liquids resist an applied external force and thus are compressed very slightly.
4. Liquids are fluids. A fluid is a substance that can easily flow. Most liquids naturally
flow downhill because of gravity. Because liquids flow readily the molecules of
a liquid can mix with each other. They flow much more slowly than gases.
Properties  of  Solids
1. Solids have a definite shape and a definite volume. This is due to the strong
force of attraction that holds the particles of solids together.
168
PHYSICAL STATES OF MATTER
2. Solids generally have higher densities than gases and liquids. The particles of
solids are very close to each other. There is almost no empty space between
the particles of solids. This closeness of particles makes solids to have more
particles (mass) per unit volume, and hence solids have high density.
3. Solids are extremely difficult to compress. This is because of the high interparticle
forces, and a very short distance between the particles.
4. Solids are not fluids. That is they normally do not flow. This is due to the fact
that solid particles are rigidly held in position by strong forces that cause the
restricted motion of their particles.
Activity 5.4
Form a group and perform the following activity:
Take a balloon and blow air into it. What happens to the volume of balloon. Explain your
observations and findings to the class.
Arrange the three states of matter in order of increasing:
Exercise 5.2
a
intermolecular force
b density
c
compressibility
d kinetic energy
5.3    THE  GASEOUS  STATE
Competencies
By  the  end  of  this  section,  you  will  be  able  to:
•
explain the assumptions of kinetic molecular theory of gases;
• describe the properties of gases using kinetic molecular theory;
• describe the behavior of gases by using the variables V (volume), T (Temperature)
P (pressure) and n (number of moles);
state Boyle’s law;
•
• perform an activity to show changes in volume and pressure of gases to illustrates
Boyle’s law;
169
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
•
•
apply Boyle’s law in solving problems;
state Charles’ law;
• perform an activity to show changes in volume and temperature of gases to
illustrate Charles’  law;
•
apply Charles’ law in solving problems;
• derive combined gas law equation from Boyle’s law and Charles’ law;
• use  the  combined  gas  law  to  calculate  changes  in  volume,  pressure  or
temperature;
• define an ideal gas;
• derive an ideal gas equation from Boyle’s law, Charles’ law and Avogadro’s
law;
•
•
compare the nature of real gases with ideal gases;
solve problems related to ideal gas equation;
• define diffusion;
•
•
•
state Graham’s law of diffusion;
carry out an activity to compare the rate of diffusion of two different gases;
apply Graham’s law of diffusion in solving problems.
Activity 5.5
Form a group and discuss each of the following phenomenon. Present your conclusion to
the  class.
Regarding  the  pressure  in  the  tyres,  what  would  you  recommend  to  the  driver  of  a  car
who  is  taking  a  trip  to  an  area  that  is  experiencing  very  cold  temperatures,  more  or  less
air? Explain.
5.3.1    The  Kinetic  Molecular  Theory  of  Gases
The  particles  in  an  ideal  gas  are  very  widely  spaced  and  they  are  in  a  constant
random motion. The pressure of a gas is the result of continuous collisions between
the particles and the walls of their container.
170
PHYSICAL STATES OF MATTER
Assumptions  of  the  kinetic  molecular  theory  of  gases
1. The particles are in a state of constant, continuous, rapid, random motion and,
therefore, possess kinetic energy. The motion is constantly interrupted by collisions
with molecules or with the container. The pressure of a gas is the effect of these
molecular impacts.
2. The volume of the particles is negligible compared to the total volume of the
gas. Gases are composed of separate, tiny invisible particles called molecules.
Since these molecules are so far apart, the total volume of the molecules is
extremely small compared with the total volume of the gas. Therefore, under
ordinary conditions, the gas consists chiefly of empty space. This assumption
explains why gases are so easily compressed and why they can mix so readily.
3. The attractive forces between the particles are negligible. There are no forces of
attraction or repulsion between gas particles. You can think of an ideal gas
molecule as behaving like small billiard balls. When they collide, they do not
stick together but immediately bounce apart.
4. The average kinetic energy of gas particles depends on the temperature of the
gas. At any particular moment, the molecules in a gas have different velocities.
The mathematical formula for kinetic energy is K.E. = ½ mν2, where m is mass
and ν is velocity of gas molecules. Because the molecules have different velocities,
they have different kinetic energies. However, it is assumed that the average
kinetic energy of the molecules is directly proportional to the absolute (Kelvin)
temperature of the gas.
5.3.2    The  Gas  Laws
Activity 5.6
Form a group and discuss the following phenomena in terms of the gas laws. Present your
conclusion to the class.
a The increase in pressure in an automobile tire on a hot day.
b The loud noise heard when a light bulb shatters.
The gas laws are the products of many experiments on the physical properties of
gases, which were carried out over hundreds of years. The observation of Boyle and
other  scientists  led  to  the  development  of  the  Gas  Laws.  The  gas  laws  express
mathematical relationships between the volume, temperature, pressure, and quantity of
a gas.
171
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Pressure: pressure is defined as the force applied per unit area.
Pressure =
Force
Area
Pressure is one of the measurable properties of gases. Thus, the pressure of a gas can
be expressed in unit of atmosphere, Pascal, torr, millimetre of mercury. The SI unit of
pressure is Pascal (Pa), and is defined as one Newton per square metre.
1 Pa = 1 N/m2 and
1 atm = 760 mmHg = 76 cmHg = 760 torr = 101325 Pa = 101.325 kPa
Volume: Volume is the space taken up by a body. The SI unit of volume is the cubic
metre (m3). Volume is also expressed in cubic centimetre (cm3) and cubic decimetre
(dm3). Other common units of volume are millilitre (mL) and litre (L).
1 cm3 =  (1×10–2  m)3  =  1×10–6  m3
1 dm3 =  (1×10–1 m)3 =  1×10–3 m3  =  1  L
A litre is equivalent to one cubic decimeter: The relation is given as follows
1 L = 1000 mL = 1000 cm3 = 1 dm3
Temperature: Temperature is the degree of hotness or coldness of a body. Three
temperature scales are commonly used. These are °F (degree Fahrenheit), °C (degree
Celsius)  and  K  (Kelvin).  In  all  gas  calculations,  we  use  the  Kelvin  scale  of
temperature.
We use the following formulae for all necessary inter-conversions:
K  =  °C  +  273
°
°
C = ( F – 32 )
5
9
°
F =



9
5
°

×  C + 32


Exercise 5.3
Convert the following:
a
b
c
500 mmHg into atm, torr, and cmHg
100 dm3 into mL, cm3, L, m3
54°C into K and °F.
172
PHYSICAL STATES OF MATTER
Molar  Volume  and  Standard  Conditions  (STP)
The conditions of a pressure of 1 atmosphere and a temperature of 0oC (273.14 K)
are called standard temperature and pressure or STP for gases. At STP the volume of
one  mole  of  any  gas  is  equal  to  22.4  litres.  This  volume  is  known  as  molar  gas
volume.
Quantity of gas: The quantity of a gas is expressed in mole (n). Mole is the quantity
of gas in terms of number of particles. It is the number of atoms or molecules in
1 gram-atom or 1 gram-molecule of an element or a compound.
1.    Boyle’s  Law
Activity 5.7
Form a group and discuss the following phenomenon. Present your discussion to the class.
Explain  why  a  helium  weather  balloon  expands  as  it  rises  more  in  the  air.  (Assume  the
temperature remains constant.)
The first quantitative experiments on gases were performed by the Irish chemist,
Robert  Boyle  (1627-1691).  His  experiment  helped  to  analyze  the  relationship
between the volume and pressure of a fixed amount of a gas at constant temperature.
Decreasing the external pressure, causes the gas to expand and to increase in volume.
Correspondingly,  increasing  the  external  pressure  allows  the  gas  to  contract  and
decrease in volume. This is shown in Figure 5.1.
Figure 5.1 The relation between pressure and volume.
Boyle studied the relationship between the pressure of the trapped gas and its volume.
Accordingly, he discovered that at constant temperature doubling the pressure on a
173
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
sample of gas reduces its volume by one-half. Tripling the gas pressure reduces its
volume to one-third of the original. Generally, the volume of a gas decreases, as the
pressure  on  the  gas  increases.  This  volume-pressure  relationship  is  illustrated  in
Table 5.1.
Table  5.1 Pressure and volume data for a gas at constant mass and temperature.
Presssure (atm)
Volume (mL)
0.5
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
6.0
1200
600
300
200
150
120
100
P × V
600
600
600
600
600
600
600
)
L
m
(
e
m
u
o
V
l
1200
900
600
300
0
0.5      1.0        2.0       3.0      4.0       5.0      6.0
Pressure (atm)
Figure 5.2 Volume versus pressure graph for a gas at constant temperature and mass.
The general volume-pressure relationship illustrated above is called Boyle's  law.
Boyle's law states that the volume of a fixed mass of gas is inversely proportional
to  the  pressure  at  a  constant  temperature.  The  inverse  relationship  between
pressure and volume is mathematically given as
From which follows,
αV
(at constant T and n)
1
P
1
P
where k is a constant at a specific temperature  for a given sample of gas.
V  =  k
or PV  =  k ;
174
PHYSICAL STATES OF MATTER
If P1 and V1 represent the initial conditions; and P2 and V2 represent the new or final
conditions, Boyle’s law can be written as:
P1V1  =  P2V2;
Experiment 5.1
Effect  of  Pressure  on  the  Volume  of  Gas
Objective:  To observe the relationships between the volume and pressure of a gas
at constant temperature.
Apparatus: U-tubes, ruler, rubber tube, burette, glass tube.
Chemicals: Mercury.
Procedure:
1.
Join  two  tubes  by  a  rubber  tubing  to  give  a  U-arrangement  as  shown  in
Figure 5.3, and then partially fill these two tubes with mercury.
2. Put a ruler in the middle of the tube.
3. The first arm of the tube (A) contains air and is sealed by a tap.
4. By moving the second arm of the tube (B) up and down, the volume of air in
the first tube can be varied.
5. The pressure exerted on the air is obtained from the difference in height of
mercury in the two arms of the tube.
Figure 5.3  Effect of pressure on the volume of a gas at constant temperature.
175
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Observations  and  analysis:
1. Plot a graph taking pressure on the vertical axis versus volume on the horizontal
axis and comment on the shape of the graph.
2. What can you conclude from this experiment?
Activity 5.8
Discuss the following activity in your group and present your discussion to the class. Plot
a graph of pressure, P, versus 1/V, using the following data:
(Note:  Calculate  1/V values  from  the  given  volume  by  yourself )
Pressure(atm)
Volume(mL)
1
20
2
10
3
6.7
4
5
5
4
1. What does the graph look like?
2. What does the graph indicate?
3. What can you conclude from the graph?
Example 1
An  inflated  balloon  has  a  volume  of  0.55  L  at  sea  level  (1.0  atm)  and  is
allowed to rise to  a height of 6.5 km, where the pressure is about 0.40 atm.
Assuming that the temperature remains constant, what is the final volume of the
balloon?
Solution:
Givens:
Initial conditions
Final conditions
P1 = 1.0 atm
V1 = 0.55 L
P2 = 0.40 atm
V2 =  ?
Use Boyles’ law equation: P1V1 = P2 V2
Therefore,
V  =
2
P V
1
1
P
2
= 0.55 L ×
1.0 atm
0.40 atm
= 1.4 L.
176
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
compartment of our refrigerator, its volume shrinks drastically as the air inside cools
(Figure 5.4(c)).
Figure 5.4 Relationship between the volume of air in the balloon and its temperature.
From  your  observation  what  can  you  conclude  about  the  effect  of  temperature
on  the  volume  of  a  gas?
In  1848,  Lord  Kelvin  realized  that  a  temperature  of  -273.15oC  is  considered  as
absolute zero. Absolute zero is theoretically the lowest attainable temperature. Then he
set up an absolute temperature scale, or the Kelvin temperature scale, with absolute
zero as the starting point on the Kelvin scale.
The  average  kinetic  energy  of  gas  molecules  is  closely  related  to  the  Kelvin
temperature. The volume of a gas and Kelvin temperature are directly proportional to
each other. For example, doubling the Kelvin temperature causes the volume of a gas
to double, and reducing the Kelvin temperature by half causes the volume of a gas to
decrease by half. This relationship between Kelvin temperature and the volume of a
gas is known as Charles’ law.
Charles’  law  states  that  the  volume  of  a  fixed  mass  of  gas  at  constant  pressure
varies  directly  with  the  Kelvin  temperature.
178
PHYSICAL STATES OF MATTER
Mathematically;
V  a  T  at  constant  P  and  n:
V  =  kT,
or
V
T
=
k
The value of T is the Kelvin temperature, and k is a constant. The value of k depends
only on the quantity of gas and the pressure. The ratio V/T for any set of volume-
temperature values always equals the same k. Charles' law can be applied directly to
volume-temperature problems using the relationship:
V
1
T
1
=
V
2
T
2
where  V1  and  T1  represent  the  initial  condition;  V2  and  T2  represent  the  new
condition.
Charles found that the volume of a gas at constant pressure increases linearly with
the  temperature  of  the  gas.  That  is,  a  plot  of  the  volume  of  a  gas  versus  its
temperature  (K)  gives  a  straight  line  assuming  the  pressure  remains  constant.
Figure 5.5  illustrates  the  relationship  between  the  volume  of  a  gas  and  Kelvin
temperature.  If  the  graph  is  extrapolated  to  give  zero  volume  for  a  gas,  the
temperature  reached  is  –273.15oC.  This  temperature  is  the  lowest  temperature
attained by a gas and it is called absolute zero.
Figure 5.5 A plot of volume versus the Kelvin temperature.
Note that the ratio V/T is constant for every plot of the curve. Figure 5.5 is drawn
using the data given in Table 5.2 for the same sample of gas. In all cases, V/T is
constant as noted in the table.
179
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Table 5.2   Volume-Temperature Data for a Gas sample (at constant mass and pressure).
Volume (mL)
Temperature in Kelvin
600
500
400
300
200
100
300
250
200
150
100
50
Experiment 5.2
V/T
2
2
2
2
2
2
Effect  of  Temperature  on  the  Volume  of  Gas
Objective: To observe the changes in volume of a gas as temperature changes.
Apparatus: Round bottomed flask, beaker, delivery tube and burner.
Procedure:
1. Set up the apparatus as shown in Figure 5.6.
2. Warm the flask gently with a low Bunsen flame.
3. Cool the flask and note what happens.
4. Record your observation.
Observations  and  analysis:
1. What do you observe from the experiment?
2. What is your conclusion from this activity?
Figure   5.6 Relationship between temperature and volume of a gas.
180
PHYSICAL STATES OF MATTER
Activity 5.10
Form a group and perform the following activity and present to the class.
Given the following data at a constant pressure:
Volume  of  Nitrogen  gas  (L)
Temperature  (K)
4.28  L
5.79  L
7.77  L
303
410
550
a Draw a graph of the relationship between volume and temperature.
b Calculate  the  expected  volume  of  the  gas  when  the  temperature  reaches  700K.
c Explain the relationship between temperature and volume.
Example 2
A quantity of gas occupies a volume of 804 cm3 at a temperature of 127°C.
At what temperature will the volume of the gas be 603 cm3, assuming that
there is no change in the pressure?
Solution:
Given:
Initial conditions
Final conditions
T1 =  127oC
=  127  +  273  =  400  K
T2 =  ?
V2  =  603  cm3
V1 = 804 cm3
Based  on  Charles’  equation



V
1
T
1
=
V
2
T
2



calculated as:
,  the  unknown  variable  (T2)  can  be
V
1
T
1
=
V
2
T
2
⇒
T
2
=
T
1
×
V
2
V
1
= 400 K ×
3
3
603cm
804 cm
= 300 K
181
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Example 3
A  gas  at  65°C  occupies  4.22  L.  What  will  be  the  volume  of  the  gas  at  a
temperature of 36.9°C, assuming a constant pressure?
Solution:
Given:
Initial conditions
T1 =  65°C
=  65  +  273  =  338  K
Final conditions
T2 =  36.9°C  +  273  =  309.9  K
V1 = 4.22 L
From Charles’  law
V2  =  ?
V
1
T
1
=
V
2
T
2
ﬁ
V
2
=
T
1
V
1
×
T
2
=
4.22 L × 309.9 K
338 K
=
3.87 L
Exercise 5.5
1. At constant pressure, by what fraction of its volume will a quantity of gas
change if the temperature changes from -173°C to 27°C?
2. At what temperature will the volume of a gas be
a halved,
c tripled at constant pressure if the original temperature is 17°C?
b doubled,
3. At 25°C and 1 atm a gas occupies a volume of 1.5 dm3. What volume will it
occupy at 100°C and 1 atm?
3.    The  Combined  Gas  Law
A sample of a gas often undergoes changes in temperature, pressure, and volume.
When this happens, the three variables must be dealt with at the same time.
Boyle’s law and Charles’ law can be combined to give one expression called the
combined  gas  law.  The  combined  gas  law  expresses  the  relationship  between
pressure, volume, and temperature of a fixed amount of gas.
Derivation of the combined gas law:
Boyle’s law:   V a 1/P
Charles’ law:  V a T
Then, V a T/P (combined)
V  =  kT/P  (where  k  is  a  constant)
182
PHYSICAL STATES OF MATTER
It follows,
P V
1
1
T
1
k
=
and
P V
2 2
T
2
=
k
Since in each case k is constant, the combined gas law equation is given as follows:
P V
1
1
T
1
=
P V
2
2
T
2
Where P1, V1 and T1 are the initial pressure, volume and temperature; P2, V2 and T2
are the final pressure, volume and temperature of the gas respectively.
Example 4
A  300  cm3  sample  of  a  gas  exerts  a  pressure  of  60.0  kPa  at  27°C.  What
pressure would it exert in a 200 cm3 container at 20°C?
Solution:
Given:
Initial  Conditions V1  =  300  cm3
V2  =200  cm3
Final  Conditions
T1  =  27  +  273  =  300  K P1=  60.0  kPa
T2  =  20  +  273  =  293  K P2  =  ?
Using the combined gas law,




PV
1 1
T
1
=
P V
2 2
T
2
.




⇒
=
P
2
V
P
1
1
T
1
P2  =  87.9  kPa
T
2
V
2
×
=
300 K
60.0 kPa 300 cm
×
3
×
293 K
3
200 cm
Exercise 5.6
If  a  50  cm3  sample  of  gas  exerts  a  pressure  of  60.0  kPa  at  35°C,  what
volume will it occupy at STP?
4.    Avogadro’s  law
Activity 5.11
Form a group and discuss the following phenomena. Present your discussion to the class.
Suppose  while  you  are  playing  a  football  in  your  school  football  team,  the  ball  is
accidentally deflated. Then immediately you fill the ball with air using air pump.
i. Why did the ball become strong enough?
ii. What happened to the number of particles in the ball?
iii. Which gas law can be obeyed? Explain.
183
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
The  relationship  between  the  volume  of  a  gas  and  its  number  of  molecules  was
explained  by  Avogadro.  Avogadro’s  law  states  that  equal  volumes  of  different
gases, under the same conditions of temperature and pressure, contain the same
number of molecules. Thus, according to the law the volume of a gas is proportional
to the number of molecules (moles) of the gas at STP.
Mathematically,   V α n; where V is the volume and n is number of moles.
5.    The  Ideal  Gas  Equation
Activity 5.12
Form a group and discuss the following phenomenon. Present your discussion to the class.
A  balloon  can  burst  when  too  much  air  is  added  into  it.  Describe  what  happens  to  the
pressure, volume, temperature, number of moles, and the balloon itself as it is inflated and
finally bursts. Can you derive an equation which describes these relationships?
An ideal gas is a hypothetical gas that obeys the gas laws. Real gases only obey the
ideal gas laws closely at high temperature and low pressure. Under these conditions,
their particles are very far apart. The ideal gas law is a combination of Boyle’s law,
Charles’ law and Avogadro’s law.
We have considered the three laws that describe the behavior of gases as revealed by
experimental observations:
Boyle's law: V α
1
P
(at constant T and n)
Charles' law: V α T (at constant P and n)
Avogadro's law: V α n (at constant P and T )
This relationship indicates how the volume of gas depends on pressure, temperature
and number of moles.
V
α
nT
P
V
=
R
nT
P
or
where R, is a proportionality constant called the gas constant.
PV = nRT
(the ideal gas equation)
Thus, the ideal gas equation describes the relationship among the four variables P, V,
T and n. An ideal gas is a gas whose pressure-volume-temperature behavior can be
completely explained by the ideal gas equation.
At STP, the values of R can be calculated from the ideal gas equation.
R
=
PV
nT
=
(1 atm) (22.414 L)
(1 mol)(273.15 K)
184
PHYSICAL STATES OF MATTER
=
0.082057
L.atm
K.mol
=
8.314 L. kPa/K.mol = 8.314 J/mol.K
For  calculations,  we  round  off  the  value  of  R  to  three  significant  figures
(0.0821 L.atm/K.mol) and use 22.4 L for the molar volume of a gas at STP.
Example 5
Calculate the volume (in liters) occupied by 7.4 g of CO2 at STP?
Solution:
The ideal gas equation is given as
PV = nRT
V =
nRT
P



since
n m M
=
/
by rearranging
V
=
mRT
M P



=
7.4 g
44 g / mol
×
0.082
L.atm 273 K
K mol 1 atm
=
3.77 L
Example 6
At STP, 0.280 L of a gas weighs 0.400 g. Calculate the molar mass of the
gas.
Solution:
Given: V = 0.280 L, m = 0.400 g
At conditions of standard temperature and pressure
T =  273  K,  P  =  1  atm
R = 0.082 L.atm/K.mol
⇒
PV = nRT
PV
=
m
M
⋅
RT
(Since
n
=
m
M
;
)
⇒
M
=
m
RT
PV
=
×
0.400 g 0.082 L. atm/K.mol 273K
1 atm 0.280 L
×
×
=31.98g/mol
185
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Exercise 5.7
The density of a gas at a pressure of 1.34 atm and a temperature of 303 K
is found to be 1.77 g/L. What is the molar mass of this gas?
6.    Graham's  Law  of  Diffusion
Activity 5.13
Form a group and discuss the following phenomenon. Present your discussion to the class.
Explain why a helium-filled balloon deflated over time faster than an air-filled balloon does.
(Hint:  A balloon has many invisible pinholes).
We have seen that a gas tends to expand and occupy any space available to it. This
spreading of gas molecules is called diffusion.
How  do  you  compare  the  rate  of  diffusion  of  molecules  with  different
densities?
Thomas Graham (1805 - 1869), an English chemist, studied the rate of diffusion of
different gases. He found that gases having low densities diffuse faster than gases with
high densities. He was able to describe quantitatively the relationship between the
density of a gas and its rate of diffusion. In 1829, he announced what is known as
Graham's law of diffusion.
Graham’s law of diffusion states that at constant temperature and pressure, the rate
of diffusion of a gas, r, is inversely proportional to the square root of its density,
d,  or  molar  mass,  M.
Mathematically it can be expressed as:
r
∝
1
d
or
r
∝
;
1
M
where r is the rate of diffusion, d is the density and M is the molecular mass of the gas.
For two gases (Gas 1 and Gas 2), their rates of diffusion can be given as:
r
1
∝
r
2
∝
and
1
d
1
1
d
or
r
1
∝
1
M
1
o
r
r
2
∝
1
M
2
Rearranging these relationships gives the following expression
2
1
r
r
2
=
d
2
d
1
or
r
1
r
2
=
M
M
2
1
;
186
PHYSICAL STATES OF MATTER
where r1, d1 and M1  represent the rate of diffusion, density and molecular mass
of gas 1.  r2, d2 and M2 represent the rate of diffusion, density and molecular
mass of gas 2.
Experiment 5.3
Determination  of  Diffusion  of  Gases
Objective: To compare the rates of diffusion of HCl and NH3 gases.
Apparatus: Glass tube, cork, cotton and stand.
Chemicals: conc NH3, conc. HCl.
Procedure:
Insert pieces of cotton at the two ends of the tube.
1. Set up the apparatus as shown in Figure 5.7.
2.
3. Add 8 drops of concentrated ammonia on the cotton at one end and 8 drops
of concentrated hydrochloric acid at the other end of the tube at the same
time. Immediately close the two ends with corks.
4. Watch till a white ring is formed and record the time at which the white ring is
formed.
5. Measure the distances between the white ring and the two ends.
Figure  5.7   Determination of diffusion of gases.
Observations  and  analysis:
1. Which gas has moved the shorter distance to the white ring?
2. How do you compare the rate of diffusion of the two gases?
3. Which gas diffuses faster? HCl or NH3?
4. Write your conclusions about the experiment.
187
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Example 7
Which gas will diffuse faster, ammonia or carbon dioxide? What is the relative
rate of diffusion?
Solution :
The  molecular  weight  of  CO2  is  44  g/mol  and  that  of  NH3  is  17  g/mol.
Therefore, NH3 diffuses faster than CO2.
We can calculate the rate of diffusion as follows:
Let the rate of diffusion of NH3 be rNH3
Let the rate of diffusion of CO2 be rCO2
r
NH
r
CO
2
3
=
M
M
CO
2
NH
3
=
44
17
= 1.6
This means rate of diffusion of NH3 is 1.6 times that of CO2.
Example 8
The rate of diffusion of methane (CH4) is twice that of an unknown gas. What
is the molecular mass of the gas?
Solution:
and  Mx  be  the  molecular  masses  of  CH4  and  the  unknown  gas
and  rx  be  the  rates  of  diffusion  of  CH4  and  the  unknown  gas
Let  rCH4
respectively.
Let  MCH4
respectively.
The rate of diffusion of CH4 is two times faster than the unknown gas. This
can be written mathematically as rCH4 = 2rx.
Now, substitute 2rx in place of rCH4 and solve for Mx using Graham’s law.
=
r
1
r
2
M
M
2
1
ﬁ
r
CH
r
x
4
=
x
M
M
CH
4
r
2
X
r
X
=
M
X
16
ﬁ  MX  =  64
Therefore, the molecular mass of the unknown gas is 64.
188
PHYSICAL STATES OF MATTER
Also the rate at which a gas diffuses is inversely proportional to the time taken.
Mathematically,
r
∝
1
t
If two different gases (gas 1 and gas 2) under the same conditions of temperature and
pressure diffuse through a porous container, then the time required to diffuse for the
two gases can be given by the following formula:
r
1
r
2
=
t
2
t
1
=
M
M
2
1
where  t1  and  t2  are  the  time  taken,  r1  and  r2  are  the  rates,  M1  and  M2  are  the
molecular masses of Gas 1 and Gas 2 respectively.
Activity 5.14
Form  a  group  and  discuss  the  kinetic  molecular  theory  to  explain  the  compression  and
expansion of gases. Present your findings to the class.
Reading  Check
What names are given for the following ideal gas relationships?
a Volume and moles at constant temperature and pressure.
b Volume and pressure at constant temperature and moles.
c Volume and Kelvin temperature at constant pressure and moles.
5.4    THE  LIQUID  STATE
Competencies
By  the  end  of  this  section,  you  will  be  able  to:
•
•
•
explain the terms: evaporation, boiling, condensation, vapor pressure; boiling point,
molar heat of vaporization and molar heat of condensation;
carry out an activity to demonstrate the concept of vapor pressure; and
carry out an activity to determine the boiling points of water and ethanol.
189
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Activity 5.15
Discuss the following activities in your group and present to the class.
1. Why some liquids are volatile and others are not?
2. What is the relationship between altitude and boiling point of a liquid?
You recall that liquids have a definite volume and an indefinite shape. They take the
shape of their containers to the level they fill. On the average, liquids are more dense
than gases, but less dense than solids.
As in a gas, particles in a liquid are in constant motion. However, the particles in a
liquid are closer together than those in a gas. The attractive forces between particles
in a liquid are more effective than between particles in a gas. This attraction between
liquid particles is caused by the intermolecular forces (dipole-dipole forces, London
dispersion forces, and hydrogen bonding).
Liquids are more ordered than gases because of the stronger intermolecular forces
and the lower mobility of liquid particles. Accordingly, liquid particles are not bound
together in fixed positions.
Energy  Changes  in  Liquids
Activity 5.16
Form a group and discuss the following phenomenon:
When you take bath with hot water in your bathroom, the water collects on the mirror of
the bathroom.
Present your discussion to the class.
The process by which a liquid changes to a gas is known as vaporization. Evaporation
is the process by which liquid molecules break freely from the liquid surface and enter
the vapor phase. Evaporation is explained in terms of the energy possessed by the
molecules on the surface of the liquid.
190
PHYSICAL STATES OF MATTER
In an open container, evaporation continues until all of the liquid enters the vapor
phase. However, liquids in a closed container behave differently. The volume of the
liquid decreases for a period of time, and remains unchanged. In closed containers,
the vapor cannot escape. As the vapor concentration increases, some of the vapor
molecules lose energy and return to the liquid state. When a vapor returns to the
liquid state, it is said to condense. The process is called condensation. Evaporation
and condensation are opposing processes.
Liquid
Evaporation
(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:88)(cid:90)
(cid:89)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:90)  Gas
Condensation
The rate of evaporation of a liquid depends on three factors. These are temperature,
intermolecular forces, and surface area of the liquid.
An increase in temperature increases the average kinetic energy of the molecules and
this increases the tendency to change into the gaseous state. Some liquids evaporate
readily at room temperature. Such liquids are said to be volatile. The volatile liquids
have relatively weak forces of attraction between particles. Diethyl ether, ethyl alcohol,
benzene and acetone are volatile liquids.
Non-volatile liquids have a little tendency to evaporate at a given temperature. They
have relatively stronger attractive forces between their molecules, e.g., sulphuric acid,
water, and molten ionic compounds.
Vapour pressure: The partial pressure of the vapour above a liquid is called vapour
pressure. The vapour pressure of a liquid depends up on the temperature. At a given
temperature, vapour pressure is constant. As the temperature increases, the vapour
pressure of a liquid also increases due to high rate of evaporation.
Vapour pressure depends also on the strength of the intermolecular forces between
the particles of the liquid. The stronger the intermolecular forces, the lower the vapour
pressure will be, because fewer particles will have enough kinetic energy to overcome
the attractive force at a given temperature. For example, water and alcohol have
relatively low vapour pressure. On the contrary, liquids with low intermolecular forces
have high vapour pressures at room temperature. For example, diethyl ether, a non-
polar molecule with relatively weak dispersion forces, has a relatively higher vapour
pressure.
191
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Boiling  and  Boiling  Point
Activity 5.17
Form a group and discuss the following ideas. Present your discussion to the class.
1. How does the kinetic-molecular theory explain why atmospheric pressure is greater at
lower altitude than at a higher altitude?
2.
Ice melts normally at 0°C. What happens to the melting point of ice in the presence of
impurities?  Does  it  melt  below  0°C,  above  0°C  or  exactly  at  0°C?  Explain.
What  is  the  difference  between  evaporation  and  boiling?  How  does  boiling
point  depend  on  the  external  pressure?
Boiling is the change of a liquid to bubbles of vapour that appear throughout the
liquids. It is the conversion of liquid to vapour within the liquid as well as at its
surface.  It  occurs  when  the  equilibrium  vapour  pressure  of  the  liquid  equals  the
atmospheric pressure. During evaporation only molecules at the surface escape into
the vapour phase, but at the boiling point the molecules within the liquid have sufficient
energy to overcome the intermolecular attractive forces of their neighbors, so bubbles
of vapour are released at the surface. It is the formation of vapour bubbles within the
liquid itself that characterizes boiling and distinguishes it from evaporation.
If the temperature of the liquid is increased, the equilibrium vapour pressure also
increases. Finally, the boiling point is reached. The boiling point of a liquid is the
temperature  at  which  the  equilibrium  vapour  pressure  of  the  liquid  equals  the
atmospheric pressure. Therefore, the lower the atmospheric pressure, the lower the
boiling point will be.
The  boiling  point  of  a  liquid  can  be  reduced  as  lowering  the  external  pressure,
because the vapour pressure of the liquid equals the external pressure at a lower
temperature.
If the external pressure is 1.0 atmosphere (760 mmHg), the boiling point is called
normal boiling point. For instance water boils, at 100°C at 1.0 atmospheric pressure.
Thus, the normal boiling point of water is 100°C.
Where  will  water  boil  first?  In  Addis  Ababa  or  Hawassa?  Why?
192
PHYSICAL STATES OF MATTER
Experiment 5.4
Observing  the  Vapour  Pressure  of  liquid
Objective: To observe the vapour pressure of liquid.
Apparatus: Erlenmeyer flask, rubber bung, U-tube and burner.
Procedure:
1. Set up the apparatus as shown in Figure 5.8.
2. Add about 100 mL of water into the Erlenmeyer flask and put a stopper. Heat
the flask to expel the air above the water in the flask.
3. Half fill the U-tube with water.
4. Connect the U-tube to Erlenmeyer flask and note the water level in the two
arms of the U-tube.
5. Heat the flask gently and observe the water level changes in the arms of the
U-tube.
Fig.   5.8 Determination of vapour pressure.
Observations  and  analysis:
1. What do you observe? Give an explanation for the observation.
193
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Experiment 5.5
Determining  of  Boiling  Point
Objectives: To determine the boiling point of water.
Apparatus: Test tube, stopper, thermometer, beaker, burner, clamp, stand and base.
Procedure:
1. Half fill the test tube with a sample of pure water and add some porclein chips.
2. Take a rubber stopper and pierce a thin opening on the side of the rubber
stopper to allow the vapour to escape.
3. Fit the thermometer with the rubber stopper and insert it in the test tube.
4. Put the test tube in a beaker containing oil as shown in Figure 5.9.
5. Heat the oil in beaker gently and record the temperature at which the water boils.
Stand
Thermometer
Test tube
Beaker
Oil
Bunsen
burner
Figure 5.9  Determination of boiling point.
Observations  and  analysis:
1. What is the boiling point of water that you obtained from the experiment?
2. Does the temperature from the thermometer reading increase after the water
starts to boil?
3. Explain why the thermometer was not put into the liquid.
4. Explain the purpose of adding porclein chips.
194
PHYSICAL STATES OF MATTER
Boiling of a liquid requires a certain amount of heat energy to break the forces of
attraction that holds the molecules together. The amount of heat energy necessary to
bring about the vaporization of a fixed amount of a liquid at a fixed temperature to the
gaseous state is called the heat of vaporization. For example, the heat of vaporization
per mole of water at 298 K and 1 atmosphere is 44.0 kJ. This is called the molar
heat of vaporization (∆Hvap) of water.
Molar  heat  of  vaporization  (∆Hvap)  and  molar  heat  of  condensation  (∆Hcond)  are
equal in magnitude but opposite in sign, i.e., ∆Hvap = – ∆Hcond. Vaporization is an
endothermic processes where as condensation is an exothermic process.
Reading Check
1. What are the effects of impurity on the boiling point of liquids?
2. Why does the boiling point of liquid decrease as altitude increases?
5.5    THE  SOLID  STATE
Competencies
By  the  end  of  this  section,  you  will  be  able  to:
•
explain the terms melting, fusion, sublimation, melting point, freezing point, molar
heat of solidification;
• describe phase changes;
•
explain temperature changes associated with phase changes;
• determine melting point of ice; and
• demonstrate an experiment to show the phase changes from ice to liquid water
and then to water vapor.
Activity 5.18
Form a group and discuss the following:
1. When  the  crystals  of  iodine  are  warmed,  they  disappear  into  vapours  without  being
changed into liquid.
2. When ethyl alcohol is taken in an open container it disappeares after sometime.
Present your discussion to the class.
195
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
When a solid is continuously heated its ordered crystalline structure is disturbed. The
particles attain their freedom of motion gradually and melting (or fusion) takes place
where  the  solid  is  converted  into  the  liquid  state.  The  temperature  at  which  a
crystalline solid is converted to a liquid is known as the melting point.
In contrast when a liquid is cooled, the molecules become closer and closer, and the
intermolecular forces of attraction become stronger and stronger. The particles arrange
themselves into a regular pattern in the liquid. This process is called freezing or
solidification. Note that the freezing point of a liquid is the same as the melting point of
a crystalline solid. This means that:
• Both melting and freezing take place at the same temperature.
• Both liquid and solid phases coexist at equilibrium with each other at the melting
or freezing point.
To clarify this, let us consider ice, which melts at 0°C and water freezes at 0°C. Ice
and water coexist in equilibrium with each other at 0°C as follows.
Ice
melting 0 C
,
(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:88)(cid:90)
(cid:89)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:90)
freezing 0 C
,
°
°
Liquid water
The amount of heat needed to convert one gram of a solid to a liquid at the melting
point is called heat of fusion. The molar heat of fusion or molar enthalpy of fusion
(∆Hfus) is the quantity of heat needed to convert one mole of a solid at its melting
point to the liquid state. For example, the molar heat of fusion of ice is 6.01 kJ at
0°C. This is the amount of energy needed to break the attractive forces in the solid at
the melting point. Melting requires the supply of energy; therefore, it is an endothermic
process.
During the process of solidification, an amount of heat equal to the heat of fusion must
be liberated. This quantity of heat liberated, which is exactly equal to the heat of
fusion, is called the heat of solidification or heat of crystallization.
The molar heat of crystallization (∆Hcryst) is the quantity of energy that must be
removed from one mole of a liquid to convert it to the solid state at its freezing point.
∆Hcryst  =  –∆Hfus
Although the motion of the particles in a solid are more restricted than those in a
liquid, many solids have a significant vapour pressure and evaporate directly from the
solid to the vapour state without passing through the liquid state. This process is called
sublimation.
Solid
sublimation
(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:88)
(cid:89)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:90)
deposition
Vapour (gas)
196
PHYSICAL STATES OF MATTER
During the sublimation process heat energy is absorbed. That is, it is an endothermic
process.
Molar heat of sublimation (∆Hfus) is the quantity of heat required to convert one mole
of a solid to a gas at its sublimation point. The heat (enthalpy) of sublimation is related
to the enthalpies of fusion and vaporization by:
DHsub = DHfus + DHvap
Phase Changes and Energy Changes in Solids
A phase is any part of a system that has uniform composition and properties.  A state
of matter represents a phase. Most solid substances undergo two changes of state
when heated. A solid change to a liquid at the melting point, and the liquid changes to
vapour at the boiling point. To understand state changes, we will consider the heating
curve for a substance given in Figure 5.10.
A heating curve is a plot of temperature verses the uniform addition of heat. This can
be illustrated for a hypothetical substance, in which the temperature of the substance is
on  the  vertical  axis  and  the  passage  of  time  during  which  heat  is  added  to  the
substance is on the horizontal axis. Figure 5.10 shows the changes in the temperature
and phases of a pure substance as it is heated, beginning with a solid and continuing
to the gaseous state as described.
Figure 5.10   Heating curve.
Initially, the substance exists in the solid state, and the addition of heat increases its
temperature. When the solid is heated, its temperature rises (A to B) until it reaches
the melting point (point B), and the temperature remains constant (B to C) until all the
197
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
solid is converted to a liquid (point C). The added heat energy is used to break the
intermolecular forces, thus disrupting the solid structure. At point C phase change is
completed. Once melting is completed, heating of the liquid raises its temperature
(C to D) until the boiling point is reached at point D. In region (D to E) the addition
of heat is utilized to break the intermolecular forces of the liquid to change it to a gas.
When all the liquid has been converted into a gas, addition of heat simply raises the
temperature of the gas.
Reading  Check
Freezing and melting point of ice takes place at 0oC. Rationalize this.
Check list
Key  terms  of  the  unit
• Absolute zero
• Atmospheric pressure
• Avogadro's law
• Boiling
• Boiling point
• Boyle's law
• Charles' law
• Collision
• Combined  gas  law
• Condensation
• Evaporation
• Fluid
• Freezing
• Freezing point
• Gas  constant
• Gas  laws
• Gases
• Graham's  law
• Heat  of  condensation
• Heat  of  vaporization
• Heating  curve
198
•
Ideal gas equation
• Kelvin  temperature
• Kinetic  molecular  theory  of
gases
• Liquids
• Melting
• Melting point
• Molar  heat  of  condensation
• Molar  heat  of  fusion
• Molar  heat  of  sublimation
• Non-volatile liquid
• Normal boiling point
• Phase  change
• Properties of gases
• Solidification
• Standard  temperature  and
pressure (STP)
• Sublimation
• Vapor pressure
• Volatile liquid
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
REVIEW  EXERCISE  ON  UNIT  5
Part I: Assert your answers based on the given instructions:
We have three physical states of substances namely solid, liquid, and gas. Identify the
following  as  solid,  liquid  or  gas  based  on  the  properties  given  to  explain  their
characteristics.
1. They have a definite shape and a definite volume.
2. Their molecules are highly disordered.
3. The motion of their molecules is highly restricted.
4. They can be easily compressed.
5. They have a tendency to flow.
6. They can take the shape of their container.
7. They can move in all direction at high speed.
8. They can easily diffuse through each other.
9. They can sublime.
10. They have less density relative to the other states.
Part  II: Matching-type  questions
A
11. Melting point
12. Heat of fusion
13. Heat of sublimation
14. Sublimation point
15. Melting
16. Freezing
17. Sublimation
18. Deposition
200
B
A Solid → gas
B Liquid → gas
C Gas → solid
D Solid → liquid
E Liquid → solid
F
Same as freezing point
G Same as deposition point
H Same as heat of crystallization
I
J
Similar to fusion
Similar to crystallization
K Similar to heat of deposition
PHYSICAL STATES OF MATTER
Part  III: Write  the  missing  words  in  your  exercise  book
19.
In a solid the particles are very close together and can only _______ about a
fixed position.
20. Sublimation occurs when a solid changes directly to a _______ passing the
_______ state.
21. The melting point of a solid is the same as _______.
22. When the water boils, its vapour pressure is equals to _______.
23. The temperature at which a crystalline solid is converted to a liquid, is called  ______.
24. The lowest attainable temperature is ______.
25.
“Equal volumes of different gases at the same temperature and pressure contain
equal numbers of molecules”; this is a statement of  _______  law.
Part  IV: Short-answers  type  questions
26. What is the difference between volatile and non-volatile substances? Give an
example of each.
27. Why is the temperature of a substance constant at its melting point; even though
heat is added to it?
28. What factors affect the rate of evaporation of a liquid?
Part  V: Problems  to  solve
29. Convert the following pressure measurements:
a 720 mmHg to atm
c 542 mmHg to atm
e 700 kPa to atm
b 1.25 atm to mmHg
d 740 mmHg to kPa
30. A 2.50 L container is filled with 175 g of argon:
a
if the pressure is 10.0 atm, what is the temperature?
31.
if the temperature is 22 K, what is the pressure?
b
If 0.500 mole of nitrogen gas occupies a volume of 11.2 L at 0°C; what volume
will 2.00 mole of nitrogen gas occupy at the same temperature and pressure?
32. A certain gas is found in the exhaust of automobiles and power plants. Consider
a  1.53  L  sample  of  a  gas  at  a  pressure  of  5.6  ×  104  Pa.  If  the  pressure  is
changed  to  1.5  ×  104  Pa  at  a  constant  temperature,  what  will  be  the  new
volume of the gas?
201
PHYSICAL STATES OF MATTER
Part  III: Write  the  missing  words  in  your  exercise  book
19.
In a solid the particles are very close together and can only _______ about a
fixed position.
20. Sublimation occurs when a solid changes directly to a _______ passing the
_______ state.
21. The melting point of a solid is the same as _______.
22. When the water boils, its vapour pressure is equals to _______.
23. The temperature at which a crystalline solid is converted to a liquid, is called  ______.
24. The lowest attainable temperature is ______.
25.
“Equal volumes of different gases at the same temperature and pressure contain
equal numbers of molecules”; this is a statement of  _______  law.
Part  IV: Short-answers  type  questions
26. What is the difference between volatile and non-volatile substances? Give an
example of each.
27. Why is the temperature of a substance constant at its melting point; even though
heat is added to it?
28. What factors affect the rate of evaporation of a liquid?
Part  V: Problems  to  solve
29. Convert the following pressure measurements:
a 720 mmHg to atm
c 542 mmHg to atm
e 700 kPa to atm
b 1.25 atm to mmHg
d 740 mmHg to kPa
30. A 2.50 L container is filled with 175 g of argon:
a
if the pressure is 10.0 atm, what is the temperature?
31.
if the temperature is 22 K, what is the pressure?
b
If 0.500 mole of nitrogen gas occupies a volume of 11.2 L at 0°C; what volume
will 2.00 mole of nitrogen gas occupy at the same temperature and pressure?
32. A certain gas is found in the exhaust of automobiles and power plants. Consider
a  1.53  L  sample  of  a  gas  at  a  pressure  of  5.6  ×  104  Pa.  If  the  pressure  is
changed  to  1.5  ×  104  Pa  at  a  constant  temperature,  what  will  be  the  new
volume of the gas?
201
Take Good Care of
This Textbook
This textbook is the property of your school.
Take good care not to damage or lose it.
Here are 10 ideas to help take care of the book:
1.  Cover the book with protective material, such as plastic, old
newspapers or magazines.
2.  Always keep the book in a clean dry place.
3.  Be sure your hands are clean when you use the book.
4.  Do not write on the cover or inside pages.
5.  Use a piece of paper or cardboard as a bookmark.
6.  Never tear or cut out any pictures or pages.
7.  Repair any torn pages with paste or tape.
8.  Pack the book carefully when you place it in your school bag.
9.  Handle the book with care when passing it to another person.
10.  When using a new book for the first time, lay it on its back. Open
only a few pages at a time. Press lightly along the bound edge as
you turn the pages. This will keep the cover in good condition.
CHEMISTRY
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
GRADE 10
Authors, Editors and Reviewers:
J.L. Sharma (Ph.D.)
Nell Angelo (M.A.)
Stella Johnson (M.A.)
Amare Legesse (B.Sc.)
Dawit Tafesse (B.Sc.)
Shimeles Admase (Ph.D.)
Evaluators:
Nega Gichile
Mahtot Abera
Solomon Haileyesus
FEDERAL DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF ETHIOPIA
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION
Published E.C. 2002 by the Federal Democratic Republic of  Ethiopia, Ministry
of   Education,  under  the  General  Education  Quality  Improvement  Project
(GEQIP)  supported  by  IDA  Credit  No.  4535-ET,  the  Fast  Track  Initiative
Catalytic  Fund  and  the  Governments  of   Finland,  Italy,  Netherlands  and  the
United Kingdom.
©  2010  by  the  Federal  Democratic  Republic  of  Ethiopia,  Ministry  of
Education. All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored
in  a  retrieval  system  or  transmitted  in  any  form  or  by  any  means  including
electronic, mechanical, magnetic or other, without prior written permission of
the  Ministry  of  Education  or  licensing  in  accordance  with  the  Federal
Democratic  Republic  of  Ethiopia,  Federal  Negarit  Gazeta,  Proclamation  No.
410/2004 – Copyright and Neighbouring Rights Protection.
The  Ministry of Education wishes to thank  the many individuals,  groups and
other  bodies  involved  –  directly  and  indirectly  –  in  publishing  this  textbook
and the accompanying teacher guide.
Copyrighted  materials  used  by  permission  of  their  owners.  If  you  are  the
owner  of  copyrighted  material  not  cited  or  improperly  cited,  please  contact
with the Ministry of Education, Head Office, Arat Kilo, (PO Box 1367), Addis
Ababa, Ethiopia.
PHOTO CREDIT:  Encarta  Encyclopedia, 2009 edition.
AAU (Addis Ababa University, Chemistry Department)
Higher 23 Preparatory School
Developed and Printed by
STAR EDUCATIONAL BOOKS DISTRIBUTORS Pvt. Ltd.
24/4800, Bharat Ram Road, Daryaganj,
New Delhi – 110002, INDIA
and
ASTER NEGA PUBLISHING ENTERPRISE
P.O. Box 21073
ADDIS ABABA, ETHIOPIA
Under GEQIP Contract No. ET-MoE/GEQIP/IDA/ICB/G01/09.
ISBN 978-99944-2-036-0
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC
Page
Unit1
CHEMISTY ....................................... 1
1.1  Introduction ............................................ 2
1.2  Saturated Hydrocarbons-Alkanes  .......... 6
1.3  Unsaturated Hydrocarbons-
Alkenes and Alkynes  ............................ 27
1.4  Aromatic Hydrocarbons-Benzene  ........ 50
1.5  Natural Sources of Hydrocarbons  ........ 54
1.6  Alcohols  ................................................ 58
1.7  Industrial and Agricultural Applications
of Organic Compounds  ........................ 78
Check List .................................... 83
Unit Summary ............................. 84
Review Exercise ........................... 85
IMPORTANT INORGANIC
COMPOUNDS ................................. 91
2.1  Introduction  .......................................... 92
2.2  Oxides  ................................................... 93
2.3  Acids  .................................................... 103
2.4  Bases  .................................................... 124
2.5  Salts  ..................................................... 137
Check List ................................... 155
Unit Summary ............................ 156
Review Exercise .......................... 157
III
Unit 2
IV                                 Content
Unit3
ELECTROCHEMISTRY  ................ 161
3.1  Introduction  ......................................... 162
3.2  Electrical Conductivity  ........................ 163
3.3  Electrolysis  .......................................... 167
3.4  Galvanic Cells (Voltaic Cells)  ............. 171
3.5  Industrial Applications of Electrolysis  178
Check list .................................... 182
Unit Summary ............................ 182
Review Exercise .......................... 183
CHEMISTRY IN INDUSTRY AND
Unit 4
ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION ....... 188
4.1  Introduction  ......................................... 189
4.2  Natural Resources and Industry  .......... 190
4.3  Production of some Important Metals
and Non-Metals  ................................... 191
4.4  Some Industries in Ethiopia  ................ 213
4.5  Environmental Pollution  ...................... 225
Check list .................................... 231
Unit Summary ............................ 232
Review Exercise .......................... 234
T
I
N
1U
O
H N — C — NH
2
2
109.5°
— C — C —
C
C — C
C —
Introduction to Organic
Chemistry
Unit  Outcomes
After  completing  this  unit,  you  will  be  able  to:
! know the historical development of organic chemistry and the classification of
organic compounds;
! know the general formulas of alkanes, alkenes, alkynes, alcohols, aldehydes,
ketones,  carboxylic  acids  and  esters;
! develop skills in naming and writing the molecular and structural formulas of
simple alkanes, branched-chain alkanes, simple alkenes, branched-chain alkenes,
simple alkynes, alcohols, aldehydes, ketones, carboxylic acids and esters;
! understand  isomerism  and  know  possible  isomers  of  alkanes,  alkenes  and
alkynes;
! know  the  major  natural  sources  of  hydrocarbons;
! understand the physical and chemical properties and the general methods of
preparation  of  alkanes,  alkenes,  alkynes,  benzene  and  alcohols;
! know the uses of organic compounds in the manufacture of plastics, beverages,
pharmaceuticals, soaps and detergents, dry cleaning chemicals, fuels, pesticides,
and herbicides; and
! demonstrate  scientific  inquiry  skills:    observing,  classifying,  communicating,
measuring, asking questions, interpreting data, drawing conclusions, applying
concepts, predicting and problem solving.
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
MAIN  CONTENTS
Introduction
Saturated hydrocarbons (alkanes)
1.1
1.2
1.3 Unsaturated hydrocarbons (alkenes and alkynes)
1.4 Aromatic hydrocarbons
1.5 Natural sources of hydrocarbons
1.6 Alcohols
1.7
Industrial and agricultural applications of organic compounds
– Unit  Summary
– Review Exercise
1.1 INTRODUCTION
Competencies
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• narrate the historical development of organic compounds;
• define the term functional group;
•
classify organic compounds based on their functional groups.
Historical Notes
Friedrich Wöhler
In  1828  German  chemist,  Friedrich  Wöhler  converted
ammonium  cyanate,  an  inorganic  compound,  into  the  organic
substance  urea.  Wöhler’s  discovery  revolutionized  the  study  of
chemistry  by  redefining  the  manner  in  which  chemists
distinguished between inorganic and organic compounds. He is
also  credited  for  his  work  in  isolating  the  elements  aluminium
and beryllium.
Activity 1.1
Friedrich  Wöhler
1. Do you agree with the notion that says: “carbon compounds can be synthesized only by
animals and plants”?
2. Draw diagrams to show how carbon atoms can link to one another in different ways to
form a variety of compounds by considering only four carbon atoms.
Discuss with your group and present it to the class.
2
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
History of Organic Chemistry
Before the beginning of the nineteenth century, chemists classified compounds into two
classes; organic and inorganic. Those derived from living things (plants and animals) were
classified as organic compounds, while those that came from mineral constituents of the
earth or were found with non-living things are classified as inorganic compounds.
What was the basis of this classification? Early chemists believed that organic compounds
differed from inorganic compounds because living things had a special ‘life force’ within
them, which was invisible and hard to detect. According to the theory of ‘life force’, the
only source of organic compounds was nature itself (plants and animals). It was thought
impossible to synthesize them in the laboratory. This was because man could not add or
create the ‘life force’ within them.
The belief in the ‘life force’ theory continued until Friedrich Wöhler synthesized urea for
the first time in 1828. In attempting to prepare ammonium cyanate, NH4CNO, from the
reaction of silver cyanate, AgCNO, and ammonium chloride, NH4Cl, he accidentally
and surprisingly obtained urea, (NH2)2CO:
AgCNO(aq) + NH4Cl(aq)  Æ  AgCl(s) + NH4CNO(aq)
Urea was the first organic compound synthesized in the laboratory. The synthesis of
urea by Friedrich Wöhler and subsequent synthesis of other organic compounds marked
the downfall of the ‘life force’ theory.
How do you explain organic compounds at present and define organic chemistry?
The common feature of organic compounds is that they all contain the element carbon. Organic
compounds are the compounds of carbon found in and derived from plants and animals.
They also include those substances synthesized in laboratories except the oxides of carbon,
carbonates, hydrogen carbonates, cyanides and cyanates.
Besides carbon, these compounds contain a few other elements such as hydrogen, oxygen,
nitrogen, sulphur, halogens and phosphorus. The branch of chemistry that studies carbon
compounds is called organic chemistry. This branch of chemistry was developed, starting
from the theory of ‘life force’ to the era in which synthetic organic compounds are used in
our daily lives. The number of inorganic compounds discovered and prepared may be in the
region of  some hundred thousand. At present, millions of organic compounds have been
discovered,  synthesized, and used.
3
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
The main reason for the presence of millions of carbon compounds is the unique property
of carbon called catenation. Catenation is the ability of atoms of the same element to join
together forming short or long chains and rings. A few other elements like sulphur, silicon
and boron show this behaviour, but to a much lesser extent.
Classification  of  Organic  Compounds
Activity 1.2
CH3CH2CHO  and  CH3COCH3  have  the  same  chemical  formula  C3H6O.  Write  their  detailed
structures  and  observe  their  difference?  Why  do  these  compounds  have  different
properties? Discuss with your group and present it to the class.
Organic compounds are generally classified based on their functional group.
What are functional groups and what groups of organic compounds are known
on the basis of this classification?
The functional group is the part of a molecule or a compound that determines the chemical
properties of that molecule or compound. This group also determines some of the physical
properties of a compound. Based on the functional groups they possess, the most common
classification of organic compounds including alkanes, alkenes, alkynes, aromatics, alcohols,
aldehydes, ketones, carboxylic acids and esters. The common functional groups of some
organic compounds are given in Table 1.1.
Table 1.1   Some classes of organic compounds, their functional groups, general structural
formula with typical examples (R = alkyl or H).
Organic
Compound
Functional
Group
General
Structure
Example
Alkane
C
C
R — CH — CH
2
3
3
H
H C — C — CH
Propane
2
3
(single bond)
C
C
(double bond)
C
C
(triple bond)
Alkene
Alkyne
4
R — CH CH2
H2C
CH2
Ethene
R — C C—R
H — C C — H
Ethyne
Continued next page
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
Organic
Compound
Functional
Group
Aromatic
(benzene ring)
General
Structure
R
Alcohols
— OH
R — OH
Aldehydes
— CHO group
R — CHO
O
C
H
O
C
R
H
Ketone
— CO — group
O
C
Carboxylic
Acid
— COOH group
O
R — COOH
O
C OH
R
C OH
Ester
— COOR group
O
C O R
O
Example
H3C
Toluene
CH3CH2
OH
Ethanol
H3
C — CH
O
O
C
H3C
H
Ethanal
3OC
CH C H
O
3
C
CH3
H C3
Propanone
O
C OH
H3C
Ethanoic acid
O
H3C — C — O CH CH2
Ethyl ethanoate
3
Exercise 1.1
1. Which compounds were classified as organic compounds, according to the early
chemists?
2. According to the belief of early chemists, which class of compounds has a special
‘life force’ within them?
3. What are the differences between organic and inorganic compounds, according to
early chemists?
4. What is the main concept of the theory of ‘life force’?
5
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
5. Who disproved the ‘life force’ theory; and how?
6. What was the first organic compound synthesized in the laboratory?
7.
Identify the functional groups in each of the following compounds?
a CH3CH2COCH2CH2CH3
b CH3CH2COOCH2CH3
8. Define the following terms.
c CH3CH2CH2COOH
d CH3CH2CH2CH2OH
a Organic chemistry
b Catenation
c Functional group
9. Why is it necessary to assign organic chemistry exclusively to the study of carbon
compounds?
10. What is the basis for the classification of organic compounds?
c      alkynes
11. Write the general structures of:
a alkanes
d aromatics
b alkenes
e alcohols
1.2 SATURATED  HYDROCARBONS
Competencies
At the end of this topic, you will be able to:
• define hydrocarbons;
• define saturated hydrocarbons;
• define homologous series;
• write the general formula of alkanes;
• write the first ten members of alkanes;
• write the molecular formulas of alkanes from the given number of carbon atoms;
• explain the physical properties of alkanes;
• write the structural formulas of the first ten alkanes;
• apply IUPAC rules to name straight and branched chain alkanes;
• define isomerism as the way compounds having the same formula differ in the way
their atoms are arranged;
• define structural isomerism;
• write possible structural isomers for C4H10, C5H12 and C6H14;
• describe the general method for the  preparation of alkanes in the laboratory;
6
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
• prepare methane in a laboratory by the decarboxylation method;
• carry out a project to produce biogas from cow dung; and
• explain the chemical properties of alkanes.
Activity 1.3
1. Draw  the  Lewis  structure  of  carbon  (Z  =  6)  and  hydrogen  (Z  =  1)  atoms.  How  many
valence electrons are there in an atom of carbon and hydrogen respectively?
2. Consider three organic compounds containing two carbon atoms each. The two carbon
atoms contributed one electron each in the first, two electrons each in the second and
three electrons each in the third for the bond they form between them by sharing the
electrons.  The  remaining  valence  electrons  of  each  carbon  atom  in  all  the  three
compounds were used to form bonds with hydrogen atoms.
a What type of covalent bond do the two-carbon atoms form between themselves
in the first, the second and the third compound, respectively?
b How many hydrogen atoms can form bonds with each carbon atom in the first, the
second and the third compound, respectively?
c
d
f
Draw line or dot formula to show the formation of the bonds between the carbon
atoms and carbon and the hydrogen atoms in the first, the second and the third
compound, respectively.
If  the  three  compounds  mentioned  above  are  hydrocarbons,  define
hydrocarbons?
If  the  first  compound  is  a  saturated  hydrocarbon,  the  second  and  the  third  are
unsaturated, what is the basis for such a classification of hydrocarbons?
Discuss with your group and present it to the class.
What are hydrocarbons and on what basis do we categorize them?
Hydrocarbons are organic compounds composed of the elements carbon and hydrogen
only. Hydrocarbons are subdivided into two groups, based on the type of bonding between
carbon atoms, as saturated hydrocarbons and unsaturated hydrocarbons.
Saturated Hydrocarbons are those compounds of carbon and hydrogen containing only
carbon-carbon single bonds. Methane, ethane, and propane are typical examples of this
group. Unsaturated Hydrocarbons are those compounds of carbon and hydrogen possessing
one or more multiple bonds (double or triple bonds) between carbon atoms. Alkenes,
alkynes and aromatic hydrocarbons are examples of unsaturated hydrocarbons.
A formula that shows all the bonds and atoms is called a detailed structure.  The shorter
structure is called condensed structure.
7
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Example
1.2.1
Alkanes  or  Paraffins
Activity 1.4
Draw a graph using the information in Table 1.2 by plotting the number of carbon atoms
of each compound on one axis, and hydrogen atoms on the other. Predict the formulas of
the saturated hydrocarbons containing 8, 9 and 10 carbon atoms and complete Table 1.2.
Discuss with your group and present it to the class.
Alkanes are saturated hydrocarbons. They contain chains of carbon atoms linked by single
bonds only. Every carbon atom in the molecule forms four single covalent bonds with other
atoms. Alkanes have the general formula CnH2n+2, where, n = 1, 2, 3 . . . Using this general
formula, we can write the molecular formula of any alkane containing a specific number of
carbon atoms. For example, the chemical formulas of alkanes containing one, two and three
carbon atoms are C1H2×1+2 = CH4, C2H2×2 + 2 = C2H6, and C3H2×3 + 2 = C3H8, respectively.
When we compare the formulas of CH4 and C2H6 or C2H6 and C3H8, they differ by one
carbon and two hydrogen atoms or – CH2 – group called the methylene group. A group of
compounds in which each member of the group differs from the next member by  a –CH2,
is called a homologous series. Compounds in the same homologous series can be represented
by the same general formula. The individual members of the group are called homologues.
Alkanes contain carbon-carbon single bonds (— C — C —) as their functional group.
8
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
The  first  ten  members  of  the  homologous  series  of  straight-chain  alkanes  are
given in Table 1.2.
Table 1.2   Homologous series and physical constants of the first ten
straight chain alkanes
Name
Formula
Physical
state (at
room temp.)
Methane
Ethane
Propane
n-Butane
n-Pentane
n-Hexane
n-Heptane
n-Octane
n-Nonane
n-Decane
CH4
C2H6
C3H8
C4H10
C5H12
C6H14
C7H16
?
?
?
gas
gas
gas
gas
liquid
liquid
liquid
liquid
liquid
liquid
M.P
(°C)
–183
–172
–187
–135
–130
–94
–91
–57
–54
–30
B.P
(°C)
Density
at 20°C
No. of
isomers
–162
0.717 g/L
–89
–42
–0.5
36
68
98
126
151
174
1.35 g/L
2.02 g/L
2.48 g/L
0.63 g/mL
0.66 g/mL
0.68 g/mL
0.70 g/mL
0.71 g/mL
0.73 g/mL
1
1
1
2
3
5
9
18
35
75
Activity 1.5
1. What happens to the percentage by mass of hydrogen and the physical state of alkanes
as the number of carbon atoms increase?
2. Categorize  the  petroleum  related  products  you  encounter  everyday  as  solids,  liquids
and gases?  Discuss in your group and present it to the class.
1.2.2    Physical  Properties  of  Alkanes
Do you know which alkanes exist in the liquid, solid or gaseous state at room temperature?
What types of intermolecular forces of attraction exist between the molecules of alkanes?
Explain why the boiling points and melting points of alkanes increase with increasing
number of carbon atoms.
At room temperature, the first four alkanes, methane to butane, are gases; whereas pentane
(C5H12) to heptadecane (C17H36) are liquids, and the alkanes containing eighteen and
more carbon atoms are solids.
Alkanes are nonpolar organic compounds. Weak intermolecular forces called Van der
Waal’s forces hold their molecules together. The strength of these forces increases with the
9
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
increasing surface area (molecular mass) of the alkanes. Since alkanes are non-polar,
they are almost insoluble in polar solvents like water, but, they are soluble in non-polar
solvents like benzene, toluene, ether and carbon tetrachloride.
The density, melting point, and boiling point of the homologous series of alkanes increase
as the carbon number increases. For alkanes of the same carbon number, branched-chain
isomers have lower boiling points than the straight-chain (normal) alkanes. The reason is,
as branching increases, there is a decrease in surface area and the strength of the
intermolecular force, which, in turn, results in a decrease in boiling point; e.g., the boiling
points of n-pentane, iso-pentane and neo-pentane are 36°C, 28°C and 9.5°C, respectively.
Alkanes containing all the carbon atoms in one continuous chain are called normal or
straight-chain alkanes and those containing chains with branches are known as branched-
chain alkanes.
Example
In alkanes (branched or straight-chain) each carbon atom is tetrahedrally bonded to
four atoms with a bond angle of 109.5°.
a   Ball and Stick Model of Methane         b   Tetrahedral structure of methane
Figure 1.1   Structure of methane.
In alkanes containing a continuous chain of carbon atoms, the carbon atoms are not linked
in straight line but in zigzag chains to keep the tetrahedral distribution of atoms.
10
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
Zigzag chain in butane
Ball and stick model of butane
Figure 1.2   Zigzag chain and ball and stick model of butane.
Activity 1.6
1. Why rules are important for naming organic compounds?    Discuss in your group some
of the rules you know for naming organic compounds and present it to your class.
2.  In  mathematics,  the  names  pentagon,  hexagon,  heptagon  and  octagon  are  used  to
describe polygons. What does each of the prefixes- pent, -hex, -hept and -oct indicate?
What is the significance of these prefixes in chemistry? Discuss in groups and present
it  to  the  class.
1.2.3    Nomenclature  (naming)  of  Alkanes
Organic chemistry uses a simplified and systematic way of naming organic compounds. The
names of alkanes and most of the organic compounds are derived from:
i) a prefix- indicating the number of carbon atoms (listed in Table 1.3)and
ii) a -suffix indicating the type of the functional group present in the molecule.
The following table introduces the prefixes that are used to indicate the presence of one to
ten carbon atoms in the longest continuous carbon chain.
Table 1.3   Prefixes commonly used to indicate one to ten carbon atoms.
Prefix
Meth-
Eth-
Prop-
But-
Pent-
Number of carbon atoms
One
Two
Three
Four
Five
Prefix
Hex-
Hept-
Oct-
Non-
Dec-
Number of carbon atoms
Six
Seven
Eight
Nine
Ten
From Table 1.2, you can note that the names of all alkanes contain the suffix ‘-ane’, which
indicates that their functional group is a carbon — carbon single bond. Thus, to name an
11
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
alkane, you should use the appropriate prefix that indicates the number of carbon atoms and
the suffix ‘-ane’. For example, to name the alkane C6H14, use the prefix ‘Hex’ that indicate
the presence of six carbon atoms and add the suffix ‘-ane’ so that the name becomes hexane.
Activity 1.7
Practice naming alkanes using first four prefixes mentioned in Table 1.3. In naming alkanes,
why are number of carbon atoms used as prefixes? Discuss in groups.
Common  Names  of  Alkanes
Lower members of the alkane homologous series have common names. The prefixes used
in the common names are n- (normal), ‘iso-’ and ‘neo-’. The prefix n- is used when all the
carbon atoms form a continuous chain.
Example
Iso- is used when all of the carbon atoms form a continuous chain, except for the one
next to the last carbon.
Example
Neo- is used when the central carbon is bonded to four other carbon atoms.
Example
12
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
IUPAC  System  of  Nomenclature  of  Alkanes
It is difficult to have common names for the more branched and complex alkanes. In
naming such alkanes, the more systematic, convenient and appropriate one is the
International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) system.  In order to apply
this system, it is very important to know the rules to be followed, what alkyl radicals are,
and how they are named.
Alkyl radicals are obtained by removing one hydrogen atom from the corresponding
alkanes. Their general formula is CnH2n+1, where n = 1, 2, 3 . . . . The names of alkyl
radicals are derived from the names of the corresponding parent alkanes by changing the
suffix -ane  to -yl.
Table 1.4   Formulas, names and structures of some alkyl groups.
Formula of
alkane
Formula of
alkyl radical
CH
4
C H
2
6
C H
3
8
CH –
3
5C H
–
2
C H
–
3
7
C H
4
10
C H
4
–
9
Condensed
structure of alkyl
radical
CH –3
C
H C
3
H –
2
H C
3
C
CH
H CH –
2
CH
— —
2
3
CH3
H CH CH –
H C
2
2
3
H C — —
CH
H
2
2
3
C
C
Common name
of alkyl radical
Methyl
Ethyl
n
-Propyl
Isopropyl
n
-Butyl
butyl
Iso
CH3
CH3
H
3 —C
C — —
H
C
2
H
CH3
H
3 —C C
—
CH3
sec-Butyl
(s-Butyl)
tert-Butyl
(t-Butyl)
The system of naming organic compounds is based on the recommendations of IUPAC.
The following are the rules established by IUPAC to name branched-chain hydrocarbons.
13
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
1. Select the longest continuous chain of carbon atoms in the molecule as the parent
structure. The name of the straight-chain alkane possessing the same number of
carbon atoms is used as the name of this longest chain. The groups attached to the
parent structure are called side chains or substituents.
Example 1
There are seven carbon atoms in the longest chain (the parent structure). Therefore, it
gets the name “heptane”.
2. Assign numbers to the carbon atoms of the longest chain starting from one end to
the other so that the carbon atoms to which side chains are attached get the lowest
possible number.
To check which direction of numbering is correct; add the locants (numbers assigned
to the carbon atoms to which substituents are attached).
The sum of locants in the first case is 3 + 4 = 7 and in the second case, 4 + 5 = 9.
So numbering should be done from left to right in this case. Thus, the first option is
correct.
3.
Indicate the position of the side chain by using the number assigned to the carbon
atom to which it is attached. If the same substituents appear more than once, use the
14
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
prefix di-, tri-, tetra- etc. before the name of the substituent to show two, three,
four, etc. substituents, respectively.
4. Numbers are separated from each other by commas while they are separated from
substituent names by hyphens.
5. Arrange the names of the side chains before the parent name in alphabetical order.
The complete name of the alkane given in the above example will then be 4-ethyl-3-
methylheptane (substituents in alphabetical order).
Example 2
Cl
CH3
2
3
CH3
4
1
3
H C — C — CH — C — CH
CH3
3
6
5
2
H C — CH
3
The longest chain has six carbon atoms and the parent name is hexane. There are two
methyl groups at carbon-2 and another two methyl groups on carbon-4 and one chlorine
atom at carbon-3.  Therefore, the correct name of the compound is 3-chloro-2,2,4,4-
tetramethylhexane.
Example 3
The longest chain contains eight carbon atoms. Hence, the parent name of the given molecule
is octane. There are three methyl groups attached to carbon number 3, 4 and 6; one
bromine atom is attached  to carbon-4 and two chlorine atoms are attached to carbon-3
and carbon-5. Thus, the correct name of the compound is 4-bromo-3,5-dichloro-3,4,6-
trimethyloctane.
15
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Note:
When F, Cl, Br and I appear as substituents, change the names fluorine, chlorine, bromine
and iodine to fluoro, chloro, bromo and iodo, respectively.
Example 4
CH3
CH3
1
H C
3
—
3
4
2
C — CH — CH — CH
5
6
— —
CH
7
2
CH
3
CH3
F
CH3
There are seven carbon atoms in the parent structure, so it takes the name heptane. There
are two methyl groups at carbon-2 and two methyl groups at carbon-4 and carbon-5 and
one fluorine at carbon-3. So the name of the compound is 3-fluoro-2,2,4,5-tetramethyl
heptane.
Activity 1.8
Is there any scientific background for the IUPAC rules or is it just a convention? Why IUPAC
recommendations are followed throughout the world. Present your opinion to the class.
Exercise 1.2
1. Write any three possible structures for octane, C8H18, and give their IUPAC names.
2. Give the IUPAC name of:
3. Write the structure of 2,2-dimethyl butane.
4. Write the structure of 2,3-dimethylpentane.
5. When F, Cl, Br and I appear as substituents in an organic compound, how are they
named?
16
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
1.2.4    Isomerism
Activity 1.9
1. Write the molecular formula of the following compounds?
Do they have the same or different molecular formula?
2. Do  they  have  the  same  or  different  molecular  formula?  Do  they  have  the  same  or
different physical and chemical properties?  Why? What do we call compounds  of this
type? Discuss the results in your group and present it to the class.
There is only one possible structure for each of the first three alkanes, namely, methane
(CH4), ethane (C2H6) and propane (C3H8). Those alkanes containing four or more carbon
atoms have more than one structure. The existence of two or more chemical compounds
with the same molecular formula but different structures is called isomerism.
The compounds that have the same molecular formula but different structures are
called isomers. Alkanes exhibit a type of structural isomerism called chain or skeletal
isomerism. These structures differ in the arrangement of the carbon atoms and hydrogen
atoms. To understand what isomers are, consider the isomers of butane (C4H10) and
pentane (C5H12).
1.
Isomers of butane (C4H10)
Butane has two isomers:
2.
Isomers of pentane (C5H12)
Pentane has three isomers.
17
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
1. Which of the following statements are true about isomers:
Exercise 1.3
a They have the same molecular formula.
b They are different compounds.
c They have different boiling and melting points.
d They have similar chemical properties.
2. Draw all the possible structural isomers for hexane and name them.
1.2.5    Preparation  of  Alkanes
Alkanes are the major constituents of petroleum and natural gas. They are mainly obtained
by fractional distillation of petroleum. Alkanes can also be prepared in the laboratory.
Some methods of their preparation are as follows:
1. Hydrogenation of alkenes with a metal catalyst.
General Reaction:
Example
2. Wûrtz Synthesis (reaction). This method involves the reaction of a halogenated
alkane with sodium and the reaction is somewhat exothermic.
18
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
General Reaction:
Example
2CH I + 2Na
3
CH — CH + 2NaI
3
3
Methyl iodide
Ethane
Sodium iodide
This reaction is named as Wûrtz reaction after the French chemist Charles-Adolphe
Wûrtz (1817–1884).
3. Heating sodium salt of an organic acid with soda lime (mixture of sodium hydroxide
and calcium oxide); the reaction brings about the removal of the carboxylate group
from the sodium salt of the carboxylic acid.  This type of reaction is called decarboxylation.
General Reaction:
Example
Methane
Methane is the main constituent (about 90%) of natural gas. It is obtained during fractional
distillation of petroleum. Methane is also formed by the decay and decomposition of animal
and plant remains in swampy or marshy lands.
19
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Activity 1.10
Discuss the following points in groups, and present your ideas to the class.
1. Have you ever walked near a marshy or swampy area?  Which characteristic smell do
you observe?
2.
3.
In most parts of Ethiopia, the walls of houses are constructed from wood and mud. The
mud for this purpose is usually prepared by mixing soil, water and hay or straw. After
two or three weeks of decay and decomposition, an unusual smell is perceived. What
do you think is the cause of this?
If Ethiopia introduces the technology of producing biogas to its residents, what benefits
will  be  obtained  by  the  country?  What  materials  can  be  used  to  generate  biogas?
Which compound is the main constituent of biogas?
Experiment 1.1
Laboratory Preparation of Methane
Objective: To prepare methane and study its properties.
Materials required: Sodium acetate (CH3COONa) and soda lime (CaO, NaOH),
test tubes, delivery tube, stopper, gas jar and gas jar lid, pneumatic trough,
stand, clamp, beehive shelf, Bunsen burner and balance.
Procedure:
Arrange the assembly as shown in Figure 1.3. Mix thoroughly 5 g powdered sodium
acetate with 10 g of soda lime. Place the mixture in the test tube and heat it. Collect the
gas by the downward displacement of water. Collect several jars of the gas.
Rubber
stopper
Delivery tube
Gas jar
Sodium acetate
+
Soda lime
Boiling tube
Methane
Pneumatic
trough
Beehive
shelf
Water
Figure 1.3   Preparation of methane.
Bunsen
burner
20
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
Carry out the following activities with the collected gas:
Insert a burning splint into the jar full of the gas. Observe what happens in the jar.
Add Ca(OH)2 solution to the jar and observe. Add a few drops of bromine water
to any one of the gas jars filled with methane. Cover the gas jar and shake well.
Observations and analysis:
a What is the colour of the gas? Is it soluble in water?
Is the gas combustible? Write a balanced equation for the change.
b
c What change did you observe upon addition of Ca(OH)2?
d
Is there any change when bromine water is added?
Write a laboratory report on your observation and submit to your teacher.
Methane can be produced in a biogas plant. The biogas plant generates biogas, mainly
consisting of methane by anaerobic fermentation of organic materials such as human excreta,
animal dung and agricultural residue.
The conversion of organic materials into biogas involves a sequence of reactions and is
graphically depicted in Figure 1.4.
Figure 1.4   Reactions in the production of biogas.
The materials that can be used to produce biogas include dung from cattle, pigs, chickens,
chopped green plants and plant wastes. The advantages of biogas technology include
saving on fuel such as kerosene, wood and charcoal, and decrease in local deforestation.The
residue obtained after preparing the biogas can be used as fertilizer.
21
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Experiment 1.2
Production of Methane from Cow Dung
Objective: To prepare biogas from locally available materials.
Materials required: Conical flask, cow dung, water, delivery tube with tap and stopper
with one hole.
Procedure:
1. Mix some cow dung with water and pour it in a conical flask.
2. Fit the conical flask with a stopper in which a delivery tube with a tap is inserted.
3. Cover the conical flask with a cotton wool and place it near a window and leave it
there for 3 to 4 days.
4. Check the formation of methane after 4 days. (Bring a lighted splint closer to the outlet
of the delivery tube and open the tap). See what happens.
Cotton wool
Cow dung + water
Figure 1.5   Preparation of methane gas from cow dung.
Observations and analysis:
a What is the importance of covering the conical flask with a cotton wool and placing
it near the window?
b What is your observation when you bring a burning splint close to the outlet of the
tube?
c What change do you think has occurred in the conical flask that leads to the formation
of methane?
Write a laboratory report in group and present to the class.
PROJECT 1.1
Organize a trip to visit a biogas plant in your Kebele or neighbouring Kebeles if any
and write a report on how it operates. Construct a small scale biogas plant in groups.
22
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
1.2.6    Chemical  Properties  of  Alkanes
Activity 1.11
Discuss the following points in groups and present your opinions to the class.
1. Which  chemical  property  of  alkanes  is  responsible  for  generating  electricity  in  diesel
power stations or for moving motor vehicles? Name the major product formed when
the  fuel  has  been  consumed  in  the  diesel  power  station.
2. The  reaction  of  methane  with  oxygen  produces  two  different  oxides  of  carbon,  CO2
and CO.
1 What condition determines whether the product of the methane reaction is CO2 or CO?
b If a domestic heating system is fuelled by methane, what difference does it make
if the combustion produces CO2 or CO?
Alkanes are generally not considered to be very reactive organic compounds. The name
paraffin for alkanes arose from two Latin words ‘parum’ meaning little and ‘affinis’ means
affinity. Thus, paraffin means little affinity. This name was suggested because alkanes are
inert towards many reagents like acids, bases, oxidizing and reducing agents. However,
they undergo several reactions under suitable conditions.
The major reactions of alkanes are the following:
1. Combustion Reactions:  If alkanes are burned with limited supply of oxygen,
they will form water and carbon monoxide and will liberate lesser amounts of heat
energy. Alkanes burn in excess oxygen to form carbon dioxide and water, liberating
a greater amounts of heat. The general equation for the reaction is:
CnH2n+2    +
3 + 1
nÊ
Ë
2
ˆ
¯ O2    Æ    nCO2    +    (n + 1) H2O    +    heat
where n is the number of carbon atoms in the alkane molecule.
Example
C3H8    +    5O2    Æ    3CO2    +    4H2O    +    2299 kJ
The heat energy liberated is used to generate electricity, to move motor vehicles or
to cook our food.
23
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Activity 1.12
1. Write the general equation for the combustion of alkanes in a limited supply of oxygen
that forms carbon monoxide, water and energy.
2. Why is a petroleum refinery is built in the open air? Present your opinion to the class.
2. Substitution Reaction:  This is a reaction that involves the replacement of one
atom or a group of atoms by another atom or group of atoms. Halogenation of
alkanes is a very good example of substitution reaction. This reaction involves
reacting alkanes with chlorine and bromine. The reaction of chlorine and bromine
with alkanes proceeds in presence of heat or sunlight. This type of reaction is
called photochemical reaction. The reaction of alkanes with chlorine and bromine
proceeds in a sequence of steps. For example, let us consider the photochemical
reaction of methane with chlorine (chlorination):
i) Chain Initiating Step: This step involves absorption of energy to generate
reactive particles known as free radicals. A free radical is an atom or a
group of atoms possessing unpaired electron. A free radical is electrically neutral.
A chlorine molecule absorbs light and decomposes into two chlorine atoms:
ii) Chain Propagating Step: This is a step which consumes a reactive particle (free
radical) produced in the chain initiation step and generates another free radical.
iii) Chain Terminating Step: In the chain terminating step reactive particles (free
radicals) are consumed but not generated.
In this step, ‘side reactions’ that do not lead to the formation of the desired products
often take place.
Examples
Such a detailed step by step description of a chemical reaction is called a reaction
mechanism.
24
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
Chlorination of methane may produce different products depending on the relative
amounts of methane and chlorine.
CH4 (g)
+ Cl2 (g) Æ CH3Cl (g) + HCl (g)
Methyl chloride
CH3Cl (g)
+ Cl2 (g) Æ CH2Cl2 (g) + HCl (g)
Methylene chloride (dichloromethane)
CH2Cl2 (g) + Cl2 (g) Æ CHCl3 (g) + HCl
Chloroform (trichloromethane)
CHCl3 (g)
+ Cl2 (g) Æ CCl4 (g)
+ HCl (g)
Carbontetrachloride (tetrachloromethane)
The chlorination of methane is an example of a chain reaction that involves a series of
steps.
Activity 1.13
Alkanes  do  not  react  with  chlorine  and  bromine  in  the  dark  but  they  do  so  in  the
presence  of  sunlight.  Discuss  the  role  of  sunlight  for  the  reaction  in  your  group  and
present to the class.
3. Elimination reaction: This type of reaction involves the removal of smaller molecules
from a compound and leads to the formation of a compound containing a multiple
bond (unsaturated compound). It can also involve the removal of hydrogen atoms
from adjacent carbon atoms at relatively high temperatures.
Cycloalkanes
Cycloalkanes are saturated hydrocarbons in which the carbon atoms are linked in such a
manner as to form closed chains or ring structures. They are represented by the general
formula, CnH2n, where n ≥ 3. Cycloalkanes are isomeric with open-chain alkenes. Their
names are obtained by prefixing “cyclo” to the name of an alkane containing the same
number of carbon atoms. The following structures represent some examples of cycloalkanes.
25
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Uses  of  Alkanes
Alkanes are primarily used as fuels.  They are also used as solvents, raw materials for
making alkenes, alcohols, soaps, detergents and plastics.
Exercise 1.4
1. Write the molecular formulas of alkanes containing the following number of carbon
atoms.
a     5
2. Define the terms
b 8
c   15
a Homologous series
d Substitution reaction
b Alkyl radical
c Isomerism
e Combustion reaction
f Functional groups
3. Write the balanced equation for the complete combustion of octane.
4. How many chain isomers are there for an alkane that contains 7 carbon atoms?
5. Give IUPAC names to each of the following.
26
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
6. Write the structural formulas of the following compounds.
a 2,3-dimethylbutane
b 2-bromo-3,3,4,4-tetramethylhexane.
c 2-chloro-4-ethyl-2,3-dimethylhexane.
7. Complete and balance the following chemical reaction:
C5H12    +    O2
Complete
ææææææÆ
Combustion
1.3 UNSATURATED  HYDROCARBONS
Competencies
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
27
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
• define unsaturated hydrocarbons;
• define alkenes;
• write the general formula of alkenes;
• write the molecular formula for the first nine members in the homologous series of
alkenes;
• define alkynes;
• write the general formula of alkynes;
• write the molecular formula for the first nine members in the homologous series of
alkynes;
• write the molecular formulas of alkenes and alkynes from the given number of carbon
atoms;
• describe the physical properties of alkenes and alkynes;
• apply IUPAC rules to name straight-and branched-chain alkenes and alkynes;
• write the structural formulas of alkenes and alkynes up to ten carbon atoms;
• write the possible structural isomers for C4H8 and C5H10;
• define geometric (cis-trans) isomerism;
• give examples of molecules that show geometric isomerism;
• construct models that show cis-trans isomerism;
• describe the general methods for the preparation of alkenes in a laboratory;
• prepare ethylene in the laboratory by the dehydration of ethanol;
• describe the general method for preparation of alkynes in a laboratory;
• prepare acetylene in the laboratory by the reaction of CaC2 with water;
•
test for unsaturation of ethylene and ethyne;
• explain chemical properties of alkenes;
• explain chemical properties of alkynes;
• explain the uses of ethylene and acetylene;
• compare and contrast the properties of ethane, ethene and ethyne.
28
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
Unsaturated hydrocarbons are those compounds of carbon and hydrogen containing either
double or triple bonds. These groups of hydrocarbons include alkenes and alkynes.
1.3.1    Alkenes  or  Olefins
Activity 1.14
1. The  molecular  formulas  for  the  first  three  members  of  an  alkene  series  are  C2H4,  C3H6
and C4H8. Derive the general formula for alkenes and compare it with that of alkanes. Is
there a difference in the number of hydrogen atoms?
2. By  referring  to  Table  1.5,  what  relationship  do  you  observe  between  the  number  of
carbon atoms and melting point, boiling point and density?
Discuss with your group and present it to the class.
Alkenes are unsaturated hydrocarbons containing a carbon-carbon double bond as their
functional group:
They are also known as olefins. They form a homologous series represented by the general
formula CnH2n, where n = 2, 3, 4….
Table 1.5   The homologous series of alkenes and their physical constants.
Melting
point (°C)
Boiling
point (°C)
Density
Molecular Condensed
formula
structure
C2H4
C3H6
C4H8
C5H10
C6 H12
C7 H14
C8 H16
C9 H18
C10 H20
CH2 = CH2
CH2 = CH – CH3
CH2 = CH – CH2 – CH3
CH2 = CH – (CH2)2 – CH3
CH2 = CH – (CH2)3 – CH3
CH2 = CH – (CH2)4 – CH3
CH2 = CH – (CH2)5 – CH3
CH2 = CH – (CH2)6 – CH3
CH2 = CH – (CH2)7 – CH3
IUPAC
name
Ethene
Propene
1-butene
–169
–185
–130
1-pentene
–130.5
1-hexene
1-heptene
1-octene
1-nonene
1-decene
–138
–119
–104
–95
–87
–102
–48
–6.5
30
63
93
122
146
171
0.61 g/L
0.61 g/L
0.63 g/L
0.64 g/L
0.67 g/L
0.69 g/L
0.72 g/L
0.73 g/L
0.74 g/L
29
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Physical  Properties  of  Alkenes
Activity 1.15
1. Why some alkenes exist in gaseous and liquid states at room temperature?
2. The  melting  points,  boiling  points  and  densities  of  alkenes  increase  with  increasing
number of carbon atoms; why?
3. Are alkenes coloured compounds? Do they have smell?
Discuss with your group and present it to the class.
At room temperature, alkenes containing two to four carbon atoms are gases. Those
containing five to seventeen carbon atoms are liquids, and those containing eighteen or
more carbon atoms are solids.
Alkenes are non-polar. Therefore, their molecules are held together by weak inter-molecular
forces. Since they are non-polar, they are almost insoluble in polar solvents like water, but
soluble in non-polar solvents like ether, benzene, toluene and carbon tetrachloride.
Nomenclature  of  Alkenes
Alkenes can have common names as well as IUPAC names. The common names of alkenes
are obtained by using the prefixes in Table 1.3 and adding the suffix ‘-ylene’:
Table 1.6   Common names of few alkenes.
Formula of
Alkene
C2H4
C3H6
C4H8
.
.
.
IUPAC  System
Condensed
Structure
CH2 = CH2
CH2 = CH – CH3
CH2 = CH –CH2–CH3
.
.
.
Common
Name
Ethylene
Propylene
Butylene
.
.
.
Activity 1.16
1. What  difference  do  you  expect  in  the  IUPAC  names  of  alkanes  and  alkenes?
2.
If you are asked to name the following hydrocarbons:
30
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
i)
ii)
a How many carbon atoms are there in the longest chain of each hydrocarbon?
b From which end do you start numbering the carbon atoms of the longest chain of
the hydrocarbon shown in structure i?
c
From which end do you start numbering the carbon atoms of the longest chain of
the hydrocarbon shown in structure ii?
d Is  there  any  difference  in  how  you  assign  number  to  the  carbon  atoms  of  the
longest chain represented by structures i and ii? If so, why?
e Which  name  do  you  think  is  more  appropriate  for  the  longest  chain  of  carbon
atoms in structure ii? 5-hexene or 1-hexene or hexane?  Discuss these questions in
your group and present to the class.
The IUPAC names of alkenes are obtained by using the prefixes listed in Table 1.3 to
indicate the number of carbon atoms in the molecule and adding the suffix ‘-ene’. The
suffix ‘-ene’ indicates the presence of a double bond. For example, the alkene having the
formula C8H16 is named as octene. The prefix oct- indicates that there are eight carbon
atoms in the molecule and ‘-ene’ signifies the presence of a double bond.
In the IUPAC system of naming alkenes, the rules we follow are similar to those rules we
follow for naming alkanes with slight modifications. These are:
1. Select the longest continuous chain of carbon atoms in the molecule that includes the
double bond as a parent structure. Its name will be the same as the alkene containing
the same number of carbon atoms.
Activity 1.17
Why should the double bond(s) in alkenes be included in the longest continuous chain?
Express your opinion to the class.
31
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
2. Number the carbon atoms starting from one end to the other in such a way that the
carbon atom preceding the double bond takes the lowest possible number and
indicate the position of the double bond by this number in the name.
Example 1
Example 2
The longest chain contains 7 carbon atoms and a double bond between the 2nd
and 3rd carbon atoms. Therefore, it takes the name 2-heptene or hept-2-ene.
There are three methyl groups at carbon number 3, 4 and 5. So the complete name
of the compound is:
3, 4, 5-trimethyl-2-heptene or 3, 4, 5-trimethyl hept-2-ene
Example 3
The parent structure contains 8 carbon atoms and a double bond between 3rd and
4th carbon atoms. Thus, it is named as 3-octene or oct-3-ene. The side chains
attached are chlorine at the 6th, two methyl groups at 5th and 6th and an ethyl
group at carbon number 3. Therefore, the complete name of the compound is:
6-chloro-3-ethyl-5,6-dimethyl-3-octene,  or
6-chloro-3-ethyl-5,6-dimethyloct-3-ene.
32
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
1. Write the names of the following compounds, using IUPAC rules:
Exercise 1.5
a
b
2. Write the structure of each of the following compounds:
a    3-methyl-3-heptene
b 3,4-diethyl-1-hexene
Isomerism  in  Alkenes
Alkenes containing two and three carbon atoms have only one possible structure.  Alkenes
containing four or more carbon atoms exhibit isomerism. Alkenes show the following three
types of isomerism:
1. Chain isomerism: This is due to the difference in the arrangement of the carbon
atoms in the longest continuous carbon chain.
2. Position isomerism: This is due to the difference in the position of the double bond
in the carbon chain.
Example
Consider the following compounds with the same molecular formula (C5H12):
33
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Compounds  (a) and (b) represent the position isomers of pentene,  (c) and (d) are
position isomers of methylbutene, (a), (c) and (e) are the chain isomers, while all
these compounds are the isomers of C5H12.
3. Geometrical isomerism. This results from the difference in the relative spatial
arrangement of atoms or groups about the double bond. This isomerism exists because
free rotation about the double bond is not possible. To differentiate geometrical
isomers, we use the prefix ‘cis’ if two similar groups are on the same side of the
double bond and ‘trans’ when the two similar groups are on opposite sides of it;
‘cis’ means the same and ‘trans’ means across.
The geometrical isomers of 2-pentene are:
Alkenes have more isomers than the corresponding alkanes.
Exercise 1.6
Write three position isomers of hexene.
PROJECT 1.2
Prepare a model from locally available materials, to show the cis-trans isomers of
2-butene.
Preparation  of  Alkenes
Do you know the major source of alkenes and the process that leads to their formation?
Alkenes are mainly obtained during fractional distillation of petroleum when the process
called cracking is carried out.
In the laboratory, alkenes can be prepared by:
1. Dehydration of alcohols with concentrated sulphuric acid or alumina (Al2O3).
Dehydration means removal of water.
General Reaction:
34
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
Example
2. Dehydrohalogenation of alkyl halides with a base (KOH). Dehydrohalogenation
means removal of hydrogen and a halogen atom.
Alkyl halides are compounds of an alkyl group and a halogen such as CH3Cl and
CH3 – CH2 – Br.
General reaction:
Example
Activity 1.18
In the above two methods of preparations of alkenes, (a) what difference do you observe
between  the  structures  of  the  major  reactant  and  the  product?  (b)  What  is  the  type  of
reaction? Share your findings with your group.
Exercise 1.7
Write the complete and balanced chemical equations for each of the following
reactions:
a
b
35
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Experiment 1.3
Laboratory preparation of Ethene
Objective: To prepare ethene and study some of its properties
Materials required:  Ethanol, concentrated H2SO4, water, bromine water, basic
KMnO4. Round-bottomed flask, stopper, delivery tube, gas jar, pneumatic
trough,  thermometer,  tripod,  Bunsen  burner,  stand  and  clamp,  beehive
shelf and wire gauze.
Procedure:
1. Arrange the set-up as shown in Figure 1.6
2. Take ethanol in the flask and add concentrated H2SO4 through the thistle funnel;
heat carefully until the temperature reaches about 170°C. Discard the initially
formed gas as it might contain air; collect the ethene gas in three gas jars by
downward displacement of water; perform the following activities.
a Insert a lighted splint into the jar containing the gas and see what happens.
b Add two drops of bromine water to the other gas jar, cover the jar and shake
well.
Thistle
funnel
Stand
Flask
Ethanol
+
concentrated
sulphuric acid
Inverted
gas jar
Ethene
Burner
Beehive
shelf
Water
Figure 1.6   Preparation of Ethene.
36
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
c Add a few drops of alkaline KMnO4 solution to another jar containing the gas
and observe what happens.
Observations and analysis:
a What is the colour and odour of the gas?
b What is the substance left after combustion of the gas in the jar?
c What change is observed when the gas is shaken with bromine water or alkaline
potassium permanganate?  Write equations for the reactions?
d Name the dehydrating agent used in the experiment?
e Which method of preparation of an alkene is used in this experiment?
Write a laboratory report about the experiment and submit to your teacher.
Chemical  properties  of  Alkenes
Alkenes are unsaturated hydrocarbons containing double bond (a strong bond and a weak
bond) between the two carbon atoms. They are more reactive than alkanes, because the
weak bond can be used for further reaction. They undergo several types of reactions.
1. Combustion reaction. Alkenes burn in oxygen with a luminous flame to form carbon
dioxide and water.
General reaction:      CnH2n    +



3
n
2



O2    Æ    nCO2    +    nH2O    +    heat
Example
C4H8(g)    +    6O2 (g)    Æ    4CO2 (g)    +    4 H2O (g)    +    heat
2. Addition reaction. Alkenes undergo mainly addition reactions. The addition occurs
at the carbon-carbon double bond.
a Addition of halogens (halogenation): When a halogen molecule, X2, (where,
X2 = Cl2 or Br2) is added to alkenes, the product is a dihaloalkane.
General reaction:
37
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Example
If bromine water (bromine in CCl4) is added to alkenes, the reddish brown
colour of Br2 in CCl4 will disappear. This is due to the addition of bromine
(Br2) across the double bond. So, Br2 in CCl4 is used to detect unsaturation
(presence of multiple bond) in a compound.
b Addition of hydrogen (Hydrogenation): Addition of hydrogen molecule to
alkenes in the presence of a nickel or platinum catalyst yields alkanes.
General reaction:
R –
CH == CH + H
2
Pt
→
2
Alkene
Example
R – CH – CH
2
Alkane
3
c Addition of hydrogen halides, HX (hydrohalogenation): Addition of hydrogen
halide (HCl, HBr or HI) to alkenes leads to the formation of alkyl halides. The
product of the reaction can be predicted by Markovnikov’s rule; which states
that “when an alkene reacts with a hydrogen halide to give an alkyl halide, the
hydrogen adds to the carbon atom of the double bond that has the greater number
of hydrogen atoms, and the halogen to the carbon that has the fewer number of
hydrogen atoms”.
The same is true when an alkene reacts with water in an addition reaction to form
an alcohol.
General reaction:
38
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
Example
Have you noticed the location where H and Br have formed bonds?
d Addition of water (hydration): When alkenes are hydrated in the presence of
an acid catalyst, they produce alcohols, in accordance with Markovnikov’s rule.
General reaction:
Example
e Oxidation of alkenes: Oxidation of alkenes with cold alkaline potassium
permanganate solution (KMnO4) forms diols (compounds containing two
hydroxyl groups).
General reaction:
Example
39
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Alkaline KMnO4 solution is also used as a qualitative test for the identification of
unsaturation in a compound. The solution is called Baeyer’s reagent. In the
presence of unsaturated hydrocarbons, the purple colour of alkaline KMnO4
solution fades and a brown precipitate is formed.
f Polymerization (self-addition) of alkenes: Polymerization is the union of small
molecules called monomers to form a large molecule called a polymer.
Example
Uses  of  Ethene  (Ethylene)
Ethene  is  used  in  the  production  of  ethanol,  and  polymers  such  as  polyethene,
polyvinylchloride (PVC), polystyrene and teflon. It is also used in the production
of 1,2-ethanediol, which is used as an antifreeze material; and for the preservation
as well as artificial ripening of fruits.
Activity 1.19
Take  some  green  tomatoes  in  first  basket  and  put  a  ripe  banana  in  between  them.  In  a
second basket put only green tomatoes (but not a banana). Compare the tomatoes in the
two baskets. Do the tomatoes ripen at the same rate in both baskets; if not, why? Share
your opinion with your classmates.
Cycloalkenes
Cycloalkenes are unsaturated cyclic hydrocarbons. The carbon atoms are linked in such a
manner as to form a closed chain or a ring structure. They contain a double bond between
carbon atoms and are represented by the general formula CnH2n–2, where n should be
equal to or greater than 3. They are isomeric with alkynes. They are named by prefixing
“cyclo” to the name of alkenes containing the same number of carbon atoms. The given
structures show some examples of cycloalkenes.
The IUPAC names for alkynes are obtained by using the prefixes listed in Table 1.3. The
suffix ‘-yne’ is added to the prefixes, which indicates the presence of a triple bond between a
pair of adjacent carbon atoms. Alkynes are named in the same way as alkenes.
40
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
Examples
Exercise 1.8
Complete each of the following equations and name the products:
a CH3CH2CH == CH2  +  HCl    Æ
b CH3CH2CH == CH2  +  Br2 Æ
c CH3CH2CH == CH2  +  H2O
H+
→
d CH3CH2CH == CH2
Alkaline
→
KMnO
4
1.3.2    Alkynes
Alkynes are another group of unsaturated hydrocarbons possessing a triple bond as their
functional group. The homologous series of alkynes is represented by the general formula
CnH2n–2, where n ≥ 2. The first member of the group is commonly known as acetylene.
The homologous series of alkynes is also called acetylene series.
Table 1.7   Homologous series of alkynes and their physical constants.
Formula of
Alkyne
C2H2
C3H4
C4H6
Condensed
Structure
CH ∫ CH
CH ∫ C – CH3
CH ∫ C – CH2
IUPAC
Name
Ethyne
Propyne
1 - butyne
Melting
Point (°C)
Boiling
Point (°C)
– 82
–101.5
–122
–75
–23
9
Continued next page
41
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Formula of
Alkyne
Condensed
Structure
C5H8
C6H10
C7H12
C8H14
CH ∫ C – (CH2)2 – CH3
CH ∫ C – (CH2)3 – CH3
CH ∫ C – (CH2)4 – CH3
CH ∫ C – (CH2)5 – CH3
IUPAC
Name
1 - pentyne
1 - hexyne
1 - heptyne
1 - octyne
1- nonyne
1- decyne
Melting
Point (°C)
Boiling
Point (°C)
–98
–124
–80
–70
–65
–36
40
72
100
126
151
182
Physical  Properties  of  Alkynes
Alkynes  are  non-polar  compounds  whose  molecules  are  held  together  by  weak
intermolecular forces. The strength of the intermolecular forces increases with increasing
molecular size. The physical properties of alkynes are almost similar to those of alkenes.
Activity 1.20
1. By looking at the trends for alkynes in Table 1.7, write the molecular formula and and
the structures of the alkynes containing 9 and 10 carbon atoms.
2. Compare the physical state, melting points and boiling points of alkynes with alkenes
and  alkanes,  as  the  number  of  carbon  atoms  increases.  Discuss  with  your  group  and
present to the class.
Nomenclature  of  Alkynes
Alkynes are commonly named as a derivative of acetylene.
Example
IUPAC System: The IUPAC names for alkynes are obtained by using the prefixes listed
in Table 1.3. The suffix ‘-yne’ is added to the prefixes. ‘-yne’ indicate the presence of a triple
bond between a pair of adjacent carbon atoms. Alkynes are named in the same way as
alkenes.
42
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
Example
Isomerism  in  Alkynes
Alkynes show both chain and position isomerism, but not geometrical isomerism.
Example
Isomers of butyne, C4H6
1-Butyne and 2-butyne are position isomers.
Activity 1.21
Write the structural formulas for pentane, pentene, and pentyne. Why are not these three
hydrocarbons considered as isomers? Tell your idea to the class.
Exercise 1.9
1. Write the possible isomers of 1-pentyne and identify which isomers are:
a chain isomers?
b position isomers?
2. Write the structures of all isomers of 1-pentyne (C5H8) and name them.
3. How many isomers are possible for 1-hexyne?
43
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Preparation  of  Alkynes
Alkynes can be prepared by several methods. Some of the general methods of preparation
of alkynes are:
1. Dehydrohalogenation of vicinal (adjacent) dihalides with a base NaOH or KOH or
NaNH2.
General  reaction:
Example
2. Alkylation of sodium acetylide (dicarbide) with a primary alkyl halide.
General reaction:
Example
Exercise 1.10
Write the major product of the following reactions:
44
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
Experiment 1.4
Laboratory Preparation of Ethyne
Objective: To prepare ethyne from calcium carbide and water.
Materials required: CaC2, H2O, bromine water, round-bottomed flask, separating
funnel, delivery tube, trough, beehive shelf and gas jar.
Procedure:
1. Arrange the set up as shown in Figure 1.7. Put a layer of sand in a conical flask and
place calcium carbide on the sand.
2. Add water drop by drop from the separating funnel onto the calcium carbide. Watch
carefully and record your observation. Touch the flask with the tip of your finger.
3. Collect several jars of the gas over water and carry out the following tests:
a Burn the gas as you did with methane and ethene.
b Add a few drops of bromine water to another jar filled with ethyne and note the
changes.
Figure 1.7 Laboratory Preparation of Ethyne.
Observations and analysis:
a What do you feel when you touch the flask? Is the reaction exothermic or
endothermic?
b How do you compare the colour of the flame produced with that of methane and
ethene?
Write a complete laboratory report and submit to your teacher.
45
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Chemical  Properties  of  Alkynes
Alkynes are more reactive than alkanes and alkenes. Why?
Alkynes are more unsaturated than alkanes and alkenes due to the presence of a carbon-
carbon triple bond. They can undergo combustion and addition reactions.
Some of the common reactions of alkynes are:
1. Combustion reaction:  Alkynes burn with a smoky luminous flame, forming CO2 and
water. Smoky luminous flames result from the combustion of alkynes due to their high
carbon content.
General reaction:     CnH2n–2    +
n
3 –1
2
O2    Æ    nCO2    +    (n – 1) H2O
Example
C3H4    +    4O2    Æ    3CO2    +    2H2O    +    heat
2. Addtion reaction: Alkynes undergo addition reaction at the carbon-carbon triple
bond. Some of the addition reactions of alkynes are the following:
a Addition of hydrogen (hydrogenation): In the presence of nickel or
palladium catalyst, alkynes produce alkanes.
General relation:
Example
Partial hydrogenation of alkynes in the presence of Lindlar’s catalyst gives
alkenes. Lindlar’s catalyst is powdered palladium partially deactivated with lead
acetate.
46
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
b Addition of halogens: When molecule of an alkyne reacts with one and two
molecules of halogens, it gives a dihaloalkene and a tetrahaloalkane,
respectively.
General Reaction:
Example
Example
Example
Example
Example
Activity 1.22
1. Do  you  expect  alkynes  to  decolorize  bromine  water;  if  so  why?
2. Write the balanced chemical equation for the reaction between C2H2 and 2Br2.
47
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
c Addition of Hydrogen Halides: Alkynes react with hydrogen halides to
form a monohaloalkene and a dihaloalkane. The addition reaction occurs
according to Markovnikov’s rule.
General Reaction:
Example
Br
CH — C
3
CH
HBr
CH
3
— C
CH
2
HBr
CH
3
— C — CH
3
Propyne
Br
2-Bromopropene
Br
2, 2-Dibromopropane
Activity 1.23
1.
Is Markonikov’s rule applied in the reaction between propyne and hydrobromic acid?
How?
2. The  addition  reaction  of  alkynes  proceeds  in  two  steps.  Explain  what  changes  occur
during the first and the second steps.
3. Compare the reaction products when 1-butyne and 2-butyne react with HBr.
3. Trimerization of Acetylene: Acetylene, on prolonged heating at 600 – 700oC,
yields benzene.
1.3.3    Properties  and  uses  of  Acetylene  or  Ethyne
Acetylene is a colourless, sweet-smelling gas in pure form and is insoluble in water. It is
usually stored as a solution of acetone in steel cylinders. Combustion of acetylene with
oxygen produces an intensely hot flame of about 3000oC. Thus, a large quantity of acetylene
is used as a fuel in oxy-acetylene torches for cutting and welding metals. Acetylene is also
used to prepare acrylonitrile which is a starting material for producing polyacrylonitrile, a
raw material for textile fibre. It is also used for making vinyl chloride which polymerizes to
48
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
give polyvinyl chloride (PVC) commonly used for making floor tiles, electrical insulators,
shoe soles, water pipes etc. Acetylene is used to produce 1,1,2,2-tetrachloroethane that
serves as a solvent for wax, grease, rubber etc.
Table 1.8   Comparison of some properties of Ethane, Ethene and Ethyne
Property
Ethane
Ethene
Ethyne
Nature of flame
Effect on colour of Br2 in CCl4
Effect on colour of alkaline KMnO4
Non-luminous
Luminous
Smoky luminous
No effect
No effect
Decolorizes
Decolorizes
Decolorizes
Decolorizes
Exercise 1.11
1. What reagents can be used to test for unsaturation of hydrocarbons?
2. Name the following hydrocarbons.
3. Which of the following hydrocarbons exhibit geometrical isomerism?
a 1-butene
b 2-butene
c 1-pentene
d 3-hexene
4. Complete the following reactions and name the main products:
a CH3CH2CH2Cl  +  KOH
b CH3  –  CH  =  CH  –  CH3  +  Cl2 Æ
heat
æææÆ
49
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
c CH3 –  CH2 –  CH  =  CH2  +  HCl  Æ
d CH3–  CH  =  CH2  +  H2O H+
e CaC2  +  2H2O  Æ
f CH3 –  C  ∫  CNa  +  CH3CH2Br  Æ
æææÆ
g CH3  –  C  ∫  CH  +  2H2
Ni
æææÆ
heat
h CH3 –  CH2  –  C  ∫  CH  +  2HBr  Æ
i H  –  C  ∫  C  –  H  +  Br2 Æ
j H  –  C  ∫  C  –  H  +  2Br2 Æ
1.4   AROMATIC  HYDROCARBONS
Competencies
At the end of this section you will be able to:
• define the term aromatic hydrocarbons;
• draw the structure of benzene;
• describe the main physical properties of benzene;
• explain the chemical reactions of benzene;
• carry out test-tube reactions with Br2 in CCl4, KMnO4, concentrated H2SO4.
Activity 1.24
Discuss the following in your group and present it to the class:
1. What  comes  to  your  mind  when  you  hear  the  word “benzene”?
2. What  is  the  word “aroma”  mean?   Which  substances  have  an  aroma  smell?
3. Are aromatic hydrocarbons unsaturated as alkenes? Why?
The term aromatic is derived from the word ‘aroma’ meaning pleasant smell, which was
originally used to describe naturally occurring compounds with pleasant smells. At present,
the term is used without its original significance. Aromatic hydrocarbons are generally
obtained from petroleum and coal tar. They are a group of hydrocarbons characterized by
the presence of a benzene ring or related structures. Some examples of aromatic
hydrocarbon structures are given below:
50
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
Figure 1.9   Structures of some Aromatic Hydrocarbons.
1.4.1    Benzene
Benzene is the simplest aromatic hydrocarbon.  Its molecular formula is C6H6. Friedrich A.
Kekule, in 1865, suggested that the six carbon atoms of benzene are arranged in the shape
of a hexagon. He also suggested a resonance hybrid structure. He represented benzene by
the resonance structures (Figure 1.10) in which the two structures shown make equal
contribution for the resonance hybrid or actual structure.
Figure 1.10   Resonance structures of benzene.
The bonds in benzene are neither single nor double but have an intermediate character
between those of single and double bonds. All the carbon-carbon bonds in the molecule
are same in length and nature. Since structure I or II given above are not the true structures
of the benzene molecule, the benzene ring is written, in most cases, in its resonance hybrid
form as follows:
51
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
The six electrons in the hexagonal ring are delocalized.
From structures I and II in Figure 1.10, one may think that benzene has three double
bonds and has the same chemistry as that of alkenes. But, this is not true. Benzene and
other aromatic hydrocarbons are not as unsaturated as alkenes because the three double
bonds in benzene are delocalized due to resonance. They are more stable than alkenes.
They undergo substitution reactions to a far greater extent than addition reactions, which is
a different characteristic compared to alkenes.
Physical  Properties  of  Benzene
Benzene is a flammable, colourless, and volatile liquid with a characteristic smell. It is
nonpolar and immiscible with water but miscible with non-polar solvents like ether and
carbon tetrachloride. It freezes at 5.4oC and boils at 80.4oC. It is a carcinogenic (cancer
causing) substance. Benzene is a good solvent for fats, gums, rubber etc., and is used in
the manufacture of dyes, drugs and explosives.
Chemical  Properties  of  Benzene
Benzene and other aromatic hydrocarbons are more stable than alkenes and alkynes due to
the stability of the aromatic ring. It neither decolorizes bromine water (Br2 in CCl4) nor is
reactive towards cold potassium permanganate solution. However, benzene undergoes
the following reactions:
1. Combustion reaction: Benzene is highly inflammable. It burns with a smoky luminous
flame to form CO2 and H2O.
2C6H6
+    15O2   Æ   12CO2     +     6H2O   +    Heat
2. Substitution reaction: The reactions of benzene are chiefly substitution but not
addition reactions. In this reaction, hydrogen atom from the benzene ring is replaced
by another atom or group.
a Halogenation: Benzene reacts with bromine and chlorine in the presence of
iron (III) chloride or aluminium chloride catalyst to form substitution products.
52
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
b Nitration: Concentrated nitric acid mixed with some concentrated sulphuric
acid reacts with benzene at moderate temperatures to form nitrobenzene.
c Sulphonation: Benzene reacts with concentrated sulphuric acid, H2SO4, at room
temperature to form benzenesulphonic acid.
3. Addition reaction: Benzene undergoes addition reactions under special conditions.
Example
When a mixture of benzene vapour and hydrogen is passed over finely divided nickel
catalyst at 200°C, cyclohexane is formed.
Experiment 1.5
Chemical  Reaction  of  Toluene
Objective: To distinguish aromatic hydrocarbons from other unsaturated hydrocarbons
Materials required: Toluene, Br2 in CCl4, KMnO4, concentrated H2SO4, test tubes,
test tube rack, test tube holder, measuring cylinder, Bunsen burner and dropper.
53
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Procedure:
1. Take three test tubes and place them in the test tube rack.
2. Add 5 mL of toluene (methylbenzene) to each of the three test tubes.
3. Add one or two drops of Br2 in CCl4 in the first test tube and add the same amount
of cold KMnO4 solution in the second test tube and observe the changes.
4. Add a few drops of concentrated sulphuric acid to the third test tube and, if necessary,
heat it gently, holding it with a test tube holder.
Observations and analysis:
In which test tube does a reaction occur?
Write a complete report of your observations and submit to your teacher.
Exercise 1.12
1. What is an aromatic hydrocarbon?
2. Are aromatic hydrocarbons saturated or unsaturated?
3. What is the name of the simplest aromatic hydrocarbon?
4. Describe the main reactions of benzene?
5. Benzene does not change the colour of Br2 in CCl4 or that of KMnO4  solution; why?
6. How do you prepare the following compounds from benzene?
a Chlorobenzene
b Nitrobenzene
c Benzene sulphonic acid.
1.5    NATURAL  SOURCES  OF  HYDROCARBONS
Competencies
After completing this subunit, you will be able to:
•
list the major natural sources of hydrocarbons;
• describe natural gas;
• define crude oil;
•
explain the fractional distillation of crude oil;
• mention the products of the fractional distillation of crude oil;
•
tell the uses of petroleum products;
• describe the composition of coal;
•
explain the destructive distillation of coal.
54
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
Activity 1.25
Discuss the following in your group and present it to the class:
1. What do you think is the major component of natural gas?
2. How can petroleum be separated into different fractions?
3. How are natural gas, petroleum and coal formed in nature? Can they be recycled?
A.    Natural  Gas
The principal sources of hydrocarbons are natural gas, crude oil and coal. Natural gas is
found in association with petroleum or alone. It is found in underground deposits several
hundreds or thousands of metres below the earth’s surface, where it originated from the decay
and decomposition of animal and plant remains millions of years ago. Natural gas mainly
contains methane (more than 90%), ethane, propane, butane and small quantities of higher
alkanes. Other gases such as, CO2, N2, O2 and H2S, may also be present in natural gas.
The composition of natural gas varies, depending on its place of origin. Natural gas is
widely used as a fuel. It is advantageous over liquid and solid fuels and also other gases,
except H2, due to its very high heat of combustion.
B.    Petroleum
The word petroleum is derived from two Latin words, ‘petra’ meaning rock, and ‘oleum’
meaning oil. Thus, petroleum means rock oil.  The term petroleum refers to a broad range
of fossil hydrocarbons that are found as gases, liquids or solids beneath the surface of the
earth.  The crude oil is generally found along with  natural gas in the form of a dark-
coloured viscous liquid, which is a complex mixture of hydrocarbons. Its composition
varies according to its place of origin. However, crude oil mainly contains alkanes,
cycloalkanes and aromatic hydrocarbons. It also contains organic compounds consisting
of nitrogen, sulphur and oxygen in small amounts.
Refining  of  Crude  Oil
Crude oil or petroleum is obtained by drilling wells until the oil-bearing region is reached.
After the crude oil is brought to the surface of the earth, it must be refined before it
can be used.
Crude oil is refined or separated into several components by fractional distillation based
on the differences in boiling ranges of its fractions. (Figure 1.11).
55
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Figure 1.11   Fractional Distillation of Petroleum.
The major products (fractions) obtained from fractional distillation of petroleum and their
uses are given in Table 1.9.
Table 1.9   Common petroleum products.
Fractions
Gases
Approximate
composition
(carbon number)
C1 – C4
Boiling
point  range
(°C)
below 20
Petroleum ether
Gasoline (petrol)
Kerosene
C5 – C7
C5 – C10
C10 – C16
20 – 60
40 – 200
175 – 275
Uses
– As fuel in the form
of bottled gas.
– As solvent, in dry cleaning.
– Motor fuel for internal
combustion engines.
– Jet engine fuel,
– household fuel.
Continued next page
56
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
Fuel oil (diesel oil)
C15 – C18
Lubricating oils
Greases
Petroleum jelly
¸
˝
˛
Paraffin wax
Asphalt
(bitumen)
Coke
¸
Ô
˝
Ô
˛
> C19
> C20
250 – 350
– Furnace fuel, diesel
engine fuel.
Non-volatile liquids – Lubrication.
Non-volatile
solids
– Candles, polishes.
– Roofing and road
construction.
– Electrodes, fuel for
power stations.
Most hydrocarbons present in petroleum are long-chain hydrocarbons. However, there is
a very high demand for petrol or gasoline, which contains hydrocarbons, composed of five
to ten carbon atoms. Therefore, the amount of petrol obtained by fractional distillation of
crude oil does not satisfy the demand for it. To satisfy the demand and maximize the output
of petrol or gasoline, the process called cracking is carried out during fractional distillation.
What does cracking mean? Cracking is the decomposition of large hydrocarbon molecules
into smaller ones by the application of heat (thermal cracking or pyrolysis) or in the
presence of catalysts (catalytic cracking).
Example
C H
16
Hexadecane
34
heat
→
C H     +     C H
8
18
Octane
8
16
Octene
Hydrogen gas can be added during cracking to saturate the alkenes formed in the process.
C.    Coal
Coal is formed naturally by the decomposition of plant matter over several millions of
years. It is not a pure form of carbon. It is an important source of aromatic hydrocarbons.
Heating mineral coal in the absence of air, or oxygen is called destructive distillation of coal
or coking of coal. When coal is heated in the absence of air it gives volatile products and
coke. The volatile products separate into coal gas and a liquid, called coal tar when cooled.
Aromatic hydrocarbons and many other substances are isolated from coal tar by fractional
distillation.
Coke, which is a solid and relatively pure form of carbon, is used as a fuel in the blast
furnace during the extraction of iron. It is also used to produce gaseous fuels, such as
water gas (mixture of H2 and CO) and producer gas (mixture of N2 and CO).
57
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Exercise 1.13
1. What are the major natural sources of hydrocarbons?
2. Which hydrocarbons are the main constituents of petroleum?
3. What is destructive distillation?
4. Describe how we can obtain aromatic hydrocarbons from coal.
5. Which fraction of petroleum is in very high demand?
6. What process should be carried out during fractional distillation of crude oil to
maximize the output of petrol or gasoline?
7. Describe the main uses of
a petroleum ether;
b kerosene;
c gasoline;
d diesel oil;
e refinery gases.
Research  and  writing
Consult reference materials in the library and read about products made from
hydrocarbons. Make a list of petroleum-related products you use almost daily.
1.6    ALCOHOLS
Competencies
After completing this section, you will be able to:
• define alcohols;
•
•
tell the functional group of alcohols;
classify alcohols based on the number of hydroxyl groups;
• write the general formulas of monohydric alcohols;
• write the molecular formulas and the names of the first six members of the
monohydric alcohols;
• give the IUPAC names for the given alcohols;
•
classify monohydric alcohols based on the number of alkyl groups attached
to the carbon atom carrying the hydroxyl group;
• give some examples for primary, secondary and tertiary alcohols;
• describe the physical properties of alcohols;
•
•
• perform an experiment to prepare ethanol from sugar;
explain general methods of preparation of alcohols;
explain the industrial preparation of ethanol;
58
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
•
•
explain the chemical reactions of alcohols such as oxidation, reaction with
active metals, esterification and dehydration;
carry out an activity to show chemical reactions of alcohols with active metals;
• write the general structural formula of aldehydes;
• write the molecular formulas and names of simple aldehydes;
• write the general structural formula of ketones;
• write the molecular formulas and names of simple ketones;
• write the general structural formula of carboxylic acids;
• write the molecular formulas and names of simple carboxylic acids;
• write the general structural formula of esters;
• write the molecular formulas and names of simple esters.
Activity 1.26
1. List  some  alcohols  you  know?    Name  the  alcohol  used  in  alcoholic  beverages?    What
are the uses of alcohols in industry?
2. Ethiopia uses an alcohol blended with benzene to drive cars.  What is the name of the
alcohol?  What is the source of this alcohol?
What do you think when you hear the word “alcohol”? Can you define alcohol?  Give a
few examples of the uses of alcohols.  Most people think of two common alcohols- the
substance that intoxicates people and the one used in clinics and hospitals. However, there
are many types of alcohol.  The only alcohol present in all alcoholic beverages is called
ethanol.  Other alcohols are used for different purposes.
Alcohols are hydroxyl derivatives of hydrocarbons that can be obtained by replacing one
or more hydrogen atom(s) of a hydrocarbon with the hydroxyl (–OH) group. The hydroxyl
group is the functional group of alcohols.
Examples
59
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
1.6.1    Classification  of  Alcohols
Alcohols are generally classified as monohydric, dihydric and trihydric depending on the
number of hydroxyl (–OH) groups they contain in their molecular structure.
Monohydric alcohols are alcohols containing only one hydroxyl group.
Examples
Dihydric alcohols are those containing two hydroxyl groups per molecule. They are also
named glycols or diols.
Example
Trihydric alcohols are those containing three hydroxyl groups in their molecular structure.
Polyhydric alcohols are those containing three or more hydroxyl groups in their molecular
structure. Trihydric alcohols are also considered as polyhydric alcohols.
Example
1.6.2    Nomenclature  of  Alcohols
An alcohol can be considered to be derived from a hydrocarbon by the replacement of at
least one H atom by hydroxyl group.  Hence, alcohols can be systematically named by
using the suffix -ol to replace the terminal -e in the corresponding alkane name.
60
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
Table 1.10   IUPAC Names,  Condensed Structure and Physical Constants of the First Six
Monohydric  Alcohol.
Structure of
monohydric  alcohol
IUPAC  name
Melting
point  (°C)
Boiling  point  (°C) Density g/mL
CH3OH
CH3CH2OH
CH3CH2CH2OH
CH3(CH2)2CH2OH
CH3(CH2)3CH2OH
CH3(CH2)4CH2OH
Methanol
Ethanol
1-Propanol
1-Butanol
1-Pentanol
1-Hexanol
–97
–117
–126
–90
–78.5
–52
64.7
78.3
97.2
117.7
138
156.5
0.792
0.789
0.804
0.810
0.817
0.819
Activity 1.27
Based  on  the  structural  formulas  given  in  table  1.10,  derive  the  general  formula  for  the
homologous series of monohydric alcohols. Discuss in your group and present to the class.
In the IUPAC system of nomenclature of alcohols containing side chains or –OH groups in
different positions, the longest chain to which the –OH group is attached, is chosen as a
parent structure. The chain is then numbered, starting from the end closer to the carbon
atom to which the –OH group is bonded. The other rules are similar to the nomenclature of
hydrocarbons.
Examples
Classification  of  Monohydric  Alcohols
Carbon atoms can be classified as primary (1°), secondary (2°), tertiary (3°) and quaternary
(4°) if they are bonded to one, two, three and four carbon atoms, respectively.
61
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Example
Carbon atoms indicated by letters a, d, and e, are primary. The carbon atom indicated
by letter b is secondary, and the one indicated by letter c is tertiary.
Monohydric alcohols can be classified as primary (1°), secondary (2°) and tertiary (3°)
alcohols, depending on the number of hydrocarbon groups (alkyl groups) attached to the
carbon atom to which the hydroxyl group is bonded.
Primary alcohols are those alcohols which have the hydroxyl group connected to a primary
carbon. They can also be defined as a molecule containing a “–CH2OH” group.
General Structure:
Examples
Secondary alcohols are those in which the carbon atom bonded to the hydroxyl group is
attached  to  two  alkyl  groups  or  contains    an  –OH  group  bonded  to  a  secondary
carbon atom.
General structure:
where R and R¢ may be same or different
62
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
Examples
Tertiary alcohols are those in which the carbon atom bonded to the hydroxyl group is
attached to three hydrocarbon (alkyl) groups or contain –OH group attached to a tertiary
carbon atom.
General Structure:
where R, R¢ and R¢¢ may be same or different
Example
Exercise 1.14
1. Classify the following alcohols as monohydric, dihydric and trihydric alcohols.
a 2-propanol
b 1,3-propanediol
c 1,2,3-butanetriol
2. Classify the following monohydric alcohols as primary, secondary or tertiary
alcohols.
a 1-pentanol
b 2-pentanol
c 2-methyl-2-butanol
1.6.3    Physical  Properties  of  Alcohols
Activity 1.28
1. Why do alcohols have higher boiling points than the corresponding hydrocarbons?
2. Why  boiling  points  of  dihydric  and  trihydric  alcohols  are  higher  than    those  of
monohydric alcohols of comparable molecular size?
63
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
3. Lower alcohols, like methanol and ethanol, are miscible with water in all proportions,
while lower hydrocarbons are not so. Explain.
4. Based  on  the  boiling  point  of  water,  H2O,  and  methanol,  CH3OH,  in  which  one  would
you  expect  to  observe  a  greater  degree  of  hydrogen  bonding?  Explain.  Discuss  with
your group and present to the class.
The hydroxyl group in an alcohol is polar due to the high electronegativity of oxygen. As a
result, there is significant hydrogen bonding in alcohols.
Figure 1.12   Hydrogen bonding between molecules of an alcohol.
Due to the hydrogen bonding in alcohols, they have higher melting and boiling points than
hydrocarbons of comparable molecular size (mass). Hydrogen bonding is also the cause
for even lower members to be liquids at room temperature. The boiling point of more
branched isomer is lower than that of its isomeric straight-chain alcohol.
For  Example:  CH3CH2CH2CH2OH,  boils  at  117.7°C,  while
boils at 82.5°C. Dihydric and the trihydric alcohols have higher boiling points than
monohydric alcohols of similar molecular size (mass). Ethane-1,2-diol (dihydric alcohol,
molecular  mass  =  62),  boils  at  197°C,  while  1-propanol  (monohydric,  molecular
mass = 60) boils at 97.2°C.
The first three alcohols, methanol, ethanol and 1-propanol are miscible with water in all
proportions, while the solubility in water decreases with increasing carbon number. The
water solubilities of dihydric and trihydric alcohols are higher than those of monohydric
alcohols of similar molecular mass.
1.6.4    Preparation  of  Alcohols
The general laboratory methods of preparation of alcohols are:
a Acid-catalyzed hydration of alkenes:
General Reaction:
64
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
Example
b Hydrolysis of alkyl halides:
Warming alkyl halides with sodium hydroxide forms alcohols.
General Reaction:
Example
c Hydrolysis of Esters:
Heating esters with potassium hydroxide produce alcohols.
General Reaction:
Example
65
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
The two methods, b and c, involve the replacement of other groups by the –OH group.
Hence, they are examples of substitution reactions.
Ethanol  (Ethyl  Alcohol),  CH3CH2OH
Activity 1.29
1 How  do  the  local  people  in  Ethiopia  prepare  alcoholic  beverages  like “Tella”, “Tej”  and
“Katikalla”? What raw materials and apparatus do they use?
2 Which industrial method of production of ethanol is more or less similar to the method
followed by the local people?  Share your ideas with your class.
Ethanol is the second member of the homologous series of monohydric alcohols. It is one
of the constituents of all alcoholic beverages. ‘Tella’, ‘Tej’, beer, wine, ‘Katikalla’, ouzo,
gin and whisky contain ethanol. There are a number of methods for  preparing ethanol
using different materials.
Industrial  preparation  of  Ethanol
Ethanol is manufactured industrially by:
1. Fermentation of carbohydrates such as sugar: Fermentation is the  slow
decomposition of carbohydrates such as sucrose, starch and cellulose in the presence
of suitable enzyme, that  results in the formation of  ethanol and carbon dioxide:
Fermentation  can  produce  an  alcoholic  beverage  whose  ethanol  content  is
12 – 15% only.  The alcohol kills the yeast and inhibits its activity when the percentage
is higher. To produce beverages of higher ethanol content, distillation of the aqueous
solution is required.
Most liquor factories in Ethiopia use molasses, a by-product of sugar industries, as
a raw material to produce ethanol. In the brewing industry, germinated barley called
malt (in Amharic, ‘Bikil’) is used as the starting material. The whole process taking
place in breweries is summarized as follows:
66
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
2. Catalytic Hydration of Ethene: Most ethanol is manufactured at present by this
method. In this process, ethene is treated with steam at 573 K and 60 atm pressures
in the presence of phosphoric acid, H3PO4, catalyst.
Experiment 1.6
Preparation  of  Ethanol  by  Fermentation
Objective: To prepare ethanol from sugar.
Materials required: Conical flask, glass rod, distillation flask, condenser, spatula,
thermometer, watch glass, Bunsen burner, beaker, stopper and delivery tube.
Sugar, ammonium phosphate or ammonium sulphate, yeast, Ca(OH)2.
Procedure:
1. Take 50 mL of distilled water in a conical flask, add 15 g of sugar to it and stir. Add
about 1 gram of yeast and a small amount of ammonium phosphate or ammonium
sulphate to the solution.  Arrange the set up, as shown below, and let the flask
stand for three days at a warm place.
Figure 1.13   The Fermentation of Sugar.
67
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Observations and analysis:
a What is the purpose of adding yeast to the solution?
b Why  do  we  add  ammonium  phosphate  or  ammonium  sulphate  to  the
sugar solution?
c What happened to the calcium hydroxide solution at the end of the first or
second day? Which gas is produced?
d What is the smell of the solution in the flask after three days?
e What has happened in the flask containing the sugar solution as it stood for
three days?
2. After three days, filter the solution, and arrange the set up as in Figure 1.14. Pour   20
mL of the filtrate in a distilling flask, heat the solution, and collect the liquid in a
receiver.
Thermometer
Rubber
stopper
Bunsen
burner
Condenser
Water outlet
Fermented
sugar solution
Water inlet
Conical
flask
Ethanol
Figure 1.14   Separation of ethanol by distillation.
Points to observe:
a Observe the colour and identify the smell of the distillate.
b Pour a small amount of the distillate on a watch glass, strike a match and bring the
flame close to the distillate. Does it catch fire?
Write complete laboratory report on this experiment and submit to your teacher.
68
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
Properties  and  Uses  of  Ethanol
Ethanol is a colourless liquid with a pleasant smell and a burning taste. It boils at 78.3°C and
freezes at –117°C. It is inflammable and burns with a blue flame. It is miscible with water in all
proportions, non-poisonous and has an intoxicating effect. It is a hypnotic (sleep producer).
Ethanol is a constituent of all alcoholic beverages. It is a good solvent for many organic
compounds that are insoluble in water, such as paints, dyes, perfumes etc. It is also used as
a fuel for cars and spirit lamps, and to make denatured alcohol which is a mixture of
ethanol and other poisonous substance that has been added to make the alcohol unfit for
drinking. For example, methylated spirit is a mixture of 95% ethanol and 5% methanol.
• Currently, Ethiopia uses 5% ethanol with 95% benzene as fuel for cars.
1.6.5    Chemical  Properties  of  Alcohols
Activity 1.30
Why  alcoholic  beverages  such  as  “Tela”,  “Tej”,  beer  and  wine  turn  sour  if  they  are  not
properly stored? Which reaction of alcohols is responsible for this phenomenon? Write a
chemical equation to support your answer.  Discuss with your group and present it to the
class.
What types of reactions do alcohols undergo? Alcohols contain a hydrocarbon group and
a functional group (–OH). Which part of alcohols is responsible for most of their chemical
reactions?
Reactions of alcohols may involve the cleavage of the oxygen hydrogen bond (— O — H) or
the carbon-oxygen bond (— C — O).
The reactions of alcohols involving the –O–H bond cleavage are:
a Alcohols react with strongly electropositive metals like Na, K and Ca to form
alkoxides and liberating H2 gas.
General reaction:
Example
69
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Experiment 1.7
Reactions of Alcohols with Active Metals
Objective: To observe the reaction of alcohols with sodium and magnesium.
Materials required: Ethanol, sodium and magnesium metal. Test tubes, test tube holder,
test tube rack, measuring cylinder, Bunsen burner, scissors or knife.
Procedure:
Take two test tubes and add 2-5 mL of ethanol to each of the test tubes. Cut a very
small piece of sodium with a knife and drop it into the first test tube. Take magnesium
ribbon and drop it in the second test tube.
Observations and analysis:
1. What do you observe:
a in the 1st test tube?
2.
3.
b in the 2nd test tube?
Is there an evolution of gas? What do you think this gas is?
If no reaction occurs in any of the test tubes, heat the mixture gently using a Bunsen
burner and write your observation.
4. Which bond of the alcohol is broken in the reaction?
5. Write a general reaction for such reactions?
6. What type of metals react in this manner?
b Oxidation of alcohols: The oxidation products of alcohols depend on the type of
alcohol and the nature of oxidizing agents. Oxidation of alcohols is a very important
method for the production of other oxygen-containing compounds of hydrocarbons,
such as aldehydes, ketones and carboxylic acids.
i) Oxidation of primary alcohols in the presence of mild oxidizing agents yields
aldehydes.
General reaction:
Example
70
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
Strong oxidizing agents, such as acidified KMnO4 or K2Cr2O7 and CrO3 in
H2SO4, oxidize primary alcohol first to aldehydes and then to carboxylic acids.
It is difficult to stop the reaction at the aldehyde stage.
Example
Note that aldehydes are represented by the general structural formula
or
RCHO, where R is an alkyl group. In the case of methanal R = H.  For naming aldehydes,
use  the  suffix  -al  to  replace  the  terminal  -e  in  the  corresponding
alkane name.   The suffix “-al” indicates the functional group –CHO. The names
and condensed structures of the first six aldehydes are given in Table 1.11.
Table 1.11   Condensed structures and IUPAC names of some aldehydes.
Molecular formula of
aldehyde
Structure of aldehyde
IUPAC name
CH2O
C2H4O
C3H6O
C4H8O
C5H10O
C6H12O
HCHO
CH3CHO
CH3CH2CHO
CH3(CH2)2CHO
CH3(CH2)3CHO
CH3(CH2)4CHO
Methanal
Ethanal
Propanal
Butanal
Pentanal
Hexanal
ii) Oxidation of secondary alcohols yields ketones.
General reaction:
71
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Example
The  general  structural  formula  of  ketones  is:
or  RCOR’  where  R
and  R’  may  be  same  or  different.      The  IUPAC  names  of  ketones  are  obtained
by  using  the  suffix  -one  to  replace  the  terminal  -e  in  the  corresponding  alkane
name.    The  suffix  ‘-one’  indicates  the  functional  group.  Unlike  aldehydes,  the
position of the functional group must be indicated in the name of higher ketones.
To do so, the longest chain containing the functional group is chosen as a parent
structure and then the carbon atoms of the chain are numbered starting from the
end closer to the carbonyl group.
Examples
iii)Tertiary alcohols and ketones are generally resistant to oxidation. However,
they can undergo oxidation under drastic conditions to form a mixture of
carboxylic acids.
72
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
Examples
CH3
H C
3
— C — O
H
[O]
H CCOOH + 2HCOOH
3
CH3
3°alcohol
O
H C
3
CH
3
— C —
Propanone
(ketone)
Ethanoic acid
Methanoic acid
[O]
3
CH COOH + HCOOH
Ethanoic
Methanoic
acid
acid
The  general  structural  formula  of  carboxylic  acids  is
or  simply
R– COOH where R – is an alkyl group or hydrogen in case of the first member of  the
carboxylic  acid  homologous  series.  The  IUPAC  names  of  carboxylic  acids
are  derived  by  replacing  the  final -e  of  the  corresponding  alkane  with -oic  acid.
The suffix ‘-oic acid’ representing the functional group –COOH.  The molecular formulas,
condensed structure and IUPAC names of the first six carboxylic acids are shown in
the Table 1.12.
Table 1.12   IUPAC names, formulas and condensed structure of some carboxylic acids.
Formula of carboxylic acid
Condensed structure
IUPAC name of the acid
HCOOH
CH3COOH
C2H5COOH
C3H7COOH
C4H9COOH
C5H11COOH
Esterification
HCOOH
CH3COOH
CH3CH2COOH
CH3 – (CH2)2 COOH
CH3 – (CH2)3 – COOH
CH3 – (CH2)4 – COOH
Methanoic acid
Ethanoic acid
Propanoic acid
Butanoic acid
Pentanoic acid
Hexanoic acid
Experiment 1.8
The reaction of alcohols and organic acids
Objective: To investigate the reaction of  ethanol and ethanoic acid.
Material required: Ethanol, ethanoic acid, concentrated sulphuric acid, test tube, test
tube holder, Bunsen burner, beaker, water and glass rod.
73
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Procedure:
1. Pour 2 mL of ethanol and 4 mL of acetic acid in a test tube. Add a few drops of
concentrated suphuric acid to the mixture of the alcohol and acid.
2. Hold the test tube containing the mixture with a test tube  holder and heat it gently
from three to five minutes. Allow the contents to cool, add it to a beaker half-filled
with water. Stir the mixture and smell the product.
Observations and analysis:
1. What smell did you recognize? What do you think is the origin of this smell?
2. Write a balanced chemical equation to show what has happened on heating the
mixture of ethanol and ethanioic acid?
3. What is the purpose of adding few drops of concentrated sulphuric acid to the
mixture of the alcohol and acid ?
Write a laboratory report in groups and present to the class.
c Carboxylic acids react with alcohols to form esters. This reaction is known as
esterification.
General reaction:
Example
The general structural formula of esters is:
or simply RCOOR¢ where R and R¢
are alkyl groups. In some cases, R can be a hydrogen atom. In the nomenclature of esters
they are considered as derivatives of both carboxylic acids and alcohols.
74
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
Esters are named first by naming the alkyl group derived from the alcohol followed by the
name of the acid changing the suffix “-ic acid” to “-ate”.
Examples
The reactions of alcohols involving the – C – O bond cleavage include:
a Dehydration of alcohols: Heating alcohols in the presence of dehydrating agents, like
concentrated H2SO4, yield alkenes.
General reaction:
Example
75
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
The overall tendency of alcohols to undergo dehydration is in the following order:
b Reactions of alcohols with hydrogen halides produce alkyl halides:
General reaction:
Example
Activity 1.31
1. Write the general structural formulas for aldehydes and ketones.
2. What structural difference do you see between aldehydes and ketones?
3. Write the general structural formulas for carboxylic acids and esters.
Discuss with your group and present it to the class.
Exercise 1.15
1. Which functional group characterizes alcohols?
2. What is the basis for the classification of alcohols?
3. What is the general formula of alcohols?
4. Classify the following alcohols as primary, secondary and tertiary alcohols:
76
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
5. Write IUPAC name for each of the following alcohols:
6. What causes the boiling points of alcohols to be higher than hydrocarbons of similar
molecular mass?
7. Complete the following chemical reactions:
a CH3I   +   NaOH  Æ
b CH3CH2COOCH2CH3   +   KOH  Æ
8. What is the functional group of aldehydes?
9. What is the functional group of ketones?
10. What suffixes are used in their IUPAC names to indicate the functional group of
aldehydes and ketones respectively?
77
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
11 What functional group characterizes carboxylic acids?
12 Complete the following chemical reactions:
CH CH CH OH
2
2
3
[O]
H
H
H C — C — C — CH
3
3
[O]
H
OH
a
b
c
CH CH COOH + CH CH OH
3
2
2
3
H+
1.7    INDUSTRIAL  AND  AGRICULTURAL  APPLICATIONS  OF
ORGANIC  COMPOUNDS
Competencies
After completing the section, you will be able to:
• discuss the uses of organic compounds in the manufacture of beverages;
• discuss the uses of organic compounds in the manufacture of pharmaceuticals;
• discuss the uses of organic compounds in the manufacture of soaps and detergents;
• discuss the uses of organic compounds in the manufacture of dry cleaning agents;
• discuss the uses of organic compounds in the manufacture of fuels;
•
conduct an experiment to prepare soap from naturally existing esters;
• discuss the uses of organic chemicals in the manufacture of pesticides and herbicides;
• discuss the importance and manufacture of urea.
Activity 1.32
1. What are the major application areas of organic compounds?
2. Do you know substances that are used in the preparation of soaps and detergents? If
yes  name  them?
3. Do you know substances (chemicals) that are used in dry cleaning?
4. What agricultural applications of organic compounds do you know?
Share your ideas with your group.
78
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
Industrial  application
Organic chemicals are used for the manufacturing of a large number of industrial products
that have a variety of uses. Some of these products include alcoholic beverages,
pharmaceuticals, soaps and detergents etc.
A.    Alcoholic  beverages
All alcoholic beverages commonly contain the alcohol known as ethanol. The ethanol
content of all alcoholic beverages is not the same. Some beverages contain small
concentrations of ethanol while others contain higher concentrations. These alcoholic
beverages can be either undistilled or distilled. The undistilled alcoholic beverages include
beer, wine, “Tella”, ‘Tej’ etc while ouzo, gin, brandy, whisky, ‘Katikalla’, and vodka are
among the distilled alcoholic beverages.
Beer: Beer is one of the alcoholic beverages widely manufactured and consumed in
most parts of the world. The common raw materials for its production are barley
and hops. Although the types of beer produced in the world are very many, the
average beer has alcohol content between 3-6 percent by volume.
Wine: Wine is another undistilled alcoholic beverage. The most common raw material for
producing wine are grapes. In the production process, grapes are first crushed and
then steamed. The liquid derived from crushing is called must. It then goes to a
fermentation tank where fermentation takes place. Then it passes to a settling tank,
where sediments are allowed to settle, and it proceeds from there to a filter. The
clear liquid is cooled in a refrigerator and is pasteurized as it passes through a flash
pasteurizer. Most wines have an alcohol content varying from 10-15% by volume.
Liquor: Compared with beer and wine, liquor contains higher concentrations of ethanol. It
is not possible to obtain an alcoholic beverage of more than 15% alcohol by volume
through fermentations. This is because the yeast cells are not able to stay alive in
alcohol of higher concentration. To get alcoholic beverages with higher percentages
of alcohol, the alcohol must be separated from the solution by distillation.
The alcoholic beverages like ouzo, gin, cognac, whisky etc, are made by distillation. Different
types of liquors have different alcohol concentrations. In most distilled alcoholic beverages
the percentage ranges between 30-45% alcohol by volume. However, some alcoholic
beverages like Araki are expected to have a higher percentage of ethanol.
B.    Pharmaceuticals
Organic chemicals are used to manufacture drugs and medicines for various uses. These
drugs  and  medicines  are  collectively  known  as  pharmaceuticals.  Some  of  the
pharmaceuticals are:
79
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Analgesics:
These are substances that reduce pain. For example: aspirin and
paracetamol.
Antiseptics:
These are substances that help to prevent infections in wounds by killing
bacteria; for example, acriflavine.
Sedatives:
These are drugs that make a person go to sleep or make them feel calm
and relaxed. Examples of such type of medicines are the barbiturates,
which include several important drugs.
Disinfectants: These are substances used to disinfect something or to kill bacteria; for
example, Dettol.
Sulphonamides: These are medicines used as antibiotics. For example: penicillin.
C.    Soaps  and  Detergents
Organic chemicals are used for the synthesis of soaps and detergents. For example, animal
fat and vegetable oils are used for manufacturing soap. Fats and oils are naturally occurring
esters of glycerol and the higher fatty acids. Long open-chain alcohols and alkyl benzene
sulphonic acid can be used for the production of detergents.
Soaps and detergents are substances used to remove dirt. They are also called surfactants
or surface active agents. This is because they reduce the surface tension of water and
change the surface properties.
Soaps are either sodium or potassium salts of higher (long-chain) carboxylic acids. Soaps
that are sodium salts are called hard soaps and those that are potassium salts are soft
soaps. Soaps are prepared by boiling animal fat or vegetable oil with a base. The reaction
that produces soap is called saponification.
Example
80
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
Detergents contain either a sulfate or a sulphonate group. One example of detergents is
sodium lauryl sulfate, C12 H25 — O — SO2 — ONa. It is prepared first by reacting
dodecyl  (lauryl)  alcohol  with  sulphuric  acid  followed  by  reaction  with
sodium hydroxide.
The reaction equation is:
25
12
C H — OH + HO — SO — OH
2
(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:2)(cid:4)
H SO2
Dodecyl alcohol
(lauryl alcohol)
4
C H — O — SO — OH + H O
2
12
2
25
Lauryl hydrogen
sulphate
C H — O — SO — OH + NaOH
2
25
12
C H — O — SO — ONa + H O
2
25
12
2
Sodium lauryl sulphate
Experiment 1.9
Preparation  of  Soap
Objective: To prepare soap from animal fat or vegetable oil.
Materials required: Animal fat or vegetable oil, NaOH, NaCl, measuring cylinder,
beaker, glass rod, Bunsen burner, filter paper, funnel, conical flask, and
test tube.
Procedure:
Measure 3 mL vegetable oil or 3 g animal fat and place it in a 100 mL beaker; add
3 mL of ethanol and 3 mL of 5M NaOH. Stir the mixture vigorously with a glass
rod and gently heat over a flame for 15 minutes or until it turns in to a paste. When
the paste begins to form, stir very carefully to prevent frothing. After all the paste
has formed, set the beaker on the bench to cool. Add about 15 mL of saturated
NaCl solution to the paste mixture and stir thoroughly. This process is called salting
out the soap. Filter off the soap mixture by suction filtration and wash the collected
soap precipitate with 15 mL of ice water.
Observations and analysis:
a Why do we add ethanol during the preparation?
b What is the purpose of adding saturated NaCl solution to the paste mixture?
Write a laboratory report and present to the class.
81
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
D.    Dry  Cleaning
The qualities of some clothes decrease when they are washed with water using ordinary
soap. In order to avoid this, other chemicals are used for washing purposes that remove
dirt in the same manner as soaps. Dry cleaning refers to the use of different chemicals
that are capable of dissolving grease and other dirt stains in a similar manner as soaps
without the use of water. The most commonly used chemicals in dry cleaning are organic
chemicals such as tetrachloromethane, CCl4; tetrachloroethylene, Cl2C = CCl2; benzene
and gasoline.
E.    Fuels
The term fuel refers to any material that is capable of burning to produce energy, heat and
light. Most fuels occurring in nature are organic compounds. However, some inorganic
substances like hydrogen, producer gas and water gas are also used as gaseous fuels. But,
the most widely used fuels at present are of organic origin. This includes petroleum which
chiefly contains alkanes. Natural gas which is used as a fuel for stoves contains mainly
methane. Gasoline which is used as a fuel for internal combustion engines also contains
alkanes. Paraffin wax which is used to make candles is another fuel to get light energy and
it is a mixture of alkanes containing more than twenty carbon atoms. Besides its use as a
constituent of all alcoholic beverages, ethanol can also be used as a fuel for internal
combustion engines. At present, it is one of the substances that we can rely on for use as a
fuel for automobiles. The use of ethanol as a fuel is now practiced in our country by mixing
it with petrol. Ethanol and other plant seed oils can be classified as bio fuels.
Agricultural  Applications
Organic compounds also play an important role in agriculture, specially to increase crop
productivity by controlling the damages caused by insects, rodents, fungi, birds and weeds.
So, organic chemicals can be used in the manufacture of pesticides and herbicides.
What is the distinction between herbicides and pesticides?
Pesticides are the chemicals used for controlling the damage that can be caused by fungi,
insects and other pests that attack crops. Among the pesticides, Bordeaux mixture is used
as fungicide. Other chemicals like DDT, aldrine, dieldrine, malathion are used as insecticides.
Herbicides are the chemicals that are applied on agricultural lands to remove unwanted
plants or weeds. Some examples of compounds that are used as herbicides include paraquat,
diquat, ammonium sulphamate, ammonium glyphosinate, sodium chlorate etc.
Fertilizers: In order to increase crop productivity we use either synthetic or natural
fertilizers. Synthetic fertilizers are grouped into three classes as nitrogen, potash and
phosphate fertilizers. Nitrogen is one of the essential plant nutrients. It is absorbed by
plants in the form of nitrate ion, NO–
3 . Nitrogen enables green plants to synthesize amino
acids and proteins, and it is also a constituent of DNA molecules. To provide nitrogen for
82
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
plants, nitrogen-containing fertilizers are usually added to the soil. These include, ammonium
salts like NH4Cl, (NH4)2SO4; nitrates like KNO3 and urea. Urea is one of the most important
nitrogen fertilizers. It is a component of urine. On an industrial scale, urea is manufactured
by the dehydration of ammonium carbamate:
It can also be prepared by direct combination of ammonia and carbon dioxide at
180°C and pressure of about 140 atm.
Check list
Key  terms  of  the  unit
addition reaction
•
alcohol
•
aldehyde
•
alkane
•
alkene
•
alkyl halide
•
alkyl radicals
•
alkynes
•
• benzene
• biogas
carboxylic acid
•
chain isomerism
•
cracking
•
crude oil
•
cycloalkanes
•
cycloalkene
•
• decarboxylation
• dehydrohalogenation
• destructive distillation
• detergents
elimination reaction
•
ester
•
fermentation
•
fertilizer
•
functional group
•
• geometrical isomerism
• halogenation
• hedrohalogenation
• herbicide
• homologous series
• hydrogenation
inorganic compound
•
isomers
•
• ketone
lifeforce theory
•
• Markovnikov’s rule
• natural gas
• nitration
• organic compound
• pesticide
• petroleum
• pharmaceuticals
• polymerization
• position isomerism
resonance structure
•
saturated hydrocarbons
•
soaps
•
substitution reaction
•
sulphonation
•
• unsaturated hydrocarbons
• Wurtz reaction
83
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Unit  Summa
Unit  Summa
Unit  Summa
Unit  Summa
Unit  Summa
Unit Summary
• The  “life  force”  theory  states  that  living  organisms  (plants  and  animals)
have a special life force which helps them to synthesize organic compounds
and  that  organic  compounds  cannot  be  synthesized  artificially  by  man  in  the
laboratory.
• Organic chemistry is the study of carbon compounds including natural and
synthetic  ones.
• Organic  compounds  are  classified  based  on  the  functional  group  they
contain in their molecules.
• The  functional  group  is  a  part  of  a  molecule  that  determines  the  chemical
and  physical  properties  of  a  compound.
• Hydrocarbons  are  compounds  composed  of  carbon  and  hydrogen  atoms
only.
• Saturated  hydrocarbons  contain  only  single  bonds  between  carbon  atoms
• Unsaturated hydrocarbons are those containing one or more double or triple
bonds  between  carbon  atoms.
• A  homologous  series  is  a  group  of  compounds  in  which  each  member  of
the  group  differs  from  the  next  member  by  –CH2–  group.
• Alkanes are saturated hydrocarbons represented by the general formula CnH2n+2.
Alkanes  are  named  by  using  prefixes  that  indicate  the  number  of  carbon
atoms  and  the  suffix  ‘-ane’.
•
Isomerism  is  the  existence  of  two  or  more  compounds  with  the  same
molecular formula but different structures. These compounds are called isomers.
• Alkenes are unsaturated hydrocarbons containing a carbon-carbon double
bond as their functional group. Their general formula is CnH2n. The suffix
‘-ene’ in their names indicates the presence of a carbon-carbon double bond.
• Alkynes are unsaturated hydrocarbons containing a carbon - carbon triple
bond as their functional group. They are represented by the general formula
CnH2n-2.  The  suffix  ‘-yne’  indicates  the  carbon-carbon  triple  bond.
• Alkenes  and  alkynes  undergo  mainly  addition  reactions  while  alkanes
undergo substitution reactions.
• Aromatic hydrocarbons are compounds containing benzene rings. Benzene
is the simplest aromatic hydrocarbon.
• Benzene mainly undergoes substitution reactions.
• The natural sources of hydrocarbons are crude oil, natural gas and coal.
84
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
• Crude oil is a complex mixture of hydrocarbons, mainly alkanes, and also
contain cycloalkanes and aromatics.
• Crude oil is separated into a number of useful fractions by fractional distillation.
• Alcohols  are  compounds  containing  the  hydroxyl  (–OH)  group  as  their
functional  group  and  represented  by  the  general  formula  CnH2n+1OH.
• Alcohols  are  classified  depending  on  the  number  of  hydroxyl  groups  they
contain as monohydric, dihydric and trihydric alcohols.
• Monohydric  alcohols  are  classified  as  primary  (1°),  secondary  (2°)  and
tertiary alcohols (3°).
• The names of alcohols contain the suffix ‘-ol’ which indicates the presence
of –OH group in the molecule.
• Primary alcohols oxidize to give aldehydes and then carboxylic acids, and
secondary  alcohols  yield  ketones  on  oxidation.
• Organic chemicals have industrial applications such as in the production
of alcoholic beverages and pharmaceuticals.
• Organic chemicals are also used in the production of fertilizers, pesticides
and weed killers for agricultural uses.
• Organic  chemicals  are  also  used  as  fuels,  and  to  produce  soaps  and
detergents  and  also  for  dry  cleaning.
REVIEW  EXERCISE  ON  UNIT  1
Part  I:    Nomenclature  based  problems
1. Give the IUPAC names of the following compounds:
Br H
a
H C — C — C — CH — CH — C — CH
3
2
2
3
H
H CH3
CH3
CH2
CH3
b
H C — C — C — C C — CH
3
CH2
CH3
3
H
CH3
85
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
CH3
CH2
H
C — CH — C — CH
3
CH3
Br
H
c
H C — C
3
CH3 H
H
d
H C — C — C — C — CH
3
3
Br
CH3
H C — CH
3
2
e
H C — C
3
H
CH3 Cl
C — C — C — CH
3
CH3
CH3
H
f
H
Cl
H C — C — C — C — CH
3
3
H — C
CH3
H
CH3
g
H
CH3 CH3
H C — C — C — C — CH
3
3
OH
CH3
CH2
CH3
CH3
H
CH2
h
H C — C — C — CH
3
3
CH2
H
CH OH2
2. Write the structural formulas of the following compounds:
a 3-bromo-2-chlorohex-1-ene
86
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
b 4-ethyl-2,2,3-trimethylhexane
c 2-methyl-2-butanol
3. Complete the following chemical equations:
a
b
c
d
e
f
g
h
4. Complete the following reaction equations:
a
b
c
d
e
f
g
h
87
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Part  II:    Multiple  choice  Type  Questions
5. Which of the following hydrocarbons does not belong to the homologous series
of alkanes?
a C3H8
b C8H18
c C6H10
d C10H22
6. Which of the following alkanes is a liquid at room temperature?
a CH4
b C10H22
c C4H10
d C3H8
7. The hydrocarbon used as a fuel in an oxyacetylene torch is:
a C2H2
b C2H4
c C4H10
d CH4
8. The general formula that represents the olefin homologous series is:
d CnH2n
c CnH2n–2
b CnH2n+2
9. The most common reaction that alkenes undergo is:
a CnH2n+1
a elimination
b substitution
c addition
d decomposition
10. Benzene is an unsaturated hydrocarbon; it mainly undergoes:
a addition
b elimination
c polymerization d substitution
11. Which of the following compounds is an alkene?
a H3C  —  CH2  —  CH3
c HC  ∫∫  C  —  CH3
b H2C  =  CH  —  CH3
d CH3  —  CH2  —  CH2  —  OH
12. Which of the following compounds is a ketone?
a
c
b
d
13. Which of the following classes of hydrocarbons is the most reactive?
a Alkynes
c Alkenes
b Alkanes
d Aromatic hydrocarbons
14. The  compounds  CH3OH  and  CH3COOH  react  in  the  presence  of  an  acid
catalyst to form:
a a carboxylic acid
c a ketone
b an aldehyde
d an ester
15. Which hydrocarbon is the main constituent of natural gas and biogas?
a C4H10
c C2H6
88
b CH4
d C6H14
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
16. During the fractional distillation of crude oil, the process of cracking is carried
out to:
a separate the crude oil into different fractions
b vaporize the liquid components
c maximize the output of petrol or gasoline
d separate alkanes from alkenes
17. Ethyne decolorizes Br2 in CCl4. This is due to the formation of:
b 1,1,2,2-dibromoethene
a 1,1-dibromoethane
c 1,2-dibromoethane
d 1,1,2,2-dibromoethane
18. The following reaction can be classified as:
CH4        +        Br2    Æ    CH3Br        +        HBr
a an addition reaction
b an elimination reaction
c a substitution reaction
d a saponification reaction
19. Which one of the following substance is not used in dry cleaning?
a CCl4
c C6H6
b Cl2C == CCl2
d CH3COOH
20. The compound with the structure
is a:
a secondary alcohol
c carboxylic acid
b trihydric alcohol
d dihydric alcohol
21. Which of the following alcohols is the easiest to dehydrate?
a
c
b
d
89
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
22. Alcohols that yield ketones on oxidation are classified as:
a primary alcohols
c dihydric alcohols
b secondary alcohols
d trihydric alcohols
23. The first organic compound was synthesized in the laboratory by:
a Friedrich Wohler
c John Dalton
b A. Kekule
d Wurtz
Part  III:      Which  of  the  following  statements  are  true?
24.
a A weed killer is a pesticide.
b Carbon tetrachloride is used in dry cleaning.
c Antiseptics are sleep inducing drugs.
d ‘Tella’ is a distilled alcoholic beverage.
e Soaps and detergents are surfactants.
f Alkanes easily undergo addition reactions.
g Benzene burns with a sooty flame.
h Biogas mainly contains n-butane.
90
T
I
N
2U
Important Inorganic
Compounds
Unit  Outcomes
After  completing  this  unit,  you  will  be  able  to:
(cid:40) understand  the  classification  of  inorganic  compounds  on  the  basis  of  their
composition and/or their chemistry;
(cid:40) know  the  types  of  oxides  and  their  chemical  properties;
(cid:40) understand  the  Arrhenius,  Brønsted-Lowry  and  Lewis  concepts  of  acids  and
bases;
(cid:40) understand  the  classification  of  acids  and  salts;
(cid:40) know  the  general  properties,  preparations  and  uses  of  common  acids,  bases
and salts;
(cid:40) understand the differences between strong and weak acids/bases, and concentrated
and dilute acids/bases;
(cid:40) recognize the corrosive nature of acids and bases, and exercise the necessary
precautions in handling and using them;
(cid:40) develop skills for identifying acidic, basic and neutral compounds;
(cid:40) develop skills in calculating, pH, pOH, H+ ion and OH– ion concentration of
a solution;
(cid:40) know  essential  plant  nutrients,  fertilizers  and  pesticides;  and
(cid:40) demonstrate  scientific  inquiry  skill:  observing,  classifying,  comparing  and
contrasting, inferring, predicting, communicating, measuring, asking questions,
interpreting data, drawing conclusion, applying concepts, relating cause and
effect  and  problem  solving.
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
MAIN  CONTENTS
2.1
Introduction
2.2 Oxides
2.3 Acids
2.4 Bases
2.5
Salts
– Summary
– Review Exercise
2.1    INTRODUCTION
Competencies
By  completing  this  section,  you  will  be  able  to:
• define inorganic compounds; and
•
classify inorganic compounds as oxides, acids, bases and salts.
Activity 2.1
In the laboratory, take samples of different compounds and classify them as organic and
inorganic. When  these  compounds  are  burnt  in  air,  it  has  been  found  that  most  organic
compounds burn when heated in air, but most inorganic compounds just melt or vaporize;
why? Discuss your observations in groups and share your opinion with the class.
Inorganic compounds are the compounds consisting of mineral constituents of the earth
or generally found in non-living things. The term inorganic compound refers to all
compounds that do not contain carbon. Although, carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide,
carbonates and hydrogen carbonates are carbon-containing compounds, which are
classified as inorganic compounds. Inorganic compounds are mostly found in nature as
silicates, oxides, carbonates, sulphides, sulphates, chlorides and nitrates, etc.
There are different ways for the classification of inorganic compounds. They can be
classified on the bases of their composition. For example; they can be classified on
the basis of the:
i) metal they contain such as copper compounds, aluminium compounds, etc.
92
IMPORTANT INOGANIC COMPOUNDS (UNIT 2)
ii) non-metal they contain such as sulphur compounds, nitrogen compounds, etc.
iii) group they contain such as sulphates, nitrates, carbonates, etc.
This unit emphasizes on the four groups of inorganic chemicals namely oxides, acids,
bases and salts.
Exercise 2.1
1. List some inorganic compounds with which you are familiar.
2. Which branch of chemistry is concerned with the study of all elements?
2.2    OXIDES
Competencies
After  Completing  this  section,  you  will  be  able  to:
• define oxides;
•
classify oxides as acidic, basic, amphoteric, neutral and peroxides;
• define acidic oxides and give examples;
•
explain the chemical properties of acidic oxides;
• define basic oxides and give examples;
•
•
•
explain the chemical properties of basic oxides;
conduct experiments to distinguish acidic oxides from basic oxides;
compare and  contrast acidic and basic oxides;
• define amphoteric oxides and give examples;
•
explain the chemical properties of amphoteric oxides;
• discuss the salt forming nature of acidic, basic and amphoteric oxides;
• define neutral oxides and give examples;
• define peroxides and give examples;
•
•
explain the chemical properties of peroxides; and
conduct an experiment to distinguish peroxides from other oxides.
What are oxides? Oxygen reacts directly with almost all elements except the noble
gases and inactive metals like gold, platinum, and palladium. Such compounds of oxygen
are called oxides. Oxides are binary compounds containing oxygen and any other
element (metal, non-metal or metalloid). Binary compounds are those consisting of
93
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
only two elements. Examples of oxides are calcium oxide, CaO, aluminium oxide,
Al2O3, sulphur dioxide, SO2, and carbon monoxide, CO.
The classification of oxides into different groups is based on their chemical behaviour;
they are classified as:
• Acidic oxides
• Basic oxides
• Amphoteric oxides
• Neutral oxides, and
• Peroxides
Exercise 2.2
Decide whether the following compounds are oxides or not:
a Na2O
b KOH
c Ga2O3
d P4O6
e N2O4
f H2O
g Na2CO3
h KNO3
i H2SO4
Activity 2.2
1. The oxides, CO2, N2O5, P4O10, SO2 are acidic oxides.
a Are these oxides formed by the combination of oxygen with
i)        metals          ii)      non-metals            or          iii)        metalloids?
b What general conclusion can you draw about the composition of acidic oxides?
2. The  presence  of  CO2  is  confirmed  by  reacting  CO2  with  lime  water.
a What  is  lime  water?  Is  it  a  base  or  an  acid?
b Write a balanced chemical equation for the above reaction.
c What type of oxides react with bases?
Discuss in your group and present your findings to the class.
A    Acidic  Oxides
Acidic oxides are the oxides formed by the chemical combination of oxygen with non-
metals. Thus, acidic oxides are non-metal oxides. These oxides are also called acid
anhydrides, since they form acidic solutions when reacted or dissolved in water. Acid
anhydride means acid without water.
94
IMPORTANT INOGANIC COMPOUNDS (UNIT 2)
Generally speaking, acidic oxides are non-metal oxides. Examples of acidic oxides
include  carbon  dioxide,  CO2,  nitrogen  dioxide,  NO2,  and  sulphur  dioxide,  SO2.
However, it is very important to note that all non-metal oxides are not necessarily
acidic oxides. For example, carbon monoxide, CO, and di-nitrogen monoxide, N2O,
are non-metal oxides, but they are neutral oxides which will be discussed later.
Chemical  Properties  of  Acidic  Oxides
Acidic oxides undergo the following reactions:
1. Acidic oxides (acid anhydrides) dissolve in water to form acidic solution (acid).
Acid anhydride    +    water    Æ    Acid
Examples
CO2
N2O3
SO2
+        H2O Æ        H2CO3  (Carbonic  acid)
+        H2O Æ        2HNO2 (Nitrous  acid)
+        H2O Æ        H2SO3  (Sulphurous  acid)
2. Acidic oxides react with basic or metallic oxides to form salt.
Acidic oxide    +    Basic oxide    Æ    Salt
Examples
CO2
SO3
+        Na2O Æ        Na2CO3
+        CaO Æ        CaSO4
3. Acidic oxides react with bases to form salt and water. This reaction is called
neutralization reaction.
Acidic oxide    +    Base    Æ    Salt    +    Water
SO2
CO2
+
+
Examples
Na2SO3
Li2CO3
Æ
2NaOH Æ
2LiOH
Exercise 2.3
1. List five examples of acidic oxides.
2. Complete and balance the following equations.
a P4O6
+
H2O Æ
+
+
H2O
H2O
95
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
b SO3
c CaO
d Ca(OH)2
e NaOH
+
+
+
+
H2O Æ
CO2 Æ
SO3 Æ
CO2 Æ
B.    Basic  Oxides
Oxides that are composed of metals and oxygen are basic oxides. But, all metal oxides
are not necessarily basic oxides; for example Al2O3 and ZnO are amphoteric oxides,
which will be discussed in part (C).
Oxides of metals that dissolve in water and react with it to form basic or alkaline solutions
are called basic anhydrides. There are metallic oxides which have basic properties but
are insoluble in water. These oxides react with acids to give salt and water.
Example
FeO        +        2HCl        Æ        FeCl2        +        H2O
The oxides of active metals, group IA and heavier members of group IIA, dissolve in
water and readily form bases. The term base is used to describe both soluble and
insoluble basic oxides. Some examples of basic oxides are Li2O, Na2O, K2O, MgO,
CaO,  BaO,  and  CuO.
Chemical  Properties  of  Basic  Oxides
What common reaction do basic oxides undergo? What products do they form
in  their  reactions  with  water,  acidic  oxides  and  acids?
1. Basic oxides dissolve in water to form alkaline solutions. As they dissolve, they
react with water to form the corresponding metal hydroxides.
Basic oxide    +    water    Æ    Base (Alkali)
Examples
Li2O + H2O Æ
CaO  +  H2O Æ
2LiOH
Ca(OH)2
2. Basic oxides react with acidic oxides to form salts.
Basic oxide    +    acidic oxide    Æ    salt
96
IMPORTANT INOGANIC COMPOUNDS (UNIT 2)
Examples
BaO
CaO
+
+
Na2O +
SO3
Æ BaSO4
CO2 Æ CaCO3
CO2 Æ Na2CO3
3. Basic oxides react with acids to form a salt and water.
Basic oxide    +    Acid     Æ    salt    +    water
CaO
CuO
+
+
Example
CaCl2
CuSO4
2HCl
Æ
H2SO4 Æ
+
+
H2O
H2O
1. Complete and balance the following chemical equations:
Exercise 2.4
a K2O
b MgO
c Na2O
d Li2O
+
+
+
+
H2O Æ
H2O Æ
CO2 Æ
SO2 Æ
e BaO
f CuO
+
+
H2SO4 Æ
HCl
Æ
2. Classify the following oxides as basic or acidic:
a MgO
e Cu2O
b BaO
f Fe2O3
c P4O10
g K2O
d N2O5
h SO2
Experiment 2.1
Test  for  Acidity  and  Basicity  of  Oxides
Objective: To identify basic and acidic oxides.
Materials required: Deflagrating spoon, gas jar and gas jar lid, test tubes.  Sulphur,
magnesium or calcium metal, water, universal indicator, litmus paper (blue
and red).
97
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Procedure:
1.    Ignite a small amount of powdered sulphur on a deflagrating spoon and insert
in a gas jar of oxygen. Add 10 mL water after ignition is complete. Cover the
gas  jar  with  a  lid  and  shake.  Take  two  test  tubes  and  pour  5  mL  of  the
solution to each test tube.  Add a few drops of universal indicator solution to
the first test tube and blue litmus paper in the second.
2.
Ignite a small amount of magnesium or calcium metal on a deflagrating spoon and
insert in to a gas jar of oxygen. Add 10 mL water to the ash formed and shake. Take
two test tubes and pour 5 mL of the solution to each of the test tubes. Add a few
drops of universal indicator in the first and red litmus paper to the second test tube.
Observations  and  analysis:
a What compounds are formed by the combustion of sulphur and magnesium or
calcium? Write chemical equations to show the reactions.
b What happens when water is added to the gas jars in which sulphur was burnt?
c What colours are observed by adding drops of universal indicator and blue or
red litmus to the solutions in the test tubes?
d Why does the change in the colour of indicators occur in the various solutions?
Write a laboratory report and submit to your teacher.
Universal indicator and litmus paper serve as indicators. Indicators are substances
used to identify whether a given solution is acidic or basic by showing colour changes.
Table 2.1 shows some common indicators and the colour they develop in acidic and
basic solutions.
Table 2.1   Some common indicators and their colours in acidic and basic solution.
Indicator
Colour  in  aqueous  solution
of acidic oxide
Colour  in  aqueous
solutionof  basic oxide
Universal      Indicator
Yellow – Orange (in weakly acidic)
and red (in strongly acidic)
Blue (in weakly basic) and
purple (in strongly basic)
Litmus
Red
Phenolphthalein
Colourless
Methyl orange
Red
Blue
Pink (red)
Yellow
In addition to their effects on indicators, acidic and basic oxides can be identified by their
chemical properties. Acidic oxides react with bases while basic oxides react with acids.
But acidic oxides do not react with acids and basic oxides do not react with bases.
98
IMPORTANT INOGANIC COMPOUNDS (UNIT 2)
C.    Amphoteric  Oxides
Activity 2.3
1. How would you classify the oxides of period III elements?
2. What trend do you observe in the properties of oxides of the elements in a period as
you go from left to right in the periodic table?
Discuss this in your group and present to the class.
There are oxides which exhibit both acidic and basic properties. These are known as
amphoteric oxides. In their reaction with acids, they behave as bases and, in their
reaction with bases they act as acids. The following reaction shows the amphoteric
behaviour of aluminium oxide, Al2O3.
Amphoteric oxide
Acid
Al2O3 (s)
Amphoteric oxide
Al2O3 (s)
water
3H2O (l)
water
H2O (l)
Æ
2NaOH (aq) Æ
salt
2AlCl3 (aq)
salt
+
2NaAlO2 (aq) +
sodium  aluminate
6HCl (aq)
base
Æ
Æ
+
+
+
+
+
+
Some other examples of amphoteric oxides are ZnO, PbO, PbO2, SnO, and SnO2. It
is also important to realize that hydroxides which react with both acids and bases are
described as amphoteric substances. For example, aluminium hydroxide, Al(OH)3, reacts
with both acids and bases to form salt and water. So, Al(OH)3, is amphoteric in nature.
What is the common characteristic of acidic, basic and amphoteric oxides? Acidic
oxides form salts when reacted with basic oxides and bases. Basic oxides also produce
salts in their reactions with acidic oxides and acids. Amphoteric oxides form salts
when they react with acids and bases. Thus, acidic oxides, basic oxides and amphoteric
oxides are salt-forming oxides.
Exercise 2.5
Write chemical equations to show the amphoteric properties of ZnO and PbO
when they react with:
a HCl
b NaOH
c HNO3
d KOH
99
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Experiment 2.2
Investigating  Amphoteric  Behaviour  of  Oxides
Objective: To observe the amphoteric behaviour of Al2O3.
Materials required:
Spatula,  reagent  bottles,  beakers,  glass  rod, Al2O3,  HCl,  NaOH,  Universal
indicator and water.
Procedure:
1. Prepare solutions by:
a mixing 20 mL concentrated HCl and 80 mL water in one reagent bottle;
b dissolving 8 g NaOH in 100 mL water in another reagent bottle.
c Add universal indicator to the acid and base, and observe the colour change.
2. Take two beakers and place a spatula full of Al2O3 in each of the beakers.
3. Pour the HCl solution (which you prepared) into one of the beakers and NaOH
solution into the other. Stir the mixture with a glass rod.
4. Add universal indicator in the two beakers and observe the colour change.
Observations  and  analysis:
1. Does Al2O3 react with the substances in both solutions?
2. What does the change in colour of the indicator in the mixtures indicate?
3. Write chemical equations to show what has happened?
Write a laboratory report and present to the class.
D.    Neutral  Oxides
Neutral oxides react neither with acids nor with bases to form salt and water. Hence,
neutral oxides do not show basic and acidic properties. Examples of neutral oxides
are  water,  H2O,  carbon  monoxide,  CO,  dinitrogen  monoxide,  N2O,  and  nitrogen
monoxide, NO. Neutral oxides are very few in number.
Activity 2.4
1.
In  a  beauty  saloon  which  chemical  is  used  to  decolorize  hair?  What  is  the  oxidation
number of oxygen in this compound?
100
IMPORTANT INOGANIC COMPOUNDS (UNIT 2)
2.
If  Na2O2  and  CaO2  are  reacted  with  water,  do  you  get  the  same  compound,  which  is
used to decolorize hair? Compare the oxidation number of oxygen in Na2O and MgO
with the oxidation number of the compound used for decolorizing hair.
Discuss your findings in group and present to the class.
E.    Peroxides
In acidic, basic, amphoteric and neutral oxides, the oxidation state of oxygen is –2,
but in peroxides it is –1. In peroxides, the two oxygen atoms are linked to each other
and with atoms of other elements. They contain the peroxide, “– O – O –” link. In
the oxides discussed above, oxygen atoms are linked directly with atoms of other elements.
Some examples of peroxides are hydrogen peroxide, H2O2, sodium peroxide, Na2O2,
calcium peroxide, CaO2, barium peroxide, BaO2, and strontium peroxide, SrO2.
Most peroxides of metals are formed by burning the metals in a sufficient amount of oxygen.
2Na (s)
Ca (s)
+
+
O2 (g)
O2 (g)
Æ
Æ
Na2O2  (s)
CaO2  (s)
Chemical  Properties  of  Peroxides
What chemical properties do the peroxides exhibit? Some of the chemical properties
of peroxides include:
a Peroxides are powerful oxidizing agents; they react with different substances
by losing oxygen.
Examples
4H2O2  (aq) Æ PbSO4  (s)
2KI (aq)  +  H2SO4 (aq)    +    H2O2 (aq)  Æ  I2 (s)  +  K2SO4 (aq)    +    2H2O  (l)
+   4H2O  (l)
PbS (s)
+
b
Peroxides react with aqueous acids to form hydrogen peroxide.
Examples
Na2O2  (s)
CaO2  (s)
+
+
Æ 2NaCl (aq)
2HCl (aq)
H2SO4  (aq) Æ CaSO4  (s)
+
+
H2O2  (aq)
H2O2  (aq)
Hydrogen  Peroxide
The structure of the hydrogen peroxide molecule is:
101
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Hydrogen peroxide decomposes to release oxygen. This reaction is slow but can be
speeded up by the addition of manganese (IV) oxide, MnO2, as a catalyst.
2H2O2 (aq)        Æ        2H2O  (l)        +        O2 (g)
Hydrogen peroxide is a strong oxidizing agent. Its oxidizing power is responsible for
its effectiveness as an antiseptic for mouthwash and cleansing wounds. It is also used
as a bleaching agent. When hydrogen peroxide is added to a coloured dye, the molecule
responsible for the colour will oxidize and so the colour will disappear. For example,
if hydrogen peroxide is added to a black dye (paint) that contains lead sulphide, PbS,
the  black  colour  turns  white.  This  is  due  to  the  oxidation  of  PbS  to  PbSO4.  The
equation for this process is:
PbS  (s)        +        4H2O2        Æ        PbSO4        +        4H2O  (l)
Experiment 2.3
Distinguishing  Peroxides  from  Other  Oxides
Objective: To identify peroxides from other oxides.
Materials required: CaO  or  MgO,  Al2O3  or  ZnO  or  PbO,  Na2O2  or  BaO2,,
P4O10, KI, dilute H2SO4, starch, water, reagent bottle, six beakers, dropper,
and spatula.
Procedure:
1. Take three beakers. In the first beaker, dissolve 20 g KI in water to prepare
a 250 mL solution. Dilute 2 mL concentrated H2SO4 by pouring it in 18 mL
of water in the second beaker. Prepare starch solution in the third beaker by
boiling 1g starch in 100 mL water.
2. Take four beakers and pour 50 mL KI solution to each of them. Acidify the
solutions in each of the beakers by adding 5-10 drops of dilute H2SO4. Add
a  spatula  full  of  CaO  or  MgO  in  the  first,  Al2O3  or  ZnO  or  PbO  in  the
second, Na2O2 or BaO2 in the third and P4O10 in the fourth beaker and then
add about 5 mL starch solution to each of the four beakers.
Observations  and  analysis:
a
In which beaker do you see a colour change?
b What is the cause of the colour change?
c Write a balanced chemical equation for the change?
Write a laboratory report and present to the class.
102
IMPORTANT INOGANIC COMPOUNDS (UNIT 2)
Exercise 2.6
1. Classify the following oxides as acidic, basic, amphoteric, neutral and peroxides:
a K2O
b CO
g MgO
h N2O
i ZnO
j BaO2
c SO2
d Al2O3
k NO
l PbO
m Na2O2
2. Complete and balance the following equations:
e Al2O3
f CaO
a BaO +
+
b SrO
c CO2
d ZnO +
+
P4O10 Æ
SO3
Æ
KOH Æ
H3PO4 Æ
g PbO
h MgO
e CaO
f NO2
n CaO2
o Li2O
p P4O6
+ HNO3 Æ
+ HCl Æ
+ NaOH Æ
+ H2SO4 Æ
3. Which acidic oxide should react with water to form each of the following
4.
d H2SO3
e H3PO4
f H3PO3
acids?
a HNO3
b H2CO3
c H2SO4
Identify the basic anhydrides that react with water to form each of the following
bases:
a Ba(OH)2
b Sr(OH)2
c Mg(OH)2
d LiOH
f CsOH
e KOH
5. How do peroxides differ from other groups of oxides?
6. How can you identify whether an oxide is acidic or basic?
2.3    ACIDS
Competencies
After  completing  this  section,  you  will  be  able  to:
• define acids in terms of Arrhenius, Brønsted-Lowry and Lewis;
103
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
• give examples of acids based on Arrhenius, Brønsted-Lowry and Lewis concepts;
•
classify acids as monoprotic and polyprotic based on the numbers of ionizable
hydrogen atoms;
• group acids as binary and ternary based on the number of elements they contain;
•
explain the general properties of acids;
• define strong and weak acids;
• distinguish between strong and weak acids;
• define concentrated and dilute acids;
• describe the conceptual difference between strong and concentrated acids;
• use the necessary precautions while working with acids;
• define pH and describe the pH scale;
•
identify a given pH labelled solution as acidic, basic or neutral;
• perform activities to determine the pH of some common substances using
universal indicator or a pH-meter;
calculate the pH of a given acidic solution;
calculate the hydrogen ion concentration from the given information;
•
•
• perform activities to investigate some physical properties of acids;
• perform activities to investigate some chemical properties of acids;
•
explain the direct combination of elements, the reaction of acidic oxides with
water, formation of volatile acids from non-volatile acids as the three methods
of preparation of acids;
•
conduct simple experiments to prepare acids in a laboratory; and
• describe the uses of three common laboratory acids.
Activity 2.5
1. How do you describe an acid?
2. Give  some  examples  of  acids  and  bases  that  you  have  encountered  in  your  everyday
life?
3. List as many sour foods as possible which you have ever tasted.
4.
In which form does the hydrogen ion, H+, exist in aqueous solutions?
Discuss with your group and present it to the class.
104
IMPORTANT INOGANIC COMPOUNDS (UNIT 2)
Acids are among the most familiar of all chemical compounds. Acetic acid in vinegar,
citric acid in lemons and other citrus fruits, are among the acids that we encounter
every day. Hydrochloric acid is the acid in gastric juice; it is essential to digestion.
Phosphoric acid gives flavour to many carbonated beverages.
Definitions  of  Acids
a  Arrhenius Definition of Acids
The simplest definition of acids is suggested by Savante Arrhenius, a Swedish Chemist.
Arrhenius defined an acid as a substance that releases hydrogen ion or proton, H+, or
hydronium ion, H3O+, in aqueous solution.
HCl(aq) Æ
or,
HCl(aq)
+
Example
H+(aq)
+
Cl–(aq)
H2O(l)
Æ
H3O+(aq)
+
Cl–(aq)
Some examples of Arrhenius acids are HCl, HNO3, H2SO4, HI, HBr, and HF. For a
substance to be called an Arrhenius acid, it should contain ionizable hydrogen.
Despite its early success and usefulness, the definition of an acid, first proposed by
Arrhenius has some limitations. The Arrhenius definition of acids explains their behaviour
only in aqueous solution. In addition, it does not explain why some substances show
acidic behaviour in the gaseous state and in non-aqueous solutions.
For example, when ammonia and hydrogen chloride gases are brought together, they
react to form ammonium chloride as follows:
NH3 (g)        +        HCl  (g)        Æ        NH4Cl  (s)
In this reaction, the hydrogen chloride provides hydrogen ion (or proton), H+, which
+. But, this happens in the gaseous state not in aqueous
reacts with NH3 to form NH4
solution. Due to the limitations of Arrhenius’ definition, chemists tried to define acids in
a more general way.
Brønsted-Lowry  Definition  of  Acids
A broader and more general definition of acids was provided independently in 1923,
by Johannes Brønsted and Thomas M. Lowry. According to Brønsted-Lowry definition;
an acid is a substance that donates protons, H+, to some other substance.
105
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Examples
HCl (aq)
NH3  (aq)
H3PO4  (aq)
+ H2O (l)
+ H2O (l) (cid:85) NH4
+ 2H2O (l) (cid:85) HPO2–
Æ H3O+ (aq)
+  (aq)
4    (aq)
+ Cl– (aq)
+ OH–  (aq)
+
2H3O+ (aq)
In the above reactions, HCl in the first, H2O in the second and H3PO4 in the third
are Brønsted-Lowry acids because they are proton donors. Here it is very important
to realize that all Arrhenius acids are Brønsted-Lowry acids. However, the reverse
is not true because Brønsted-Lowry acids include substances that are not acids
according to Arrhenius.
Although the Brønsted-Lowry definition of an acid is more general than the definition
proposed  by Arrhenius,  it  still  depends  on  the  transfer  of  protons.  However,  the
presence of acids that are not proton-donors, initiated chemists to search for another
definition of acids.
b  Lewis Definition of Acids
In 1923, the American chemist Gilbert Newton Lewis produced a definition of acid
that extends the concept of acids even further than that of Brønsted-Lowry.
According to Lewis, an acid is a substance that can form a coordinate covalent
bond  by  accepting  an  electron  pair  from  another  substance.  In  other  words,  an
acid is an electron-pair acceptor. Consider the following reactions:
In the above reaction, between BF3 and F–, BF3 acts as a Lewis acid since it accepts
a pair of electrons from F–.
The Lewis definition of an acid is also valid for the Arrhenius concept of an acid.
This is because as the acid releases an hydrogen ion, H+, in aqueous solution, the
released proton or H+ accepts a pair of electrons from a water molecule to form an
hydronium, H3O+ ion.
106
IMPORTANT INOGANIC COMPOUNDS (UNIT 2)
The Lewis definition of an acid is also valid for the Brønsted-Lowry concept of
acids. Since Brønsted-Lowry defined an acid as a proton donor, the donated proton
can be accepted by a molecule or species that has lone pair of electrons. So the
proton,  H+,  is  an  electron  pair  acceptor  and  hence  a  Lewis  acid.  Consider  the
following reaction.
NH3 (g)        +        H2O  (l)        (cid:85)        NH4
+ (aq)        +        OH– (aq)
In this reaction, H2O is a proton donor and hence a Brønsted-Lowry acid. The donated
proton from water to ammonia, accepts a pair of electrons from the nitrogen atom in
NH3 to form NH4
+ as shown below:
The Lewis concept of acids not only includes  H+ as an acid, but also ions or molecules
capable of accepting an electron pair that neither release H+ in aqueous solution nor
donate a proton.
Classification  of  Acids
Activity 2.6
Phosphoric  acid,  H3PO4,  has  three  hydrogen  atoms  and  it  is  a  triprotic  acid.  Acetic  acid,
CH3COOH,  has  four  hydrogen  atoms  and  is  classified  as  a  monoprotic  acid.  Discuss  the
reason in your group and present it to the class.
There are different ways of classifying acids; they can be classified depending on the
number of replaceable (ionizable) hydrogen atom(s) they contain per molecule as
monoprotic or polyprotic acids.
Monoprotic  acids  are  the  acids  containing  only  one  ionizable  (replaceable)
hydrogen  atom  per  molecule  or  those  acids  that  can  furnish  only  one  hydrogen
107
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
ion per molecule in aqueous solution. Common examples of monoprotic acids are
HCl, HNO3, HBr, HI, and CH3COOH. The ionization of a monoprotic acid in aqueous
solution is presented using HCl and HNO3 as specific examples, as shown below:
H+ (aq)
HCl (aq) Æ
HNO3  (aq) Æ          H+ (aq)
+
+
Cl– (aq)
NO3
–  (aq)
Polyprotic acids are those acids containing more than one ionizable (replaceable)
hydrogen ion in aqueous solution. Example of acids in this category includes H2SO4,
H2CO3,  and  H3PO4.
The ionization of polyprotic acids in aqueous solution is shown in the following chemical
equations:
2H+ (aq)
H2SO4  (aq) Æ
H2CO3  (aq) (cid:85) 2H+ (aq)
H3PO4  (aq) (cid:85) 3H+ (aq)
+
+
+
SO4
CO3
PO4
2–  (aq)
2–  (aq)
3–  (aq)
Polyprotic acids which contain two ionizable hydrogen atoms such as H2SO4, H2S,
and H2CO3 are also called diprotic acids;  those containing three ionizable hydrogen
atoms like H3PO4 are called triprotic acids.
Activity 2.7
Ammonia and phosphoric acid have three hydrogen atoms but ammonia does not behave
as triprotic acid. Why? Discuss in your group and present it to the class.
Acids can also be classified depending on the number of their constituent elements as
binary and ternary acids. Binary acids are those acids composed of only two elements.
Examples of binary acids are HCl, HBr, HF, HI, and H2S.
Ternary acids also called oxy-acids are acids composed of three different elements.
They usually contain hydrogen, oxygen and a non-metal. Examples are H2SO4, H2CO3,
HClO4, and H3PO4.
General  Properties  of  Acids
Activity 2.8
Add  a  drop  of  lemon  juice  on  your  tongue  and  try  to  identify  its  taste.  Repeat  your
observation with orange juice. Do the two juices taste bitter or sour? Try to classify them
as acid or base, depending on their taste. Share your observations with the rest of class.
108
IMPORTANT INOGANIC COMPOUNDS (UNIT 2)
Acids  generally  have  the  following  properties:
1. Acids have a sour taste
Aqueous solutions of acids have a sour taste. Lemon juice and orange juice taste
sour due to the presence of citric acid. Citric acid is harmless. However, most
concentrated acids are corrosive and poisonous. So it is strictly forbidden to attempt
to identify such acids by tasting them.
2.  Acids change the colour of indicators
The  common  indicators  available  in  high  school  laboratories  are  litmus,
phenolphthalein, methyl orange or methyl red and universal indicator. The effect of
acids on the colour of indicators is summarized in Table2.1, Section 2.2.
Experiment 2.4
Effect  of  Acids  on  Indicators
Objective: To detect acidity of a solution using indicators.
Materials  required:  Lemon  juice,  dilute  HCl,  dilute  HNO3,  dilute  H2SO4
phenolphthalein, litmus, methyl red, universal indicator, test tubes, test tube rack,
test tube holder, and reagent bottles.
Procedure:
Take four clean test tubes and place some lemon juice in the first, dilute HCl
in the second, dilute HNO3 in the third and dilute H2SO4 in the fourth. Dip a
strip of blue litmus paper into each of the four test tubes and observe. Follow
the same procedure and repeat the experiment until each acid has been tested
by each indicator. Record your observation.
Observations  and  analysis:
What colours have you observed when each indicator was added to each of
the four acid solutions?  Use the following Table to record your observation:
Indicator
Lemon juice dilute HCl dilute HNO3 dilute H2SO4
Colour of indicator in
Phenolphthalein
Litmus
Methyl red
Universal
indicator
Write a laboratory report and present to the class.
109
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
3. Acids react with active metals to form salt and hydrogen gas
Metals like magnesium, zinc, and iron react with dilute acids to form salt and liberate
hydrogen gas.
Acid    +    Active metal    Æ    Salt    +    Hydrogen gas
2HCl
H2SO4
+
+
Zn
Mg
Examples
ZnCl2
MgSO4
Æ
Æ
+
+
H2
H2
Very active metals like sodium, potassium, and calcium react very violently with dilute
acids. The reaction is very dangerous and should not be performed.
Acids reacting with metals do not necessarily produce hydrogen gas. For example,
concentrated nitric acid and hot concentrated sulphuric acid react with copper producing
nitrogen dioxide and sulphur dioxide gases, respectively, instead of hydrogen. This is
because concentrated HNO3 and hot concentrated H2SO4 are oxidizing acids. The
reactions of these acids with copper are given by the following equations:
Cu
Cu
+
+
4HNO3
Æ
2H2SO4 Æ
Cu(NO3)2
CuSO4
+
+
2NO2
SO2
+
+
2H2O
2H2O
Experiment 2.5
Investigating  the  Reactions  of  Metals  with  Dilute  Acids
Objective:  To investigate the reaction between active metals and dilute acids.
Materials required: Dilute H2SO4, dilute HCl, zinc, magnesium and iron, test
tubes, test tube holder, test tube rack, burner, wooden splint, spatula.
Procedure:
Take three test tubes and place a spatula-full of powdered zinc in the first,
powdered magnesium in the second and iron filings in the third. Pour dilute
HCl into each of the test tubes until the metals are completely covered by the
acid. To test the type of gas evolved, cover one of the test tubes with a piece
of cardboard for a few seconds. Bring a burning splint close to the mouth of
the test tube and remove the cardboard.
Repeat the experiment with dilute H2SO4 after placing each of the three metals
in three different test tubes.
110
IMPORTANT INOGANIC COMPOUNDS (UNIT 2)
Observations  and  analysis:
a What does the formation of bubbles indicate?
b What sound do you hear when the burning splint is close to the mouth of
the test tube?
c Which gas is evolved during the reaction?
d Which metal’s reaction with dilute HCl or H2SO4 is the most violent?
Write a laboratory report on your observations and present to the class.
4.  Acids react with carbonates and hydrogen carbonates to form salt, water
and carbon dioxide gas
Acid
Acid
+
+
2HCl
H2SO4
2HNO3
hydrogen carbonate Æ salt + water +
carbon dioxide
carbonate
Æ salt + water +
carbon dioxide
+ MgCO3
+
Examples
Æ MgCl2
Ca(HCO3)2 Æ CaSO4
Na2CO3
Æ 2NaNO3
+
+
+
+
+
H2O
2H2O +
+
H2O
CO2
2CO2
CO2
Experiment 2.6
Reactions  of  Acids  with  Carbonates  and  Hydrogen  Carbonates
Objective: To investigate the reaction between acids and carbonates and bicarbonates.
Materials required: Sodium carbonate, calcium carbonate, calcium or magnesium
or sodium bicarbonate, dilute HCl, dilute H2SO4, dilute HNO3, lime water
(Ca(OH)2 solution) blue and red litmus paper, conical flask, delivery tube,
rubber stopper, beaker.
Procedure:
1. Take three conical flasks and add powdered Na2CO3 in the first, powdered
CaCO3 to the second and powdered sodium bicarbonate to the third. Pour
dilute HCl into each of the three conical flasks until the acid covers the carbonates
and bicarbonate. Hold damp blue litmus paper close to the mouth of the conical
111
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
flasks. Repeat this with damp red litmus paper and record your observations.
Bubble the gas through limewater as shown in Figure 2.1.
Rubber stopper
Delivery tube
Conical flask
Gas bubbles
Dilute H lC
Beaker
Limewater
CaCO3
Figure 2.1   Test for Carbon dioxide.
2. Repeat the experiment using the same carbonates and hydrogencarbonate with
dilute H2SO4 and dilute HNO3.
Observations  and  analysis:
a What does the formation of bubbles in the conical flasks indicate?
b Does the colour of the damp blue litmus paper change when you hold it close
to the mouth of the conical flasks? What about the colour of damp red litmus?
c What happened to the colour of lime water when you bubble the gas through
it? If there was any change, what did it prove?  Write a balanced chemical
equation for the change?
Write a laboratory report on your observation and present to the class.
5.    Concentrated  acids  react  with  sulphites  liberating  sulphur  dioxide  gas
and forming a salt and water
Sulphite    +    Acid    Æ    Sulphur dioxide    +    Salt    +    Water
Na2SO3
CaSO3
+
+
Examples
2HCl
Æ SO2
H2SO4 Æ SO2
+
+
2NaCl
+
CaSO4 +
H2O
H2O
6.   Acids neutralize basic oxides and bases or alkalis to form salt and water
The reaction of acids with basic oxides or bases to form salt and water is called
neutralization reaction.
Acid
+
Basic oxide Æ
Salt
+
Water
112
IMPORTANT INOGANIC COMPOUNDS (UNIT 2)
Examples
MgO
CaO
Base
Æ
Æ
MgCl2
CaSO4
Æ Salt
Examples
2NaOH
KOH
Æ
Æ
Na2SO4
KNO3
+
+
+
+
+
H2O
H2O
Water
2H2O
H2O
2HCl
H2SO4
Acid
H2SO4
HNO3
+
+
+
+
+
Experiment 2.7
Neutralization  Reaction
Objective: Investigate the reaction between acids and bases
Materials required: 1 M HCl, 1 M NaOH, 0.5 M Ca(OH)2, red and blue litmus
papers, four 150 mL beakers, two droppers, stirring rod, two watch glasses.
Procedure:
1. Make 1 M NaOH solution by dissolving 4.0 g NaOH in enough water to
make 100 mL solution.
2. Make a 1 M HCl solution by dissolving 8.3 mL of concentrated HCl in enough
distilled water until the volume of the solution is 100 mL.
3. Dissolve 3.7 g of Ca(OH)2 in enough distilled water to make 100 mL solution.
4. To a 150 mL beaker add 10 mL HCl solution and 9.5 mL NaOH solution and
stir thoroughly and test with blue and red litmus paper. Continue adding NaOH
solution dropwise using a dropper, stirring after each addition and checking
with red and blue litmus until the blue remains blue and the red stays red. Put
2 mL of the neutral solution in a watch glass and allow the water to evaporate
until the next day.
5. To another 150 mL beaker add 10 mL Ca (OH)2 solution and 9.5 mL HCl
solution. Repeat all the steps, which you followed in procedure 4.
113
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Observations  and  analysis:
a
Is there any colour change, when you dip blue and red litmus papers into the
solution of the acid and the base?
b Why is it necessary to add NaOH solution dropwise (one drop at a time) in
procedure 4?
c During this experiment, under what conditions does the blue litmus remain blue
and the red remain red?
d What are the products formed in procedures 4 and 5? Write balanced chemical
equations for the reactions?
Write a laboratory report on your observations and submit to your teacher.
7. Acids are electrolytes   They conduct electricity in aqueous solutions.
Strength  of  Acids  (Strong  and  Weak  Acids)
Activity 2.9
1. Add  a  few  drops  of  citric  acid  solution  and  nitric  acid  separately  on  a  piece  of  waste
cotton cloth; what happens? Based on your observations, can you classify these acids as
weak acid or strong acid?
2. You are allowed to taste some acids like acetic acid (in the form of vinegar), and citric
acid  at  home,  but  you  are  never  allowed  to  taste  any  kind  of  acids  in  the  laboratory.
What is the reason?
Discuss your findings  in your group and present to the class.
Acids can be classified as strong acids and weak acids depending on their degree of
ionization in aqueous solution, i.e., the extent to which the acids dissociate to form
hydrogen or hydronium ions when they dissolve in water. A strong acid is one that
ionizes almost completely in aqueous solution. Examples of strong acids are HClO4,
HI, HBr, HCl, HNO3, and H2SO4. These acids dissociate to a very high extent as
shown below:
HCl (aq)
Æ
HNO3  (aq) Æ
HClO4 (aq) Æ
H+ (aq)
H+ (aq)
H+(aq)
+
+
+
Cl– (aq)
NO3
ClO4
–  (aq)
–  (aq)
A dilute aqueous solution of strong acids contains predominantly the ions derived from
the acids instead of the acid molecules. For example, HCl and HNO3 are almost
completely ionized in water.
114
IMPORTANT INOGANIC COMPOUNDS (UNIT 2)
An acid that releases few hydrogen ions in aqueous solution is a weak acid. The
aqueous  solution  of  a  weak  acid  contains  hydronium  ions,  anions  and  dissolved
molecules of the acid.
Organic acids which contain the acidic carboxyl group –COOH, are generally weak
acids. For example, CH3COOH, ionizes slightly in water to give hydronium ions and
acetate ions, CH3COO–.
CH3COOH  (aq)    +    H2O(l)   (cid:85)    CH3COO–  (aq)  +  H3O+(aq)
Concentrated  and  Diluted  Acids
Activity 2.10
1.
2.
In a solution, if there is 95% H2O and the rest is HCl, what kind of solution is it?
In a car battery, the electrolyte used is 35% of H2SO4. How many percent of it is water?
What do you think about the concentration of the electrolyte?
“Concentrated” and “dilute” are terms used to describe the relative amount of acid in
a given acid solution.
A concentrated acid contains a relatively large amount (percentage) of acid and a
small amount of water. For example, concentrated sulphuric acid is 98% H2SO4 and
2% water. Concentrated acetic acid is 99% acetic acid and 1% water. But, H2SO4 is
a strong acid and CH3COOH a weak acid.
A dilute acid contains a relatively small amount of acid dissolved in large amount of
water. For example, a diluted solution of sulphuric acid may contain 10% H2SO4 and
90%  H2O.
The concentration of an acid is the measure of the number of moles of the acid in one
litre of acid solution and is expressed in mol/L. This unit of concentration is called
Molarity, denoted by M. Mathematically,
Molarity (M) =
Number of moles of the substance dissolved
Volume of solution in litres
Number of moles of the substance =
Mass of  the substance dissolved in grams
Molar mass of  the substance
For example, the concentration of 98% H2SO4 is about 18 mol/L. If one litre of this
acid is added to 2 litres of water to make 3 litres of solution, the concentration will
115
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
become 6 mol/L. The new solution obtained is a dilute solution of H2SO4. Thus,
concentrated acids contains a greater number of moles of acid while dilute acids contain
less number of moles of the acid per litre of the acid solution.
Example
How many moles of HCl are present in 0.8 L of a 0.5 M HCl solution?
Solution:
M  =
n
V
ﬁ  n  =  MV  =  0.5  M  ×  0.8  L  =  0.4  mol  HCl,  where  M  is  the
molarity, n, the number of moles and V, volume of solution in litre.
An important aspect of the property of acids is that they conduct electricity in aqueous
solutions, i.e., the acids are electrolytes. The extent of conduction of electricity depends
on the amount of ions present in the solution. Thus, aqueous solutions of strong acids
are better conductors of electricity than the same concentrations of weak acid solutions.
The conduction of electricity through acid solution is also used as one means of
identification between weak and strong acids.
Experiment 2.8
Can  Aqueous  Acid  Solution  Conduct  Electricity?
Objectives: To investigate the conductivity of acids
Materials required: 1 M HCl, 1 M HNO3, 1 M CH3COOH, three 150 mL beakers,
two graphite electrodes, insulated electric wires, two dry cells, and bulb
Procedure:
Take  about  100  mL  of  1  M  HCl  in  the  first  beaker,  the  same  volume  and
concentration of HNO3 and CH3COOH in the second and third beakers respectively.
Arrange the set up as shown in Figure 2.2. First test the conduction of electricity
through HCl solution by inserting the two graphite electrodes. See whether the
bulb glows or not. Is the light bright or dim? Record your observation. Repeat
the same activity with HNO3 and CH3COOH. Rinse the electrodes after use
in each of the acid solutions. Compare the intensity of light produced with
HNO3  and  CH3COOH.
116
IMPORTANT INOGANIC COMPOUNDS (UNIT 2)
Bulb
+
–
Battery
Switch
Anode (+)
Cathode (–)
HCl solution
Figure 2.2   Conductivity of acid solution.
Observations  and  analysis:
a
In which of the acid solutions does the bulb produce:
i)  bright light?
ii) dim light?
b What conclusions can you draw from your observations?
Write a laboratory report on your observations and present to the class.
Precautions  when  Handling  Acids
Concentrated acids are extremely corrosive and poisonous. They can destroy metals
and clothes; produce a chemical burn on skin or inside the body. If taken internally
they can be fatal. So acids must be handled with care.
The following precautions are helpful while working with acids:
a Wear goggles, gloves and a laboratory coat.
b If a concentrated acid is spilled or splashed on your body, first wash the affected
part with running water and then with 10%  Na2CO3 solution.
c If concentrated acid is spilled on to cloth, immediately wash it with running water.
d If an acid enters your eye, wash with water repeatedly and then consult a doctor.
117
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
e If corrosive acids are swallowed, administer weak bases such as Mg(OH)2 or
Al(OH)3.
f Use bellows to pipette acid instead of sucking using yours lips.
g To dilute concentrated acids, pour the concentrated acid in to water and not
water in to the acid.
pH  and  pH  scale
Expressing acidity as the concentration of H3O+ can be cumbersome because the
values tend to be very small. A more convenient quantity called pH is used to indicate
the  concentration  of  H3O+.  The  letter  pH  stands  for  the  French  words  pouvoir
hydrogène, meaning “hydrogen power”.
pH is defined as the negative logarithm of the hydrogen ion concentration (hydronium
ion concentration). The mathematical expression is:
pH = log
1
]H +
[
= – log [H+]
The square bracket [ ] means concentration in mol/L.
To calculate the hydrogen ion concentration of a solution from its pH we can proceed
as follows.
[H+] = antilog (–pH) = 10–pH
The pH of a solution can be measured using universal indicator solution, pH indicator
paper or a pH-meter. When universal indicator solution or pH indicator papers are
added to an acid solution, they develop different colours depending on the pH of the
solution. So, to identify the pH, we need to compare the colour developed with the
standard colour chart. A pH meter is an electronic device, which reads the pH of a
solution directly. (Figure 2.3).
b
a
Figure 2.3   a) The colour of universal indicator in solutions of pH from 1 to 12,
b) A pH meter with its electrical probe dipped into an orange.
118
IMPORTANT INOGANIC COMPOUNDS (UNIT 2)
Acidity and alkalinity are usually expressed on the pH scale. The range is between 0
and 14.
A neutral solution has a pH value of 7 at 298 K. Acidic solutions have pH values less
than 7. As the pH value decreases the acidity of the solution increases. For example,
if two solutions A and B have pH values of 4 and 6, respectively, then we can conclude
that solution A is more acidic than solution B. The hydrogen ion concentration in
solution A is one hundred times greater than that in B.
The following examples will guide us through how to calculate pH values of solutions.
Calculate the pH of a 0.001 M solution of HCl?
Example
Solution:
HCl is a strong acid and dissociates almost completely.
The dissociation of 0.001 M (0.001 mol/L) of HCl produces 0.001 mol/L of
H+ and 0.001 mol/L of Cl– as follows:
HCl  (aq)        Æ        H+(aq)        +        Cl–  (aq)
0.001 mol/L      0.001mol/L      0.001 mol/L
Thus, [H+] = 0.001 mol/L = 1 × 10–3 M
pH  = –log [H+]  = – log 1 × 10–3 = 3
Example
The hydrogen ion concentration in a dilute solution of vinegar is 4.6 × 10-5 M.
What is the pH of the solution?
Solution:
pH = – log [H+] = – log (4.6 × 10–5) = – (log 4.6 + log 10–5)
=  –  (log  4.6  –  5)  =  –  (0.663  –  5)  =  4.337
119
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Example
The pH of lemon juice was determined to be 3. What is the hydrogen ion
concentration in the lemon juice?
Solution:
pH = – log [H+];
–pH = log [H+]
[H+] = antilog (–pH) = 10–pH = 10–3M
Exercise 2.7
1. The pH of a given solution is 8. What is the hydrogen ion concentration of the
solution?
2. Two solutions A and B have pH values of 2 and 6 respectively. How many
times greater is the hydrogen ion concentration in solution A than that of
solution B?
Experiment 2.9
pH  of  Solutions  of  Common  Substances
Objective: To determine the pH of different substances
Materials required: Lemon juice, vinegar, tonic water, tomato juice, beakers, and
universal indicator solution or pH indicator paper
Procedure:
Take four beakers and place lemon juice in the first, vinegar solution in the
second, tonic water in the third and filtered tomato juice solution in the fourth.
Then pour a few drops of universal indicator solution or dip a piece of pH
indicator paper into each of the solutions. Compare the colour developed with
standard colour chart to decide the pH of each solution.
Observations  and  analysis:
a What is your conclusion based on your observations?
b Are the substances used in this experiment acidic or neutral? Why?
c Record your observations using the following Table:
120
IMPORTANT INOGANIC COMPOUNDS (UNIT 2)
Colour developed
pH
Substance
Lemon juice
Vinegar solution
Tonic water
Tomato juice
Write a laboratory report on your observations and present to the class.
Preparation  of  Acids
Acids  can  be  prepared  by:
1. The reaction of oxides of non-metals (acidic oxides) and water:
Acidic oxide    +    Water    Æ    Acid
SO2 (g)
N2O5  (s)
P4O10  (s)
+
+
+
Examples
H2O (l) Æ H2SO3  (aq)
H2O (l) Æ 2HNO3  (aq)
6H2O (l) Æ 4H3PO4  (aq)
2. Direct combination of some non-metals like S, Cl, Br with hydrogen:
This method is mostly used to prepare binary acids (acids consisting only two
elements)
H2 (g)
H2 (g)
+
+
Examples
Cl2 (g) Æ 2HCl (g)
Br2 (g) Æ 2HBr (g)
When gaseous hydrogen chloride and hydrogen bromide dissolve in water,
they form hydrochloric acid and hydrobromic acid respectively.
3. Using a non-volatile acid: Volatile acids can be prepared by heating their
salts with a non-volatile acid such as concentrated sulphuric acid, H2SO4.
Hydrochloric acid HCl and nitric acid, HNO3 can be prepared by this method
according to the following equations.
NaCl (s)
NaNO3  (s)
+ H2SO4 (l) Æ NaHSO4  (s)
+ H2SO4 (l) Æ NaHSO4  (s)
+
+
HCl (l)
HNO3 (l)
121
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Experiment 2.10
Preparation  of  Chlorous  Acid
Objective:  To investigate the product formed from Ba(ClO2)2 and H2SO4
Materials required: Two 250 mL beakers, glass rod, water, dropper, test tubes,
test  tube  rack,  blue  and  red  litmus  papers,  methyl  red,  Ba(ClO2)2  and
concentrated H2SO4.
Procedure:
1. Dissolve 12 g Ba(ClO2)2 to prepare 100 mL solution in one  beaker. Dilute 2
mL concentrated H2SO4 with water to prepare 50 mL of dilute H2SO4 solution
in the second beaker.
2. Add 80 mL of Ba(ClO2)2 solution to the dilute solution of H2SO4 in the second
beaker. Is there any formation of the white precipitate? What do you think is
the precipitate formed? Wait for some time till the precipitate settles. Continue
adding Ba(ClO2)2 solution using a dropper, one drop at a time until formation
of white precipitate stops. After all the precipitate settles, take 5 mL of the
clear liquid in a test tube and test with litmus or methyl red.
Observations  and  analysis:
a
Is the final solution acidic or basic?
b Which acid is formed?
c Write a balanced chemical equation for the reaction.
Write a laboratory report as a group and present to the class.
Reading  assignment
Refer to chemistry books from the library and write the uses of sulphuric acid, nitric
acid and hydrochloric acid.
Uses  of  some  important  acids
Activity 2.11
1. List  uses  of  some  common  acids  in  your  daily  life.
2. High consumption of sulphuric acid in a country indicates the economic growth of the
country. What is the reason? Discuss in groups and present to the class.
122
IMPORTANT INOGANIC COMPOUNDS (UNIT 2)
Hydrochloric Acid, HCl is present naturally in the gastric juice of our body and
helps in the digestion of food. Industrially, hydrochloric acid is important for pickling
of iron and steel (to remove surface impurities) before galvanizing and tin plating. It
is also used to produce aniline dyes, drugs, photographic films, plastics like polyvinyl
chloride (PVC), and to recover magnesium from sea water.
Nitric Acid, HNO3 is used industrially in the manufacture of explosives such as
trinitrotoluene (TNT) and trinitroglycerine, fertilizers such as KNO3 and NH4NO3,
rubber, chemicals, plastics, dyes and drugs.
Sulphuric acid, H2SO4 is the leading industrial chemical. It is widely used in the
production  of  sulphate  and  phosphate  fertilizers,  synthetic  fibres,  paints,  drugs,
detergents, paper and dyes. It is also used in petroleum refining, production of metals
and as electrolyte in car batteries.
1. Which one of the following substances are Arrhenius acids:
Exercise 2.8
a HClO4
b HI
c HBr
d BF3
e HF
f PCl5
2.
In each of the reactions listed below, identify the Brønsted-Lowry acid:
a CH3COOH  (aq) + H2O (l) (cid:85) CH3COO– (aq) + H3O+ (aq)
–  (aq)
2–  (aq) (cid:85) CN–  (aq)
b HCN (aq)
+ HSO4
+ SO4
+ NH3 (g) (cid:85) F–  (aq)
+ NH4
+ (aq)
c HF (aq)
d HClO4 (aq)
+ N2H4 (aq) (cid:85) ClO4
–  (aq)
+ N2H5
+  (aq)
3.
Identify the Lewis acids in each of the following reactions:
a AlCl3
b BF3
c SiCl4
d PF5
+
+
+
+
–
Cl– Æ AlCl4
NH3 Æ F3B  –  NH3
–2
2Cl– Æ SiCl6
F–
–
Æ PF6
123
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
4. Classify the following acids as monoprotic, diprotic or triprotic, binary or ternary,
strong or weak acids. (give three answers for each type):
a HClO4
b H2SO4
c H2CO3
d HF
e HCl
f HNO2
g HCN
h HNO3
i CH3COOH
j H2SO3
k H2S
l H3PO4
5. A reagent bottle (labelled as A) is filled with HCl solution and the other (labelled
as B) is filled with water.  Both liquids in the bottles are colourless. What
method do you recommend to identify the acid and water?
6. What is the basis for the classification of acids as strong and weak?
7. What is the pH of a solution having the following hydrogen ion concentrations?
a 5  ×  10–3  M
b 0.003  M
c 2.0  ×  10–6  M
8. Calculate the hydrogen ion concentrations in solutions having the following pH
values:
a 4
b 2
c 5
9. How  many  moles  of  H2SO4 are  present  in  0.500  L  of  a  0.150  M  H2SO4
solution?
2.4    BASES
Competencies
After  completing  this  section,  you  will  be  able  to:
• define bases in terms  of the concepts of Arrhenius, Brønsted-Lowry and Lewis;
• give  examples  of  bases  based  on  Arrhenius,  Brønsted-Lowry  and  Lewis
concepts;
124
IMPORTANT INOGANIC COMPOUNDS (UNIT 2)
•
explain the general properties of bases;
• define strong and weak bases;
• distinguish between strong and weak alkalis (soluble bases);
• define concentrated and dilute alkalis;
• distinguish between concentrated and dilute alkalis (soluble bases);
• use the necessary precautions while working with bases;
• define pOH;
•
•
•
•
•
show the mathematical relationship between pH  and pOH;
calculate the pOH of a given solution;
calculate the concentration of hydroxide ions from the given information;
conduct activities to investigate some chemical properties of bases;
explain the reaction of active metals with water, the reaction of basic oxides
with water, and double displacement reactions as the three methods of preparation
of bases;
conduct simple experiments to prepare bases in a laboratory;
•
• describe  the  uses  of  the  three  common  laboratory  bases  (NaOH,  Ca(OH)2
and NH3).
Activity 2.12
1. Have  you  ever  wondered  about  the  origin  of  the  saying “it  is  a  bitter  pill  (kosso)  to
swallow”? Discuss and give a meaning to the saying.
2. Discuss why farmers sometimes need to put crushed limestone on their soil.
3. While taking bath, have you ever had soap in your mouth? How does it taste?
Share your experience with your class.
Bases  belong  to  the  class  of  inorganic  compounds  that  include  most  oxides  and
hydroxides of metals. They are of great importance in chemical industries and in our
daily lives, directly or indirectly. For example, sodium hydroxide, NaOH is used in the
production of soap, paper, textile etc. Potassium hydroxide, KOH is used to produce
soft soap, fertilizers etc. Calcium hydroxide, Ca(OH)2, is used to manufacture mortar
and bleaching powder, to remove soil acidity etc.
Definition  of  Bases
There are different definitions of bases, as suggested by different chemists namely Arrhenius,
Bronsted-Lowry and Lewis.
125
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Arrhenius definition of bases: A base is any substance that ionizes (dissociates) in
aqueous solution to release hydroxide, OH– ions. Arrhenius bases are mostly ionic
metal hydroxides such as, LiOH, NaOH, KOH and Ba(OH)2. The dissociation of a
few bases is shown by the following equations:
NaOH (aq)
Æ
Ba(OH)2 (aq) Æ
Na+ (aq)
Ba2+ (aq)
+
+
OH–  (aq)
2OH–  (aq)
Brønsted-Lowry  definition  of  bases:  A  base  is  a  substance  that  is  capable  of
accepting proton(s), H+. Thus, a base is a proton, H+ acceptor.
Note:
Note that not all Brønsted-Lowry bases are Arrhenius bases, but all Arrhenius
bases contain the hydroxide ion which is a Brønsted-Lowry base. This is because
OH- can accept a proton, H+, to form water.
According to the Brønsted-Lowry definition, an acid-base reaction is the transfer of a
proton from an acid to a base.
Example
NH3  (aq)
Base
+
HCl (aq) Æ NH4
+ (aq)
Acid
HCO–
3  (aq) +
OH–  (aq) (cid:85) CO 2
− (aq)
3
+
+
Cl– (aq)
H2O (l)
Acid
Base
Lewis  Definition  of  Bases
The Lewis definition is a more general definition than the Arrhenius and Brønsted-
Lowry definitions. According to Lewis, a base is a substance that is capable of
donating a pair of electrons. In other words, a base is an electron-pair donor.
Brønsted-Lowry bases are also bases according to the Lewis concept. This is
because  for  Brønsted-Lowry  bases  to  accept  a  proton,  H+ they  should  have  a
lone pair. However, Lewis base include other species that can form a coordinate
covalent bond by sharing their lone pair with substances other than a proton, H+.
It is important to note that Lewis acid-base reactions include many reactions that
do  not  involve  protons.  The  following  equation  shows  an  acid-base  reaction
according to Lewis concept:
126
IMPORTANT INOGANIC COMPOUNDS (UNIT 2)
Example
Activity 2.13
Consider the following reactions:
+
+
+
H+
Æ
NH3
BF3
In the above reactions, name the Lewis acids and Lewis bases. Do NH3 and F– act as Lewis
acid or Lewis base? Why?
NH4
BF4
Æ
F–
–
General  Properties  of  Bases
Activity 2.14
Dissolve one table-spoon of washing soda in a glass of water. Try to wash your hands with
this  solution.  How  do  you  feel?  Does  it  give  a  soapy  touch  or  an  oily  touch.  Share  your
observations with the rest of the class.
Bases like NaOH, KOH, and Ba(OH)2 are readily soluble in water, while others such as
Mg(OH)2 are slightly soluble. Bases that are soluble in water are also called alkalis.
Bases  or  alkalis  show  the  following  properties:
1. Bases are slippery to the touch and have a bitter taste: Bases have a bitter
taste; feel slippery to the skin in dilute aqueous solutions.  Strong bases such as
NaOH and KOH are very corrosive and poisonous. So they should be neither
brought in to contact with the skin nor tasted.
2. Soluble bases change the colour of indicators: Aqueous solutions of bases
turn the colour of red litmus to blue, phenolphthalein to pink (red), methyl red to
yellow and universal indicator blue (purple).
127
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
3. Soluble bases release hydroxide ion in aqueous solution: The characteristic
properties of bases in aqueous solutions are due to the presence of the hydroxide
ion, OH– which they release on dissolution.
Examples
KOH (aq)
Æ
K+ (aq)
Ca(OH)2 (aq) (cid:85) Ca2+  (aq)
+
+
OH–  (aq)
2OH–  (aq)
4. Bases neutralize acids or acidic oxides to form salt and water:
Base    +    Acid (or acidic oxide)    Æ    Salt    +    Water
Examples
2NaOH (aq)
2KOH (aq)
+
+
Ca(OH)2 (aq) +
H2SO4  (aq) Æ Na2SO4  (aq)
SO3 (g)
Æ K2SO4  (aq)
2HCl (aq) Æ CaCl2 (aq)
+
+
+
2H2O (l)
H2O (l)
2H2O (l)
5. Aqueous solutions of bases conduct electricity: Soluble bases are electrolytes.
Solutions of strong bases are good conductors while solutions of weak bases are
poor conductors.
Strength  of  Bases  (Strong  and  Weak  Bases)
Activity 2.15
Is  a  concentrated  base  a  strong  base  and  a  dilute  base  a  weak  base?    Discuss  in  your
group and present to the class.
Both acids and bases are classified as strong and weak depending on their degree of
ionization (dissociation) in aqueous solution.
Strong bases are those which ionize (dissociate) completely or almost completely in
water solutions. Examples of strong bases include hydroxides of alkali (Group IA)
metals and lower members of alkaline earth metals such as LiOH, NaOH, KOH, and
Ba(OH)2.
LiOH (aq) Æ
Examples
+
Li+ (aq)
OH–  (aq)
KOH (aq) Æ
K+ (aq)
+
OH–  (aq)
128
IMPORTANT INOGANIC COMPOUNDS (UNIT 2)
Weak bases are those bases which ionize (dissociate) only partially or slightly in aqueous
solution. Examples of weak bases include NH3, and Ca(OH)2.
The dissociation of a weak base can be shown as follows using, NH3, as an example.
NH3 (g)        +        H2O  (l)        (cid:85)        NH4
+ (aq)        +        OH– (aq)
The double arrow shows that the dissociation of a weak base does not proceed to
completion. This means an aqueous solution of a weak base contains only a small
amount of ions derived from the dissociation of the base and a large amount of the
non-ionized base. For example, a solution of ammonia containing 0.1 mole NH3 per
litre of solution ionizes only to the extent of 1.3%.
Concentrated  and  Dilute  Bases
Concentrated and dilute solutions are terms used to describe the amount of a substance
present in a given volume of solution. The amount can be described in terms of either
percentage or number of moles. Concentrated bases contain relatively large amounts
of a base in a given volume of solution while dilute base solutions contain only a small
amount of base. The concentration of a base is the measure of the number of moles
of the alkali (base) dissolved in one litre of solution.  The concentration is expressed
in terms of mole per litre (Molarity).
Molarity of the base =
number of  moles of  the base
volume of  solution in litres
The  greater  the  number  of  moles  of  the  base  per  litre  of  the  solution  the  more
concentrated is the solution. For example, a solution containing ten moles of NaOH
per litre is more concentrated than the solution containing two moles of NaOH per
litre. The latter solution is more dilute than the former. Thus, both a strong base and a
weak base may be concentrated or dilute depending on the number of moles of the
base present per litre.
Precautions  when  Handling  Bases
Strong bases such as sodium hydroxide and potassium hydroxide can attack human
skin, and even damage animal and plant tissues. That is why NaOH and KOH are
named caustic soda and caustic potash respectively. The word “caustic” refers to a
substance that can cause burning. Thus, it is very important to avoid the contact of
bases with any part of our body or clothing. Not only strong bases but weak bases
are also corrosive. For example, concentrated ammonia solution can cause blindness if
splashed into the eye.
129
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
The following safety precautions are useful in handling bases in school laboratories or
anywhere while working with them.
a Wear eye goggles, gloves and a laboratory coat.
b If bases are spilled on your working table wipe the spillages immediately.
c Whenever bases are splashed on your cloth, wash the affected part with running
water.
d If a base enters your eyes, wash with water repeatedly as first aid treatment
and seek medical advice.
e
If  a  base  is  swallowed  by  accident,  drink  1-2%  acetic  acid  or  lemon  juice
immediately.
f Whenever bases come in to contact with your skin, wash the affected part with
plenty of water and then wash the affected part with a very dilute solution (about
1%) of a weak acid such as acetic acid.
pOH
Activity 2.16
1. Since water, H2O,  has  H+  and  OH–,  it  is  both  acidic  and  basic.  Is  this  true?
2.
If  [OH–]  increases  in  a  solution  what  happens  to  its  [H+]?  Share  your  comments  with
your group.
pH is the measure of the hydrogen (H+) or hydronium (H3O+) ion concentration in a
solution.  In  the  same  manner,  pOH  is  the  measure  of  the  hydroxide,  OH–  ion
concentration in a solution. It also measures the acidity or alkalinity of a solution as
pH does.
pOH is defined as the negative logarithm of hydroxide, OH” ion concentration.
pOH = –log [OH–]
To calculate the hydroxide ion concentration from a given pOH value, we proceed as
follows:
[OH–] = antilog (–pOH) = 10–pOH
Relationship  Between  pH  and  pOH
How  can  you  derive  the  mathematical  relationship  between  pH  and  pOH?  To
understand the relationship between pH and pOH let us start from the ionization of
water. Water undergoes ionization to a small extent as follows:
H2O (l) (cid:85) H+ (aq)
+
OH–  (aq)
130
IMPORTANT INORGANIC COUMPOUNDS (UNIT 2)
or
2H2O (l) (cid:85) H3O+ (aq)
+
OH–  (aq)
We can write a mathematical expression for the ionic product of water or dissociation
constant for water, Kw as
Kw = [H+] [OH–]  =  [H3O+]  [OH–]
Kw = 1.0 × 10–14 (mol/L)2 at  25°C
(2.1)
Since water is neutral, [H+] = [OH–] or [H3O+] = [OH–]. So we can write equation
2.1  as
Kw = [H+] [OH–] = [H+]2 = 1.0 × 10–14(mol/L)2
Solving for [H+]
[H+] =
1.0 × 10
–14
mol
(
)2
L
= 1.0 × 10 mol/L
–7
Thus, in any neutral aqueous solution at 25°C,
[H+] = [OH–] = 1.0 × 10–7 mol/L
In an acid solution, [H+] > [OH–] and in a basic solution, [OH–] > [H+]. However,
the product [H+] × [OH–] remains constant, i.e., 1.0 × 10–14 at 25°C. Thus, if the
concentration of either H+ or OH– is known in a given solution, we can calculate the
concentration of the other.
[OH–] =
WK
+[H ]
;   [H+] =
K
W
–
[OH ]
To find the relationship between pH and pOH let us begin with equation 2.1.
Kw = [H+] [OH–] = 1.0 × 10–14 (mol/L)2
Take the negative logarithm of both sides
–log Kw = –log [H+] [OH–] = –log 1.0 × 10–14
–log Kw = –log [H+] + (–log [OH–]) = –log 1.0 ×10–14
but, –log Kw = pKw,
–log [OH–] = pOH,
–log [H+] = pH
–log  1.0  ×  10–14  =  14
So, the above equation becomes
pkw = pH + pOH = 14 (at 25°C)                                                     (2.2)
131
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Thus, the sum of pH and pOH is 14 for any aqueous solution, at 25°C. Since pH,
pOH, [H+] and [OH–] are interrelated through Kw, knowing any one of the values
enables us to determine the others.
Table 2.2:  Acidity and Basicity in relation to [H+], [OH–], pH and pOH.
Solution
Acidic solution
Basic solution
[H+] (mol/L)
> 10–7
< 10–7
[OH–] (mol/L)
< 10–7
> 10–7
pH
< 7
> 7
pOH
> 7
< 7
Example
The hydroxide ion concentration in a solution is 5.0 × 10–5M? Calculate:
a pOH
Solution:
b [H+]
c pH
a To calculate pOH we proceed as follows.
pOH =  – log [OH–] = – log (5 ×10–5) = – (log10–5 – log 5)
=  5  –  log  5  =  4.3
b [H+] is calculated using the relationship
[H+]  =
K
[OH ]   =
W
–
–14
1.0 ×10
(mol/L)
–5
5.0 ×10  mol/L
2
= 2.0  ×  10–10  M
c pH = –log [H+] = –log 2.0 × 10–10
=  10  –  log  2  =  9.7
Since the pOH of the solution is found in part (a), we can also calculate the
pH using the relationship
pH  +  pOH  =  14
pH  +  4.3  =  14
pH  =  14  –  4.3  =  9.7
1. Determine the [OH–] in 3 × 10–5 M solution of HCl.
Exercise 2.9
2. Determine  the  pH  of  2.0  ×  10–2  M  Sr(OH)2  solution  assuming  complete
dissociation.
132
IMPORTANT INORGANIC COUMPOUNDS (UNIT 2)
Experiment 2.11
Chemical  Behaviour  of  Bases
Objectives: To investigate the thermal stability and reaction of bases with acids.
Materials required: NaOH or KOH, Ca(OH)2, HNO3, water, blue and red litmus
papers,  cobalt  chloride,  test-tube,  test-tube  rack,  test-tube  holder,  Bunsen
burner, three beakers, dropper, measuring cylinder, glass rod and watch glass.
Procedure:
1. Place 4.5 g NaOH or KOH in one test-tube and the same amount of Ca(OH)2
in another test-tube. Heat the test-tube containing NaOH or KOH gently using
a Bunsen burner, by holding the test tube with a test tube holder. Hold the
cobalt chloride paper partly inserted in the test tube. See whether the cobalt
chloride paper shows a colour change or not. Repeat the same experiment
with the second test tube that contains Ca(OH)2.
2. Dissolve 3.6 g KOH in distilled water to prepare 100 mL solution in one
beaker. Dilute 2 mL concentrated HNO3 to make a 50 mL solution in another
beaker. Add 10 mL KOH solution and 9.5 mL HNO3 to the third beaker, stir
thoroughly and test with blue and red litmus papers. Continue adding HNO3
using a dropper, one drop at a time stirring after each addition and checking
with red and blue litmus until the blue remains blue and the red remains red.
Put 5 mL of the neutral solution on a watch glass and allow the water to
evaporate until the next day.
Observations  and  analysis:
1. What type of reaction occurred between the KOH and HNO3?  Write the balanced
chemical equation for the reaction.
2. What is left on the watch glass?
3. Which hydroxide melts on heating? Which base decomposes on heating to give
metal oxide and water? How do you know this? Write the balanced chemical
equation for the reaction.
Write a laboratory report and present to the class.
Preparation  of  Bases
Bases containing hydroxide ion (hydroxide bases) can be prepared by the following
methods:
133
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
1. By the reaction of highly reactive metals from Group IA and Group IIA (below
magnesium) with water. This reaction produces the metal hydroxide with the
liberation of hydrogen gas.
2Li (s)
2K (s)
Ca (s)
+
+
+
Examples
2H2O (l) Æ 2LiOH (aq)
2H2O (l) Æ 2KOH (aq)
2H2O (l) Æ Ca  (OH)2
+
+
+
H2 (g)
H2 (g)
H2 (g)
2. By the reaction of Group IA or Group IIA metal oxides with water, which
gives the metal hydroxides.
Metal oxide    +    Water    Æ    Metal hydroxide
Examples
Na2O  (s) +
+
CaO  (s)
BaO (s)
+
2H2O (l) Æ 2NaOH (aq)
2H2O (l) Æ Ca(OH)2 (aq)
2H2O (l) Æ Ba(OH)2 (aq)
3. By double displacement reaction.
This method involves the reaction of an aqueous solution of a soluble base and
a soluble salt, which gives another soluble base and an insoluble salt as products.
Soluble base   +   Soluble salt   Æ   Another Soluble base   +   Insoluble salt
Ba(OH)2 (aq)
Ca(OH)2 (aq)
Examples
+ K2SO4  (aq) Æ 2KOH (aq)
+
+ Na2CO3  (aq) Æ 2NaOH (aq) +
BaSO4 (s)
CaCO3  (s)
Experiment 2.12
Preparation  of  Bases
Objective:  To prepare bases from metal and metal oxides.
Materials required: Water, trough, a knife, tongs, filter paper, litmus paper,
test tubes, test tube rack, calcium or sodium metal, CaO or MgO, Na2SO4
134
IMPORTANT INORGANIC COUMPOUNDS (UNIT 2)
or K2SO4, Ba(OH)2 solution, spatula, balance, three beakers, measuring
cylinder, dropper, glass rod.
Procedure:
1. Pour clean water into a trough to three-fourth of its volume. Then take a piece
of sodium metal or calcium metal from the bottle with tongs. If you use sodium,
place it on filter paper and then blot it to remove the oil. Carefully cutoff a
very small piece with a knife and drop this piece onto the surface of the water
in the trough. Observe the reaction.
After the reaction is complete, take some solution from the trough and add it
to two test tubes. Test the solution in the first test tube using red litmus paper
and add a few drops of methyl orange to the second.
2. Add a half a spatula measure of CaO or MgO to a test tube containing clean
water. Shake well and then test whether the solution is acidic or basic using
red litmus paper. Does the colour of the red litmus paper change?
3. Add 6 g Na2SO4 or 7 g K2SO4 to the first and 7 g Ba(OH)2 to the second
beaker. Add water to each beaker and stir with a glass rod to prepare a 100
mL solution of each sample. After dissolution is complete, take 20 mL Ba(OH)2
solution and pour it into the third beaker. Measure 20 mL Na2SO4 or K2SO4
solution, mix it with the solution in the third beaker and shake well. Observe
what is happening. Continue adding Na2SO4 or K2SO4 solution drop by drop
using a dropper while shaking the solution after the addition of each drop.
When the formation of a white precipitate does not occur anymore stop adding
Na2SO4 or K2SO4 solution and test whether the solution in the third beaker is
acidic or basic using litmus paper.
Observations  and  analysis:
1. Does the colour of red litmus paper change when dipped into the solutions obtained
in procedure 1 and 2? Are the solutions acidic or basic?
2. What gas is given off during the reaction in procedure 1?
3. Why do you think is the white precipitate formed?
4. What is the nature of the final solution in the third beaker?
5. Write balanced chemical equations for the reactions.
Write a laboratory report on your observations and present to the class.
135
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Uses  of  Some  Important  Bases
Sodium hydroxide, NaOH: This is known by the common name lye or caustic soda.
It is one of the most important laboratory and industrial chemicals. It is used in the
laboratory for absorbing carbon dioxide and other acidic gases, in a number of organic
reactions and in chemical analysis. Industrially, it is used in the manufacture of soaps
and detergents, pulp and paper, textiles, dyes, cosmetics, pharmaceuticals, in purifying
aluminium ore and petroleum refining. It is also used to clean drains since it dissolves
grease and other organic matter.
Potassium hydroxide, KOH: It is commonly known as caustic potash. It is a stronger
base and is more expensive than NaOH and has limited uses. It is used as an electrolyte
in some dry cells and to make soft soap.
Calcium hydroxide, Ca(OH)2: It is also called slaked lime or lime water when it is
dissolved in water. It is a weaker base than NaOH and KOH, and is widely used to
remove soil acidity, to make mortar (mixture of lime, sand and water) which serves
as binding material for bricks and plastering walls, to remove temporary hardness of
water and in manufacturing bleaching powder. Its aqueous solution is also used to test
for carbon dioxide gas.
Ammonia: A solution of gaseous ammonia, NH3 in water is used as household cleaning
agent and as a laboratory reagent. It is used to manufacture ammonium fertilizers,
Reading  Assignment
The  common  uses  of  NaOH,  KOH,  Ca(OH)2  and  NH3  have  been  described
above. After reading reference books in your library, search for some more uses
of these compounds. Present your findings to the class.
Exercise 2.10
1.
Identify the Brønsted-Lowry bases and acids in each of the following chemical
reactions:
a HCOOH (aq)
+ CN–  (aq) (cid:85) HCOO–  (aq)
+
HCN (aq)
+ OH–  (aq) (cid:85) HS– (aq)
b H2S (g)
Identify the substances acting as Lewis bases and acids in each of the following
chemical reactions:
H2O (l)
+
a AlCl3 (aq) +
b H+ (aq)
+
Cl– (aq) Æ AlCl4
NH3 (g) Æ NH4
– (aq)
+ (aq)
2.
136
IMPORTANT INORGANIC COUMPOUNDS (UNIT 2)
3. What is the concentration of the base (in molarity) containing:
a 80 g NaOH is dissolved in water to make 1 litre of solution?
b 224 g KOH is dissolved in water to make 2 litres of solution?
4. Calculate the pOH, [H+] and pH of the solutions having the following hydroxide
ion concentrations:
a [OH–] = 4.6 × 10–3 mol/L
b  [OH–] = 2.5 × 10–6 mol/L
5. Potassium hydroxide solution is added from a burette to dilute hydrochloric
acid solution in a beaker. Which of the following changes will not occur in the
beaker:
a The pH of the solution in the beaker increases.
b The [H+] of the solution in the beaker decreases.
c The pOH of the solution in the beaker increases.
6. How many moles of NaOH are contained in 65 mL of a 2.20 M solution of
NaOH in H2O?
7. A solution of barium hydroxide, Ba(OH)2, contains 4.285 g of barium hydroxide
in 100.0 mL of solution. What is the molarity of the solution?
2.5    SALTS
Competencies
After  completing  this  section,  you  will  be  able  to:
• define salts;
• give examples of salts;
•
•
•
•
•
classify salts as acidic, normal and basic salts;
explain the direct combination of elements, the reaction of acids with bases and
the reaction of acids with metals as methods of salt preparation;
conduct simple experiments to prepare a salt by neutralization;
list some important salts and discuss their uses;
explain the properties of salts;
• describe the chemical tests of some salts by conducting activities;
• mention the essential nutrients of plants;
• describe the functions of nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium in plant growth;
137
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
• define fertilizers;
•
•
•
list some common fertilizers;
explain the importance of fertilizers; and
list some common inorganic compounds that are used as pesticides and herbicides.
Activity 2.17
Discuss the following in your group and present it to the class:
1. List all the salts that you know and tell where they are found.
2. Make a list of coloured salts available in your school laboratory.
3. Which salts are found in Dalol area, Ethiopia?
Salts are ionic compounds that contain positive ions (cations) derived from bases and
negative ions (anions) derived from acids. Salts are also defined as ionic compounds
formed when the ionizable hydrogen of acids are partly or completely replaced by
metal ions or ammonium ions. For example, Ca(HCO3)2 and CaCO3 are salts derived
from  the  acid  H2CO3  while  the  salts  Mg(H2PO4)2,  MgHPO4  and  Mg3(PO4)2 are
salts derived from H3PO4.
• A salt is produced when an acid is neutralized by a base:
Acid        +        Base        Æ        Salt        +       Water
Examples
HCl (aq)
+ NaOH (aq)
Æ NaCl (aq)
H2SO4  (aq)
+ Ca(OH)2 (aq) Æ CaSO4(s)
+ H2O (l)
2H2O (l)
+
Some common examples of salts are sodium chloride (NaCl), calcium carbonate
(CaCO3), potassium nitrate (KNO3), copper sulfate (CuSO4) etc.
Classification  of  Salts
Activity 2.18
Recall the concept of the neutralization reaction between an acid and a base to give a salt and water.
a What would be the nature of the salt, if all the acid hydrogen ions are not replaced by
metal ions or ammonium ion?
138
IMPORTANT INORGANIC COUMPOUNDS (UNIT 2)
b What would be the nature of the salt, if all the base hydroxide ions are not replaced by
the anions of the acid?
Discuss in your group and present the findings to the class.
Salts  can  be  classified  as:
• Acidic salts: These are salts in which not all of the hydrogen ions in an acid have
been replaced by metal ions or ammonium (NH+
4) ions.
Example:   Sodium hydrogen sulphate, NaHSO4.
When acidic salts are dissolved to make an aqueous solution, they release H+
ions which make the solution acidic. For example, NaHSO4 releases ions in
aqueous solution as follows:
NaHSO4 (aq)        Æ        Na+ (aq)        +        H+ (aq)        +        SO2–
4   (aq)
• Normal salts: These are salts in which all of the hydrogen ions in an acid
have been replaced by metal ions or ammonium ions.
Example:   Sodium sulphate, Na2SO4.
Normal salts do not contain ionizable H+ or OH–.
Example
Na2SO4 release ions as follows:
Na2SO4 (aq)        Æ        2Na+ (aq)        +        SO2–
4   (aq)
• Basic salts: These are salts in which not all of the hydroxide ions in a base
have been replaced by the anions of the acid.
Example:   Zinc hydroxychloride, Zn(OH)Cl.
When basic salts are dissolved to make an aqueous solution, they release OH–
ions and this makes the solution basic.
Zn(OH)Cl  (aq)        Æ        Zn2+ (aq)        +        OH– (aq)        +        Cl– (aq)
Preparation  of  Salts
Activity 2.19
List  a  few  methods  to  prepare  sodium  chloride  in  the  laboratory?  Discuss  in  groups  and
present it to the class.
139
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Salts can be prepared by the following methods:
1. Direct  combination  of  elements:  This  method  is  used  to  prepare  binary
salts, that is, salts consisting of only two elements.
2Na (s)
Fe (s)
Fe (s)
+
+
+
Examples
Cl2 (g) Æ 2NaCl (s)
S (s)
Æ FeS (s)
3Cl2 (g) Æ 2FeCl3 (s)
2. Reacting active metals with dilute acids:
Active metal    +    Acid    Æ    Salt    +    Hydrogen gas
Examples
2Al (s)
Mg (s)
Zn (s)
+
+
+
6HCl (aq) Æ 2AlCl3 (aq)
2HCl (aq) Æ MgCl2 (aq)
H2SO4  (aq) Æ ZnSO4 (aq)
+
+
+
3H2 (g)
H2 (g)
H2 (g)
Since, the reactions of metals of Group IA like sodium and potassium are very
vigorous, it is advisable not to use the metals of Group IA for the preparation
of salts by this method.
Sometimes, the reaction of active metals with dilute acids to prepare salts may
not be as successful as expected. For example, calcium sulphate is only sparingly
soluble in water. So in the reaction with dilute sulphuric acid, calcium tends to
become coated with calcium sulphate which inhibits the reaction from proceeding.
3. Reacting  metal  oxides  with  acids  (by  neutralizing  basic  oxides  with
dilute acids):
Metal oxide    +    Dilute acid    Æ    Salt    +    Water
Examples
+
2HCl (aq)
Æ CaCl2 (aq)
+ H2SO4  (aq) Æ CuSO4  (aq)
+
+ H2O (l)
+ H2O (l)
2HNO3  (aq) Æ Zn(NO3)2 (aq) + H2O (l)
CaO  (s)
CuO (s)
ZnO (s)
140
IMPORTANT INORGANIC COUMPOUNDS (UNIT 2)
4. Reacting metal hydroxides with dilute acids: This reaction is commonly called
neutralization.
Metal hydroxides    +    Dilute acid    Æ    Salt    +    Water
Examples
NaOH (aq)
2KOH (aq)
+
+
HCl (aq)
Æ NaCl (aq)
H2SO4  (aq) Æ K2SO4  (aq)
+
+
H2O (l)
2H2O (l)
5. Reacting  metal  carbonates  or  hydrogen  carbonates  with  dilute  acids:
The reaction of carbonates or hydrogen carbonates with dilute acids always
releases carbon dioxide gas along with the formation of a salt and water.
Metal carbonates  +  Dilute acid  Æ  Salt  +  Water  +  Carbon dioxide
Examples
MgCO3 (s)
+ H2SO4  (aq) Æ MgSO4 (aq) + CO2 (g) + H2O (l)
CuCO3  (s)
+ 2HCl (aq) Æ CuCl2 (aq)
+ H2O (l) + CO2 (g)
Na2CO3  (s) + 2HNO3  (aq) Æ 2NaNO3  (aq) + H2O (l) + CO2 (g)
Ca(HCO3)2 (s) + 2HCl (aq) Æ CaCl2 (aq)
+ 2H2O (l) + 2CO2 (g)
6. Double  decomposition  reaction  (double  displacement  reaction):  In  this
method, two different soluble salts react to form a soluble and an insoluble salt
as products that can be separated easily.
Examples
Pb(NO3)2  (aq)
+ NaI (aq)
Æ PbI2 (s)
+ 2NaNO3  (aq)
CaCl2 (aq)
+ Na2CO3  (aq) Æ CaCO3  (s) + 2NaCl (aq)
It may be noted that each method of preparing salts cannot be used to make
every salt; i.e., different methods may be used to make different salts.
141
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Experiment 2.13
Preparing  salts  from  Metallic  Oxides  and  Acid
Objective: To prepare copper sulphate from copper oxide and sulphuric acid.
Materials required: Copper oxide, sulphuric acid, beaker, filter funnel, filter paper,
evaporating dish.
Procedure:
1. Pour some sulphuric acid in beaker and add copper (II) oxide, warm and stir
gently.
2. When the reaction is complete, filter the solution to remove excess copper
oxide.
3. Transfer the filtrate to the evaporating dish and evaporate some of the water
from the filtrate. Leave for the salt to crystallize out.
Observations  and  analysis:
1. What is the product formed? Write a balance chemical equation for the reaction.
2. What is the colour change as the reaction occurs? What does this show?
Write a laboratory report and present to the class.
Some  Important  Salts  and  their  Uses
Activity 2.20
1. Have you ever taken Oral Rehydration Salt (ORS) for diarrhoea? What are the contents
of  the  ORS?
2. Can you prepare your own ORS?
Discuss in your group and present to the class.
Sodium  chloride  (common  salt,  NaCl)  is  widely  used  in  the  preparation  and
preservation of food, as raw a material for the manufacture of sodium, chlorine, and
sodium hydroxide. It is used as component of Oral Rehydration Salt (ORS) that has
medical  applications.  It  is  also  used  to  manufacture  baking  soda  (NaHCO3)  and
Na2CO3 that serve as raw materials for the production of glass.
Ammonium nitrate, (NH4NO3) is used as a nitrogenous fertilizer and in explosives.
142
IMPORTANT INORGANIC COUMPOUNDS (UNIT 2)
Copper (II) sulphate, (CuSO4) is used to make Bordeaux mixture (mixture of CuSO4
and Ca(OH)2) and other fungicides. Bordeaux mixture is used to prevent fungal attack
of leaves and vines. CuSO4 is also useful in electroplating.
Iron (III) chloride, (FeCl3) is used in the treatment of waste water, and in etching
printed circuits.
Potassium nitrate, (KNO3) is used in making gun powder (mixture of KNO3, carbon
and sulphur) and other explosives. It is also used as a fertilizer.
Calcium  sulphate,  (CaSO4
supporting fractured bones.
.2H2O,  Gypsum)  is  used  for  plastering  walls  and
Barium sulphate, (BaSO4) is given to patients as a “barium meal” before gastro-
intestinal x-ray photography; it is also used as a white pigment.
Iron (II) sulphate (FeSO4) is given as iron tablets to patients who suffer from anaemia.
Properties  of  salts
Salts can be classified depending on the anion (negative ion) they possess, because
the anion is partly responsible for the solubility of the salt.
1. Solubility of salts. The following table summarizes some simple observations
about the solubility of some groups of salts.
Table 2.2   Solubility of salts.
Soluble  salts
Exceptions
–),
–), perchlorates (ClO4
–) and acetates
(cid:127) All nitrates (NO3
chlorates (ClO3
(CH3COO–)
(cid:127) Most halides
(cid:127) Most sulphates
(cid:127) Carbonates (CO3
3–)
2–), phosphates (PO4
and sulphides (S2–) of alkali metals
+)
and ammonium ion (NH4
(cid:127) Sulphides of alkaline-earths, Group IIA,
elements
(cid:127) No exception
(cid:127) Those containing Ag+, Hg2+, Pb2+
(AgCl, AgBr, AgI, HgCl2, HgBr2, HgI2, PbCl2, PbBr2,
PbI2) (PbCl2 is soluble in hot water)
(cid:127) BaSO4, HgSO4, PbSO4, SrSO4
(cid:127) All carbonates, phosphates and
sulphides of other elements are insoluble
2. Tendency  to  absorb  water  from  the  atmosphere  or  release  water  to  the
atmosphere.
143
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Depending on their tendency to absorb water from or release water to the
atmosphere,  salts  can  be  classified  as  hygroscopic,  deliquescent  and
efflorescent.
Hygroscopic salts are those which absorb water from the atmosphere but remain
solid.
Deliquescent salts absorb water from the atmosphere to form a solution. The
process of absorbing water from the atmosphere by a solid to form a solution
is called deliquescence.
Efflorescent salts lose their water of crystallization to the atmosphere. The
loss of water of crystallization by solid crystals to the atmosphere is known as
efflorescence.
It is very important to note that all deliquescent substances are hygroscopic,
but all hygroscopic substances are not necessarily deliquescent.
Table 2.3   Examples of hygroscopic, deliquescent and efflorescent salts.
Deliquescent
Hygroscopic
Efflorescent
(cid:127) Calcium chloride , CaCl2
(cid:127) Anhydrous Copper( II)
sulphate, CuSO4
(cid:127) Hydrated sodium
carbonate Na2CO3(cid:127)10H2O
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
Sodium Nitrate, NaNO3
Iron (III) chloride, FeCl3
(cid:127) Magnesium chloride, MgCl2
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
Lithium nitrate, LiNO3
Sodium nitrate, NaNO3
(cid:127) Hydratedsodium sulphate,
Na2SO4(cid:127)10H2O
3. Aqueous solutions of soluble salts are good conductors of electricity, because
they release mobile positive and negative ions in solution.
NaNO3  (aq) Æ Na+ (aq)
CaCl2 (aq) Æ Ca2+(aq)
Examples
NO3
+
2Cl– (aq)
–  (aq)
+
4. Thermal stability of salts: When different salts containing the same anion
are heated, they may not show similar behaviour. Some salts are thermally
stable while others undergo decomposition. The following examples illustrate
this fact.
144
IMPORTANT INORGANIC COUMPOUNDS (UNIT 2)
a Thermal decomposition of carbonates:
Carbonates are salts containing a carbonate,
as an anion. Carbonates of Group
IIA and most transition metals decompose on heating to give the metal oxides
and carbon dioxide:
MgCO3 (s)
heat
→ MgO (s)
+
CO2 (g)
heat
CuCO3  (s)
However, carbonates of sodium and potassium are not decomposed by heat.
→ CuO (s)
CO2 (g)
+
b Thermal decomposition of nitrates
Nitrates are salts containing a nitrate, as an anion. Heating nitrates of Group IIA
and most transition metals produces a metal oxide, nitrogen dioxide and oxygen:
Nitrate
heat
→    Metal oxide   +   Nitrogen dioxide   +   Oxygen
Examples
2Mg(NO3)2 (s)
heat
→ 2MgO (s)
2Pb(NO3)2  (s)
heat
→ 2PbO  (s)
+
+
4NO2  (g)
+ O2 (g)
4NO2  (g)
+ O2 (g)
Nitrates of sodium and potassium decompose on heating to give nitrites and
oxygen gas;
2NaNO3  (s)
heat
→ 2NaNO2  (s) +
O2 (g)
heat
→ 2KNO2  (s) +
2KNO3  (s)
The carbonate and nitrate of lithium differ from those of sodium and potassium;
they decompose on heating in the following manner:
O2 (g)
4LiNO3 (s)
heat
→ 2Li2O (s)
Li2CO3 (s)
heat
→ Li2O (s)
+
+
4NO2  (s)
+ O2 (g)
CO2  (g)
145
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Chemical  Tests  of  Some  Ions  in  Salts
Activity 2.21
1. Do you know why fireworks give different colours? Consult books in your library, and
discuss in your group. Explain to the class.
2. How do chemists know of the presence of certain ions in a compound?
There are several simple tests which may help in the identification of metal ions and
anions present in salts.
1. Flame tests: Certain metals give a  characteristic colour to a Bunsen flame
when their solid salts or moist salts are heated directly in the flame.A flame test
is commonly used to identify the presence of lithium, sodium, potassium, calcium,
strontium and barium ions in salts.
Experiment 2.14
Test for cations-I
Objective:   To identify the presence of Li+, Na+, K+, Ca2+, Sr2+ and Ba2+ in salts by
flame tests.
Materials required: Platinum or nichrome wire, watch glass, Bunsen burner, distilled
water, salts containing Li+, Na+, K+, Ca2+, Sr2+ and Ba2+.
Procedure:
1. Place a small amount of the salt containing a Li+ ion on a watch glass, moisten it
with pure concentrated HCl, dip the tip of the platinum or Nichrome wire into the
moist salt and then bring to the Bunsen flame.
2. Observe the colour produced.
3. Repeat the same step for salts containing Na+, K+ Ca2+, Sr2+ and Ba2+ and record
your observations.  Rinse the platinum or Nichrome wire with distilled water after
each test.
Observations and analysis:
a Write the colour of the flame produced in the following table.
146
IMPORTANT INORGANIC COUMPOUNDS (UNIT 2)
Metal ion in the salt
Colour of  flame produced
Lithium
(Li+)
Sodium
(Na+)
Potassium (K+)
Calcium (Ca2+)
Strontium (Sr2+)
Barium
(Ba2+)
Write a laboratory report and present to the class.
Experiment 2.15
Test  for  cations-II
Objectives: To identify the presence of Cu2+, Fe2+ and Fe3+ in salts.
Materials required: Beakers, test tubes, test tube rack, glass rod, ammonia solution,
sodium hydroxide solution, salts containing each of Cu2+, Fe2+ and Fe3+ ions
Procedure:
1. Dissolve a salt containing Cu2+ in the first beaker, Fe2+ in the second and Fe3+
in the third. Take three test tubes and add a 2 mL solution of (each ion) Cu2+
salt to the first, Fe2+ salt solution to the second and Fe3+ salt solution to the
third.
2. Add aqueous ammonia in small quantities until it is in excess, to the first test
tube containing a copper (II) salt solution and record your observations.
3. Add sodium hydroxide solution in small quantities, until it is present in excess,
to the second and third test tubes, and record your observations.
Observations  and  analysis:
1. What does the formation of  a blue precipitate in the first indicate? Write the chemical
equation for the blue precipitate formation.
2. Observe the colours of the precipitates formed and complete the following Table:
147
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Colour observed
Confirms the presence of
3. Write balanced chemical equations for the reactions.
Write a laboratory report in group and present to the class.
Experiment 2.16
Test  for  Halide  Ions
Objectives:  To identify the presence of Cl–, Br– and I– ions.
Materials required: test tubes, test tube rack, NaCl, NaBr, NaI, AgNO3, ammonia
solution, reagent bottles, dilute HNO3
Procedure:
1. Prepare 125 mL solution by dissolving 2.0 g AgNO3 in the first, 1.59 g NaCl
in the second, 2.50 g NaBr in the third and 3.75 g NaI in the fourth reagent
bottle respectively.
2. Take three test tubes and pour about 5 mL of NaCl solution in to the first, 5
mL NaBr solution in to the second and 5 mL NaI solution in to the third. To
each of the solutions in the test tube add 1 mL of dilute HNO3 followed by
addition of about 5 mL AgNO3 solution. Observe if a precipitate is formed in
each beaker.
3. After a precipitate has been formed, add ammonia solution to each test tube
and see what happens to the precipitate.
Observations  and  analysis:
1. What did the formation of the white precipitate in the first test tube confirm? Name
the compound formed as the white precipitate.
2. What did the formation of the yellow precipitate in the second test tube confirm?
Name the compound formed as the yellow precipitate.
3. What did the formation of the deep-yellow precipitate in the third test tube confirm?
Name the compound formed as the deep-yellow precipitate.
148
IMPORTANT INORGANIC COUMPOUNDS (UNIT 2)
4. What happened to the contents in the three test tubes, when ammonia solution was
added to each of the test tubes?
5. Write balanced chemical equations for the reactions taking place in each test tube.
Write a laboratory report and present to the class.
Experiment 2.17
Test  for  Sulphates
Objective:   To identify for the presence of sulphate using barium salts.
Materials required: Beakers, test tubes, and test tube rack, any soluble sulphate
salt (such as sodium sulphate), barium chloride or barium nitrate solution, and
dilute HCl.
Procedure:
Add some sodium sulfate solution to a test tube and acidify the solution by
adding a few drops of dilute HCl. Then add BaCl2 or Ba(NO3)2 solution and
note if a white precipitate is formed.
Observations  and  analysis:
1. Name the white precipitate formed?
2. Why is it necessary to add a few drops of dilute HCl?
3. Write a balanced chemical equation for the reaction.
Write a laboratory report and present to the class.
Experiment 2.18
Test  for  Carbonates  and  Hydrogen  Carbonates
Objective: To distinguish betweem carbonates and hydrogen carbonates
Materials required: Na2CO3, NaHCO3, dilute HCl, lime water, conical flasks,
beakers, rubber stopper, gas delivery tube, calcium chloride solution
149
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Procedure:
1. Take 20 mL solution of Na2CO3 and add it to one conical flask and 20 mL
NaHCO3 solution to another. Add the same amount of dilute HCl to each of
the conical flasks; Fit a rubber stopper to which a delivery tube is inserted to
each conical flask. Allow the gas produced to pass through lime water and
observe the changes.
2. Again take Na2CO3 solution in one conical flask and NaHCO3 solution in the
other. Add the same amount of CaCl2 solution to each of the conical flasks.
Observations  and  analysis:
1. What has happened to the lime water in each case?
2. Which solution forms a white precipitate on the addition of CaCl2 solution?
3. Write balanced chemical equations for all the reactions.
Write a laboratory report and present to the class.
Experiment 2.19
Test  for  Nitrates  (Brown  Ring  Test)
Objectives: To identify the presence of nitrate in a solution.
Materials Required: Test tube, test tube rack, beaker, nitrate solution, iron (II) sulphate
solution, concentrated H2SO4
Procedure:
Take 2 mL of nitrate solution in a test tube and add an equal volume of freshly
prepared iron (II) sulphate solution. Hold the test tube in an inclined position
and carefully pour concentrated sulphuric acid down along the inclined side of
the test tube. The acid sinks to the bottom. Carefully observe the changes in
test tube.
Observations  and  analysis:
1. Where is the brown ring formed?
2. Write the chemical equation for the formation of the brown ring.
3. What does the formation of brown ring in the solution indicate?
Write a laboratory report and present to the class.
150
IMPORTANT INORGANIC COUMPOUNDS (UNIT 2)
Exercise 2.11
1. Name the acid and base pairs required to prepare each of the following salts:
a K2SO4
b Ca(NO3)2
c MgBr2
d BaI2
2. Suggest at least three methods for the preparation of salts.
3. Classify the following salts as soluble or insoluble in water:
a NH4Cl
b FeCO3
c AgNO3
d PbSO4
e Li3PO4
f AgCl
g CaCl2
h Na2S
4. Why do aqueous solutions of soluble salts conduct electricity?
5. Which carbonates do not decompose on heating?
6. Nitrates mostly decompose by heat to give metal oxide, nitrogen dioxide and
oxygen. Which nitrates do not give these products on heating?
7. What reagents do you use to identify the presence of the following ions in
salts?
a Halide ions?
b Fe2+ and Fe3+ ions?
c Sulphate, SO4
2– ions?
8. An unknown salt when heated with a Bunsen flame produced a bright-yellow
flame. An aqueous solution of this salt when reacted with dilute HCl released a
gas that turns lime water milky. Upon addition of calcium chloride solution to
an aqueous solution of this salt, a white precipitate is formed. What is the
unknown salt?
Plant  Nutrients
Essential  nutrients
Activity 2.22
1. Form  a  group  and  list  the  kind  of  fertilizers  you  are  familiar  with.  Which  of  the  listed
fertilizers are inorganic salts?
151
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
2. Plants need nitrogen for their growth, and there is plenty of nitrogen in the air. If this
is so, why do we apply nitrogeneous fertilizers for plants?
3. Some  people  prefer  to  eat  organic  food  that  has  been  grown  without  fertilizers  and
pesticides.  Does  eating  organic  food  overcome  the  problems  caused  by  artificial
fertilizers? Discuss in groups and present to the class.
The growth and development of plants is determined by various factors of soil, climate,
and by factors inherent in the plants themselves. Minerals required by plants for their
growth  and  development  are  called  plant  nutrients.  For  a  soil  to  produce  crops
successfully, it must have an adequate supply of all the necessary nutrients that plants
take from the soil. The required nutrient elements must be present in the soil in forms
that plants can use and also there should be a rough balance among them in accordance
with the amounts needed by plants. When any one of these elements is lacking or is in
excess of the required proportion, the normal plant growth will not take place.
Elements required by plants for their growth and development are called essential
nutrients. The elements considered as essential nutrients are carbon, hydrogen, oxygen,
sulphur, nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium, calcium, magnesium, iron, manganese, boron,
copper, zinc, molybdenum, cobalt and chlorine. All these seventeen elements have
their own roles in the growth and development of plants. Depending on the amount
required by plants, these elements are classified as macronutrients and micronutrients.
Activity 2.23
Try to identify the (a) micronutrients, (b) macronutrients, required for the growth of wheat,
maize, and rice crops, by consulting the books in your library. Share your findings with the
class.
Macronutrients are the elements required in relatively large amounts by plants. These
are nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium, calcium, magnesium, sulphur, carbon, hydrogen and
oxygen.
Micronutrients are the elements required by plants in relatively small (trace) amounts.
These elements are iron, cobalt, zinc, manganese, molybdenum, copper, boron and
chlorine.
The elements carbon, hydrogen and oxygen are obtained by plants from air and water.
These are not considered as mineral nutrients. Nitrogen, phosphorous and potassium
152
IMPORTANT INORGANIC COUMPOUNDS (UNIT 2)
are said to be primary mineral nutrients. The roles of nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium
in the plant growth are discussed below:
Nitrogen is a very important plant nutrient. It is absorbed by plants in the form of
–). In the growth and development of plants, nitrogen is utilized in the
nitrate ions (NO3
synthesis of amino acids, proteins, coenzymes and nucleic acids. The proteins formed
control the metabolic processes that occur in plant cells. Nitrogen is also involved in
the synthesis of chlorophyll to produce a deep green colour.
Phosphorus is an important element without which the growth of plants is impossible.
It facilitates early growth and root formation, quick maturity and promotes seed or
– and
fruit production. Phosphorus is absorbed by plants mainly in the form of H2PO4
2– in small amounts. Phosphorus has a role in the formation of some amino
HPO3
acids and proteins, coenzymes, nucleic acids and high energy phosphate compounds
like Adenosine Triphosphate (ATP).
Potassium is absorbed by plants in the form of the K+ ion. It is a component of
enzymes that facilitate the process of photosynthesis and protein synthesis. It also adjusts
stomata movement. It is the most important ion in controlling the turgidity of plant
cells. It increases in the solute potential (sap concentration) within the cells which
leads to an increase in the amount of water that enters the cells osmotically.
Exercise 2.12
1. What is the importance of the following elements for the growth of food crops?
a nitrogen b phosphorus
c potassium
2.
In what form do plants absorb these elements?
Fertilizers
During the growth and development of plants, the plants consume the essential nutrients
from the soil. The concentration of these nutrients will decrease in the soil. If the
plants are specially food crops, the nutrients can be lost from the soil when the plants
are removed on harvest. So for the soil to be suitable for the growth of plants in the
next round, the nutrients lost must be replaced.
How  can  we  replace  the  nutrients  lost  from  the  soil?  How  can  we  increase  the
crop producing potential of soils? The nutrients lost from the soil can be replaced or
the crop producing potential of soils can be increased by adding the appropriate fertilizers
to the soil.
153
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
What are fertilizers? Fertilizers are materials that are added to soils to increase the
growth, yield or nutrient value of crops. Fertilizers are usually classified as organic
(natural) fertilizers and synthetic or artificial fertilizers.
Organic (natural) fertilizers are those derived from animals and plants. This includes
animal dung, urine and substances obtained from the decay and decomposition of
plants. These fertilizers provide readily available nutrients to plants after some period
of  decay  and  decomposition.  These  fertilizers  can  supply  the  elements  nitrogen,
phosphorus, potassium and various trace elements to the soil.
Synthetic or artificial fertilizers contain all three major plant nutrients i.e., nitrogen,
phosphorous and potassium, and are known as complete fertilizers.
A mixed artificial fertilizer may contain nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium. Such a
type of fertiliser is called a complete fertiliser. The term NPK is used to describe
fertilizers containing the elements nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium.
Examples of artificial fertilizers are ammonium sulphate, (NH4)2SO4, potassium nitrate
(KNO3), ammonium nitrate (NH4NO3), and diammonium hydrogen phosphate, DAP
((NH4)2HPO4).
The most important mineral nutrients that need to be added to the soil are usually
nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium. All the three elements are needed in large quantities.
Commercial fertilizers are normally given a “grade”, which reflects the percentages
they contain of N, P and K by dry weight. For example, a NPK fertilizer may be
described as 10:10:10 indicating that there is 10% of each element in the fertilizer. The
suitable proportions are best determined in relation to the tested fertility of the soil and
the requirements of the particular crop that is being grown on it. This means fertilizers
of the same composition are not used for different purposes. In nitrogen deficient soil,
a fertilizer containing a higher percentage of nitrogen than phosphorus and potassium
must be used. In addition to this, all fertilizers are not used for treatment of all kinds
of soil. For example, ammonium sulphate is more suitable for use in basic soils than in
acidic or neutral soils.
Exercise 2.13
1. Classify the following as organic or synthetic fertilizers:
a NH4NO3
b urea
c (NH4)2SO4
2. Can the same fertilizer be applied to all types of soil? Explain.
Pesticides
Pesticides are chemicals that can be applied to agricultural crops to kill pests which
affect the growth and development of plants. Parasitic fungi, insects and animals like
rodents,  rabbits  and  birds  reduce  crop  yields  or  even  completely  destroy  crops.
154
IMPORTANT INORGANIC COUMPOUNDS (UNIT 2)
Pesticides are used to overcome the damage caused by fungi and pests. The majority
of the pesticides used in agriculture are organic compounds. However, there are some
inorganic substances that serve as pesticides. These include fumigant insecticides that
exist in the vapour phase. Examples of fumigants are hydrogen cyanide (HCN), sulphur
dioxide (SO2), carbon disulphide (CS2) and phosphine (PH3). These pesticides are
mostly used in the treatment of empty transport containers, grain stores, warehouses,
harvested products prior to or during storage and to destroy pests in the soil. The
other inorganic pesticides are mostly copper compounds such as CuCl2, Cu(OH)2,
Cu(NO3)2,  CuSO4,  Cu2O  and  CuCO3. Among  the  inorganic  compounds,  CuSO4
and  Cu2O  are  used  as  fungicides  where  as  HCN,  SO2,  PH3,  CuCl2,  Cu(OH)2,
Cu(NO3)2 and CuCO3 are used as insecticides.
Herbicides
Herbicides are also called weed killers. They are used to control the damage caused
by weeds. Inorganic compounds used as herbicides include ammonium sulphamate
.10H2O), sodium chlorate (NaClO3) and ferrous
((NH4)SO3–NH2), borax (Na2B4O7
sulphate (FeSO4
.7H2O).
Check list
Key  terms  of  the  unit
• acidic oxide
• amphoteric  oxide
• Arrhenius acid
• Arrhenius base
• acid, basic and normal salt
• basic oxide
• Bronsted - Lowery acid
• Bronsted - Lowery base
•
• dilute acid
• deliquescent
• dissociation  constant  for  water  (kw)
efflorescent
•
electrolyte
•
•
flame  test
• hygroscopic
indicator
•
concentrated  acid
Lewis acid
•
Lewis base
•
litmus
•
• molarity
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
• weak  acid
• weak  base
neutral  oxide
neutralization
non-volatile acid
peroxide
pH
plant  nutrient
pOH
salt
strong acid
strong base
universal indicator
155
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Unit Summary
•
•
Inorganic compounds are those compounds that originate from mineral constituents
of the earth’s crust.
Inorganic compounds may be classified as oxides, acids, bases and salts.
• Oxides are binary compounds consisting of oxygen and any other element.
• Most common oxides are classified as acidic, basic, amphoteric, neutral oxides
and peroxides.
• Acidic oxides are oxides of non-metallic elements.
• Basic oxides are oxides of metals.  These metal oxides which dissolve in water
are also called basic anhydrides.
• Amphoteric oxides are those oxides which show the properties of both acids
and bases.
• Neutral oxides are those oxides which do not show basic or acidic properties.
• Peroxides are oxides containing a peroxide (-O-O-) link and the oxidation
state of oxygen is -1.
• Arrhenius acids are substances that release hydrogen ions or protons in aqueous
solution.
• Arrhenius bases are substances that release hydroxide (OH–) ions in aqueous
solution.
• A Brønsted-Lowery acid is a proton-donor.
• A Brønsted-Lowery base is a proton-acceptor.
• A Lewis acid is an electron-pair acceptor.
• A Lewis base is an electron-pair donor.
• Strong acids and strong bases ionize almost completely in aqueous solution.
• Weak acids and weak bases ionize only slightly in aqueous solution.
• pH is the negative logarithm of hydrogen ion concentration pH = –log [H+].
• pOH is the negative logarithm of hydroxide ion concentration pOH = –log
[OH–].
• KW = [H+][OH—] = 1 × 10–14 at 25°C.
• pKw = pH + pOH = 14 at 25°C.
• A salt is an ionic compound containing a cation derived from a base and anion
derived from an acid.
156
IMPORTANT INORGANIC COUMPOUNDS (UNIT 2)
• Salts may be classified as acidic, normal and basic salts.
• An acid salt is formed when ionizable hydrogen atoms of an acid are replaced
partly by a metal ion or ammonium ion.
• A normal salt is formed when all ionizable hydrogen atoms of an acid are
completely replaced by a metal or ammonium ion.
• A basic salt is a salt containing ionizable hydroxide ion.
• Hygroscopic substances absorb water from the atmosphere.
• Deliquescent substances absorb water from the atmosphere and dissolve in
the water absorbed to form solutions.
• Efflorescent substances lose their water of crystallisation to the atmosphere.
• Plant nutrients are minerals required by plants for their growth and development.
• The elements plants need for their growth and development are classified as
macronutrients and micronutrients depending on the amount utilised by them.
• Fertilizers are natural products or synthetic chemicals that are added to the
soil to increase its crop producing potential.
• Synthetic fertilizers are classified as nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium fertilizers.
• Pesticides are chemicals used in agriculture to kill pests that reduce crop yields.
REVIEW  EXERCISE  ON  UNIT  2
Part  I:    Write  the  missing  words  in  your  exercise  book
Acidic
react
litmus
acids
salt
ammonia
Alkalis
hydroxide
soluble
Most oxides of non-metals are   1   oxides, acidic oxides react with   2      to
form a   3  and water. Some acidic oxides   4   with water to form solutions of
acids. These solutions turn blue  5  red. Alkalis are  6   bases. Examples of
alkalis are  7   and sodium   8 .   Alkalis react with   9  to form a  10   and
water.
157
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Part  II:  A    Match  the  substances  on  the  left  with  those
properties  stated  on  the  right
1. Vinegar (pH ª 4.5)
2. dish-washing powder (pH ª 12)
3.
soap (pH ª 7.5)
4. distilled water (pH ª 7)
5.
concentrated hydrochloric acid
a strongly acid
b weakly alkaline
c neutral
d strong alkaline
e weakly acidic
Part  II:  B    Match  the  ions  or  molecules  on  the  left  with
the  correct  test  reagent  on  the  right
6.
7.
Iron (II) ion
Iodide ion
8. Sulphate ion
9. Carbon dioxide
10. Nitrate ion
a silver nitrate
b acidified barium nitrate
c heat with aluminium
d iron (II) sulphate and sulphuric acid
e sodium hydroxide
f limewater
Part  III:
Choose  the  correct  answer  from  the  given
alternatives
11. A solution has a pH of 9. The solution is best described as:
a strongly alkaline
b weakly acidic
c weakly alkaline
d strongly acidic
12. Which one of these statements about magnesium oxide is true:
a it reacts with hydrochloric acid to form a salt
b it reacts with sodium hydroxide to form a salt
c it reacts with water to form an acid
d it reacts with basic oxide to form a base
13. Sodium hydroxide is added to solution M. A reddish-brown precipitate is
formed, solution M contains:
a iron (II) ions
b iron (III) ions
c copper (II) ions
d silver (I) ions
14. Which one of these statements about fertilizers is true?
158
IMPORTANT INORGANIC COUMPOUNDS (UNIT 2)
a ammonium nitrate can be used as a fertilizer
b primary fertilizers contain nitrogen, sulphur and iron
c fertilizers are added to the soil to make it more alkaline
d fertilizers are made by combining calcium with oxygen
15. Which of the following is not the characteristic of an acid:
a an acid changes the colour of an indicator
b  an acid has a bitter taste
c an acid ionizes in water
d an acid produces hydronium ions in water
16. When an acid reacts with an active metal:
a hydronium ion concentration increases
b metal forms anions
c hydrogen gas is produced
d carbon dioxide gas is produced
17. Which of the following is the correct definition of a Brønsted-Lowry base?
a an electron pair donor
b an electron pair acceptor
c a proton donor
d a proton acceptor
18. The pH of a solution is 6.32. What is the pOH of the solution:
a 6.32
b 4.8  ×  10¯7
C 7.68
d 2.1  ×  10–8
19. A neutral aqueous solution:
a has a 7.0 M H3O+ concentration
b contains neither hydronium ion nor hydroxide ion
c has an equal number of hydronium ions and hydroxide ions
d has an unequal number of hydronium ions and hydroxide ions
20. Which of the following solutions would have a pH value greater than 7:
a [OH–]  =  2.4  ×  10–2  M
b [H3O+]  =  1.53  ×  10–2 M
c 0.0001 M HCl
d [OH¯]  =  4.4  ×  10–9  M
159
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Part  V:    Give  Short  Answers
21. Write equations for the reaction of zinc oxide with:
a hydrochloric acid
b aqueous sodium hydroxide
22. Calcium oxide reacts with hydrochloric acid to form calcium chloride and water.
a Write a balanced equation for this reaction.
b Farmers often add calcium oxide to the soil. Explain why they do this.
23. Fertilizers are spread on fields by farmers.
a Why do farmers use fertilizers?
b State the names of three elements most commonly found in fertilizers.
c Ammonium sulphate is a fertilizer. Describe how you can make ammonium
sulphate in the laboratory from aqueous ammonia and sulphuric acid.
d Ammonium nitrate is also a fertilizer. Write a word equation to show how
ammonium nitrate can be produced.
24. State the names of a suitable acid and alkali you can use to make each of the
following fertilizers:
a ammonium sulphate
b potassium phosphate
c ammonium nitrate
25. A classmate states, “All compounds containing H atoms are acids, and all
compounds containing OH groups are bases.” Do you agree? Give examples
and explanations.
26. For the following three reactions, identify the reactants that are Arrhenius bases,
Brønsted-Lowry bases, and/or Lewis bases. State the type(s) of bases in each
case. Explain your answer.
a NaOH  (s)  Æ  Na+ (aq)  +  OH– (aq)
b HF  (aq)  +  H2O  (l)  Æ  F–(aq)  +  H3O+ (aq)
c H+ (aq)  +  NH3 (aq)  Æ  NH+
4 (aq)
160
T
I
N
3U
Electrochemistry
Unit  Outcomes
After  completing  this  unit,  you  will  be  able  to:
(cid:40) understand  how  a  chemical  reaction  produces  an  electric  current  and  how
electricity brings about chemical reactions in electrochemical cells;
(cid:40) understand  the  differences  between  metallic  conduction  and  electrolytic
conduction;
(cid:40) develop  skills  in  writing  the  oxidation  half-reaction,  reduction  half-reaction
and cell reaction for the electrolysis of molten electrolytes that occur in electrolytic
cells;
(cid:40) know  three  types  of  voltaic  cell;
(cid:40) understand the difference between electrolytic cells and voltaic cells;
(cid:40) appreciate the industrial applications of electrolysis in the production of certain
metals, non metals and chemicals and electroplating, and purification of metals;
(cid:40) demonstrate  scientific  inquiry  skills:  observing,  comparing  and  contrasting,
measuring, asking questions, designing experiment, interpreting data, predicting,
classifying, communicating and problem solving.
MAIN  CONTENTS
Introduction
3.1
3.2 Electrical Conductivity
3.3 Electrolysis
3.4 Galvanic (Voltaic) Cells
3.5
Industrial Application of Electrolysis
– Unit  Summary
– Review Exercise
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
3.1    INTRODUCTION
Competencies
By  the  end  of  this  section,  you  will  be  able  to:
•
explain electrochemistry;
Activity 3.1
Discuss  the following in groups and one of your group members will present your ideas
to the class.
Dry cells which we use in portable radios and flashlights are energy converters.
a
Peel the external cover of a dry cell battery and observe the components. How many
different components do you see? What are they?
b What  type  of  energy  do  we  get  from  dry  cells?  How  does  the  cell  generate  this
energy?
Electrochemistry is a field of chemistry that deals with the relationship between
electrical  energy  and  chemical  energy.  It  is  a  field  of  chemistry  concerned  with
processes that bring about chemical reactions (changes) using electricity or generating
electrical energy from chemical reactions. Thus, electrical energy and chemical energy
are inter-convertible.
The devices that convert chemical energy to electrical energy or electrical energy to
chemical energy are called electrochemical cells. These cells can be classified as
electrolytic cells and galvanic or voltaic cells. Electrolytic cells use electrical energy to
bring about chemical changes that produce many desirable substances in our daily
lives. Galvanic or voltaic cells convert chemical energy to electrical energy. The cells
we use in flashlight batteries, wrist watches, cameras and car batteries are examples
of Galvanic cells. The reactions between the chemicals in these cells are responsible
for the generation of electricity.
Electrochemistry has practical applications in our modern world and in everyday life.
Electrolysis is used to manufacture metals like sodium, aluminium; non-metals like
chlorine, hydrogen and compounds like sodium hydroxide and sodium hypochlorite.
Electrochemistry  also  has  a  role  in  the  production  of  dry  cells  and  lead  storage
batteries used in the automotive industry.
162
ELECTROCHEMISTRY (UNIT 3)
3.2    ELECTRICAL  CONDUCTIVITY
Competencies
After  completing  this  subunit,  you  will  be  able  to:
• define electrical conductivity;
explain metallic conductivity;
•
explain electrolytic conductivity;
•
• distinguish between metallic and electrolytic conduction;
• distinguish between weak and strong electrolytes;
• use conductivity apparatus to test the conductivity of substances.
Why do metals conduct electricity? Do you know any non-metal, which conducts
electricity? Electrical conductivity is the capacity of a substance to transmit electricity.
The materials that allow the passage of electricity through them are called electrical
conductors.
Conductivity apparatus is used to test the conductivity of different solid substances or
that  of  aqueous  solutions  of  different  compounds.  The  basic  components  of
conductivity apparatus include electric wires, electrodes, a d.c. source or dry cells, a
switch and light bulb. The components of the apparatus can be connected to one
another as shown in Figure 3.1.
+
–
Battery
Switch
Carbon
electrodes
Aqueous solution
of a substance
Figure 3.1   Conductivity cell.
163
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Depending on the nature of the particles responsible for the flow of electric charges
through conductors, electrical conductivity can be classified as metallic conductivity or
electrolytic conductivity.
a)    Metallic  conductivity
Activity 3.2
1. With  the  help  of  your  teacher  collect  pieces  of  iron  bars,  zinc  metal,  sodium  chloride
crystal, rubber stoppers, rubber bands, coins, stone, glass, pieces of dry wood, a spoon, a
pencil, chalk and solid sulphur.
2. Identify  the  substances  that  conduct  electricity  and  classify  them  as  conductors  and
non-conductors.
3. From  your  observations  above,  (a)  what  type  of  solids  conduct  electricity,  (b)  why  do
you  think  some  of  the  materials  conduct  electricity?  (c)  Does  graphite  have  the  same
nature as the other conductors of electricity?
Discuss in groups and present it to the class
Why do metals transmit electric current? What are the charge carriers in metals?
Metallic conductivity refers to the transmission of electric current through metals. This
transmission is directly related to the structure of metals. In atoms of metals, the
valence electrons are bounded very loosely to their respective nuclei and move very
easily throughout the metal. This means metals contain electrons that do not have fixed
positions and are relatively free to move. These electrons are called free electrons or
mobile electrons or delocalized electrons. Thus, the structure of the metals can be
regarded as a series of positively charged metal ions, or cations, in a sea of negatively
charged electrons.
+
+
Electron
in
+
+
+
+
+
+
Electron
out
Free Electrons
Nucleus
Figure 3.2 Electrical conductivity in metals.
164
ELECTROCHEMISTRY (UNIT 3)
The electrons entering the metal displace (repel) the freely moving electrons at the
point of entry. The displaced electrons occupy new positions by pushing neighbouring
electrons ahead. This will continue until electrons are forced out of the wire at the
opposite end. So, metallic conductivity is caused by the flow of mobile electrons due
to repulsion exerted on them from the electrons entering the metal from the source of
electricity. The charge carriers in metallic conduction are electrons. Hence, metallic
conductivity is also called electronic conductivity.
Non-metals are generally non-conductors of electricity, because they do not have freely
moving electrons. Graphite is a form of carbon in which the carbon atoms are bonded in
trigonal planar fashion to the three other carbon atoms, to form inter-connected hexagonal
rings, as shown in Figure3.3. Electrons move freely through the hexagonal layers, making
graphite a good conductor of electricity.
Figure 3.3 Structure of graphite (The blue colour is added to emphasize the planarity of the carbon layers.)
b)    Electrolytic  conductivity
Electrolytes are substances that transmit electricity in a molten state or in aqueous
solution. Based on their degree of ionization or the extent to which they produce
anions  and  cations,  electrolytes  can  be  classified  as  strong  electrolytes  or  weak
electrolytes. Strong electrolytes ionize almost completely in aqueous solutions. Weak
electrolytes  ionize  only  slightly.  When  electrical  potential  is  applied  through  an
electrolyte solution, the positive ions (cations) move in one direction and the negative
ions (anions) move in the opposite direction. This movement of ions through the
electrolyte,  brought  about  by  the  application  of  electricity,  is  called  electrolytic
conductivity. Hence, the charge-carriers in electrolytic conductivity are ions (anions
and cations).
165
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Project 3.1
Construct a conductivity apparatus in your group. To construct the apparatus,
you will need a light bulb, three dry cells, some electric wire, two graphite
electrodes and a switch. You can get the graphite electrodes by peeling off
two old dry cells. A graphite electrode is the long cylindrical black rod inside
the cell. Ask your teacher for further assistance. Assemble the materials as
shown in Figure 3.4. Demonstrate the experimental set-up to the class.
Experiment 3.1
Conductivity  of  electrolytes
Objectives: To test the conductivity of different electrolytes.
Materials required: Conductivity apparatus, distilled water, table salt, copper
sulphate, hydrochloric acid, sodium hydroxide, acetic acid, ammonia solution,
molten lead bromide and sugar solution.
Procedure:
1. Arrange the conductivity apparatus as shown in Figure 3.4.
Battery
–
+
Switch
Anode (+)
Cathode (–)
Aqueous solution
of an electrolyte
Figure 3.4  Conductivity of electrolytic solution.
2. Pour some distilled water in the beaker, dip the electrodes into the water and
turn the switch on.
3. Repeat the experiment with separate solutions of table salt, copper sulphate,
hydrochloric acid, sodium hydroxide, acetic acid, ammonia and sugar solutions
(use  1.0  M  solutions  of  each).
166
ELECTROCHEMISTRY (UNIT 3)
Observations  and  Analysis:
a Does the bulb glow when the switch is turned on?
b Solutions of which substances make the bulb glow and not glow, when you
turn on the switch?
c Solutions of which substances make the bulb to glow with a:
i
ii
bright light?
dim light?
d Classify the substances used in this experiment as strong conductors, weak
conductors and non-conductors by completing the table below:
Strong conductors
Weak conductors
Non-conductors
e Which substances in the experiment are used as:
i  strong electrolytes
ii  weak electrolytes
Write a laboratory report on what you have observed and submit to your teacher.
Exercise 3.1
1. Explain the difference between i) metallic and electrolytic conductivity ii)
electrolyte and non-electrolyte.
2. Why do NaCl and CaCl2 conduct electricity when they are dissolved in water
or when they are in the molten form, but not in the solid state?
3. Why are solutions of strong electrolytes better conductors of electricity than
weak electrolytes?
The substances that do not transmit electricity either in solution or in a molten state are
called non-electrolytes. Ionic compounds are non-conductors of electricity in the solid
state. This is because their ions are held at fixed positions and cannot move. Other
examples of non-electrolytes include sugar, ethanol, oil, benzene, and liquid nitrogen.
3.3    ELECTROLYSIS
Competencies
After  completing  this  section,  you  will  be  able  to:
• define the term electrolysis;
• define the terms electrode, anode, cathode, electrolyte, anion and cation;
167
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
• describe an electrolytic cell;
• draw and label a diagram of an electrolytic cell;
• define the terms half-cell reaction and cell reaction;
• write the oxidation half-reaction, reduction half-reaction and cell reaction for the
electrolysis of molten or fused electrolytes;
• perform an activity to show the electrolysis of molten electrolytes.
Activity 3.3
Give an opinion on the following questions and present your ideas to the class.
1. How do you identify whether an electrode is a cathode or an anode?
2. Can  you  suggest  why  positive  and  negative  ions  are  named  as  cations  and  anions
respectively?
Electrolysis is a process in which electrical energy is used to produce chemical
changes.  This  process  is  carried  out  in  an  electrochemical  cell  known  as  an
electrolytic or electrolysis cell. A typical electrolysis cell contains a source of direct
electric  current,  an  electrolyte  and  connecting  wires  that  join  the  source  to  the
electrodes.
Electrodes are strips of metal or graphite that allow electrons to leave or enter the
electrolytes. They can be chemically active or inert. Active electrodes directly take
part in reactions. Examples include zinc and magnesium. Inert electrodes do not
directly  take  part  in  chemical  reactions.  They  only  serve  to  transfer  electrons.
Examples include platinum and graphite.
The electrode connected to the positive terminal of the source is positively charged
and is called the anode. It is the electrode through which electrons leave the cell. The
electrode connected to the negative terminal of the source is negatively charged and is
called the cathode. It is the electrode through which electrons enter the cell.
During electrolysis, the ions of the electrolyte migrate to the electrodes of the opposite
charge. The positive ions are attracted to the cathode and are called cations. Since
the cathode has excess electrons, the cations will discharge by gaining electrons. This
process of gaining electrons is called reduction.  The negative ions are attracted by the
positive electrode (anode) and are called anions. These ions are discharged by losing
electrons at the anode. This process of losing electrons is called oxidation.
Thus, the cathode is the electrode at which reduction occurs and the anode is the
electrode at which oxidation takes place.
168
ELECTROCHEMISTRY (UNIT 3)
The reaction that takes place at each electrode is known as a half-cell reaction. Oxidation
half-reactions occur at the anode and reduction half reaction at the cathode. The net
reaction that takes place in the electrolytic cell is known as a cell reaction. This overall
reaction  is  also  referred  to  as  an  oxidation-reduction  reaction  or  redox  reaction.  So
electrolysis is a process in which electric energy is used to bring about an oxidation-
reduction reaction. It is also defined as the decomposition of an electrolyte, using electricity.
The  process  of  electrolysis  includes  electrolyzing  aqueous  solutions  of  electrolytes.
However, at this level, electrolysis of molten electrolytes will be discussed.
Electrolysis of Molten (Fused) Electrolytes
When ionic solids melt, they dissociates into positive and negative ions that are not
held  in  fixed  positions.  To  understand  the  chemical  reactions  that  occur  during
electrolysis, consider a hypothetical electrolyte, MX, that dissociate into M+ and X–.
MX melting→ M+  + X–
During electrolysis, the cations, M+ ions, move toward the cathode, gain one electron
each and become M atoms. The anions, X– ions, move toward the anode, lose one
electron and become X atoms. The reaction at each electrode and the entire reaction
in the electrolytic cell are represented by the following equations.
Cathode reaction:  M+ + 1e– Æ M (Reduction-half reaction)
X–Æ X +  1e– (Oxidation  half-reaction)
Anode reac tion:
M+ + X–
Cell reaction:
→ M + X (Oxidation-reduction)
electrolysis
Figure 3.5  Electrolysis of fused Electrolyte, MX.
Here, it is very important to realize that the number of electrons gained by the cations
at the cathode is exactly equal to the number of electrons lost by anions at the anode
during  electrolysis.  This  is  true  for  any  oxidation-reduction  (redox)  reaction.
Moreover, oxidation and reduction reactions proceed simultaneously. Reduction and
oxidation cannot occur separately. Oxidation is always accompanied by reduction and
there cannot be reduction in the absence of oxidation, and vice versa.
169
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Electrolysis of Molten (Fused) lead bromide
Experiment 3.2
Electrolysis  of  fused  lead  Bromide  (PbBr2 )
Objectives: To observe substances produced at the electrodes during electrolysis.
Materials required: Stand and clamp, two graphite electrodes, wires, switch, light
bulb, test tube (bigger in size), Bunsen burner, lead bromide crystals.
Precaution: Bromine causes very severe burn on the skin.
Procedure:
1. Assemble the materials as shown in Figure 3.6.
+
–
Bulb
Switch
Bromine gas
Molten lead
bromide
Molten lead
Figure 3.6 Electrolysis of Fused Lead Bromide.
2. Place  small  amount  of  lead  bromide  crystals  in  a  beaker.  Insert  the  two
electrodes, as shown in Figure 3.6, until they are in contact with the lead
bromide crystals. Then turn on the switch. Does the bulb glow?
3. Heat the lead bromide in a beaker gently, using a Bunsen burner. When the
lead bromide melts, turn on the switch.
Observations  and  Analysis:
1. Does the bulb glow? If yes, what is the reason?
2. Write the dissociation reaction for PbBr2.
3.
4. Write the products formed at each electrode.
5.
Write a laboratory report on your observation and present to the class.
Identify the ions which migrate to the respective electrodes.
Identify the half reactions as oxidation and reduction.
170
ELECTROCHEMISTRY (UNIT 3)
Exercise 3.2
Consider the electrolysis of KI and NaCl
a
Identify ions which migrate towards the anode.
b Identify ions which migrate towards the cathode.
c Write down the half-reactions at the anode and cathode and cell reactions.
d Write the substances produced at the electrodes.
3.4    GALVANIC  (VOLTAIC)  CELLS
Competencies
After  completing  this  section,  you  will  be  able  to:
•
construct a simple galvanic cell, using strips of zinc, copper, ZnSO4 and CuSO4
solutions;
• mention different types of voltaic cells;
• describe how voltaic cells can be used to make commercially useful batteries;
• distinguish between voltaic cell and an electrolytic cell;
• describe voltaic cells.
Activity 3.4
Discuss the following and present your ideas to the class:
1. Have you seen the expiry date written on dry cells? Can we get the expected amount
of  electric  energy  after  the  expiry  date  of  the  cell;  why?
2. Do we throw away car batteries when they fail to generate electricity? Explain.
3. Galvanic cells available in the market have positive and negative terminals. Does this
show that they also possess an anode and cathode?
In the previous section, electrolytic cells were defined as electrochemical cells in which
electricity was used to bring about chemical reactions. The chemical reaction in an
electrolytic cell is caused by electricity and is a non-spontaneous redox reaction. This
means the reaction can proceed only in the presence of electricity. If we stop passing
electricity through the electrolyte, the reaction will stop.
In a Galvanic cell, the reaction that occurs inside the cell is a spontaneous redox
reaction. The reaction that occurs inside the cell will proceed on its own without any
171
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
external  influence.  This  reaction  enables  a  galvanic  cell  to  generate  electricity.
Therefore,  Galvanic  cells  are  electrochemical  cells  in  which  spontaneous  redox
reactions generate electricity. They convert chemical energy into electrical energy.
Galvanic or voltaic cells are classified into primary cells, secondary cells, and fuel
cells. For this level, only primary and secondary cells will be discussed.
Primary  Cells
Primary galvanic cells are those cells that are not rechargeable. This is because the
electrode reaction as well as the entire cell reaction cannot be reversed on recharging.
Once the chemicals in the cells that serve as reactants are completely used up, it is
not possible to recover them by charging the cells. Examples of primary cells include
Daniel’s  cell  and  zinc-carbon  (Leclanche)  dry  cells.  The  common  feature  of  all
Galvanic cells is that they contain two electrodes in contact with an electrolyte. The
electrolyte in a Galvanic cell can be in the form of a solution or a paste. The cells
containing electrolytes in the form of solution are called wet cells, and those containing
electrolytes in the form of paste are called dry cells.
An example of a wet primary cell is the Daniell cell. It consists of a zinc strip placed
in ZnSO4 solution in one compartment and a copper strip placed in copper sulphate,
CuSO4, solution in another compartment. Each compartment is called a half-cell, and
the  reactions  occurring  in  each  compartment  are  called  half-cell  reactions.  The
solutions in the two compartments are linked by a salt bridge as shown in Figure 3.7.
The salt bridge consists of  a delivery tube filled with warm mixture of conc. KCl
solution and agar solution, which is then allowed to cool so that it sets in the form of
a gel.
Alternately, a porous barrier is used to separate the solutions. The zinc atoms from the
zinc electrode lose two electrons each and become zinc ions, Zn2+. The ions enter
into the solution, and the electrons remain on the electrode and flow through the
external wire to the copper electrode. This situation causes the zinc electrode to be
negative and the solution to have an overall positive charge.
On the other hand, in the compartment containing the copper electrode, copper ions,
Cu2+, from the solution move to the cathode and gain two electrons each, to become
copper  atoms  and  deposit  on  the  surface  of  the  copper  electrode.  This  condition
causes the electrode to be positive and the solution to have a negative charge.
172
ELECTROCHEMISTRY (UNIT 3)
Zinc electrode
Copper electrode
Zinc
Copper
2+
–
Cu + 2e
Cu
Reduction
Figure 3.7  The Daniell Cell.
Note that the anode is the negative electrode and the cathode is the positive electrode
in galvanic cells, as opposed to the situation in an electrolytic cell. But, it is always
oxidation that occurs at the anode and reduction at the cathode.
The half-cell reactions and the cell reaction in Daniell cells are represented as
Anode reaction: Zn (s)  Æ  Zn2+ (aq) + 2e–
Cathode reaction: Cu2+ (aq) + 2e–  Æ  Cu (s)
Cell reaction: Zn (s) + Cu2+ (aq)  Æ  Zn2+ (aq) + Cu (s)
Due to the oxidation-reduction reaction in the cell, the Daniell cell generates electricity.
What is the purpose of the salt bridge in Figure 3.7?
From the preceding discussion, it is clear that the solution in which the zinc electrode
is placed has an overall positive charge while the solution in the copper compartment
has a negative charge. Unless the two solutions are neutral, the cell cannot produce
electricity. Thus, the purpose of the salt bridge is to:
a maintain electrical neutrality between the two solutions. In this process the anions
(negative ions) from the salt bridge diffuse into the solution containing the zinc
electrodes, and the cations (positive ions) diffuse into the solution containing
the copper electrode to compensate for the excess positive and negative charges,
respectively;
173
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
b allow electrical contact between the two solutions;
c prevent mixing of the electrode solutions.
Although, wet cells like the Daniell cell can serve as a source of electricity, they are
not portable since they contain solutions. Due to this practical problem of using wet
cells, dry cells were developed.
In a dry cell, a moist electrolyte paste is used instead of solutions. This cell was
invented by Georges Leclanche, a French chemist.
A zinc-carbon dry cell, which is also called a Leclanche cell (Figure 3.8) is used in
devices like portable radios and flashlights. The cell consists of a zinc cup that serves
as  the  anode.  The  zinc  cup  is  filled  with  a  paste  of  manganese  (IV)  oxide,  zinc
chloride, ammonium chloride and powdered carbon. A graphite rod, immersed in this
paste, serves as the cathode.
Figure 3.8   Zinc-carbon dry cell (Leclanche cell).
A  zinc-carbon  dry  cell  produces  electricity  as  a  result  of  a  spontaneous  redox
reaction. Oxidation occurs at the zinc cup.
Oxidation: Zn (s) Æ Zn2+ (aq) + 2e–
Reduction takes place at the graphite (carbon) electrode.
2MnO2 (s)  +  2NH+
4 (aq)  +  2e–    Æ    Mn2O3 (s)  +  2NH3 (aq)  +  H2O  (l)
A build up of ammonia gas around the cathode may disrupt the current. However, this
is  prevented  by  the  reaction  between  Zn2+  and  NH3  to  form  a  complex  ion,
[Zn(NH3)2]2+ which crystallizes as a chloride salt.
Zn2+ (aq) + 2NH3 (g) + 2Cl– (aq) Æ Zn(NH3)2 Cl2 (s)
174
ELECTROCHEMISTRY (UNIT 3)
The overall reaction occurring in a Leclanche cell is:
Zn (s) + 2MnO2 (s) + 2NH4Cl (aq) Æ Zn(NH3)2Cl2 (s) + Mn2O3 (s) + H2O (l)
There are other examples of dry cells, such as the alkaline dry cell, silver oxide cell,
and copper oxide cell.
Exercise 3.3
1.
In a Daniell cell, copper and zinc are used as electrodes. Which metal serves
as an anode and which one as a cathode? Is the anode the positive or the
negative terminal in this cell?
2. Which electrode is negative and which one is positive in the Leclanche cell? Is
the polarity of the electrodes in Galvanic cells similar to that of the electrodes
in electrolytic cells?
3. Why do we refer to the redox reactions in electrolytic and voltaic cells as non-
spontaneous and spontaneous, respectively?
Experiment 3.3
Constructing  Simple  Galvanic  Cells
Objectives: To design and construct a simple Galvanic cell.
Materials  required:  1.0  M  solutions  of  ZnSO4,  1.0  M  solutions  of  CuSO4,
concentrated KCl solution, zinc and copper strips, electric wires, beakers, a
salt bridge, a tomato or lemon, magnesium ribbon, zinc, iron and aluminium
metals.
Procedure:
1. Put  about  150  mL  of  1.0  M  ZnSO4  solution  in  one  beaker  and  the  same
amount of 1.0 M CuSO4 solution in another beaker. Immerse a zinc strip in
the beaker containing the ZnSO4 solution, and immerse a copper strip in the
copper sulphate solution. Attach electric wires to the electrodes and a voltmeter
as shown in Figure 3.7. Connect the solutions in the two beakers by yarn
(thread used in kerosene stoves). Soak the yarn in concentrated KCl solution.
2.
Insert a magnesium ribbon and a copper strip into a raw tomato or lemon.
The two metals should be at least 0.5 cm apart and should not touch each
other. Attach magnesium and copper strips to the negative and positive ends of
a voltmeter, respectively, using electric wires.
175
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
3. Repeat the same procedure using metals like Fe, Al, Zn in place of Magnesium
and see which of the metals gives the greatest voltage and which one the least.
Observations  and  Analysis:
A For the cell in procedure 1
1. What do you observe at each electrode in this cell?
2. What is the direction of electron flow in the external circuit?
3. Which metal serves as the   a) anode    b) cathode
4. At which electrode does   a) oxidation   b) reduction  occur?
5. Write the   a) anode   b) cathode and   c) cell reaction
B For the cell in procedure 2
1. Do you observe deflection of the pointer in the volt meter?
2. Which of the metals has the greatest voltage and which one the least when
coupled with copper?
3. Is there any relationship between the voltage produced and the reactivity of
the metals?
Write a laboratory report and submit to your teacher.
Secondary  Cells
Unlike primary cells, secondary cells are rechargeable. The electrode reactions can be
reversed, and the original reactants can be regenerated. This can be achieved by passing
a direct current through the cell. The process is called charging or recharging.
A secondary cell needs to be recharged when it stops producing electricity. A lead
storage battery is an example of a secondary cell.
A lead Storage Battery is the common automobile battery that usually delivers either 6
or 12 volts, depending on the number of cells used in its construction. The inside of
the battery consists of galvanic cells connected in series. A fully-charged lead-acid cell
is made up of a stack of alternating lead and lead (IV) oxide plates isolated from each
other by porous separators. The individual cells contain a number of lead anodes
connected  together,  plus  a  number  of  cathodes  composed  of  PbO2,  also  joined
together. These electrodes are immersed in 35% sulphuric acid, which serves as an
electrolyte.
A single lead-storage cell delivers 2 volts. Therefore, a 12 V battery contains six cells
connected in series.
176
ELECTROCHEMISTRY (UNIT 3)
Figure 3.9   Lead - Storage Battery.
When a lead-storage battery is in operation (on discharge), the following reactions
occur at the electrodes:
Anode  reactions:      Pb  (s)  +  SO2–
4    (aq)    Æ    PbSO4 (s)  +  2e–
Cathode reactions: PbO2 (s) + 4H+ (aq) + SO2–
and the overall reaction is:
4   (aq) + 2e– Æ PbSO4 (s) + 2H2O (l)
Pb  (s)  +  PbO2 (s)  +  4H+ (aq)  2SO2–
4    (aq)  Æ  2PbSO4 (s)  +  2H2O  (l)
From  the  electrode  reactions  it  can  be  noticed  that  PbSO4  is  produced  at  both
electrodes.
Unlike primary cells a lead-storage battery is rechargeable when the battery runs
down.  The  electrode  reactions  can  be  reversed  by  placing  a  potential  across  the
electrodes that is slightly larger than that which the battery can deliver. The reaction
that  takes  place  on  recharging  a  lead  storage  battery  is  given  by  the  following
equation.
2PbSO4 (s)  +  2H2O  (l)    Æ    Pb  (s)  +  PbO2 (s)  +  2H2SO4 (aq)
What are the differences between voltaic cells and electrolytic cells?
Activity 3.5
Compare and contrast between voltaic and electrolytic cells. List the differences between
voltaic cells and electrolytic cells, and discuss with your classmates.
177
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Exercise 3.4
1.   Explain the differences between primary and secondary cells.
2. What  substances  are  used  as  the  anode,  cathode  and  electrolyte  in  a  lead
storage battery?
3. What happens to the concentration of sulphuric acid when a lead storage battery
is on discharge?
4. Write the overall reactions taking place in a lead storage battery when it is
discharging.
3.5    INDUSTRIAL  APPLICATIONS  OF  ELECTROLYSIS
Competencies
After  completing  this  section,  you  will  be  able  to:
• describe selected industrial applications of electrolysis;
Activity 3.6
1. The copper used for the transmission of electric current is supposed to be 100% pure.
What happens if the copper is impure?
2. How many articles in your house are electroplated? Make a list. What is the purpose of
electroplating?
Discuss in groups and share your opinions with your classmates.
Each day, our lives are touched directly or indirectly by the products of electrolysis.
Electrolysis has important industrial applications. It is used for:
a) The  production  of  chemicals  like  sodium  hydroxide,  from
electrolysis  of  brine  (concentrated  NaCl  solution),  using
inert  electrodes.
The reactions that take place at the electrodes (when graphite electrodes are used)
are as follows:
Anode reaction: 2Cl– (aq)  Æ  Cl2 (g) + 2e–
Cathode reaction: 2H2O (l) + 2e– Æ H2 (g) + 2OH– (aq)
The overall cell reaction is:
2NaCl  (aq)  +  2H2O  (l)  Æ  2Na+ (aq)  +  2OH– (aq)  +  Cl2 (g)  +  H2 (g)
178
ELECTROCHEMISTRY (UNIT 3)
b)    For  the  production  of  metals  and  non-metals.
The non-metals like H2, Cl2, F2 etc are manufactured on an industrial scale by the
process called electrolysis. The metal aluminium is extracted industrially by the Hall
Process. This process involves the electrolysis of molten alumina (Al2O3) mixed with
some amount of cryolite, Na3AlF6. The role of cryolite is to reduce the melting point
of  alumina  from  2000°C  to  1000°C.  The  vessel  holding  the  molten  mixture
(Figure  3.8)  is  made  up  of  iron  lined  with  carbon,  which  serves  as  the  cathode.
Carbon (graphite) rods that serve as the anode are inserted into the melt. When the
molten mixture is electrolyzed, pure aluminium is produced. The reactions at the
electrodes are:
Anode reaction:
Cathode reaction:
Overall reaction:
2
→
2–
( )
6O l
–
l  + 12e
( )
(l)  +  6O (l)
4Al
4Al
→
3+
3+
2–
3O  (g)  +  12e
–
4Al (l)
→
3O (g)  +  4Al (l)
2
Figure 3.10   Production of Aluminium by Hall Process.
c)    For  the  Purification  of  Metals.
Activity 3.7
For  electrolytic  and  voltaic  cells,  the  cell  reaction  is  the  sum  of  anode  and  cathode  half-
reactions. For electrolytic cell used to purify copper, there is no net (overall) reaction.
a Explain why this is so.
b Does this process mean wastage of time, labour and energy? Why? Discuss in groups
and present your opinion o the rest of the class.
179
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Another important application of electrolysis is the purification of metals like copper.
When first separated from its ore, copper metal is about 99% pure with nickel, silver,
gold and platinum as major impurities. In the refining process, the impure copper is
used as the anode, copper metal of high purity used as cathode, and copper sulphate,
CuSO4 solution and aqueous H2SO4 as the electrolyte.
When electrolysis is carried out, copper and impurities that are more easily oxidized
than  copper,  such  as  nickel,  will  go  into  the  solution.  Copper  passes  through  the
solution and deposits on the cathode, while the impurities remain in solution. Impurities
like silver and gold are less easily oxidized and do not dissolve but fall away from the
anode as ‘sludge’. The electrode reaction in the purification of copper is the following:
Anode reaction:
Cu (s)
→
2
+
Cu (aq) 2e
+
−
Cathode reaction:
2Cu (aq) 2e
+
+
−
→
Cu (s)
During the process, the size of the impure copper anode decreases and that of the
pure copper cathode increases.
Figure 3.11   Purification of Copper by Electrolysis.
Always remember that, in the purification of metals by electrolysis, the impure metal
should  be  used  as  the  anode,  the  pure  form  of  the  metal  as  the  cathode  and  an
electrolyte should contain soluble salt (ions) of the metal to be purified. The process
of purifying metals by electrolysis is called electrorefining.
180
ELECTROCHEMISTRY (UNIT 3)
d)  Electroplating
Activity 3.8
When  zinc  electrode  is  dipped  in  copper  sulphate  solution,  part  of  the  electrode  in  the
solution  will  be  covered  with    a  reddish  brown  layer  of  copper.  Can  this  process  be
considered as electroplating? Explain. Discuss in groups and present your opinion to the
class.
What  is  the  purpose  of  electroplating?
Electroplating is a process of covering the surface of a metal (metal article) with a
thin layer of another metal. Using this process, metals that easily corrode can be
protected by a thin coating of another metal that resists corrosion. For example, tin
cans are steel cans with a thin coating of tin, and chrome-plated bumpers are used for
automobiles. Thus, the main objective of electroplating is to protect an article from
corrosion and to give articles a beautiful appearance. In the process of electroplating,
the pure plating metal should be used as the anode, the article (metal) to be plated
the as cathode and a solution containing ions of the plating metal as the electrolyte.
For example, to produce a silver-plated copper article, say, a medal, one should
use silver as the anode, the copper medal as the cathode and silver nitrate solution as
the electrolyte (Figure 3.12).
D.C. source
Silver (Anode)
Copper medal
(Cathode)
AgNO solution
3
Figure 3.12   Electroplating Copper medal with Silver.
The reactions that occur at the electrodes during electroplating are:
Anode reaction:
Ag (s)
→
+
Ag (aq) + 1e−
Cathode reaction:
+
Ag (aq) + 1e
–
→
Ag (s)
181
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Check list
Key  terms  of  the  unit
cathode
conductivity apparatus
• anode
•
•
• Daniel cell
•
•
•
•
•
•
electrical conductivity
electrochemical cell
electrochemistry
electrode
electrolysis
electrolyte
electrolytic cell
electroplating
electrorefining
•
•
•
• half - cell
• half - reaction
• hall process
• primary cell
salt bridge
•
secondary cell
•
voltaic (galvanic) cell
•
Unit Summary
• Electrochemistry is a field of chemistry that studies how chemical reactions
produce  electricity  and  how  electricity  is  used  to  bring  about  chemical
reactions in electrochemical cells.
• Electrochemistry  deals  with  the  relationship  that  exists  between  chemical
energy and electrical energy.
• Electrochemical cells include electrolytic cells and Galvanic (voltaic) cells.
• Electrical  conductivity  is  the  ability  of  substances  to  conduct  electricity.
• Metallic  conductivity  is  the  flow  of  electricity  through  metals,  and  the
conduction  of  electricity  through  metals  is  due  to  the  presence  of  freely
moving (delocalized) valence electrons.
• Electrolytes  are  substances  that  conduct  electricity,  either  in  an  aqueous
solution  or  in  a  molten  state.
• The  conduction  of  electricity  through  electrolytes  is  due  to  the  movement
of anions and cations towards electrodes of opposite charge, and the charge-
carriers in electrolytic conduction are ions.
• Electrolysis  is  a  process  in  which  electricity  is  used  to  bring  about  an
oxidation- reduction reaction in an electrolytic cell.
• Electrolysis  is  also  the  process  of  decomposition  of  an  electrolyte,  using
electrical energy.
182
ELECTROCHEMISTRY (UNIT 3)
• Electrodes are either metal strips or graphite rods.
• An  anode  is  the  electrode  attached  to  the  positive  terminal  of  a  direct
current source, at which oxidation (loss of electrons) by anions occurs, and
electrons leave the cell.
• A cathode is the electrode attached to the negative terminal of a dc source,
the  negative  electrode  at  which  reduction  (gain  of  electrons)  of  cations
occurs and electrons enter the cell (electric current enters the electrolyte).
• During  electrolysis,  anions  move  to  the  anode  and  cations  move  to  the
cathode.
• The  reaction  taking  place  at  each  electrode  (cathode  or  anode)  is  said  to
be a half-cell reaction.
• Cell  reaction  is  the  reaction  that  takes  place  in  the  entire  cell.
• Voltaic  (Galvanic)  cells  are  electrochemical  cells  in  which  a  spontaneous
redox  reaction  generates  electricity.  They  convert  chemical  energy  into
electrical energy.
• Primary cells are voltaic cells that are not rechargeable, and the reactions
taking place in them are irreversible.
• Secondary  cells  are  voltaic  cells  that  are  rechargeable  since  the  reactions
taking  place  in  them  are  reversible.
• Unlike  electrolytic  cells,  the  anode  is  negative  and  the  cathode  is  positive
in voltaic cells.
• Electrolysis has important industrial applications such as in the production
of  chemicals  like  NaOH,  in  the  production  of  non-metals  like  Cl2  and  H2,
metals  like  Na, Al  and  in  purification  of  metals  and  electroplating.
REVIEW  EXERCISE  ON  UNIT3
Part  I: Choose  the  correct  answer  from  the  suggested
options
1. Which one of the following solutions shows no current flow in an electrolytic
cell?
a water solution of table salt
b molten sodium chloride
c hydrochloric acid solution
d sugar solution
183
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
2. Which of the following is not correct about voltaic cells?
a the anode is negative
b the cathode is positive
c oxidation takes place at the cathode
d redox reactions produce electricity in the cell
3. Which of the following conditions is not used to electroplate a tray made of iron
with chromium?
a using chromium as the anode
b using an electrolyte containing iron (III) ions
c using the tray as the cathode
d using an electrolyte containing chromium ions
4. Electrolysis is not used for the:
a purification of metals
b production of metals
c electroplating  of metals
d production of electricity
5. Which substance is not used in the Leclanche cell?
a H2SO4
b NH4Cl
c MnO2
d powdered carbon
6. Which one of the following is correct about automobile batteries?
a the electrodes in the battery are graphite electrodes
b each cell in the battery delivers 1.5 volts
c the electrolyte is aqueous H2SO4 solution
d lead (IV) oxide is used as anode
7. Which of the following occurs during electrolysis of the molten binary salt of a
metal:
a the metal in the salt will deposit on the cathode
b reduction will take place at the anode
c oxidation will take place at the cathode
d no current will flow through the molten salt
8. Which substance does not conduct electricity?
a solid CaCl2
b aqueous NaCl solution
c dilute aqueous solution of HCl
d molten PbBr2
184
ELECTROCHEMISTRY (UNIT 3)
9. Two copper electrodes dipped in copper sulphate solution are connected to a
12 volt battery. The electrode connected to the end of the battery marked with
a “_” is:
a anion
b cathode
c
anode
d cation
10. The charge-carriers in electrolytic conduction are:
a anions only
b cations only
c
cations and anions
d delocalized electrons
11. When electric current is applied externally, which of the following produces a
redox reaction:
a wood
b electrolytic cells
solid sugar
c
d diamond
12. During the electrolysis of fused sodium chloride, the anode half reaction involves:
a oxidation of sodium atoms to ions
b reduction of chlorine atoms to give chloride ions
c reduction of sodium ions to form free metal
d oxidation of chloride ions to elemental chlorine
13. Metals conduct electricity. This is because metals possess:
14.
a freely moving ions
b all electrons held in fixed position
c delocalized electrons
d valence electrons that are strongly bound to the nucleus
Increasing the concentration of ions in an electrolyte solution:
a increases the extent of conduction of electricity through it
b decreases the extent of conduction of electricity through it
c has no effect on the conduction of electricity
d changes the direction of electron flow
15. Voltaic cells and electrolytic cells are similar in that:
a the anode is positive and cathode is negative in both types of cells
b oxidation half-reaction occurs at the cathode in both types of cells
c both types of cells contain two electrodes in contact with electrolytes
d reduction half-reaction occurs at the anode in both types of cells
16. The conduction of electricity through each of the following substances is caused
by the migration of ions except in one case; the exception is:
a fused lead bromide
b aqueous solution of NaCl
c molten KCl
d graphite
185
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
17. Four different solutions of equal volume (1 L) were prepared by dissolving one
mole of each of the following substances. The conduction of electricity is least
in the solution containing:
a HCl
b CH3COOH
c HNO3
d KCl
18. Strong electrolytes differ from weak electrolytes in that strong electrolytes:
a are poorer conductors than weak electrolytes
b ionize to a smaller extent than weak electrolytes
c produce greater numbers of ions in aqueous solution as compared to weak
electrolytes
d do not conduct electricity in aqueous solutions
19. Which of the following is a wet voltaic cell:
a Leclanche cell
b cells used in electronic wrist watches
c cells used in mobile telephones
d lead-storage cell
Part  II:   Write  the  missing  words  in  your  exercise  book
20. The type of electrical conductivity caused by the flow of freely moving electrons
is known as_________________.
21. Consider the following galvanic cell:
Half-reaction:
Cu (s)
→
2+
Cu (aq) + 2e
–
Half-reaction:
+Ag (aq) + 1e
–
→
Ag (s)
According to the information given in the above figure,
186
ELECTROCHEMISTRY (UNIT 3)
a The anode of the galvanic cell is _______________.
b The cathode of the galvanic cell is ______________.
c The negative electrode is _____________________.
d The positive electrode is ______________________.
e The overall cell reaction is ____________________.
22. ________________ means two metal strips or graphite rods through which
electrons enter and leave an electrolyte in electrolytic cells.
23.
In an electrolytic cell, positive ions move to the ______________ and negative
ions move to the _____________ and electrons flow from the _____________
to the __________ in the external circuit during electrolysis.
24. The process of covering one metal with a thin layer of another metal, using
electricity, is known as ______________.
Part  III:    Give  short  answers  to  each  of  the  following  questions
25. Explain the differences between the following pairs of terms.
a Anode and cathode
b Metallic conduction and electrolytic conduction
c Inert and active electrodes
d Galvanic cell and electrolytic cell
e Cation and anion
f Wet cell and dry cell
g Primary and secondary voltaic cells
h Strong and weak electrolytes
26. Why are ionic compounds like NaCl, KCl, CaCl2, PbBr2, etc. non-conductors
in the solid state but conductors in aqueous solutions?
27. During electrolysis of fused CaCl2,
a Which ions are responsible for the conduction of electricity through the molten
salt?
b What half-cell reactions occur at the anode and cathode?
28. How can a salt bridge maintain electrical neutrality in the solutions of the two
half-cells of a galvanic cell?
29. A chemistry teacher in a chemistry laboratory asked two students, A and B, to
perform an experiment. The teacher told student A to refine impure silver and
told student B to produce a gold-plated medal from a medal made of copper.
How can these students accomplish the tasks given to them?
30. What is the purpose of a salt bridge in a voltaic cell?
187
T
I
N
4U
Chemistry in Industry and
Environmental Pollution
Unit  Outcomes
After  completing  this  unit,  you  will  be  able  to:
(cid:40) know the renewable and non-renewable natural resources and appreciate their
importance  to  industry  as  raw  materials;
(cid:40) know the extraction, chemical properties and uses of aluminium, iron, copper,
nitrogen, phosphorus, oxygen, sulphur and chlorine;
(cid:40) know the production and chemical properties of nitrogen, phosphorus, oxygen,
sulphur and chlorine;
(cid:40) know  some  chemical  and  related  industries  in  Ethiopia;
(cid:40) understand  the  important  steps  in  the  production  of  glass,  ceramics,  cement,
sugar, paper and pulp;
(cid:40) know  how  tanning  is  carried  out  and  how  food  is  packed  and  preserved;
(cid:40) know the three types of environmental pollution and the names of the pollutants;
(cid:40) understand  the  causes  and  effects  of  air,  water  and  land  pollution  and  know
the  main  methods  to  reduce  them;  and
(cid:40) demonstrate scientific inquiry skills such as observing, classifying, communicating,
asking questions, applying concepts and problem-solving.
CHEMISTRY IN INDUSTRY AND ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION (UNIT 4)
MAIN  CONTENTS
4.1
Introduction
4.2 Natural Resources and Industry
4.3
4.4
Production of Some Important Metals and Non-metals
Some Industries in Ethiopia
4.5 Environmental Pollution
– Unit  Summary
– Review Exercise
4.1    INTRODUCTION
Competencies
After completing this section, you will be able to:
•
list general characteristics of chemical industries;
Activity 4.1
1. What  do  you  understand  by  the  statement  that,  “life  would  have  been  very  much
harder without the chemical industry.”?
2. Name major raw materials used by chemical industries for the production of chemicals.
3. Prepare  a  list  of      many  products  which  are  manufactured  by  chemical  industries?
Discuss in groups and give a presentation to the class.
A chemical industry is an institution involved in the production of chemical products. The
chemical industry involves the use of chemical processes such as chemical reactions and
refining methods to produce a wide variety of materials with desirable properties and
quality to satisfy social needs. Most of these products, in turn, can be used by other
chemical industries to manufacture other items or can be used directly by consumers.
Generally, chemical industries:
• use naturally-available raw materials to produce the desired products,
•
involve chemical reactions to transform raw materials into finished and semi-finished
products,
consume relatively large quantities of energy during the manufacturing process,
•
• use safe operation methods in their manufacturing processes, and
189
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
•
test their products during and after manufacture in their quality control laboratories
to ensure that the products meet the required specifications.
4.2  NATURAL  RESOURCES  AND  INDUSTRY
Competencies
After completing this section, you will be able to:
• define natural resources;
list natural resources;
•
classify natural resources as renewable and non-renewable;
•
• define the chemical industry as a firm that involves the taking of raw materials from
the environment and turning them into usable products by chemical means;
• describe the applications of minerals in industry.
Activity 4.2
1. Can  fossil  fuels  be  renewed?
2. How can animals and plants be replaced once they die?
3. What are natural resources?
4. Explain  the  importance  of  natural  resources  for  chemical  industries  with  examples.
Discuss in group and present your opinion to the class.
Natural resources can be classified as renewable and non-renewable resources.  Renewable
resources are resources that can be replenished (replaced) by natural processes. These
resources can be renewed at the same rate at which they are used. Plants, animals, soil and
water are examples of renewable resources.  Non-renewable resources are resources that
are found in a fixed amount in nature and cannot be replenished. These resources can be
completely used up within some decades and cannot be replaced easily. Examples of non-
renewable resources include natural gas, and coal.  Generally, any chemical industry utilizes
either natural resource as starting materials, or other substances obtained from natural resources
after processing, as a raw material, for its manufacturing activity.
Exercise 4.1
Classify the following natural resources as renewable and non-renewable:
a petroleum
d biomass
b minerals
e plants
c fire wood
f coal
190
CHEMISTRY IN INDUSTRY AND ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION (UNIT 4)
4.3 PRODUCTION  OF  SOME  IMPORTANT  METALS  AND
NON-METALS
Competencies
After completing this section, you will be able to:
• outline the extraction of aluminium by the Hall process;
• describe the main physical and chemical properties of aluminium;
• describe the uses of aluminium;
• outline the extraction of iron by the  blast furnace;
• briefly describe the conversion of pig iron in steel;
• describe wrought iron;
• describe the main chemical properties of iron;
• describe the uses of iron;
• outline the extraction of copper;
• describe the main chemical properties of copper;
• describe the uses of copper;
• outline the production of nitrogen;
• describe the main chemical properties of nitrogen;
• outline the production of phosphorus;
• describe  the main chemical properties of phosphorus;
• outline the production of oxygen;
• describe  the main chemical properties of oxygen;
• outline the production of sulphur;
• describe the main chemical properties of sulphur;
• outline the production of chlorine; and
• describe the chemical properties of chlorine.
Activity 4.3
Discuss the following issues in groups:
1. Steel-cored  aluminium  cables  are  used  for  conducting  high-voltage  electricity  over
long distances.
i) Give  two  reasons  why  aluminium  is  used  for  these  cables.
ii) What is the purpose of  the steel core?
191
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
2. Can you mention materials, in your home or outside, that are made of aluminium?
What are their properties for example weight, rusting, shape etc?
Discuss in groups and give presentation to the class.
4.3.1    Production  of  Some  Important  Metals
A.    Aluminium
Occurrence  and  extraction
Aluminium is the most abundant metal and the third most plentiful element after oxygen and
silicon in the earth’s crust. About seven percent of the earth’s crust is aluminium. It is the
second-most important metal, after iron, in terms of consumption. Aluminium does not
.2H2O). Other minerals
occur as a free metal in nature. Its principal ore is bauxite (Al2O3
containing aluminium are orthoclase (KAlSi3O8), cryolite (Na3AlF6), corundum (Al2O3),
beryl (Be3Al2Si6O8) and china clay (Al2Si2O7
Aluminium is extracted industrially principally, from bauxite, Al2O3•2H2O, by the Hall–
Héroult process or simply the Hall process. In this process, first the bauxite needs to be
purified since it is frequently contaminated with silica (SiO2), iron oxides and titanium (IV)
oxide. To isolate pure Al2O3 from bauxite, the powdered ore is first heated with sodium
hydroxide solution to convert silica into a soluble silicate.
.2H2O).
SiO2 (s)
+
2NaOH (aq) Æ Na2SiO3 (aq)
+
H2O (l)
At the same time aluminium oxide is converted to soluble sodium aluminate.
Al2O3 (s)
+
2NaOH (aq) Æ NaAlO2 (aq)
+
H2O (l)
The impurities like iron oxides and titanium (IV) oxide remain unaffected by the base and
are filtered off. Why are they not affected?
Then the solution is treated with acid to precipitate aluminium hydroxide.
AlO2
–  (aq) +
H3O+ (aq)
Æ Al(OH)3 (s)
Aluminium hydroxide is collected by filtration, washed, dried, and then heated strongly in
a furnace to get Al2O3.
2Al(OH)3
heat
→  Al2O3    +    3H2O
Pure aluminium oxide is mixed with some cryolite, Na3AlF6, and then melted. Cryolite is
added to Al2O3 to reduce its melting point from 2045oC to 1000oC. The molten mixture is
then electrolyzed to obtain aluminium. The electrolytic cell, in which the molten mass is
electrolyzed, contains graphite electrodes as both anode and cathode.
192
CHEMISTRY IN INDUSTRY AND ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION (UNIT 4)
Activity 4.4
1. Write  the  balanced  chemical  equation  for  the  dissociation  of  aluminium  oxide  in  the
molten state.
2.
Identify  the  ions  that  move  to  the  cathode  and  the  anode  during  the  electrolysis  of
molten  aluminium  oxide?  Write  the  half-reactions  at  the  anode,  cathode  and  overall
cell reactions.
3. At which electrode will aluminium be produced during the process?
Discuss in groups and give a presentation to the class.
Graphite rods (Anodes)
Power
Solid charge
Molten electrolyte
Bubbles of CO2
Graphite furnace
lining (cathode)
Molten Al
Figure 4.1   Electrolytic cell for aluminium production
Al2O3 is converted to Al, by electrolysis. We do not use reducing agents for reduction
of aluminium from aluminium oxide; why?
Physical Properties: Aluminium is a soft silvery-white metal having a density of 2.7
g/cm3. It melts at 660°C.. It can be shaped into wires, rolled, pressed or cast into different
shapes. It is a good conductor of heat and electricity.
Chemical Properties: Aluminium is a reactive metal, even though its reactions are not
vigorous in comparison with those of sodium, potassium, calcium and other metals of
group IA and IIA. It undergoes the following reactions:
a Reaction with Oxygen:
Aluminium has affinity for oxygen and reacts with atmospheric oxygen to form a thin
film of aluminium oxide on its surface.
4Al (s)
3O2 (g) Æ 2Al2O3 (s)
+
193
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
This thin film of oxide inhibits further reaction with oxygen. The thin film can be
removed by rubbing with mercury or mercury (II) chloride solution.
What type of oxide is Al2O3?
b Reaction  with  dilute  acids:
Aluminium reacts with dilute acids like HCl and H2SO4, forming salts and liberating
hydrogen gas.
2Al (s)
2Al (s)
Æ 2AlCl3 (s)
Aluminium does not react with dilute or concentrated HNO3 due to the formation of
a protective oxide layer on its surface.
3H2SO4 (aq) Æ Al2(SO4)3 (aq)
6HCl (aq)
3H2 (g)
3H2 (g)
+
+
+
+
c Aluminium burns in chlorine gas to form aluminium chloride:
2Al (s)
+
3Cl2 (g)
Æ 2AlCl3 (s)
d Aluminium reacts with sodium hydroxide solution:
2Al (s) + 2NaOH (aq) +
6H2O (l) Æ 2NaAl(OH)4 (aq) + 3H2 (g)
Uses: Aluminium is lightweight and corrosion resistant, so it is used to make light alloys
like duralumin (mixture of Al, Cu and Mg). Alloys of aluminium are extensively used in the
transport industry to make aircraft, ships and cars. It is used in the manufacture of household
cooking utensils due to its high thermal conductivity and resistance to corrosion. It is also
used to make door and window frames and roofing for buildings, as packaging material in
food industries, and for electrical transmission lines.
In the thermite welding process, powdered aluminium when mixed with iron (III) oxide
and ignited, produces a temperature of about 3000°C. This temperature is quite sufficient
for welding metals. The reaction in this process is as follows:
2Al (s)
Al2O3 (s)
The mixture of powdered aluminium and iron oxide is called thermite.
Fe2O3 (s) Æ 2Fe (l)
+
+
Research  and  writing
1. Make a list of materials made of aluminium you encounter at home, and in the city
or town where you live.
2. What property of aluminium makes it useful in the construction industries?
3. Regarding the manufacturing of aluminium by electrolysis, answer the following
questions.
a The electrolyte does not need heating to keep it in its molten state; why?
b The graphite anode gradually disappear during the electrolysis. What is it turning
into? (Think about the product that is given off at the anode).
Present your findings to the class.
194
CHEMISTRY IN INDUSTRY AND ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION (UNIT 4)
Activity 4.5
1.
Iron is the cheapest among all metals.  Give reasons for this.
2. What  is  the  difference  between  stainless  steel  and  iron?
3. What do you understand by the term alloy?  Is stainless steel an alloy?
Discuss in groups and give a presentation to the class.
B.    Iron
Occurrence  and  Extraction
Iron is the second-most abundant metal next to aluminium, in the earth’s crust and it is the
fourth most abundant element.  It constitutes about 4.7% of the earth’s crust by weight. It
is never found as a free metal in nature. It occurs in nature only in the form of compounds,
such as oxides, carbonates and sulphides. The chief ores of iron are hematite (Fe2O3),
.H2O), magnetite (Fe3O4), and siderite (FeCO3). It is also found in the
limonite (Fe2O3
form of iron pyrites (FeS2) which is commonly called fool’s gold.
Iron is generally extracted from hematite (Fe2O3), magnetite (Fe3O4) and siderite (FeCO3).
The extraction of iron from its ores is carried out in a blast furnace. The raw materials for
the extraction of iron are iron ore, coke, limestone and hot air. The furnace is charged with
a mixture of iron ore, limestone and coke at the top and a blast of hot air is blown in at the
bottom. The coke burns to form carbon dioxide and the temperature approaches 2000°C
near the bottom. As the carbon dioxide rises up, the coke reduces it to carbon monoxide.
The carbon monoxide then reduces the iron oxide to iron metal. The overall reactions in
the blast furnace can be summarized as follows:
1. Oxidation of coke to carbon dioxide:
C (s)
+ O2 (g) Æ CO2 (g)
+
heat
2. Reduction of carbon dioxide to carbon monoxide:
CO2 (g)
+ C (s) Æ 2CO (g)
3. Reduction of iron oxides to metallic iron by carbon monoxide:
+ CO2 (g)
+ CO2 (g)
+ CO2 (g)
3Fe2O3 (s) + CO (g) Æ 2Fe3O4 (s)
+ CO (g) Æ 3FeO (s)
Fe3O4 (s)
+ CO (g) Æ Fe (l)
FeO (s)
4. Decomposition of the limestone by heat in the blast furnace serves as a flux to
remove impurities:
195
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
CaCO3 (s)
heat
→ CaO (s)    +    CO2 (g)
5. Reaction of calcium oxide with impurities like silica (SiO2) to form calcium silicate
which is a glass-like material called slag.
SiO2 Æ CaSiO3
CaO
+
The molten iron flows to the bottom of the blast furnace. The slag is less dense and floats
on the surface of the molten iron. Thus, the molten iron and the molten slag are tapped off
separately. The slag is used mostly for the manufacture of cement
Figure 4.2   Blast furnace.
196
CHEMISTRY IN INDUSTRY AND ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION (UNIT 4)
The iron obtained directly from the blast furnace is called pig iron. It is impure and contains
about 2% silicon, up to 1% phosphorus and manganese, and traces of sulphur. These
impurities make pig iron brittle. When pig iron is re-melted with scrap iron and cast into
moulds, it forms cast iron.
Wrought iron: is the purest form of commercial iron. It is obtained by removing most of
the impurities from pig iron. It is manufactured by heating impure iron with hematite and
limestone in a furnace.  This increases the purity of the iron to 99.5%.  Wrought iron is a
tough, malleable and ductile form of iron.
PROJECT 4.1
Form a group and construct a model of the blast furnace from locally available
materials.
Conversion  of  Pig  Iron  to  Steel
The relatively high carbon-content of the iron recovered from the blast furnace (pig iron)
makes it very hard and brittle. The conversion of pig iron to steel is essentially a purification
process in which impurities are removed by oxidation. This purification process is carried
out in a furnace at high temperatures. In the conversion of pig iron to steel, three different
methods are used.  These are the Bessemer Converter, Open-hearth Furnace and the
Basic Oxygen Process.
a The Bessemer Converter: In the process of converting pig iron to steel, molten
pig iron from the blast furnace is transferred to a cylindrical vessel containing a
refractory lining of MgCO3 and CaCO3. A blast of hot air is blown through the
molten metal from a set of small holes at the bottom of the vessel. The oxygen
passing through the molten metal converts silicon, phosphorus and sulphur to their
oxides, which then react with the lining to form a slag. The carbon in the pig iron is
also oxidized to carbon monoxide, so its concentration is also reduced. The
conversion of the pig iron to steel by this process requires only 15 minutes. However,
the reaction is difficult to control and the quality of the steel produced can be quite
variable.
b The Open-hearth Furnace: It has a large, shallow hearth, which is usually lined
with a basic oxide refractory (MgO and CaO). The furnace is charged with a mixture
of pig iron, Fe2O3, scrap iron and limestone. A blast of hot air and burning fuel is
directed over the surface of the charge to maintain it in the molten state. Impurities in
the pig iron are oxidized by the Fe2O3 and air. Carbon dioxide, and sulphur dioxide
formed by the oxidation of the carbon and sulphur, respectively, in the pig iron
bubble out of the mixture as waste gases.
197
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
The SiO2 and other acidic oxides like P4O10 combine with CaO (from limestone) and the
refractory lining to form a slag.
The impurities in pig iron are oxidized in the following way:
C
S
12P
3Si
+
+
+
+
Æ
O2
O2
Æ
10Fe2O3 Æ
2Fe2O3 Æ
CO2
SO2
3P4O10
3SiO2
+
+
20Fe
4Fe
Calcium oxide, formed by the decomposition of limestone, reacts with oxides of silicon
and phosphorus to form slag.
P4O10 +
SiO2 +
6CaO Æ
CaO
Æ
2Ca3(PO4)2
CaSiO3
This entire process takes 8 to 10 hours to complete and the quality of the steel is much
more easily controlled. A calculated amount of various elements can be added to the steel
to form steel alloys with desired properties.
a
b
Figure 4.3   a) Bessemer converter   b) Open-hearth furnace.
198
CHEMISTRY IN INDUSTRY AND ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION (UNIT 4)
c Basic Oxygen Process: This newer procedure has largely replaced the open
hearth, because of its high speed. It involves forcing a mixture of powdered
calcium oxide, CaO, and oxygen gas directly into the surface of the molten
pig  iron. The  oxygen  reacts  exothermically  with  carbon,  sulphur,  silicon,
phosphorus and impurity metals. Carbon and sulphur are oxidized to CO2 and
SO2, respectively, and are released as exhaust gases. The oxides of silicon
(SiO2), phosphorus, (P4O10) and impurity metals combine with lime (CaO),
forming slag. The charge in the converter is maintained in the molten state by
the energy released in these oxidation reactions. The converter is tilted to
remove the slag. After a second blow of oxygen, the converter is tilted once
again and the molten steel is poured out.  This process takes only about 20
to 25 minutes.
Figure 4.4   The basic oxygen converter.
Activity 4.6
Prepare  a  list  of  materials  which  are  made  of  steel  and  describe  their  uses.    Discuss  in
groups and give a presentation to the class.
199
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Physical  Properties  of  Iron
Do you remember physical properties of iron? Can you mention some of them?
Iron is a grey, lustrous, malleable and ductile metal. It is a good conductor of heat and
electricity. It has a high melting point (1580°C) and a high density (7.87 g/cm3). It is a
ferromagnetic metal, which means it can be permanently magnetized.
Chemical  Properties  of  Iron
Have you ever noticed the formation of a reddish thin film on the surface of an
iron  object?  Do  you  know  the  chemical  nature  of  this  thin  film?  From  your
observations, what do you conclude about the reactivity of iron?
Iron is a reactive metal. Its reactivity is very slow, compared to group IA and IIA metals.
Iron rusts in the presence of air and moisture to form hydrated iron (III) oxide.
4Fe (s)
+
3O2 (g)
moisture
→
2Fe2O3 .x H2O(s) (rust)
Iron reacts with dilute acids, like HCl and H2SO4, forming iron (II) salts and liberating
hydrogen gas.
Fe (s)
Fe (s)
+
+
2HCl (aq) Æ
H2SO4 (aq) Æ
FeCl2 (aq)
FeSO4 (aq)
+
+
H2 (g)
H2 (g)
Like other transition metals, iron also exhibits different oxidation states. It commonly exists
as the ferrous (Fe2+) and ferric (Fe+3) ions.  Iron (II) and iron (III) compounds are coloured.
Aqueous solutions of iron (II) compounds are pale-green and solutions of iron (III)
compounds are yellowish brown.
Aqueous solutions of some iron (II) compounds are rapidly oxidized to the corresponding
iron (III) compounds. For example, iron (II) hydroxide, Fe(OH)2, on exposure to air,
oxidizes to iron (III) hydroxide.
4Fe(OH)2 (s)
+
O2 (g)
+
2H2O (l) Æ 4Fe(OH)3 (s)
Heated iron reacts with hydrogen chloride gas, forming iron (II) chloride and hydrogen gas.
Fe (s)
+
2HCl (g) Æ
FeCl2 (g)
+
H2 (g)
Heated iron reacts with chlorine and sulphur to form the chloride and sulphide, respectively.
2Fe (s)
Fe (s)
+
+
3Cl2 (g)
S (s)
Æ
Æ
2FeCl3 (s)
FeS (s)
200
CHEMISTRY IN INDUSTRY AND ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION (UNIT 4)
Iron has the ability to displace less active metals from solutions of their salts. For example,
when a piece of iron is placed in a solution of CuSO4, it is oxidized to Fe2+ and a reddish
brown deposit of copper metal forms on the surface of the iron.
Fe (s)
+
Cu2+ (aq)
Æ
Fe2+ (aq)
+
Cu (s)
Uses  of  Iron
Iron is the most widely used metal and takes first position in worldwide consumption. It is
used as a structural metal in the construction of buildings and bridges. In the form of pig
iron, it is used to make domestic boilers, hot-water radiators, railings, water pipes, castings,
and mouldings. As wrought iron, it is used in making nails, sheets, horseshoes, ornamental
gates, door knockers, farm machinery etc. Iron is also used in the manufacture of alloys
such as carbon steels and alloy steels. Carbon steels can be classified as mild steel, medium
steel and high-carbon steel, based on the amount of carbon.
Mild Steel: contains up to 0.2% carbon and is used in making screws, motors, car batteries,
railway lines, ships, bridges, nuts and bolts.
Medium Steel: contains 0.3–0.6% carbon and is used to make springs and chains.
High-Carbon Steel: contains 0.6–1.5% carbon and is used to make drill bits, knives,
hammers and chisels.
Alloy Steel: contains iron and a relatively higher percentage of other metals. For example,
stainless steel contains chromium (14–18%) and nickel (7–9%). Tool steels include tungsten
steel and manganese steel. These metals give the alloy hardness, toughness and heat
resistance. They are used in rock drills, cutting edges and parts of machinery that are
subjected to heavy wear.
Activity 4.7
1. You have learned about the purification of metals, including copper in unit 3. Describe
the electrolytic process used for the purification copper metal.
2. Prepare a list of items made of copper.
3.
In the refining process of copper, zinc does not deposit on the cathode. Why?
Discuss in your group and give a presentation to the class.
201
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
C.  Copper
Occurrence  and  extraction
Copper is occasionally found as native copper. However, it is found mainly in compounds
such as sulphides, oxides and the carbonates. The most important sulphide ores are
chalcopyrite (CuFeS2), chalcocite (Cu2S), covellite (CuS) and bornite (Cu5FeS4). The
principal oxide ores are cuprite (Cu2O) and tenorite (CuO). In the carbonate form, it
exists as malachite (CuCO3
Copper is principally extracted from chalcopyrite. Since the amount of copper in the ore is
very small, the crushed and ground sulphide ore is first concentrated by froth flotation. This
treatment changes the concentration of the ore from 2 % copper to as high as 30% copper.
The concentrated ore is then roasted with a limited supply of air (oxygen).
+ 4O2 (g) Æ Cu2S (s)
+ 2FeO (s) + 3SO2 (g)
.Cu(OH)2).
2CuFeS2 (s)
The roasted mixture is smelted by adding limestone and sand to form a molten slag that
removes many of the impurities. FeO present in the roasted mixture can also be removed
as slag in the form of iron silicate (FeSiO3), and silica in the form of calcium silicate (CaSiO3).
CaCO3 (s)
FeO (s)
+ SiO2 (s) Æ     CaSiO3 (l)
+ SiO2 (s) Æ FeSiO3 (l)
+ CO2 (g)
The Cu2S obtained by roasting chalcopyrite is then reduced by heating it in a limited supply
of oxygen.
Cu2S (s)
+ O2 (g) Æ 2Cu (l)
+ SO2 (g)
The copper produced by the above process is called blister copper and it has 98.5 – 99.5
% purity. Blister copper contains iron, silver, gold and sometimes zinc as impurities. So it is
refined further by electrolysis as shown in Figure 4.5. Copper obtained by electrolytic
refining is 99.99% pure.
Figure 4.5   Electrolytic refining of copper.
202
CHEMISTRY IN INDUSTRY AND ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION (UNIT 4)
Physical  Properties  of  Copper
Copper is a soft, ductile, malleable, reddish-brown metal with a density of 8.96 g/cm3. It
is second to silver in electrical conductivity. It melts at 1086°C and boils at 2310°C.
Chemical  properties  of  copper
Copper is less reactive metal, that is why it is found in the native state. Although it is not
very reactive, it undergoes the following reactions:
Powdered copper, when heated in air forms a black powder of copper (II) oxide, CuO.
2Cu (s)    +    O2 (g)    Æ    2CuO (s)
Copper does not react with dilute acids like HCl and H2SO4. It cannot displace hydrogen
from acids. However, it can be oxidized by oxidizing acids such as dilute and concentrated
nitric acid and hot concentrated sulphuric acid, H2SO4.
3Cu (s)   +   8HNO3 (aq)
Cu (s)   +   4HNO3 (aq)
Cu (s)   +   2H2SO4 (aq)
dilute
→    3Cu(NO3)2 (aq)   +   2NO (g)   +   4H2O (l)
concentrated
→   Cu(NO3)2 (aq) + 2NO2 (g)   +   2H2O (l)
Hot and concentrated
→   CuSO4 (aq)   +   2SO2 (g)   +   2H2O (l)
Copper corrodes in moist air over a long period of time as a result of oxidation caused by
a mixture of water, oxygen and carbon dioxide. It turns green, due to the formation of
verdigris:  a basic copper carbonate (CuCO3
.Cu(OH)2) or Cu2(OH)2CO3.
2Cu (s)    +    H2O (l)    +    O2 (g)    +    CO2 (g)    Æ    CuCO3
.Cu(OH)2
Basic copper carbonate is responsible for the green layer that forms on the surface of
copper and bronze objects. This layer adheres to the surface and protects the metal from
further corrosion.
Copper is a transition metal and exhibits different oxidation states. It exists as cuprous
(Cu+) and cupric (Cu2+) ions. Compounds containing copper in the +1 oxidation state are
stable in insoluble compounds. Cu1+ is unstable and cannot exist in aqueous solution since
it reduces and oxidizes (disproportionates) itself as follows:
2Cu+ (aq)    Æ    Cu2+ (aq)    +    Cu (s)
Soluble compounds containing Cu+, such as CuCl, CuI and CuBr, are all colourless solids.
The most stable oxidation state of copper is +2.  Aqueous solutions of many copper (II)
compounds are blue, thus copper forms coloured compounds in the oxidation state of +2.
.5H2O, consists of blue crystals, and its
For example, hydrated copper sulphate, CuSO4
aqueous solution is also blue.
203
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Uses  of  Copper
Copper is used to manufacture alloys. For example, bronze is an alloy of copper and tin,
and it is used to make coins, medals, bells, machinery parts, etc. Brass is an alloy of
copper and zinc, and it is used for hardware tops, terminals and pipes. Copper is widely
used in the electrical industry in the form of electric wires, cables etc. Copper compounds,
such as copper chloride, copper carbonate and copper hydroxide, are used as pesticides.
Exercise 4.2
1. Describe the occurrence and extraction of the following metals; aluminium, iron,
and copper.
2. Which of the three metals, Al, Fe and Cu is produced by electrochemical reduction?
3. Explain how Al, Fe and Cu behave in dry air, moisture and acidic solutions.
4. Suggest the main chemical reactions involved in the conversion of pig iron to wrought
iron.
5. Discuss the main areas of applications of Al, Fe and Cu in home and industry.
4.3.2    Production  of  Some  Important  Non-metals
A.    Nitrogen
Activity 4.8
1. Draw  the  structure  of  a  nitrogen  molecule.  How  many  bonds  are  present  in  it?  Why
does nitrogen form triple bond?
2. Which form of nitrogen is absorbed by green plants?
Discuss in group and give a presentation to the class.
Occurrence  and  Production
Nitrogen occurs in nature in the elemental form.  It also exists in the form of compounds. In
the elemental state, it exists as a diatomic molecule, N2, in atmospheric air. It constitutes
about 80% by volume of the atmosphere. In the form of compounds, it exists as sodium
nitrate (Chile salt peter, NaNO3) and potassium nitrate (KNO3) also called saltpetre. It is
also found in DNA molecules and proteins of all living things.
In the industrial production of nitrogen, the first step is to remove impurities like dust and
other particles from air. The air is then compressed under high pressure and low temperature
to remove carbon dioxide and water vapour since they solidify at a relatively high
204
CHEMISTRY IN INDUSTRY AND ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION (UNIT 4)
temperatures compared to nitrogen and oxygen. As the temperature continues to decrease,
the air containing mainly nitrogen and oxygen condenses to give a pale-blue liquid. Nitrogen
is thus separated on an industrial scale by fractional distillation of liquid air. When liquid air
is fractionally distilled, nitrogen is collected and stored in steel cylinders under pressure.
The second fraction consists of argon, which distils off the mixture at –186°C, leaving
behind a blue liquid of oxygen that boils at –183°C.
In the laboratory, nitrogen is prepared by warming an aqueous solution containing ammonium
chloride and sodium nitrite.
NH4Cl (aq)    +    NaNO2 (aq)    Æ    NaCl (aq)    +    N2 (g)    +    2H2O (l)
Physical  Properties  of  Nitrogen
Nitrogen is colourless, odourless and tasteless gas. It is inert under ordinary conditions, and
that is why it is found in atmospheric air as N2. The inertness of nitrogen at low temperatures
is directly related to the strength of the triple bond, which requires high energy to break.
Chemical  Properties  of  Nitrogen
Is nitrogen a reactive or unreactive non-metal? Can you suggest a proof for your
answer?
However, nitrogen reacts with metals of group IA and IIA as well as oxygen at higher
temperatures. When heated with reactive metals like lithium, calcium and magnesium, it
forms compounds, known as nitrides.
6Li (s)
3Ca (s)
3Mg (s)
+
+
+
N2 (g) Æ 2Li3N (s)
N2 (g) Æ Ca3N2 (s)
N2 (g) Æ Mg3N2 (s)
Nitrogen combines with oxygen at elevated temperatures or in an electric arc to form
oxides.
N2 (g)
N2  (g)
+
+
O2 (g) Æ 2NO (g)
2O2 (g) Æ 2NO2 (g)
Nitric oxide, also called nitrogen monoxide, NO, is a colourless and reactive gas. It forms
nitrogen dioxide (NO2), a reddish brown gas, when it comes into contact with oxygen.
2NO (g) +
O2 (g) Æ 2NO2 (g)
This reddish brown gas dimerizes at low temperatures to give a colourless gas of dinitrogen
tetraoxide, N2O4.
2NO2 (g) Æ N2O4 (g)
205
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Nitrogen also forms oxides, like dinitrogen monoxide, N2O, (commonly called laughing
gas), dinitrogen trioxide (N2O3) and dinitrogen pentoxide (N2O5).
Nitrogen reacts directly with hydrogen in the Haber process to form ammonia. In this
process, a mixture of N2 and H2 gas, at a pressure of 200-300 atm and a temperature of
400-600°C, is passed over a catalyst of finely divided iron.
N2 (g) +
3H2 (g)
Fe/200–300atm
→
← 2NH3 (g)
400–600°C
The ammonia produced by this method is primarily used in the manufacture of fertilizers. It
is also used for the production of nitric acid (HNO3).
Uses  of  Nitrogen
Nitrogen is used in food packaging to prevent oxidation, and to create an inert atmosphere
in the production of semiconductors. Liquid nitrogen is used as a refrigerant to preserve
bulls’ semen and blood. Its major use is in the production of ammonia.
Activity 4.9
Have you ever observed glowing worms? Why do they glow? Anyone who has observed
them should explain to the class.
B.    Phosphorus
Occurrence  and  Extraction
Does phosphorus exist in the pure form (elemental state) as does nitrogen?  If not,
why? Phosphorus is a relatively abundant element, ranking 12th in the earth’s crust. It
exists naturally only in the combined state, such as in rock phosphate, Ca3(PO4)2,
fluoroapatite, Ca10(PO4)6F2  or  3Ca3 (PO4)2.CaF2. It is also found in teeth, bones and
DNA.
What is allotropy? What are the two common allotropes of phosphorus?
Allotropes are different forms of the same element with the same physical state but with
different physical properties. This is due to the difference in the arrangement of atoms.
The two common allotropic forms of phosphorus are white phosphorus and red phosphorus.
White phosphorus is a very poisonous, white waxy-looking substance that melts at 44.1°C
and boils at 287°C.  Its density is 1.8 g/cm3. It consists of individual tetra-atomic (P4)
molecules and is an unstable form of phosphorus.
206
CHEMISTRY IN INDUSTRY AND ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION (UNIT 4)
Red phosphorus is denser (2.16 g/cm3) and is much less reactive than white phosphorus at
normal temperatures. It consists of P4 molecules linked together to form a polymer (large
molecule) as shown below.
Industrially, white phosphorus is manufactured by heating a mixture of crushed rock
phosphate, Ca3(PO4)2, silica, SiO2, and coke in an electric furnace. The reaction in the
furnace is:
2Ca3(PO4)2 (s)   +   6SiO2 (s)   +   10C (s)   Æ   6CaSiO3 (l)   +   P4 (g)   +   10CO (g)
The vaporized phosphorus (P4) is condensed, collected and stored under water. Red
phosphorus is prepared by heating white phosphorus in sunlight for several days. White
phosphorus is stored under water because it spontaneously ignites (bursts into flames) in
the presence of oxygen. Red phosphorus is much less reactive than white phosphorus and
does not need to be stored under water.
Physical  Properties  of  Phosphorus
Activity 4.10
Use reference books available in your school library and write down the main properties
of white and red phosphorus.
Chemical  Properties  of  Phosphorus
Phosphorus exhibits the following common  chemical reactions. Phosphorus reacts with
limited and excess supplies of oxygen to form tetraphosphorus hexoxide (P4O6) and
tetraphosphorus decoxide (P4O10) respectively.
P4 (s)
P4 (s)
+
+
3O2  (g) Æ
5O2 (g)
Æ
P4O6 (s)
P4O10 (s)
P4O6 and P4O10 dissolve in water to form phosphorous acid, H3PO3, an orthophsophoric
acid, H3PO4 respectively.
P4O6 (s)
+
P4O10 (s) +
6H2O (l) Æ
6H2O (l) Æ
4H3PO3 (aq)
4H3PO4 (aq)
207
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Phosphorus also reacts with limited and excess supplies of chlorine to form phosphorus
(III) chloride (PCl3) and phosphorus (V) chloride (PCl5) respectively.
P4 (s)
P4 (s)
+
+
6Cl2  (g) Æ
10Cl2  (g) Æ
4PCl3 (s)
4PCl5 (s)
Activity 4.11
1. Write the chemical reactions for photosynthesis and respiration. What are the products
formed in photosynthesis and respiration?
2. What are the uses of oxygen in hospitals?
3. How do astronauts breathe while in space?
Discuss all the above points in groups and give a presentation to the class.
C.    Oxygen
Occurrence  and  Production
Oxygen is the most abundant element on earth. It constitutes about 46.6% by weight of the
earth’s crust in the form of compounds such as oxides, silicates, carbonates, phosphates
etc. It exists in nature in the elemental state in atmospheric air constituting about 20% by
volume.  Oxygen is manufactured industrially by the fractional distillation of liquid air in a
way similar to that of nitrogen.
Chemical  Properties  of  Oxygen
Oxygen is relatively reactive and combines directly with most elements to form oxides.
Oxygen combines with metal to form metal oxides (basic oxides). For example,
2Mg (s)
+ O2 (g) Æ 2MgO (s)
2Ca (s)
+ O2  (s) Æ 2CaO  (s)
Oxygen combines with non-metals to form acidic oxides; for example:
S8 (s)
P4  (s)
+
+
8O2 (g) Æ 8SO2 (g)
5O2 (g) Æ P4O10  (g)
Oxygen supports combustion and is necessary for the burning of substances like charcoal,
hydrocarbon fuel, etc.
208
CHEMISTRY IN INDUSTRY AND ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION (UNIT 4)
C (s)
+ O2 (g) Æ CO2  (g)
CH4 (g)
+
2O2 (g) Æ CO2  (g)
+
2H2O (g)
Activity 4.12
Have you observed the colour of sulphur? What is the use of sulphur   in your area?
D.    Sulphur
Occurrence  and  Extraction
Sulphur is found in nature and in the form of compounds such as galena (PbS), pyrites
.2H2O), barite
(FeS2) (fool’s gold ), cinnabar (HgS), sphalerite (ZnS), gypsum (CaSO4
(BaSO4), and as hydrogen sulphide (H2S) in natural gas and crude oil.
Sulphur is extracted from underground deposits of elemental sulphur by the Frasch process
(Figure 4.6). In this process, three concentric pipes are sent down to the sulphur deposit.
Superheated water at about 170oC is pumped through the outermost pipes. Hot air is
compressed in the innermost tube. A froth of sulphur, air and water come out to the surface
of the earth forced by hot compressed air in the middle tube. The molten sulphur is then
cooled and solidified.
Figure 4.6   Frasch Process for the production of sulphur.
209
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Uses: Nearly one-half of the sulphur needed by chemical industries is obtained as a waste
product of other industrial processes. For example, sulphur can be obtained in the form of
hydrogen sulphide (H2S) from natural gas and during the purification of crude oil. It can
also be obtained in the form of sulphur dioxide from the roasting of sulphide ores during the
manufacture of metals. The use of sulphur obtained from waste products of other industries
reduces the demand for the element from natural deposits. This also reduces the pollution
of atmospheric air and the formation of acid rain.
Sulphur exhibits allotropy. The most important allotropes of sulphur are rhombic and
monoclinic sulphur. Rhombic sulphur is the most stable form of sulphur consisting of S8
molecules.
Chemical  Properties  of  Sulphur
Sulphur is relatively stable and unreactive at room temperature. However, it reacts with
metals and non-metals when heated.
Sulphur combines with metals when heated to form sulphides.
8Fe (s) +
S8  (s) Æ 8FeS (s)
Sulphur burns in oxygen to form oxides.
S8 (s)
+
8O2 (g) Æ 8SO2 (g)
Sulphur is the raw material for the production of sulphuric acid (H2SO4) by the Contact
Process. This process of sulphuric acid production involves the following steps.
Step 1: Sulphur is first oxidized to produce sulphur dioxide:
S8 (s)        +      8O2 (g)        Æ        8SO2 (g)
Step 2: Sulphur dioxide is converted to sulphur trioxide at high temperatures in the presence
of a catalyst:
2SO2 (g)    +    O2
5V O
2
→     2SO3 (g)
Step 3: Sulphur trioxide is absorbed into concentrated sulphuric acid to produce oleum
(H2S2O7).
SO3 (g)
+
H2SO4 (l) Æ H2S2O7 (l)
Step 4: The oleum is then diluted with water to produce the desired concentration of
sulphuric acid. Commercially used concentrated sulphuric acid is 98% H2SO4.
H2S2O7 (l) +
H2O (l) Æ 2H2SO4 (aq)
210
CHEMISTRY IN INDUSTRY AND ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION (UNIT 4)
E.  Chlorine
Activity 4.13
1. When we turn on the water tap, the water coming out of the tap sometimes appears white
and turns normal after a few minutes. Many people say that the white colour we see is due
to chlorine. Do you agree? Discuss in group and present your opinion to the class.
2. What is the purpose of adding chlorine to drinking water?
Occurrence  and  Extraction
Chlorine belongs to group VIIA, known as the halogens. It is the most abundant element
among the halogens. It is found in nature in the form of compounds only. Chlorine is found
in nature chiefly in the form of chlorides of sodium, potassium, calcium and magnesium.
Sodium chloride is the chief source of chlorine, and it is obtained from seawater or as
deposits of rock salt.
Commercially, chlorine is manufactured by the electrolysis of a concentrated aqueous solution
of sodium chloride. During electrolysis of the concentrated solution, chlorine is formed at
the anode and the reduction of water occurs at the cathode, producing hydrogen gas and
hydroxide ions (OH–). The electrode and the overall cell reactions are as follows:
Oxidation at anode:
2Cl– (aq)  Æ  Cl2 (g)  +  2e–
Reduction at cathode: 2H2O  (l)  +  2e–  Æ  H2 (g)  +  2OH– (aq)
Cell reaction:
2NaCl (aq) + 2H2O (l) Æ 2NaOH (aq) + Cl2 (g) + H2 (g)
Although NaOH forms at the cathode compartment and Cl2 at the anode, the two substances
must be kept apart from one another. This is because, if they come into contact with each
other, they can react according to the following equation.
NaOH (aq)    +    Cl2 (g)    Æ    NaOCl (aq)    +    HCl (aq)
What is the oxidation number of chlorine in NaOCl?
Physical  Properties  of  Chlorine
Activity 4.14
1.
In urban area, tap water possesses a peculiar smell, which disappeares after a few minutes.
Many people say that the smell is due to chlorine. Do you agree? Discuss in group and
present your opinion to the class.
211
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Some of its physical properties are the following:
• Chlorine is a greenish-yellow gas at room temperature.
•
•
•
It melts at –102°C and boils at –34°C.
It is fairly soluble in water.
It is extremely poisonous, causing inflammation of the lungs and mucous membranes
if inhaled, even in very small amounts. It is fatal if inhaled in higher amounts.
Chemical  Properties  of  Chlorine
Chlorine is a highly reactive non-metal. It reacts directly with almost all elements except
the noble gases, carbon and nitrogen. It is a powerful oxidizing agent and oxidizes most of
the elements with which it reacts. The following are the main reactions of chlorine.
Chlorine reacts with heated metals to form chloride salts
2Fe (s)
2Al (s)
+
+
3Cl2 (g) Æ 2FeCl3 (s)
3Cl2 (g) Æ 2AlCl3 (s)
Chlorine reacts smoothly with hydrogen, in the presence of a charcoal as a catalyst, at
room temperature to form hydrogen chloride.
H2 (g)
+
Cl2 (g) Æ 2HCl (g)
Chlorine displaces less reactive halogens (Br2 and I2) from aqueous solutions of their
compounds.
Cl2 (g)
Cl2 (g)
+
+
2KBr (aq) Æ 2KCl (aq)
2Kl (aq) Æ 2KCl (aq)
+
+
Br2 (l)
l2 (aq)
Can bromine displace chlorine in a chemical reaction?
Chlorine dissolves in water and reacts with it, forming an acidic solution containing
hydrochloric acid (HCl) and hypochlorous acid (HOCl).
Cl2 (g)
+
H2O (l) Æ HCl (aq)
+
HOCl (aq)
This type of reaction is called a disproportionation reaction, where chlorine is itself reduced
and oxidized.
Chlorine is commercially used as a bleaching agent and disinfectant (kills germs). As
elemental chlorine or as chlorine water, it is strong enough to oxidize dyes and to bleach
coloured materials. For example, it can be used to remove yellow or brown colours from
wood pulp, paper and cotton.
212
CHEMISTRY IN INDUSTRY AND ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION (UNIT 4)
Exercise 4.3
1. What are the main natural sources of N, P, O, S, and Cl?
2. Describe the main processes involved in the production (extraction) of N, P, O, S
and Cl.
3. How do N, P, and S behave when heated in air?
4. Write an equation for the reaction of chlorine with water.
5. Consult the books present in your library and describe with the aid of labelled
diagrams the laboratory preparation of following molecules:
a N2
b Cl2
4.4    SOME  INDUSTRIES  IN  ETHIOPIA
Competencies
After completing this section, you will be able to:
list some industries in Ethiopia;
• define industry;
•
• describe the general characteristics of industries;
• outline the important steps in the productions of ceramics;
• mention some uses of ceramics;
• outline the important steps in the production of cement;
• outline the important steps in the production of sugar;
• outline the important  steps in the  production of pulp and paper;
•
• describe the application of the chemical preservation of skin and hides;
• mention some uses of skin and hides;
explain the process of food packing and preservation; and
•
• present a report to the class after visiting a nearby food factory.
explain how tanning is carried out;
Activity 4.15
1. Define industry.
2. What are the general characteristics of chemical industries?
3. List some common chemical industries in Ethiopia, mention products manufactured by
them in tabular form.
213
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
PROJECT 4.2
1. Have you ever wondered how glass retains different colours? Consult books
in your library and make list of the compounds added to impart colour to the
glass.
2. Can glass be recycled; how?
Submit your findings to your teacher.
Glass
Glass is an amorphous or non-crystalline solid material. Almost all glass contains silica as
the main component. Quartz glass is made by melting pure silica, SiO2, at a temperature of
about 2300°C and then pouring the molten viscous liquid into moulds. It is of high strength,
low thermal expansion and highly transparent.
Soda-lime glass is ordinary glass which is a mixture of sodium silicate and calcium silicate.
It is made by heating a mixture of silica sand, sodium carbonate or sodium sulphate and
limestone. The reactions that take place in forming soda-lime glass are the following:
Na2CO3
CaCO3
+
+
SiO2 Æ Na2SiO3
SiO2 Æ CaSiO3
+
+
CO2
CO2
Soda-lime glass accounts for about 90% of manufactured glass. This type of glass is widely
used for window panes, bottles, dishes etc.
Borosilicate glass is commonly known as Pyrex. It is manufactured using boron (III)
oxide, B2O3, instead of limestone or calcium oxide. This glass has high resistance to chemical
corrosion and temperature changes and is widely used to make ovenware and laboratory
equipment such as flasks, beakers, and test tubes.
Steps in glass production
i) Batch preparation: refers to the preparation of the raw materials according to the
appropriate combinations. The raw materials are mixed in a proportion of 60%
sand, 21% sodium carbonate and 19% limestone.
ii) Glass melting: The raw materials and recycled glass (according to their colour)
are fed into a glass-melting furnace. The materials are then heated to a temperature
of about 1600°C to form a molten viscous liquid. Why are glasses is separated
according to the colour?
The furnace operates continuously, producing glass 24 hours a day. Substances that
give the glass different colours or improved chemical and physical properties such
as transparency, thermal and chemical stability and mechanical strength are added
during this process.
214
CHEMISTRY IN INDUSTRY AND ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION (UNIT 4)
iii) Glass forming: This is the stage in which the melted glass is made into a required
shape.
iv) Annealing: This is a process that involves the removal of internal stresses by reheating
the glass followed by a controlled slow-cooling cycle during which the stresses are
relieved.
v)
Inspection: It involves testing of the glass product to check whether it fulfils desired
quality requirements or not.
vi) Packing and dispatching is the final stage before distribution.
Ceramics
Activity 4.16
1. Are  you  familiar  with  the  pottery  industry?  Do  you  know  any  ceramic  factories  in
Ethiopia?
3. Prepare a list of ceramic products used in daily life.
Discuss in groups and give presentation to the class.
Ceramic is an inorganic, non-metallic solid prepared by the action of heat and subsequent
cooling. Traditional ceramics, such as porcelain, tiles and pottery are formed from minerals
such as clay, talc and feldspar. Most industrial ceramics, however, are formed from
extremely pure powders of specialty chemicals, such as silicon carbide, alumina, barium
titanate, and titanium carbide.
Manufacturing  of  ceramics
The minerals used to make ceramics are dug out of the earth and are then crushed and
ground into a fine powder. Manufacturers often purify this powder by mixing it in a solution
and allowing a chemical precipitate (a uniform solid that forms within a solution) to
form. The precipitate is then separated from the solution. The powder is heated to drive off
impurities including water.
The processes of manufacturing ceramics include:
A Moulding: After purification, small amounts of wax are often added to bind the ceramic
powder and make it more workable. Plastics may also be added to the powder to
give the desired pliability and softness. The powder can then be shaped into different
objects by various moulding processes.
B Densification: The process of densification uses intense heat to condense a ceramic
object into a strong, dense product. After being moulded, the ceramic object is
heated in an electric furnace to temperatures between 1000°C and 1700°C. As the
215
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
ceramic heats, the powder particles coalesce, much as water droplets join at room
temperature. As the ceramic particles merge, the object becomes increasingly dense,
shrinking by up to 20 percent of its original size. The goal of this heating process is
to maximize the strength of ceramic by obtaining an internal structure that is compact
and extremely dense.
In general, most ceramics are hard and wear-resistant, brittle, refractory, thermal and
electrical insulators, non-magnetic, oxidation-resistant, and chemically stable.
Due to the wide range of properties of ceramic materials, they are used for a multitude of
applications.
• Well-known uses of ceramics: They are commonly found in art sculptures, dishes,
platters and other kitchenware, kitchen tiles and bath room structures.
• Lesser-known  uses  for  ceramics:  They  are  used  as  electrical  insulators,
computers parts, tools, dental replacements, engine parts, and tiles on space shuttles
and to replace bones such as the bones in hips, knees and shoulders.
• Future uses of ceramics: In future, the ceramics might be used to remove impurities
from the drinking water, and to replace diseased heart valves.
Cement
Activity 4.17
1. How  many  cement  factories  do  you  know  in  Ethiopia?  Name  the  regions  where  they
are found and share these with your classmates.
2. Why  are  cement  factories  located  in  rural  areas  of  Ethiopia?  Give  your  reasons  to  the
class.
Cement is made by heating limestone (chalk), alumina (Al2O3) and silica-bearing materials
such as clay to 1450°C in a kiln using a process known as calcination. The resulting hard
substance called ‘clinker’ is then ground with a small amount of gypsum into a powder to
make “ordinary Portland cement” (OPC).
Cement mainly consists of calcium silicate (CaSiO3), calcium aluminate (CaAl2O4),      iron
(III) oxide (Fe2O3) and magnesium oxide (MgO).
Portland cement is a very important building material, and was first discovered in England.
It received its name because, on setting, it hardens to a stone-like mass and was compared
to the famous Portland Rock of England. It is a mixture of calcium and aluminium silicates
with gypsum.
Raw  Materials:  Limestone  and  clay  are  the  chief  raw  materials  used  in  the
manufacture of Portland cement.
216
CHEMISTRY IN INDUSTRY AND ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION (UNIT 4)
Manufacturing Process: First, limestone and clay are crushed separately. They are
then mixed in the required quantities and finally mixed and ground together, which can
be done either by the dry or wet process. The wet process is suitable if the limestone
and clay are soft. If the raw materials are hard, the dry process is preferred. The dry
process is cost-effective because fuel consumption is less when the raw materials are
burnt in a rotary kiln.
Figure 4.7   Cement manufacturing process.
– Upper Part of the Kiln
Raw material heated   ∆
– Middle Part of the Kiln
→    complete elimination of moisture
Limestone decomposes to calcium oxide.
CaCO (s)
3
∆
→
CaO (s) + CO (g)
2
– Lower End of the Kiln
In this part, the temperature reaches about 1600°C; the partly fused and sintered mixture
undergoes a series of chemical reactions to form calcium aluminates and silicates.
2CaO
+
2SiO2 Æ 2CaO.SiO2 (di-calcium silicate)
217
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
3CaO
3CaO
+
+
3SiO2 Æ 3CaO.SiO2 (tri-calcium silicate)
3Al2O3 Æ 3CaO.Al2O3 (tri-calcium aluminate).
4Al2O3 +
4Fe2O3 Æ    4CaO.Al2O3
.Fe2O3
+
4CaO
(tetra-calcium aluminium ferrate)
SiO2 Æ MgSiO3 (magnesium silicate)
MgO
+
The resulting mixture of all these silicates and aluminates is called cement clinker. After
cooling, it is mixed with 2-3% gypsum (calcium sulphate) and ground to a fine powder.
Gypsum slows down the rate of setting of cement, so that the cement hardens adequately.
Table 4.3   The approximate composition of cement.
Component
Calcium oxide (CaO)
Silica (SiO2)
Alumina (Al2O3)
Magnesium Oxide (MgO)
Ferric oxide (Fe2O3)
Sulphur trioxide(SO3)
Setting  of  Cement
Percentage
50-60 %
20-25 %
5-10 %
2-3 %
1-2 %
1-2 %
When mixed with water cement first forms a plastic mass that hardens after sometime. This
is due to the formation of three-dimensional cross-links between –Si–O–Si– and  –Si–O–
Al– chains.
The first setting occurs within 24 hours, whereas, the subsequent hardening requires about
two weeks. In the hardening process of cement, the transition from plastic to solid state is
called setting.
PROJECT 4.3
Take a 0.5 kg of cement and mix it with correct proportion of sand and water. Mix
the compoment well till a palstic mass is formed. Take this plastic mass and construct
a model of any object. Start pouring water on the model starting from the second day
onwards. Report the changes to the class after 24 hours and after two weeks.
Sugar  Manufacturing
Activity 4.18
1. Prepare a list of foods and drinks used at your home in which sugar is an ingredient.
2.
Is  sugar  made  only  from  sugar  cane?  If  no,  what  are  the  other  sources?    Discuss  in
group and give a presentation to the class.
218
CHEMISTRY IN INDUSTRY AND ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION (UNIT 4)
Sugarcane is a perennial herb belonging to the grass family. Native to tropical and subtropical
regions of the world, this tropical grass is about 3 metres tall.
Planting: Sugarcane is planted in fields by workers or mechanical planters. Typical cane
soil is made from the mixture of silts, clay particles and organic matter. Fertilizers are
applied from the time of planting up until the beginning of the ripening period, depending on
the region where the crop is planted. Cane seasons last from 8-22 months.
1. Collecting the Harvest: Mature canes are gathered by a combination of manual
and mechanical methods. The cane is cut at ground level, the leaves are removed,
the top is trimmed off (by cutting off the last mature joint) the canes and transported
to a sugar factory.
2. Cleansing and Grinding: The stalks are thoroughly washed and cut at the sugar
mill. After the cleaning process, a machine led by a series of rotating knives, shreds
the cane into pieces. This is known as “grinding”. During grinding, hot water is
sprayed onto the sugarcane to dissolve the remaining hard sugar. The shredded
cane is then spread out on a conveyer belt.
3. Juicing: The shredded sugarcane travels on the conveyor belt through a series of
heavy-duty rollers, which extract juice from the pulp. The pulp that remains, or “bagasse”,
is dried and used as a fuel. The raw juice moves on through the mill to be clarified.
4. Clarifying: Carbon dioxide and milk of lime are added to the liquid sugar mixture,
which is heated until boiling. The process of clarifying begins at this stage. As the
carbon dioxide moves through the liquid, it forms calcium carbonate, which attracts
non-sugar debris (fats, gums and waxes) from the juice, and pulls them away from
the sugar juice. The juice is then pushed through a series of filters to remove any
remaining impurities.
5. Evaporation: The clear juice that results from the clarifying process is put under a
vacuum, where the juice boils at a low temperature and the water in it begins to
evaporate. It is heated until it forms into thick, brown syrup.
6. Crystallization: Crystallization is the process of evaporating the water from the
sugar syrup. Pulverized sugar is fed into a sterilized vacuum pan. As the liquid
evaporates, crystals form. The remaining mixture is a thick mass of large crystals.
These crystals are sent to a centrifuge that spins and dries them. The dried product
is raw sugar, which is edible.
7. Refinery: Raw sugar is transported to a cane sugar refinery for the removal of
molasses, minerals and other non-sugars that contaminate it. This is known as the
purification process. Raw sugar is mixed with a solution of sugar and water to loosen
the molasses from the outside of the raw sugar crystals, producing a thick matter
known as “magma”. Large machines then spin the magma, separating the molasses
from the crystals. The crystals are promptly washed, dissolved and filtered to remove
impurities. The golden syrup that is produced is then sent through filters, and SO2 is
219
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
passed through it to remove the colour and water. The process of removing colour
is known as bleaching.What is left is concentrated, clear syrup which is again fed
into a vacuum pan for evaporation.
8. Separation and packaging: Once the final evaporation and drying process is done,
screens separate the different- sized sugar crystals. Large and small crystals are
packaged and labelled as white refined sugar.
Figure 4.8   Steps involved in sugar production.
220
CHEMISTRY IN INDUSTRY AND ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION (UNIT 4)
Paper  and  Pulp
Activity 4.19
Discuss the following issues in the group and give a presentation to your class:
1. Wasting paper is like chopping down trees. Comment.
2. Some  papers  are  relatively  cheap.  The  paper  used  for  this  grade  10  text  book,  for
example,  is  expensive.  Are  different  types  of  paper  manufactured  by  different
processes?
Wood is the raw material for making wood pulp and paper. Wood pulp is a dry fibrous
material used for making paper. The timber resources used to make wood pulp are referred
to as pulp wood. Wood pulp is made from soft-wood trees, such as spruce, pine, fir, larch
and hemlock, and from hard woods, such as eucalyptus, aspen and birch.
Wood is composed of cellulose, lignin, oils and resins. Lignin is used to bind fibres of
cellulose together. To provide wood pulp, the cellulose must be separated from the lignin.
Manufacturing of pulp and paper involves the following steps:
1. Harvesting trees involves the cutting down of trees from their growing areas and
transporting the timber to the paper and pulp industry.
2. Preparation for pulping is a step in which the bark of the tree is removed and then
the wood is chipped and screened to provide uniform sized chips (pieces).
3. Pulping is a step used to make wood pulp from the chipped wood pieces. This can
be accomplished by either mechanical or chemical means depending on the strength
and grade of paper to be manufactured.
a Mechanical pulping:  It utilizes steam, pressure and high temperatures instead
of chemicals to tear the fibres. The fibre quality is greatly reduced because
mechanical pulping creates short, weak fibres that still contain the lignin that bonds
the  fibres  together.  Paper  used  for  newspapers  are  a  typical  product  of
mechanical pulping.
b Chemical pulping: Chemical pulp is produced by combining wood chips and
chemicals in large vessels called digesters. Heat and the chemicals break down
the lignin which binds the cellulose fibres together without seriously degrading
the cellulose fibres. Chemical pulp is manufactured using the Kraft process or
the Sulphite Process.
i) The Kraft Process is the dominant chemical pulping method. It is the most
widely used method for making pulp from all types of trees. The process uses
221
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
aqueous sodium hydroxide and sodium sulphide as a digestion solution. After
digestion for about four hours at a temperature of 170oC, the pulp is separated
by filtration. This process uses a basic digestion medium.
ii) The Sulphite Process uses a cooking liquor (digestion) solution of sodium
bisulphate or magnesium bisulphate digester at pH of about 3 in a pulp.
The action of the hydrogen sulphide ions at 60oC over 6 to 12 hours dissolves
the lignin and separates it from the cellulose. After the process is complete,
the pulp is recovered by filtration.
The wood pulp achieved from the Sulphite or Kraft processes is washed to
remove chemicals and passed through a series of screens to remove foreign
materials.
4. Bleaching: It is the process of removing colouring matter from wood pulp and
increasing its brightness. The most common bleaching agents are strong oxidizing
agents such as chlorine, chlorine oxide, ozone and hydrogen peroxide.
5. Making paper from pulp: After bleaching, the pulp is processed into liquid stock
that can be transferred to a paper mill. The suspension is poured onto a continuously
moving screen belt and the liquor is allowed to seep away by gravity to produce
paper sheet. The continuous sheet then moves through additional rollers that compress
the fibres and remove the residual water to produce fine paper.
Tannery
Activity 4.20
1. The  leather  products  of  Ethiopia  are  durable  and  relatively  cheaper  than  the  same
products  imported  from  outside.  Why  do  people  prefer  to  buy  imported  products?
What can you suggest to change this attitude? Discuss this matter in class in relation to
quality and availability of resources.
2. Why are leather products being replaced by synthetic products?
Discuss in groups and present to the class.
Tanning is a process of converting raw animal hides and skin to leather, using tannin. Leather
is a durable and flexible material created by the tanning of animal hides and skin. Tannin is
an acidic chemical that permanently alters the protein structure of a skin so that it can never
return to rawhide or skin again.
Leather production involves various preparatory stages, tanning, and crusting
1. Preparatory stages are those in which the hide or skin is prepared for tanning.
This stage includes curing, soaking, flesh removal, hair removal, scudding, and
deliming.
222
CHEMISTRY IN INDUSTRY AND ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION (UNIT 4)
a Curing: This process involves salting or drying the hide once it has been removed
from the animal. Curing is employed to prevent putrefaction of the protein
substance, collagen, from bacterial infection. Curing also removes excess water
from the hide and skin. Brine curing is the simplest and fastest method.
b Soaking:  In this process, cured hides are soaked in water for several hours to
several days to remove salt, dirt, debris, blood and excess animal fat from the
skin.
c Flesh removal: In this process, animal hides are moved through a machine
that strips the flesh from the surface of the hide.
d Hair removal: In this step, the soaked hides and skins are transported to large
vats where they are immersed in a mixture of lime and water. This process is
called liming. It loosens the hair from the skin and makes hair-removal easier.
After 1–10 days soaking, the hair is mechanically removed from the hide by a
hair-removing machine.
e Scudding:  This is the process in which hair and fat missed by the machines are
removed from the hide with a plastic tool or dull knife.
f Deliming:  This process involves the removal of lime from the skin or hide in a
vat of acid. After this preparatory process, the skin or hide is ready for tanning.
2. Tanning is a process that converts the protein of the raw hide or skin into a stable
material. There are two main types of tanning:
a Vegetable or natural tanning: The skin is placed in a solution of tannin. Tannins
occur naturally in the barks and leaves of many plants. The primary barks used in
modern times are chestnut, oak, tanoak, hemlock, quebracho, mangrove,
wattle (acacia) and myrobalan.  Naturally tanned hide is flexible and is used
for making shoes, luggage and furniture.
b Mineral tanning: In this process, the skin is placed in solutions of chemicals
such as chromium sulphate and other salts of chromium. Chrome tanning is faster
than natural (vegetable) tanning and requires only twenty four hours. The leather
is greenish-blue in colour derived from the chromium. This process produces
stretchable leather that is used for making garments and handbags.
3. Crusting: This is the final stage in leather manufacturing and includes dyeing, rolling
the leather to make it strong, stretching it in a heat-controlled room and performing
a process that involves covering the grain surface with chemical compounds such as
wax, oil, glazes etc. to make the leather very attractive.
223
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Food  Processing  and  Preservation
Activity 4.21
1. The rate of spoilage of food is faster in open air in comparison to foods kept inside the
refrigerator. Explain. Discuss in group and present your findings to the class.
Food preservation is the process of treating and handling food to stop or greatly reduce
spoilage, loss of quality, edibility or nutritive value caused or accelerated by micro-
organisms.
Preservation usually involves preventing the growth of bacteria, fungi and other micro-
organisms, as well as reducing the oxidation of fats, which causes rancidity.
Activity 4.22
1. What  are  the  traditional  methods  used  to  preserve  food  for  a  long  time  without
spoilage at your home?
2. What modern methods of food preserving and processing do we use in Ethiopia?
Discuss in groups and give a presentation to the class.
Modern methods of food preservation are:
a Freezing: This is one of the most commonly used processes, commercially and
domestically, for preserving a very wide range of  foods such as potatoes, as well as
prepared foodstuffs that would not require freezing in their normal state.
b Freeze-drying: Water vapour has easier access through the cell structure of any
product compared to water-penetrating the product and evaporating from the surface
of the product as is the case of other drying methods. The gentle escape of water
vapour in the freeze-drying process leaves the product close to its original shape,
taste, and colour and there is no loss of aroma or flavour.
For example, liquids such as coffee, tea, juices and other extracts, vegetables,
segments of fish and meat products. Freeze-drying is a superior preservation method
for a variety of food products and food ingredients.
c Vacuum-packing: Stores food in a vacuum environment, usually in an air-tight bag
or bottle. The vacuum environment strips bacteria of the oxygen needed for survival,
slowing down the rate of spoiling. Vacuum-packing is commonly used for storing
nuts to reduce loss of flavour from oxidation.
224
CHEMISTRY IN INDUSTRY AND ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION (UNIT 4)
Exercise 4.4
1. What is the basic difference in the composition of glass and cement?
2. What is ceramics?
3. Write the main chemical equations involved in the production of cement.
4. Describe the refinery processes involved in sugar production.
5. Explain the difference between chemical and mechanical pulping.
6. How does natural tanning differ from mineral tanning?
7. Point out the modern methods of food preservation.
4.5    ENVIRONMENTAL  POLLUTION
Competencies
After completing this section, you will be able to:
• define pollution;
•
•
list the three types of pollution;
list the names of common air pollutants;
• describe the effects of air pollutants;
• describe some of the main methods used to reduce air pollution;
• describe the different types of industrial water pollutants;
•
explain some of the factors involved in water pollution and their effects;
• describe some of the methods used to reduce water pollution;
•
explain some of the factors involved in land pollution;
• describe some of the main methods used to reduce land pollution; and
•
carry out a project on the effects(s) of an industry on environment.
Activity 4.23
1. The  Copenhagen  summit  was  a  popular  international  climate  change  summit.  What
was the role played by Ethiopia? What were the major issues of the summit?
2. Mention  any  activity  in  your  area  to  bring  awareness  of  air  pollution  and  global
warming.
Discuss in your group and present to the class.
225
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Pollution is any discharge of a solid, liquid or gaseous substance or radiation (energy) into
an environment that causes unwanted changes. Pollution causes short-term or long-term
harm that affects the earth’s ecological balance and lowers the quality of life in the
environment. A pollutant is any substance that changes air, water or any other natural
resource in a way that impairs the use of the resource.
Pollutants are discharged into the environment as a result of natural events (like a volcanic
eruption) and as a result of human activities (such as the operation of chemical industries,
agriculture, etc.). Pollutants can be classified by the type of pollution they cause: air pollution,
water pollution, and land pollution.
Air  Pollution
Activity 4.24
1. Based  on  the  situation  of  your  locality,  discuss  the  following  issues  in  groups  and
present the findings to the class:
a List some human activities which contribute to air pollution.
b How these activities contribute to air pollution?
c What solutions do you recommend to overcome these problems?
d What could be your contribution to reduce air pollutions?
2. Give your suggestions on the statement, ‘Air pollution any where is a potential threat
elsewhere.’
Air pollution is caused by the presence of contaminant gaseous substances in the air that
affect the lives of plants and animals on earth. Some common air pollutants are sulphur
dioxide,  nitrogen  oxides,  carbon  monoxide,  ozone,  hydrocarbons,  particulates,
chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), and lead compounds.
Sulphur dioxide (SO2): This enters the atmospheric air from the combustion of coal and
petroleum, and during extraction of metals from their sulphide ores. It causes coughing,
chest pains and shortness of breath.  It is thought to be a cause for bronchitis and lung
diseases. It slowly oxidizes to SO3 by reacting with the oxygen in the air.
Oxides of nitrogen: These can be formed in the atmosphere by natural processes like
thunderstorms. Combustion of fossil fuel containing nitrogen compounds as impurities and
exhaust gases from furnaces and engines increase the amount of nitric oxide, NO, and
nitrogen dioxide, NO2, in the atmosphere. Nitric oxide, NO, catalyzes the decomposition
of ozone in the upper layer of the atmosphere to oxygen, thus decreasing the ozone layer.
2O3 (g)
NO
→  3O2 (g)
226
CHEMISTRY IN INDUSTRY AND ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION (UNIT 4)
Nitric oxide is oxidized by oxygen to nitrogen dioxide in the presence of ultraviolet light.
2NO (g)    +    O2 (g)    Æ    2NO2 (g)
SO2, SO3 and NO2 react with rainwater and form sulphurous acid (H2SO3), sulphuric
acid (H2SO4) and nitric acid (HNO3), respectively and cause acid rain. Acid rain accelerates
corrosion and the deterioration of metals, buildings, statues and also causes tree defoliation,
release of heavy metal ions from soil into water courses and drop in the pH of water in
rivers and lakes.
Hydrocarbons and ozone are responsible for photochemical smog. It is characterized by
a reddish-brown haze containing substances irritating to the eye, nose, and lungs, and
causes extensive damage to vegetation. Considerable amounts of hydrocarbons are released
into the atmosphere by the evaporation of gasoline as unburnt hydrocarbons in auto exhaust.
These substances react with ozone to give compounds that contribute to the oxidizing
nature of photochemical smog.
Carbon monoxide: Most of the carbon monoxide escapes into the atmosphere due to
the incomplete combustion of fuel. Prolonged exposure to carbon monoxide impairs vision,
produces headaches, and exerts strain on the heart. It also reduces the oxygen-carrying
capacity of the blood by reacting with haemoglobin.
Particulates: Dust storms, forest fires, volcanic eruptions and human activities such as
mining and burning coal and oil increase the amount of solid particles in the air. Industrial
areas contain particles of limestone, fertilizers, coal, stones, cement and silica. These
particulates irritate the lungs and deleteriously affect breathing.
Chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs): Chlorofluorocarbons are used as refrigerants, solvents
and plastic foam-blowing agents. When entering the atmosphere, they penetrate into the
upper layers and interact with ultraviolet radiation as follows.
CF2Cl2
UV
→    CF2Cl.    +    .Cl
The free chlorine, Cl, reacts with ozone to form chlorine monoxide and oxygen.
.Cl    +    O3    Æ    ClO.    +    O2
These reactions result in the conversion of ozone to molecular oxygen and contribute to
depletion of the ozone layer. This situation in the upper atmosphere allows dangerous
ultraviolet radiation to reach the earth’s surface. This radiation causes skin cancer in human beings.
Excess carbon dioxide: The combustion of coal and petroleum to generate electricity,
move our vehicles, heat our homes and supply power to our industrial machinery causes a
significant increase in the concentration of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. Combustion
of these fuels releases about 20 billion tonnes of CO2 annually. The increase in the
concentration of CO2 in the atmosphere has resulted in a rise in the average global
temperature, owing to the greenhouse effect. Carbon dioxide and water vapour absorb
infrared radiation, re-radiated from the earth, behaving like the glass in a green house.
Since CO2 and water vapour absorb heat they are called green-house gases. Due to the
227
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
absorption of heat by the green house gases in the atmosphere, the overall effect is global
warming (an increase in the average temperature of our planet). This rise in global
temperature causes melting of polar ice and thus additional water flowing into the oceans.
This situation, in turn, results in the rising of the levels of seas and oceans, flooding of
coastlines and lowland areas, which can submerge these areas.
Heavy metals: Lead contamination in the atmosphere is a result of vehicle engines that
use fuels containing tetraethyl lead which is added to the fuel to reduce engine knocking.
The use of lead paints also contributes towards lead contamination. High levels of lead
cause damage to the brain, kidneys and liver.
What are the potential air pollutants in and around your home?
Methods of Reducing Air Pollution:
Activity 4.25
1. Name the major air pollutants.
2. What  methods  do  you  recommend  to  reduce  air  pollution?  Discuss  in  groups  and
present your idea s to the class.
Research  and  writing
Investigating the effects of air pollution on the environment by:
a
b
consulting experts working on environmental protection, and
referring materials available in you school library. Write a report about your findings
and give a presentation to the class.
Water  Pollution
Activity 4.26
1.
In your community,
a What are the major sources of drinking water?
b What are the principal sources of contamination of surface water and ground water?
c What could be done to reduce these problems?
Discuss in groups and present to the class.
228
CHEMISTRY IN INDUSTRY AND ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION (UNIT 4)
Water pollution is the degradation of the quality of water brought about by the discharge
into it of untreated sewage, industrial and agricultural waste, and oil spillage. In general,
water is said to be polluted if it contains matter that affects the health of living things or
causes damage to property. The major water pollutants are nitrate and phosphate fertilisers
washed out of the soil, phosphate detergents, untreated sewage, insecticides and herbicides,
and the heavy metal ion, acidic and/or basic residues released by industrial processes.
Phosphate and nitrate fertilisers washed out of the soil and phosphate detergents from
untreated water, enter natural water systems, such as streams, rivers, lakes, and seas.
These dissolved minerals are valuable nutrients for plants, and their discharge into the
water systems accelerates the growth of surface-water plants, such as algae. As a result,
less light reaches the bottom-living plants, which reduces the photosynthesis they need to
live, and they die. When these aquatic plants die, they rot under the action of bacteria
which multiply greatly and consume the oxygen dissolved in the water at a rate faster than
natural aeration or photosynthesis can replenish. Thus, the amount of oxygen in the water
decreases. This depletion of oxygen kills aquatic animals like fish. This sequence of events
is called eutrophication.
Insecticides (pesticides) and herbicides applied in agriculture may also be washed into
lakes, rivers, streams and seas. Some of the insecticides and herbicides do not decompose
easily and are persistent in the environment. Residues of these insecticides and herbicides
may enter the food chains and accumulate in an organism that is consumed by the next
organism. The increasing amount of insecticide and herbicide residue in the bodies of
animals causes health and behavioural problems.
The release of heavy metal ions, acidic and/or basic residues from industrial processes into
natural water systems, such as lakes and rivers, causes pH changes in the water. Water
organisms need specific ranges of water pH to survive, so these changes in pH can kill
them. In the same way, increasing concentrations of toxic metal ions kills some aquatic
organisms.
The release of untreated sewage to natural water systems can spread water-borne diseases
such as cholera, typhoid, hepatitis, and polio.
Methods of Reducing Water Pollution:
1. Treatment of water before discharge into rivers and lakes.
2. To avoid unnatural temperature changes in natural water systems, industries should
not discharge heat-ladened water into them.
3. Recycling industrial and agricultural wastes.
4. Using moderate amounts of agricultural chemicals and increasing the use of organic
fertilizers and biological methods to control pests.
229
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
PROJECT 4.4
Develop a water conservation plan for your school and submit it to your teacher.
Land  Pollution
Activity 4.27
Discuss the following issues and present your answer to your class.
1. Do you observe any pollution of land in your environment?
2. What are the causes of land pollution?
3. Do  you  observe  soil  erosion  in  your  area?  What  three  major  things  do  you  believe
elected officials should take to decrease soil erosion in the region you live?
4. What should be your responsibility in solving the land pollution problems?
Land pollution is caused by things we put into it. It results from the spillage of oil,
leaching  of  harmful  chemicals  and  heavy  metal  ions,  and  dumping  of  non-
biodegradable wastes such as plastics.
Factors involved in land pollution include:
• Spillages of oil from leaking pipelines.
• Harmful heavy metal ions from buried waste leaching into water systems.
• Leaching of harmful chemicals from corroded metal drums which have been buried
underground.
• Dumping of non-biodegradable (do not decompose by the action of bacteria)
wastes like plastics which remain unchanged in the soil for decades or hundreds of
years. Their accumulation in the soil hinders air and water movement and affects the
growth of plants.
• Excessive use of synthetic fertilisers in agricultural activities also contributes towards
land pollution.
What are the contributions of commercial inorganic fertilizers to land pollution?
Methods of Reducing Land Pollution:
Activity 4.28
What  methods  should  be  practiced  globally  to  reduce  land  pollution?  Discuss  in  groups
and present your opinion to the class.
230
CHEMISTRY IN INDUSTRY AND ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION (UNIT 4)
Research  and  writing
Investigating the effects of an industry on the environment
This project work will develop your skills in identifying problems that an industry can
cause in your environment and help you to seek solutions to overcome the problem.
Select an industry close to your school or home. Try to identify the following
1. What are the products manufactured by the industry?
2. What are the raw materials used by the industry?
3. What is the manufacturing process involved?
4. What are the waste products generated?
5. What happens to the waste products? (How does the industry discharge wastes)
6. How is the environment affected by the industrial waste product?
7. How could the environmental impact of waste product be reduced?
Write a report in groups and give a presentation to the class.
Exercise 4.5
1. Describe the main agents of:
a air pollution
b water pollution
2. What are the main methods of reducing:
a air pollution
b water pollution
c
c
land pollution
land pollution
Check list
Key  terms  of  the  unit
allotrope
alloy
•
•
• Basic – oxygen process
• bauxite cryolite
• Bessmer converter
• blast furnace
• blister copper
ceramics
•
chlorine
chemical industry
•
• Chile salt peter
•
• Contact process
•
•
•
•
flotation
fluoroapatite
flux
food preservation
231
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
fractional distillation
•
• Frasch process
• glass
• Haber process
• Hall process
• nitrogen
• Occurrence
• Open – hearth fumace
• ore
• paper and pulp
• pollutants
redphosphorus
rock phosphate
slag
steel
sugar
sulphur
tanning
thermite process
• pollution
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
• verdigris
• white phosphorus
Unit Summary
• A chemical industry is any institution involved in the production of chemicals.
• A chemical industry is characterized by using raw materials available in nature
and transforming them into desired products by chemical means.
• Most of the materials used by the industries are present in nature.
• Natural resources are classified as renewable and non-renewable.
• Aluminium is the most abundant metal in the earth’s crust. It is manufactured
by the electrolysis of molten aluminium oxide mixed with cryolite using the
Hall process.
• Aluminium is used to make light-weight alloys that can be used for aircraft
and similar constructions.
• Aluminium resists corrosion due to the formation of a thin film of an oxide on
its surface.
•
•
Iron is the second-most abundant metal in the earth’s crust.
Iron is extracted in a blast furnace. The furnace is charged with iron ore, coke
and limestone, and hot air is blown up from the bottom.
• Limestone is used in the blast furnace to remove impurities like sand (silica) in
the form of slag.
• The type of iron obtained directly from the blast furnace is called pig iron and
it is impure.
• Wrought iron is the purest form of iron obtained from pig-iron by removing
most of the impurities.
232
CHEMISTRY IN INDUSTRY AND ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION (UNIT 4)
• Steel is an alloy of iron containing definite amounts of carbon and other metals
like chromium, nickel, tungsten, vanadium, manganese etc.
• Steel is manufactured by the Bessemer Converter, Open-Hearth Furnace and
Basic Oxygen Processes.
• Copper is extracted by roasting chalcopyrites (CuFeS2).
• Copper that is obtained by roasting chalcopyrites is called blister copper. It is
impure, and it is refined further by electrolysis.
• Copper is malleable and ductile, a good conductor of heat and electricity and
is used to make electric wires and in the manufacture of alloys.
• Nitrogen constitutes about 80% by volume of atmospheric air.
•
Nitrogen is manufactured by the fractional distillation of liquefied air.
• Nitrogen is relatively inert. However, its reactivity increases when heated and
combined with metals of group IA and IIA to form nitrides and with oxygen to
form oxides like NO and NO2.
• Phosphorus is manufactured by heating a mixture of rock phosphate, coke
(carbon) and silica in an electric furnace.
• Phosphorus has two common allotropes, white and red phosphorus. White
phosphorus is highly reactive, while red phosphorous is relatively stable.
• White phosphorus is stored under water.
• Phosphorus reacts with oxygen and chlorine.
• Oxygen  makes  up  about  20%  by  volume  of  air.  It  is  manufactured  by  the
fractional distillation of liquid air.
• Oxygen is the most abundant element in the earth’s crust.
• Sulphur exists in the elemental state in underground deposits from which it is
extracted by the Frasch process.
• Sulphur reacts with oxygen to form sulphur dioxide and sulphur trioxide.
• Sulphur is used for the manufacture of sulphuric acid by the Contact Process.
• Chlorine is manufactured by the electrolysis of brine.
• Chlorine is a powerful oxidizing agent and reacts with heated metals to form
chlorides.
• Chlorine and chlorine water are used to bleach coloured materials and as
disinfectant.
• Glass is a mixture of two or more silicates.
• Pyrex is a glass containing boron.  It resists high temperatures.
233
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
• Ceramics are materials that are baked or fired at very high temperatures.
• Cement is made by heating a ground mixture of sand and clay. It contains calcium
oxide, silicon dioxide, aluminium oxide, iron (III) oxide, and magnesium oxide.
• Sugar is manufactured from sugarcane in a series of steps.
• Paper and pulp are manufactured from trees in a series of steps. Bleaching
agents such as chlorine, chlorine oxide, ozone or hydrogen peroxide are used
in paper and pulp production.
• Tanning is a process of converting skin to leather.
• The methods used in food processing and preservation are salting, pickling,
sugaring, smoking, drying, canning etc.
• Pollution is the discharge of harmful waste material into the environment.
• The three types of pollution are air, land and water pollution.
• Air pollution is caused by the release of sulphur dioxide, oxides of nitrogen,
carbon  monoxide,  hydrocarbons,  particulates,  CFCs,  and  lead  compounds
etc. into the atmosphere.
• Water pollution is caused by the discharge of untreated sewage, industrial and
agricultural waste and oil spillage.
• Land pollution results from the spillage of oil, leaching of harmful chemicals
and  heavy  metal  ions,  and  dumping  of  non-biodegradable  wastes  such  as
plastics.
REVIEW  EXERCISE  ON  UNIT  4
Part  I:    Write  the  missing  words  in  your  exercise  book
air
blast
coke
haematite
oxide
reduces
1. We extract iron from iron ore in    a    furnace. The commonest ore of iron is  b. The
other raw materials used are    c   , limestone and   d   . Inside the blast furnace,
carbon monoxide    e    the iron (III)   f   to iron.
234
CHEMISTRY IN INDUSTRY AND ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION (UNIT 4)
Part  II:    Multiple  choices  type  questions
2. Which of the statements about the extraction of iron in the blast furnace is true?
a limestone is added to combine with excess carbon dioxide
b a slag of iron oxide forms at the bottom of the furnace
c hot air is blown in at the top of the furnace
d carbon monoxide reduces iron (III) oxide to iron
3. Calcium oxide is added to a steel making furnace to:
a oxidize basic oxides
b oxidize carbon to carbon dioxide
c react with acid impurities
d react with silicon to form silicon dioxide
4. Which of the following statements about fertilizers is true?
a ammonium nitrate can be used as a fertilizer
b fertilizers contain nitrogen, sulphur and iron
c fertilizers are added to the soil to make it more alkaline
d fertilizers are made by combining calcium with oxygen
5. The chemical name for quicklime is:
a calcium carbonate
b calcium sulphate
c calcium hydroxide
d calcium oxide
6. Ordinary glass is chiefly composed of:
a Al2SiO6(OH) and SiO2
b Al2O3 and K2SiO3
c Na2SiO3 and CaSiO3
d Na2CO3 and SiO2
7. The purpose of using brine in the process of tanning is to:
a remove unwanted flesh from the skin
b dehydrate the skin and kill bacteria
c remove hair from the skin
d make the skin soft
8.
In the sugar industry, sulphur dioxide is used as:
a a disinfectant
b a bleaching agent
c a preservative
d an oxidizing agent
235
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
9.
In the tanning process, the purpose of putting the skin into slaked lime solution is to:
a facilitate the removal of unwanted flesh
b dehydrate the skin
c facilitate the removal of hair
d soften the skin
10. Which of the following is the purpose  of treating the crude bauxite ore with hot
aqueous sodium hydroxide in the extraction of aluminium?
a to lower the melting point of crude bauxite
b to dissolve impurities like iron oxides
c to decrease the solubility of crude bauxite
d to obtain pure aluminium oxide
11. Which of the following is not a raw material in the manufacture of ordinary glass?
a boron oxide
b limestone
12. Of the following, a light metal is:
a Au
b Ag
c silica sand
d soda ash
c Hg
d Al
13. Aluminium metal has the following properties with the exception that:
a it occurs in nature in the combined form as bauxite
b it is a conductor of heat and electricity
c it is ductile and malleable
d it is a heavy metal
14. Aluminium is used for:
a kitchen utensils
b electric wires
c making alloys
d all of the above
15. Which of the following is the purest form of iron?
a cast iron
b pig iron
c wrought iron
d limonite
16. Which of the following is used for the extraction of copper?
a haematite
b chalcopyrite
c cryolite
d siderite
17. The highest quality steel is produced by using:
a Contact Process
b Open-hearth Process
c Basic Oxygen Process
d Bessemer Process
236
CHEMISTRY IN INDUSTRY AND ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION (UNIT 4)
18. Which of the following elements possess allotropes?
a carbon
b sulphur
c phosphorus
d all
19. The product obtained by combining a material rich in lime, CaO with other materials
such as clay, which contains silica, SiO2, along with oxides of aluminium, iron and
magnesium is:
a glass
b steel
c cement
d fertilizer
20. Which of the following is not a specific characteristic of chemical industries:
a using naturally available raw materials
b providing transport services to customers
c involving chemical reactions
d consuming energy
21. Which of the following is a non-renewable resource:
a soil
b water
c petroleum
d plants
22. Which of the following elements does not react with nitrogen:
a Li
b Ca
c Fe
d Mg
23. Which of the following is not a use of nitrogen:
a making matches
b making fertilizers
c production of ammonia
d as a refrigerant
24. The most abundant element in the earth’s crust is:
c iron
d aluminium
a silicon
b oxygen
25. Which of the following elements is not found as a free element in nature:
a sulphur
b copper
c oxygen
d chlorine
Part  III:    Match  the  following  items
sulphur dioxide and nitrogen oxides
26.
27. hydrocarbons and ozone
28. particulates
29. CFC’s
30.
31.
excess carbon dioxide
lead compounds and carbon monoxide
a destroy the ozone layer
b poisonous substances
c acid rain
d smog
e green house effect
irritate the lungs
f
237
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Part  IV:    Answer  the  following  questions
32. Why is it important to ban the use of CFC’s as refrigerants?
33. Mention three pollutants that can be released from the exhausts of motor vehicles.
34. What is the difference between carbon monoxide and carbon dioxide in polluting
the environment?
35. What is the impact of using fertilizers and pesticides on the pollution of water?
36. What is the green-house effect? And what is its relationship to global warming?
37. What is the effect of heavy metals like Pb, Cd, and Hg on the body?
38. Mention three diseases that are caused by drinking water polluted by untreated
sewage.
39. Mention two methods of converting potentially dangerous waste into harmless
substances.
40. Explain at least two factors involved in land pollution.
41. What are the important properties of aluminium that make it useful in transport and
construction?
42. Aluminium is one of the most reactive metals. How could it be corrosion resistant?
43.
Iron is extracted in a blast furnace as shown below:
F
E
D
B
C
A
a Name the four raw materials used in the extraction of iron from its ore.
b Which letter in the diagram of blast furnace indicates:
i) The region where solid raw materials are put into the furnace.
ii) The hottest region of the furnace.
iii) The region where slag is collected.
44. Write balanced chemical equations for the given reactions, which take place in the
blast furnace during the extraction of iron:
a The reaction of iron (III) oxide with carbon monoxide.
b The reaction of calcium oxide with silicon (IV) oxide.
45. Why is limestone added to the blast furnace?
46. Explain why aluminium is used to make cooking utensils.
47. Describe the advantages of using steel alloys instead of pure iron.
238
Organic Chemistry
At this moment, you are walking,
sitting, or standing in an “organic”
body. Your skin, hair, muscles, heart,
and lungs are all made from organic
compounds. In fact, the only parts of
your body that are not mostly organic
are your teeth and bones! When you
study organic chemistry, you are
studying the substances that make
up your body and much of the world
around you. Medicines, clothing,
carpets, curtains, and wood and
plastic furniture are all manufactured
from organic chemicals. If you look
out a window, the grass, trees, squir-
rels, and insects you may see are also
composed of organic compounds.
Are you having a sandwich for
lunch? Bread, butter, meat, and lettuce
are made from organic compounds.
Will you have dessert? Sugar, ﬂour,
vanilla, and chocolate are also organic.
What about a drink? Milk and juice
are solutions of water in which
organic compounds are dissolved.
In this unit, you will study a
variety of organic compounds. You
will learn how to name them and how
to draw their structures. You will also
learn how these compounds react, and
you will use your knowledge to pre-
dict the products of organic reactions.
In addition, you will discover the
amazing variety of organic compounds
in your body and in your life.
U N I T   1   C O N T E N T S
CHAPTER  1
Classifying Organic Compounds
CHAPTER  2
Reactions of Organic Compounds
UNIT  1  ISSUE
Current Issues Related to
Organic Chemistry
UNIT 1 OVERALL  EXPECTATIONS
How do the structures of
various organic compounds
differ? What chemical
reactions are typical of these
compounds?
How can you name different
organic compounds and
represent their structures?
What do you need to know in
order to predict the products
of organic reactions?
How do organic compounds
affect your life? How do they
affect the environment?
Unit Issue Prep
Before beginning Unit 1, read
pages 110 to 111 to ﬁnd out about
the unit issue. In the unit issue, you
will analyze an issue that involves
chemistry and society. You can
start planning your research as you
go through this unit. Which topics
interest you the most? How does
society inﬂuence developments in
science and technology?
2
Classifying
Organic Compounds
As you wander through the supermarket, some advertising claims catch
your eye. “Certiﬁed organic” and “all natural” are stamped on the labels
of some foods. Other labels claim that the foods are “chemical free.” As a
chemistry student, you are aware that these labels may be misleading. Are
all “chemicals” harmful in food, as some of the current advertising suggests?
Many terms are used inaccurately in everyday life. The word “natural”
is often used in a manner suggesting that all natural compounds are safe
and healthy. Similarly, the word “chemical” is commonly used to refer to
artiﬁcial compounds only. The food industry uses “organic” to indicate
foods that have been grown without the use of pesticides, herbicides,
fertilizers, hormones, and other synthetic chemicals. The original meaning
of the word “organic” refers to anything that is or has been alive. In this
sense, all vegetables are organic, no matter how they are grown.
Organic chemistry is the study of compounds that are based on
carbon. Natural gas, rubbing alcohol, aspirin, and the compounds that
give fragrance to a rose, are all organic compounds. In this chapter, you
will learn how to identify and name molecules from the basic families of
organic compounds. You will be introduced to the shape, structure, and
properties of different types of organic compounds.
What is the word “organic” intended to mean here?
How is this meaning different from the scientiﬁc
meaning of the word?
C h a p t e r   P r e v i e w
1.1 Bonding and the Shape
of Organic Molecules
1.2 Hydrocarbons
1.3 Single-Bonded
Functional Groups
1.4 Functional Groups
With the C(cid:2)O bond
P r e r e q u i s i t e
C o n c e p t s   a n d   S k i l l s
Before you begin this chapter,
review the following concepts
and skills:
(cid:2) drawing Lewis structures
(Concepts and Skills
Review)
(cid:2) writing molecular formulas
and expanded molecular
formulas (Concepts and
Skills Review)
(cid:2) drawing complete, con-
densed, and line structural
diagrams (Concepts and
Skills Review)
(cid:2) identifying structural
isomers (Concepts and
Skills Review)
4
MHR • Unit 1  Organic Chemistry
Bonding and the
Shape of Organic Molecules
1.1
Early scientists deﬁned organic compounds as compounds that originate
from living things. In 1828, however, the German chemist Friedrich Wohler
(1800–1882) made an organic compound called urea, CO(NH2)2, out of an
inorganic compound called ammonium cyanate, NH4CN. Urea is found in
the urine of mammals. This was the ﬁrst time in history that a compound
normally made only by living things was made from a non-living sub-
stance. Since Wohler had discovered that organic compounds can be made
without the involvement of a life process, a new deﬁnition was required.
Organic compounds are now deﬁned as compounds that are based on
carbon. They usually contain carbon-carbon and carbon-hydrogen bonds.
The Carbon Atom
There are several million organic compounds, but only about a quarter
of a million inorganic compounds (compounds that are not based on
carbon). Why are there so many organic compounds? The answer lies in
the bonding properties of carbon.
As shown in Figure 1.1, each carbon atom usually forms a total of
four covalent bonds. Thus, a carbon atom can connect to as many as four
other atoms. Carbon can bond to many other types of atoms, including
hydrogen, oxygen, and nitrogen.
•
•
C•
•
H
+  4H → C
H
H
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
H
This Lewis structure shows methane, the simplest organic compound. The
Figure 1.1
carbon atom has four valence electrons, and it obtains four more electrons by forming four
covalent bonds with the four hydrogen atoms.
In addition, carbon atoms can form strong single, double, or triple bonds
with other carbon atoms. In a single carbon-carbon bond, one pair of
electrons is shared between two carbon atoms. In a double bond, two
pairs of electrons are shared between two atoms. In a triple bond, three
pairs of electrons are shared between two atoms.
Molecules that contain only single carbon-carbon bonds are saturated.
In other words, all carbon atoms are bonded to the maximum number of
other atoms: four. No more bonding can occur. Molecules that contain
double or triple carbon-carbon bonds are unsaturated. The carbon atoms
on either side of the double or triple bond are bonded to less than four
atoms each. There is potential for more atoms to bond to each of these
carbon atoms.
Carbon’s unique bonding properties allow the formation of a
variety of structures, including chains and rings of many shapes and
sizes. Figure 1.2 on the next page illustrates some of the many shapes
that can be formed from a backbone of carbon atoms. This ﬁgure includes
examples of three types of structural diagrams that are used to depict
organic molecules. (The Concepts and Skills Review contains a further
review of these types of structural diagrams.)
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
(cid:2) discuss the use of the
terms organic, natural, and
chemical in advertising
(cid:2) demonstrate an under-
standing of the three types
of carbon-carbon bonding
and the shape of a molecule
around each type of bond
(cid:2) communicate your under-
standing of the following
terms: organic chemistry,
organic compounds,
tetrahedral, trigonal
planar, linear, bent,
electronegativity, bond
dipole, polar, molecular
polarity
Web
L I N K
www.mcgrawhill.ca/links/
chemistry12
In the chapter opener, you
considered how the terms
“natural” and “chemical” are
used inaccurately. A natural
substance is a substance that
occurs in nature and is not
artiﬁcial. A chemical is any
substance that has been made
using chemical processes in
a laboratory. A chemical can
also be deﬁned as any sub-
stance that is composed of
atoms. This deﬁnition covers
most things on Earth. Go to the
web site above, and click on
Web Links to ﬁnd out where
to go next. Look up some
natural poisons, pesticides,
and antibiotics that are
produced by animals, plants,
and bacteria. Then look up
some beneﬁcial chemicals
that have been synthesized
by humans. Make a poster to
illustrate your ﬁndings.
Chapter 1  Classifying Organic Compounds • MHR
5
C H E M
FA C T
A
A few carbon compounds are
considered to be inorganic.
These include carbon dioxide,
CO2, and and carbon com-
pounds containing complex
negative ions (for example,
CO3
−, and OCN−).
2−, HCO3
B
C
CH3
C
CH
H
C
C
C
H
C
C
H
H
H
C
C
H
H
H
C H
H
(A) This complete structural diagram shows all the bonds in the molecule.
Figure 1.2
(B) This condensed structural diagram shows only carbon-carbon bonds. (C) This line
structural diagram uses lines to depict carbon-carbon bonds.
Carbon compounds in which carbon forms only single bonds have a
different shape than compounds in which carbon forms double or triple
bonds. In the following ExpressLab, you will see how each type of bond
affects the shape of a molecule.
ExpressLab
Molecular Shapes
The type of bonding affects the shape and
movement of a molecule. In this ExpressLab,
you will build several molecules to examine the
shape and character of their bonds.
Procedure
4. Examine the shape of the molecule around
each carbon atom. Draw diagrams to show your
observations.
Analysis
1. Which bond or bonds allow rotation to occur?
1. Build a model for each of the following com-
Which bond or bonds are ﬁxed in space?
pounds. Use a molecular model kit or a chemical
modelling computer program.
2. (a) Describe the shape of the molecule around a
carbon atom with only single bonds.
CH3
CH2
CH2
CH3
H2C
CH
CH2
CH3
butane
1–butene
H2C
CH
CH
CH2
H3C
C
C
CH3
1,3–butadiene
2–butyne
2. Identify the different types of bonds in each
molecule.
3. Try to rotate each molecule. Which bonds
allow rotation around the bond? Which bonds
prevent rotation?
(b) Describe the shape of the molecule around a
carbon atom with one double bond and two
single bonds.
(c) Describe the shape of the molecule around a
carbon atom with a triple bond and a single
bond.
(d) Predict the shape of a molecule around
a carbon atom with two double bonds.
3. Molecular model kits are a good representation
of real atomic geometry. Are you able to make a
quadruple bond between two atoms with your
model kit? What does this tell you about real
carbon bonding?
As you observed in the ExpressLab, the shape of a molecule depends on
the type of bond. Table 1.1 describes some shapes that you must know for
your study of organic chemistry. In Unit 2, you will learn more about why
different shapes and angles form around an atom.
6
MHR • Unit 1  Organic Chemistry
Table 1.1 Common Molecular Shapes in Organic Molecules
Central atom
carbon with four
single bonds
Shape
Diagram
The shape around this carbon atom is tetrahedral.
That is, the carbon atom is at the centre of an
invisible tetrahedron, with the other four atoms at
the vertices of the tetrahedron. This shape results
because the electrons in the four bonds repel each
other. In the tetrahedral position, the four bonded
atoms and the bonding electrons are as far apart
from each other as possible.
H
C
109.5˚
H
H
H
carbon with one
double bond and
two single bonds
The shape around this carbon atom is trigonal
planar. The molecule lies flat in one plane around
the central carbon atom, with the three bonded
atoms spread out, as if to touch the corners of a
triangle.
H
CH3
120˚
C
C
O
C
H
120˚
CH3
H3C
CH3
120˚
carbon with two
double bonds or
one triple bond and
one single bond
oxygen with two
single bonds
The shape around this carbon atom is linear. The
two atoms bonded to the carbon atom are stretched
out to either side to form a straight line.
H
C
180˚
C
CH3
A single-bonded oxygen atom forms two bonds.
An oxygen atom also has two pairs of non-bonding
electrons, called lone pairs. Since there are a total
of four electron pairs around a single-bonded
oxygen atom, the shape around this oxygen atom
is a variation of the tetrahedral shape. Because
there are only two bonds, however, the shape
around a single-bonded oxygen atom is usually
referred to as bent.
lone
pairs
O
H
104.5˚
H
Three-Dimensional Structural Diagrams
Two-dimensional structural diagrams of organic compounds, such as
condensed structural diagrams and line structural diagrams, work well
for ﬂat molecules. As shown in the table above, however, molecules
containing single-bonded carbon atoms are not ﬂat.
You can use a three-dimensional structural diagram to draw the tetra-
hedral shape around a single-bonded carbon atom. In a three-dimensional
diagram, wedges are used to give the impression that an atom or group is
coming forward, out of the page. Dashed or dotted lines are used to show
that an atom or group is receding, or being pushed back into the page. In
Figure 1.3, the Cl atom is coming forward, and the Br atom is behind. The
two H atoms are ﬂat against the surface of the page.
A
B
H
C
Br
Cl
H
Figure 1.3
bromochloromethane molecule, BrClCH2 (B) Ball-and-stick model
(A) Three-dimensional structural diagram of the
The following diagram shows
1-bromoethanol. (You will learn
the rules for naming molecules
such as this later in the chap-
ter.) Which atom or group is
coming forward, out of the
page? Which atom or group is
receding back, into the page?
CH3
C
H
Br
HO
Chapter 1  Classifying Organic Compounds • MHR
7
In this unit, you will encounter
the following polar bonds:
C(cid:3)I, C(cid:3)F, C(cid:3)O, O(cid:3)H,
N(cid:3)H, and C(cid:3)N. Use the
electronegativities in the
periodic table to discover
which atom in each bond has
a partial negative charge, and
which has a partial positive
charge.
Molecular Shape and Polarity
The three-dimensional shape of a molecule is particularly important when
the molecule contains polar covalent bonds. As you may recall from your
previous chemistry course, a polar covalent bond is a covalent bond
between two atoms with different electronegativities.
Electronegativity is a measure of how strongly an atom attracts
electrons in a chemical bond. The electrons in a polar covalent bond are
attracted more strongly to the atom with the higher electronegativity. This
atom has a partial negative charge, while the other atom has a partial posi-
tive charge. Thus, every polar bond has a bond dipole: a partial negative
charge and a partial positive charge, separated by the length of the bond.
Figure 1.4 illustrates the polarity of a double carbon-oxygen bond. Oxygen
has a higher electronegativity than carbon. Therefore, the oxygen atom in
a carbon-oxygen bond has a partial negative charge, and the carbon atom
has a partial positive charge.
partial positive charge
partial negative charge
δ + δ−
C
O
dipole vector points
from positive charge
to negative charge
Figure 1.4
direction and location in space.
Dipoles are often represented using vectors. Vectors are arrows that have
Other examples of polar covalent bonds include C(cid:3)O, O(cid:3)H,
and N(cid:3)H. Carbon and hydrogen attract electrons to almost the same
degree. Therefore, when carbon is bonded to another carbon atom or
to a hydrogen atom, the bond is not usually considered to be polar. For
example, C(cid:3)C bonds are considered to be non-polar.
Predicting Molecular Polarity
A molecule is considered to be polar, or to have a molecular polarity,
when the molecule has an overall imbalance of charge. That is, the
molecule has a region with a partial positive charge, and a region with a
partial negative charge. Surprisingly, not all molecules with polar bonds
are polar molecules. For example, a carbon dioxide molecule has two
polar C(cid:2)O bonds, but it is not a polar molecule. On the other hand, a
water molecule has two polar O(cid:3)H bonds, and it is a polar molecule.
How do you predict whether or not a molecule that contains polar bonds
has an overall molecular polarity? To determine molecular polarity, you
must consider the shape of the molecule and the bond dipoles within the
molecule.
If equal bond dipoles act in opposite directions in three-dimensional
space, they counteract each other. A molecule with identical polar bonds
that point in opposite directions is not polar. Figure 1.5 shows two
examples, carbon dioxide and carbon tetrachloride. Carbon dioxide, CO2,
has two polar C(cid:2)O bonds acting in opposite directions, so the molecule
is non-polar. Carbon tetrachloride, CCl4, has four polar C(cid:3)Cl bonds in
a tetrahedral shape. You can prove mathematically that four identical
dipoles, pointing toward the vertices of a tetrahedron, counteract each
other exactly. (Note that this mathematical proof only applies if all four
bonds are identical.) Therefore, carbon tetrachloride is also non-polar.
8
MHR • Unit 1  Organic Chemistry
A
B
• •
O C
• •
• •
O
• •
Cl
C
Cl
Cl
Cl
The red colour indicates a region of negative charge, and the blue colour
Figure 1.5
indicates a region of positive charge. In non-polar molecules, such as carbon dioxide (A) and
carbon tetrachloride (B), the charges are distributed evenly around the molecule.
If the bond dipoles in a molecule do not counteract each other exactly, the
molecule is polar. Two examples are water, H2O, and chloroform, CHCl3,
shown in Figure 1.6. Although each molecule has polar bonds, the bond
dipoles do not act in exactly opposite directions. The bond dipoles do not
counteract each other, so these two molecules are polar.
A
B
•
•
•
•
O
H
H
H
C
Cl
Cl
Cl
In polar molecules, such as water (A) and chloroform (B), the charges are
Figure 1.6
distributed unevenly around the molecule. One part of the molecule has an overall negative
charge, and another part has an overall positive charge.
The steps below summarize how to predict whether or not a molecule
is polar. The Sample Problem that follows gives three examples.
Note: For the purpose of predicting molecular polarity, you can assume
that C(cid:3)H bonds are non-polar. In fact, they have a very low polarity.
Step 1 Does the molecule have polar bonds? If your answer is no, see
below. If your answer is yes, go to step 2.
If a molecule has no polar bonds, it is non-polar.
Examples: CH3CH2CH3 , CH2(cid:2)CH2
Step 2 Is there more than one polar bond? If your answer is no, see below.
If your answer is yes, go to step 3.
If a molecule contains only one polar bond, it is polar.
Examples: CH3Cl, CH3CH2CH2Cl
Step 3 Do the bond dipoles act in opposite directions and counteract each
other? Use your knowledge of three-dimensional molecular shapes
to help you answer this question. If in doubt, use a molecular model
to help you visualize the shape of the molecule.
If a molecule contains bond dipoles that do not counteract each
other, the molecule is polar.
Examples: H2O, CHCl3
If the molecule contains dipoles that counteract each other, the
molecule is non-polar.
Examples: CO2, CCl4
Chapter 1  Classifying Organic Compounds • MHR
9
C H E M
FA C T
The polarity of a molecule
determines its solubility. Polar
molecules attract each other,
so polar molecules usually
dissolve in polar solvents,
such as water. Non-polar
molecules do not attract
polar molecules enough to
compete against the strong
attraction between polar
molecules. Therefore, non-
polar molecules are not
usually soluble in water.
Instead, they dissolve in
non-polar solvents, such
as benzene.
Sample Problem
Molecular Polarity
Problem
Use your knowledge of molecular shape and polar bonds to predict
whether each molecule has an overall molecular polarity.
(a)
CH3
CH3
(b)
CH3
CH2
HO
(c)
H
Cl
C
C
Cl
H
Solution
(a) Step 1 Does the molecule have polar bonds? H(cid:3)C and C(cid:3)C
bonds are usually considered to be non-polar. Thus, this molecule
is non-polar.
(b) Steps 1 and 2 Does the molecule have polar bonds? Is there more
than one polar bond? The C(cid:3)O and O(cid:3)H bonds are polar.
Step 3 Do the bond dipoles counteract each other? The shape around
oxygen is bent, and the dipoles are unequal. Therefore, these dipoles
do not counteract each other. The molecule has an overall polarity.
(c) Steps 1 and 2 Does the molecule have polar bonds? Is there more
than one polar bond? The C(cid:3)Cl bonds are polar.
Step 3 Do the bond dipoles counteract each other? If you make a
model of this molecule, you can see that the C(cid:3)Cl dipoles act in
opposite directions. They counteract each other. Thus, this molecule
is non-polar.
Practice Problems
1. Predict and sketch the three-dimensional shape around each
single-bonded atom.
(a) C and O in CH3OH
(b) C in CH4
2. Predict and sketch the three-dimensional shape of each
multiple-bonded molecule.
(a) HC(cid:4)CH
(b) H2C(cid:2)O
3. Identify any polar bonds that are present in each molecule in
questions 1 and 2.
4. For each molecule in questions 1 and 2, predict whether the molecule
as a whole is polar or non-polar.
10 MHR • Unit 1  Organic Chemistry
Section Summary
In this section, you studied carbon bonding and the three-dimensional
shapes of organic molecules. You learned that you can determine the
polarity of a molecule by considering its shape and the polarity of its
bonds. In Unit 2, you will learn more about molecular shapes and
molecular polarity. In the next section, you will review the most basic
type of organic compound: hydrocarbons.
Section Review
1
MC
How are the following statements misleading? Explain your
reasoning.
(a) “You should eat only organic food.”
(b) “All-natural ingredients make our product the healthier choice.”
(c) “Chemicals are harmful.”
2
Classify each bond as polar or non-polar.
K/U
(a) C(cid:3)O
(b) C(cid:3)C
(c) C(cid:3)N
(d) C(cid:2)C
(e) C(cid:2)O
3
K/U
Describe the shape of the molecule around the carbon atom
that is highlighted.
(a)
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
(b)
H
H O
C
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
4
5
K/U
Identify each molecule in question 3 as either polar or non-polar.
Explain your reasoning.
I
Identify the errors in the following structural diagrams.
(a)
HC
CH
CH2
CH3
(b)
6
C
Use your own words to explain why so many organic
compounds exist.
Chapter 1  Classifying Organic Compounds • MHR
11
1.2
Hydrocarbons
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
(cid:2) distinguish among the
following classes of organic
compounds: alkanes,
alkenes, alkynes, and
aromatic compounds
(cid:2) draw and name hydro-
carbons using the IUPAC
system
(cid:2) communicate your under-
standing of the following
terms: hydrocarbons,
aliphatic hydrocarbon,
aromatic hydrocarbon,
alkane, cycloalkane, alkene,
functional group, alkyne,
alkyl group
The molecular formula of
benzene is C6H6. Remember
that each carbon atom must
form a total of four bonds. A
single bond counts as one
bond, a double bond counts
as two bonds, and a triple
bond counts as three bonds.
Hydrogen can form only
one bond. Draw a possible
structure for benzene.
In this section, you will review the structure and names of hydrocarbons.
As you may recall from your previous chemistry studies, hydrocarbons
are the simplest type of organic compound. Hydrocarbons are composed
entirely of carbon and hydrogen atoms, and are widely used as fuels.
Gasoline, propane, and natural gas are common examples of hydrocarbons.
Because they contain only carbon and hydrogen atoms, hydrocarbons are
non-polar compounds.
Scientists classify hydrocarbons as either aliphatic or aromatic. An
aliphatic hydrocarbon contains carbon atoms that are bonded in one or
more chains and rings. The carbon atoms have single, double, or triple
bonds. Aliphatic hydrocarbons include straight chain and cyclic alkanes,
alkenes, and alkynes. An aromatic hydrocarbon is a hydrocarbon based
on the aromatic benzene group. You will encouter this group later in
the section. Benzene is the simplest aromatic compound. Its bonding
arrangement results in special molecular stability.
Alkanes, Alkenes, and Alkynes
An alkane is a hydrocarbon that has only single bonds. Alkanes that do not
contain rings have the formula CnH2n + 2. An alkane in the shape of a ring is
called a cycloalkane. Cycloalkanes have the formula CnH2n. An alkene is a
compound that has at least one double bond. Straight-chain alkenes with
one double bond have the same formula as cycloalkanes, CnH2n.
A double bond involves two pairs of electrons. In a double bond, one
pair of electrons forms a single bond and the other pair forms an addition-
al, weaker bond. The electrons in the additional, weaker bond react faster
than the electrons in the single bond. Thus, carbon-carbon double bonds
are more reactive than carbon-carbon single bonds. When an alkene
reacts, the reaction almost always occurs at the site of the double bond.
A functional group is a reactive group of bonded atoms that appears
in all the members of a chemical family. Each functional group reacts in a
characteristic way. Thus, functional groups help to determine the physical
and chemical properties of compounds. For example, the reactive double
bond is the functional group for an alkene. In this course, you will
encounter many different functional groups.
An alkyne is a compound that has at least one triple bond. A straight-
chain alkyne with one triple bond has the formula CnH2n − 2. Triple bonds
are even more reactive than double bonds. The functional group for an
alkyne is the triple bond.
Figure 1.7 gives examples of an alkane, a cycloalkane, an alkene, and
an alkyne.
CH3CH2CH2CH3
H
H
C
H
C
C H
CH3
C
C
CH2
CH2
CH3
cyclopentane, C5H10
butane, C4H10
H H
propene, C3H6
2-hexyne, C6H10
Figure 1.7
Identify each compound as an alkane, a cycloalkane, an alkene, or an alkyne.
12 MHR • Unit 1  Organic Chemistry
General Rules for Naming Organic Compounds
The International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) has set
standard rules for naming organic compounds. The systematic (or IUPAC)
names of alkanes and most other organic compounds follow the same
pattern, shown below.
prefix
+
root
+
suffix
The Root: How Long Is the Main Chain?
The root of a compound’s name indicates the number of carbon atoms in
the main (parent) chain or ring. Table 1.2 gives the roots for hydrocarbon
chains that are up to ten carbons long. To determine which root to use,
count the carbons in the main chain, or main ring, of the compound. If the
compound is an alkene or alkyne, the main chain or ring must include the
multiple bond.
Table 1.2 Root Names
Number of
carbon atoms
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Root
-meth-
-eth-
-prop-
-but-
-pent-
-hex-
-hept-
-oct-
-non-
-dec-
Figure 1.8 shows some hydrocarbons, with the main chain or ring
highlighted.
CH3
HC
CH
CH2
CH3
H3C
C
CH3
A
CH3
CH
H2C
CH2
H2C
CH2
B
Figure 1.8
carbons in the main ring. The root is -pent-.
(A) There are six carbons in the main chain. The root is -hex-. (B) There are ﬁve
The Sufﬁx: What Family Does the Compound Belong To?
The sufﬁx indicates the type of compound, according to the functional
groups present. (See Table 1.4 on page 22.) As you progress through this
chapter, you will learn the sufﬁxes for different chemical families. In your
previous chemistry course, you learned the sufﬁxes -ane for alkanes, -ene
for alkenes, and -yne for alkynes. Thus, an alkane composed of six carbon
atoms in a chain is called hexane. An alkene with three carbons is called
propene.
Chapter 1  Classifying Organic Compounds • MHR
13
The Preﬁx: What Is Attached to the Main Chain?
The preﬁx indicates the name and location of each branch and functional
group on the main carbon chain. Most organic compounds have branches,
called alkyl groups, attached to the main chain. An alkyl group is obtained
by removing one hydrogen atom from an alkane. To name an alkyl group,
change the -ane sufﬁx to -yl. For example, (cid:3)CH3 is the alkyl group that is
derived from methane, CH4. It is called the methyl group, taken from the
root meth-. Table 1.3 gives the names of the most common alkyl groups.
Table 1.3  Common Alkyl Groups
methyl
ethyl
propyl
CH3
butyl
CH2CH2CH2CH3
CH2CH3
CH2CH2CH3
sec-butyl
CH3
CH
CH2CH3
iso-butyl
CH3
CH2
CH
CH3
isopropyl
CH3
CH
CH3
tert-butyl
CH3
C
CH3
CH3
Read the steps below to review how to name hydrocarbons. Then examine
the two Sample Problems that follow.
How to Name Hydrocarbons
Step 1 Find the root: Identify the longest chain or ring in the hydrocarbon.
If the hydrocarbon is an alkene or an alkyne, make sure that you
include any multiple bonds in the main chain. Remember that the
chain does not have to be in a straight line. Count the number of
carbon atoms in the main chain to obtain the root. If it is a cyclic
compound, add the preﬁx -cyclo- before the root.
Step 2 Find the sufﬁx: If the hydrocarbon is an alkane, use the sufﬁx -ane.
Use -ene if the hydrocarbon is an alkene. Use -yne if the hydrocarbon
is an alkyne. If more than one double or triple bond is present, use
the preﬁx di- (2) or tri- (3) before the sufﬁx to indicate the number
of multiple bonds.
Step 3 Give a position number to every carbon atom in the main chain.
Start from the end that gives you the lowest possible position
number for the double or triple bond, if there is one. If there is no
double or triple bond, number the compound so that the branches
have the lowest possible position numbers.
Step 4 Find the preﬁx: Name each branch as an alkyl group, and give it
a position number. If more than one branch is present, write the
names of the branches in alphabetical order. Put the position
number of any double or triple bonds after the position numbers
and names of the branches, just before the root. This is the preﬁx.
Note: Use the carbon atom with the lowest position number to give
the location of a double or triple bond.
Step 5 Put the name together: preﬁx + root + sufﬁx.
14 MHR • Unit 1  Organic Chemistry
Sample Problem
Naming Alkanes
Problem
Name the following alkanes.
(a)
CH3
3
CH3
1
CH
2
CH3
Solution
(b)
4
5
3
2
1
CH2CH3
(a) Step 1 Find the root: The longest chain has three carbon atoms, so the
root is -prop-.
Step 2 Find the sufﬁx: The sufﬁx is -ane.
Steps 3 and 4 Find the preﬁx: A methyl group is attached to carbon
number 2. The preﬁx is 2-methyl.
Step 5 The full name is 2-methylpropane.
(b) Steps 1 and 2 Find the root and sufﬁx: The main ring has ﬁve carbon
atoms, so the root is -pent-. Add the preﬁx -cyclo-. The sufﬁx is -ane.
Steps 3 and 4 Find the preﬁx: Start numbering at the ethyl branch. The
preﬁx is 1-ethyl, or just ethyl.
Step 5 The full name is 1-ethylcyclopentane.
PROBLEM TIPS
• Use hyphens to separate
words from numbers.
Use commas to separate
numbers.
• If there is a ring, it is
usually taken as the main
chain. Follow the same
rules to name cyclic
compounds that have
branches attached.
Include the preﬁx -cyclo-
after the names and
position numbers of the
branches, directly before
the root: for example,
2-methyl-1-cyclohexene.
Sample Problem
Naming an Alkene
Problem
Name the following alkene.
CH3
1
CH3
C
2
CH3
Solution
CH CH2
4
5
C
3
CH2CH3
CH2
6
CH3
7
Step 1 Find the root: The longest chain in the molecule has seven carbon
atoms. The root is -hept-.
Step 2 Find the sufﬁx: The sufﬁx is -ene. The root and sufﬁx together are
-heptene.
Step 3 Numbering the chain from the left, in this case, gives the smallest
position number for the double bond.
Step 4 Find the preﬁx: Two methyl groups are attached to carbon number
2. One ethyl group is attached to carbon number 3. There is a
double bond at position 3. The preﬁx is 3-ethyl-2,2-dimethyl-3-.
Step 5 The full name is 3-ethyl-2,2-dimethyl-3-heptene.
Chapter 1  Classifying Organic Compounds • MHR
15
To draw a condensed structural diagram of a hydrocarbon, follow the
steps below. Then examine the Sample Problem that follows.
How to Draw Hydrocarbons
Step 1 Draw the carbon atoms of the main chain. Leave space after each
carbon atom for bonds and hydrogen atoms to be added later.
Number the carbon atoms.
Step 2 Draw any single, double, or triple bonds between the carbon atoms.
Step 3 Add the branches to the appropriate carbon atoms of the main chain.
Step 4 Add hydrogen atoms so that each carbon atom forms a total of
4 bonds. Remember that double bonds count as 2 bonds and triple
bonds count as 3 bonds.
Sample Problem
Drawing an Alkane
Problem
Draw a condensed structural diagram for 3-ethyl-2-methylhexane.
Solution
Step 1 The main chain is hexane. Therefore, there are six carbon atoms.
Step 2 This compound is an alkane, so all carbon-carbon bonds are single.
Step 3 The ethyl group is attached to carbon number 3. The methyl group
is attached to carbon number 2.
Step 4 Add hydrogen atoms so that each carbon atom forms 4 bonds.
CH2CH3
CH3
1
CH CH CH2
3
2
CH3
4
CH2
5
CH3
6
Practice Problems
Electronic Learning Partner
5. Name each hydrocarbon.
The Chemistry 12 Electronic
Learning Partner has a video
that compares models of
hydrocarbons.
(a)
H3C
CH3
H2C
CH
(b)
H2C
CH
CH3
(c)
CH3
C
CH
CH2
CH3
(d)
CH3
CH3
(e)
(f)
(g)
16 MHR • Unit 1  Organic Chemistry
6. Draw a condensed structural diagram for each hydrocarbon.
(a) propane
(c) 3-methyl-2,4,6-octatriene
(b) 4-ethyl-3-methylheptane
7. Identify any errors in the name of each hydrocarbon.
(a) 2,2,3-dimethylbutane
(c) 3-methyl-4,5-diethyl-2-nonyne
(b) 2,4-diethyloctane
8. Correct any errors so that each name matches the structure beside it.
(a)
4-hexyne
CH3
CH2
CH
CH
CH2
CH3
(b)
2,5-hexene
CH3
C
C
C
C
CH3
9. Use each incorrect name to draw the corresponding hydrocarbon.
Examine your drawing, and rename the hydrocarbon correctly.
(a) 3-propyl-2-butene
(c) 4-methylpentane
(b) 1,3-dimethyl-4-hexene
Careers
in Chemistry
The Art and Science of Perfumery
Since 1932, The Quiggs have manufactured perfume
compounds for cosmetics, toiletries, soaps, air fresh-
eners, candles, detergents, and industrial cleaning
products.
Jeff Quigg says the mixing of a perfume is “a
trial and error process.” An experienced perfumer
must memorize a vast library of hundreds or even
thousands of individual scents and combinations of
scents. Perfume ingredients can be divided into
natural essential oils (derived directly from plants)
and aromatic chemicals (synthetically produced
fragrance components).
Essential oils are organic compounds derived
from ﬂowers, seeds, leaves, roots, resins, and citrus
fruits. The structures of many fragrant compounds
have been studied, and processes for making these
valuable compounds in a laboratory have been
developed. There are now approximately 5000
synthetically produced chemicals that are available
to a perfumer. These chemicals include vanillin,
rose oxides, and the damascones, or rose ketones.
An aspiring perfumer must have a discrimi-
nating sense of smell. As well, a perfumist should
obtain at least a bachelor of science degree in
chemistry, or a degree in chemical engineering.
There are few formal schools for perfumers, so
companies usually train perfumers in-house.
The training takes ﬁve to ten years to complete.
Although inventors are trying to develop
electronic and artiﬁcial noses to detect odours, they
have not yet been able to duplicate the sensitive
nose of a skilled, trained, and talented perfumer.
Making Career Connections
1. Perfume schools exist, but admission is very
competitive. One of these schools is the Institut
Supérieur International du Parfum, de la
Cosmétique et de l’Aromatique Alimentaire
(ISIPCA, or International High Institute of
Perfume, Cosmetic and Food Flavouring). The
ISIPCA is located in Versailles, France. You can
ﬁnd out more about the ISIPCA by logging onto
www.mcgrawhill.ca/links/chemistry12 and
clicking on Web Links. Use the Internet or a
library to ﬁnd out more about perfume schools
and training for perfumers.
2. The fragrance industry is closely linked to the
ﬂavour industry. Many of the skills required of a
perfumer are also required of a ﬂavourist. Find
out more about the ﬂavour industry. Contact the
chemistry department of a university to ﬁnd out
more about ﬂavour chemistry.
Chapter 1  Classifying Organic Compounds • MHR
17
Aromatic Compounds
If you completed the Concept Check activity on page 12, you drew a
possible structure for benzene. For many years, scientists could not
determine the structure of benzene. From its molecular formula, C6H6,
scientists reasoned that it should contain two double bonds and one triple
bond, or even two triple bonds. Benzene, however, does not undergo the
same reactions as other compounds with double or triple bonds.
A
B
We know today that benzene is a cyclic compound with the equivalent
Figure 1.9
of the benzene molecule.
Two representations
of three double bonds and three single bonds, as shown in Figure 1.9(A).
However, the electrons that form the double bonds in benzene are spread
out and shared over the whole molecule. Thus, benzene actually has six
identical bonds, each one half-way between a single and a double bond.
These bonds are much more stable than ordinary double bonds and do
not react in the same way. Figure 1.9(B) shows a more accurate way to
represent the bonding in benzene. Molecules with this type of special
electron sharing are called aromatic compounds. As mentioned earlier,
benzene is the simplest aromatic compound.
Figure 1.10 illustrates some common aromatic compounds. To name
an aromatic compound, follow the steps below. Figure 1.11 gives an
example.
CH3
HC
CH2
NO2
PROBLEM TIP
Often an organic compound
has more than one type of
branch. When possible, num-
ber the main chain or ring of
the compound to give the most
important branches the lowest
possible position numbers.
The table below ranks some
branches (and other groups)
you will encounter in this
chapter, from the highest
priority to the lowest priority.
The Priority of Branches
Highest
priority
Lowest
priority
(cid:3)OH
(cid:3)NH2
(cid:3)F, (cid:3)Cl,
(cid:3)Br, (cid:3)I
(cid:3)CH2CH2CH3
(cid:3)CH2CH3
(cid:3)CH3
NO2
NO2
CH3
methylbenzene
(toluene)
phenylethene
(styrene)
2,4,6-trinitromethylbenzene
(trinitrotoluene, TNT)
The common name for methylbenzene is toluene. Toluene is used to produce
Figure 1.10
explosives, such as trinitrotoluene (TNT). Phenylethene, with the common name styrene, is an
important ingredient in the production of plastics and rubber.
Naming an Aromatic Hydrocarbon
Step 1 Number the carbons in the benzene ring. If more than one type of
branch is attached to the ring, start numbering at the carbon with
the highest priority (or most complex) group. (See the Problem Tip.)
Step 2 Name any branches that are attached to the benzene ring. Give
these branches position numbers. If only one branch is attached to
a benzene ring, you do not need to include a position number.
Step 3 Place the branch numbers and names as a preﬁx before the root,
benzene.
5
4
6
3
1
2
Figure 1.11
name of this compound is 1,3-diethylbenzene.
Two ethyl groups are present. They have the position numbers 1 and 3. The
18 MHR • Unit 1  Organic Chemistry
Chemists do not always use position numbers to describe the branches
that are attached to a benzene ring. When a benzene ring has only two
branches, the preﬁxes ortho-, meta-, and para- are sometimes used instead
of numbers.
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
1,2-dimethylbenzene
ortho-dimethylbenzene
(common name:
ortho-xylene)
1,3-dimethylbenzene
meta-dimethylbenzene
(common name:
meta-xylene)
1,4-dimethylbenzene
para-dimethylbenzene
(common name:
para-xylene)
C H E M
FA C T
Kathleen Yardley Lonsdale
(1903–1971) used X-ray crystal-
lography to prove that benzene
is a ﬂat molecule. All six
carbon atoms lie in one plane,
forming a regular hexagonal
shape. The bonds are all
exactly the same length.
The bond angles are all 120˚.
Practice Problems
10. Name the following aromatic compound.
CH3
H3C
CH3
11. Draw a structural diagram for each aromatic compound.
(a) 1-ethyl-3-methylbenzene
(b) 2-ethyl-1,4-dimethylbenzene
(c) para-dichlorobenzene (Hint: Chloro refers to the chlorine atom, Cl.)
12. Give another name for the compound in question 11(a).
13. Draw and name three aromatic isomers with the molecular formula
C10H14. (Isomers are compounds that have the same molecular
formula, but different structures. See the Concepts and Skills Review
for a review of structural isomers.)
Section Summary
In this section, you reviewed how to name and draw alkanes, alkenes,
and alkynes. You also learned how to name aromatic hydrocarbons. The
names of all the other organic compounds you will encounter in this unit
are based on the names of hydrocarbons. In the next section, you will
learn about organic compounds that have single bonds to halogen atoms,
oxygen atoms, and nitrogen atoms.
Chapter 1  Classifying Organic Compounds • MHR
19
Section Review
1
K/U
Name each hydrocarbon.
(a)
CH3
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH3
(b)
(c)
CH3
CH
CH2
CH
CH2
CH3
(d)
CH2CH3
2
C
Draw a condensed structural diagram for each hydrocarbon.
(a) cyclopentane
(b) 2-methyl-2-butene
(c) 1,4-dimethylbenzene (common name: para-xylene)
(d) 3-ethyl-2,3,4-trimethylnonane
C
Draw and name all the isomers that have the molecular
formula C4H10.
C
Draw a line structural diagram for each hydrocarbon.
(See the Concepts and Skills Review for a review of structural
diagrams and cis-trans isomers.)
(a) pentane
(b) 2-methylpropane
(c) 1-ethyl-3-methylcyclohexane
(d) trans-2,5-dimethyl-3-heptene
C
Draw and name twelve possible isomers that have the molecular
formula C6H10.
I
Use a molecular model set to build a model of the benzene ring.
Examine your model. Does your model give an accurate representation
of benzene’s bonding system? Explain your answer.
C
Draw and name all the isomers that have the molecular formula
C5H10. Include any cis- trans isomers and cyclic compounds.
C
Draw two different but correct structures for the benzene molecule.
Explain why one structure is more accurate than the other.
3
4
5
6
7
8
20 MHR • Unit 1  Organic Chemistry
Single-Bonded Functional Groups
When you cut yourself, it is often a good idea to swab the cut with
rubbing alcohol to disinfect it. Most rubbing alcohols that are sold in
drugstores are based on 2-propanol (common name: isopropanol), C3H8O .
You can also swab a cut with a rubbing alcohol based on ethanol, C2H6O .
Often it is hard to tell the difference between these two compounds. Both
have a sharp smell, and both evaporate quickly. Both are effective at
killing bacteria and disinfecting wounds. What is the connection between
these compounds? Why is their behaviour so similar?
Functional Groups
Both 2-propanol and ethanol contain the same functional group, an
(cid:3)OH (hydroxyl) group, as shown in Figure 1.12. Because ethanol and
2-propanol have the same OH functional group, their behaviour is similar.
CH3
CH
CH3
CH3
CH2 OH
OH
2-propanol
ethanol
Figure 1.12
Ethanol and 2-propanol both belong to the alcohol family.
The general formula for a family of simple organic compounds is
R + functional group . The letter R stands for any alkyl group. (If more
than one alkyl group is present, R ′ and R ′′ are also used.) For example,
the general formula R(cid:3)OH refers to any of the following compounds:
CH3OH, CH3CH2OH, CH3CH2CH2OH, CH3CH2CH2CH2OH, etc.
Organic compounds are named according to their functional group.
Generally, the sufﬁx of a compound’s name indicates the most important
functional group in the molecule. For example, the sufﬁx -ene indicates
the presence of a double bond, and the sufﬁx -ol indicates the presence
of a hydroxyl group.
Functional groups are a useful way to classify organic compounds,
for two reasons:
1. Compounds with the same functional group often have similar
physical properties. In the next two sections, you will learn to
recognize various functional groups. You will use functional groups
to help you predict the physical properties of compounds.
2. Compounds with the same functional group react chemically in very
similar ways. In Chapter 2, you will learn how compounds with each
functional group react.
Table 1.4, on the next page, lists some of the most common
functional groups.
1.3
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
(cid:2) distinguish among the
following classes of organic
compounds: alkyl halides,
alcohols, ethers, and amines
(cid:2) describe the effects of
intermolecular forces on
the physical properties of
alcohols, ethers, and amines
(cid:2) draw and name alkyl
halides, alcohols, ethers,
and amines using the
IUPAC system
(cid:2) identify the common names
of some organic compounds
(cid:2) communicate your under-
standing of the following
terms: (cid:3)OH (hydroxyl)
group, general formula,
intermolecular forces
hydrogen bonding,
dipole-dipole interactions,
dispersion forces, alcohol,
parent alkane, alkyl halide
(haloalkane), ether, alkoxy
group, amine
Each organic family follows a
set pattern. You have just seen
that you can represent the
hydrocarbon part of a
functional family by the letter
R. All the structures below
belong to the primary amine
family. What is the functional
group for this family? Write the
general formula for an amine.
CH3
NH2
CH3
CH2
NH2
CH3
CH2
CH2
NH2
Chapter 1  Classifying Organic Compounds • MHR
21
Table 1.4 Common Functional Groups
Type of compound
Suffix
Functional group
Example
alkane
alkene
alkyne
-ane
-ene
-yne
none
propane
C
C
propene
C
C
propyne
alcohol
-ol
C
OH
propanol
amine
-amine
aldehyde
-al
ketone
-one
carboxylic acid
-oic acid
propanamine
propanal
propanone
propanoic acid
OH
NC
O
HC
O
C
O
C
O
ester
-oate
methyl propanoate
amide
-amide
OC
O
C N
propanamide
Physical Properties and Forces Between Molecules
Organic compounds that have the same functional group often have
similar physical properties, such as boiling points, melting points, and
solubilities. Physical properties are largely determined by intermolecular
forces, the forces of attraction and repulsion between particles. Three
types of intermolecular forces are introduced below. You will examine
these forces further in Chapter 4.
• Hydrogen bonding is a strong intermolecular attraction between the
hydrogen atom from an N(cid:3)H, O(cid:3)H, or F(cid:3)H group on one molecule,
and a nitrogen, oxygen, or ﬂuorine atom on another molecule.
• The attractive forces between polar molecules are called dipole-dipole
interactions. These forces cause polar molecules to cling to each other.
• Dispersion forces are attractive forces that occur between all covalent
molecules. These forces are usually very weak for small molecules, but
they strengthen as the size of the molecule increases.
The process that is outlined on the next page will help you to predict the
physical properties of organic compounds by examining the intermolecular
forces between molecules. As you progress through the chapter, referring
back to this process will enable you to understand the reasons behind
trends in physical properties.
22 MHR • Unit 1  Organic Chemistry
Intermolecular Forces and Physical Properties
Draw two or three molecules of the same organic compound close
together on a page. If you are considering the solubility of one com-
pound in another, sketch the two different molecules close together.
Ask the following questions about the intermolecular interactions
between the molecules of each compound:
1. Can the molecules form hydrogen bonds?
If the molecules have O(cid:3)H, N(cid:3)H, or
H(cid:3)F bonds, they can form hydrogen
bonds with themselves and with water.
The diagram to the right illustrates
hydrogen bonding between water
molecules. If the molecules contain
O, N, or F atoms that are not bonded
to hydrogen atoms, they may accept hydrogen bonds from water,
even though they cannot form hydrogen bonds with themselves.
H
H
H
O
H
H
O
O
H
Molecules that can form hydrogen bonds with themselves have
a higher boiling point than similar molecules that cannot form
hydrogen bonds with themselves. For example, alcohols can form
hydrogen bonds, but alkanes cannot. Therefore, alcohols have
higher boiling points than alkanes.
Molecules that can form hydrogen bonds with water, or can
accept hydrogen bonds from water, are usually soluble in water.
For example, many alcohols are soluble in water because they can
form hydrogen bonds with water.
2. Are the molecules polar ?
The molecules are polar if they have polar bonds, and if these
bonds do not act in opposite directions and counteract each other.
Polar molecules are attracted to each other by dipole-dipole forces.
Polar molecules usually have a higher boiling point than
similar non-polar molecules. Also, polar molecules that can form
hydrogen bonds have an even higher boiling point than polar
molecules that cannot form hydrogen bonds. For example, ethanol,
CH3CH2OH, is polar. Its molecules can form hydrogen bonds.
Methoxymethane, CH3OCH3, is an isomer of ethanol. It is also
polar, but its molecules cannot form hydrogen bonds. Thus,
ethanol has a higher boiling point than methoxymethane. Both of
these compounds have a higher boiling point than the non-polar
molecule ethane, CH3CH3.
Polar molecules with a large non-polar hydrocarbon part are
less polar than polar molecules with a smaller non-polar hydrocar-
bon part. For example, octanol, CH3CH2CH2CH2CH2CH2CH2CH2OH ,
is less polar than ethanol, CH3CH2OH.
Polar molecules with a large hydrocarbon part are less soluble
in water than polar molecules with a smaller hydrocarbon part.
For example, octanol, CH3CH2CH2CH2CH2CH2CH2CH2OH , is less
soluble in water than ethanol, CH3CH2OH.
continued on the next page
Chapter 1  Classifying Organic Compounds • MHR
23
3. How strong are the dispersion forces ?
Dispersion forces are weak intermolecular forces. They are stronger,
however, when the hydrocarbon part of a molecule is very large.
Thus, a large molecule has stronger dispersion interactions than a
smaller molecule.
A molecule with a greater number of carbon atoms usually has
a higher boiling point than the same type of molecule with fewer
carbon atoms. For example, hexane, CH3CH2CH2CH2CH2CH3 has a
higher boiling point than ethane, CH3CH3.
The melting points of organic compounds follow approximately
the same trend as their boiling points. There are some anomalies,
however, due to more complex forces of bonding in solids.
In the following ThoughtLab you will use the process in the box above to
predict and compare the physical properties of some organic compounds.
ThoughtLab
Comparing Intermolecular Forces
Intermolecular forces affect the physical properties
of compounds. In this ThoughtLab, you will com-
pare the intermolecular forces of different organic
compounds.
(a) Which compound is more polar? Explain your
answer.
(b) Which compound is more soluble in water?
Explain your answer.
Procedure
Analysis
1. Draw three molecules of each compound below.
1. Which compound has a higher solubility in
(a) propane, CH3CH2CH3
(b) heptane, CH3CH2CH2CH2CH2CH2CH3
(c) 1-propanol, CH3CH2CH2OH
(d) 1-heptanol, CH3CH2CH2CH2CH2CH2CH2OH
2. For each compound, consider whether or not
hydrogen bonding can occur between its mole-
cules. Use a dashed line to show any hydrogen
bonding.
3. For each compound, consider whether or not
any polar bonds are present.
(a) Use a different-coloured pen to identify any
polar bonds.
(b) Which compounds are polar? Which
compounds are non-polar? Explain your
reasoning.
4. Compare your drawings of propane and heptane.
(a) Which compound has stronger dispersion
forces? Explain your answer.
(b) Which compound has a higher boiling point?
Explain your answer.
5. Compare your drawings of 1-propanol and
1-heptanol.
water?
(a) a polar compound or a non-polar compound
(b) a compound that forms hydrogen bonds with
water, or a compound that does not form
hydrogen bonds with water
(c) CH3CH2CH2OH or CH3CH2CH2CH2CH2OH
2. Which compound has stronger attractions
between molecules?
(a) a polar compound or a non-polar compound
(b) a compound without O(cid:3)H or N(cid:3)H bonds,
or
a compound with O(cid:3)H or N(cid:3)H bonds
3. Which compound is likely to have a higher
boiling point?
(a) a polar compound without O(cid:3)H or N(cid:3)H
bonds, or a polar compound with O(cid:3)H or
N(cid:3)H bonds
(b) CH3CH2CH2OH or CH3CH2CH2CH2CH2OH
4. Compare boiling points and solubilities in
water for each pair of compounds. Explain
your reasoning.
(a) ammonia, NH3, and methane, CH4
(b) pentanol, C5H11OH, and pentane, C5H12
24 MHR • Unit 1  Organic Chemistry
Compounds With Single-Bonded Functional Groups
Alcohols, alkyl halides, ethers, and amines all have functional groups
with single bonds. These compounds have many interesting uses in
daily life. As you learn how to identify and name these compounds, think
about how the intermolecular forces between their molecules affect their
properties and uses.
Alcohols
An alcohol is an organic compound that contains the (cid:3)OH functional
group. Depending on the position of the hydroxyl group, an alcohol
can be primary, secondary, or tertiary. Figure 1.13 gives some examples
of alcohols.
primary alcohol
secondary alcohol
tertiary alcohol
OH
CH3
HO CH2
CH2
CH2
CH3
CH3
CH CH2
CH3
CH3
C
CH3
The hydroxyl group is bonded
to a carbon that is bonded to
only one other carbon atom.
The hydroxyl group is bonded
to a carbon that is bonded to
two other carbon atoms.
Figure 1.13
OH
The hydroxyl group is bonded
to a carbon that is bonded to
three other carbon atoms.
Table 1.5 lists some common alcohols and their uses. Alcohols are very
widely used, and can be found in drug stores, hardware stores, liquor
stores, and as a component in many manufactured products.
Table 1.5 Common Alcohols and Their Uses
Name
Common name(s)
Structure
Boiling point
Use(s)
methanol
wood alcohol,
methyl alcohol
ethanol
grain alcohol,
ethyl alcohol
CH3
OH
64.6˚C
CH3
CH2
OH
78.2˚C
2-propanol
isopropanol,
isopropyl alcohol,
rubbing alcohol
CH3
CH3
CH OH
82.4˚C
• solvent in many chemical
processes
• component of automobile
antifreeze
• solvent in many chemical
processes
• component of alcoholic
beverages
• antiseptic liquid
• antiseptic liquid
1,2-ethanediol
ethylene glycol
HO CH2
CH2 OH
197.6˚C
• main component of
automobile antifreeze
Alcohols are named from the parent alkane: the alkane with the same
basic carbon structure. Follow the steps on the next page to name an
alcohol. The Sample Problem that follows gives an example.
Chapter 1  Classifying Organic Compounds • MHR
25
Web
L I N K
www.mcgrawhill.ca/links/
chemistry12
Methanol and ethanol are
produced industrially from
natural, renewable resources.
Go to the web site above, and
click on Web Links to ﬁnd out
where to go next. Research the
processes that produce these
important chemicals. From
where do they obtain their raw
materials?
How to Name an Alcohol
Step 1 Locate the longest chain that contains an (cid:3)OH group attached to
one of the carbon atoms. Name the parent alkane.
Step 2 Replace the -e at the end of the name of the parent alkane with -ol.
Step 3 Add a position number before the root of the name to indicate the
location of the (cid:3)OH group. (Remember to number the main chain
of the hydrocarbon so that the hydroxyl group has the lowest possi-
ble position number.) If there is more than one (cid:3)OH group, leave
the -e in the name of the parent alkane, and put the appropriate
preﬁx (di-, tri-, or tetra-) before the sufﬁx -ol.
Step 4 Name and number any other branches on the main chain. Add the
name of these branches to the preﬁx.
Step 5 Put the name together: preﬁx + root + sufﬁx.
PROBLEM TIP
If an organic compound is
complex, with many side
branches, the main chain may
not be obvious. Sketch the
compound in your notebook
or on scrap paper. Circle or
highlight the main chain.
Sample Problem
Naming an Alcohol
Problem
Name the following alcohol. Identify it as primary, secondary,
or tertiary.
CH2
CH2
CH3
HO
CH2
CH2
CH CH3
Solution
Step 1 The main chain has six carbon atoms. The name of the parent
alkane is hexane.
Step 2 Replacing -e with -ol gives hexanol.
Step 3 Add a position number for the (cid:3)OH group, to obtain 1-hexanol.
Step 4 A methyl group is present at the third carbon. The preﬁx
is 3-methyl.
Step 5 The full name is 3-methyl-1-hexanol. This is a primary alcohol.
Practice Problems
14. Name each alcohol. Identify it as primary, secondary, or tertiary.
OH
(a)
CH3
CH2
CH2
OH
(d)
CH3
CH
CH CH2
CH3
OH
(e)
OH
OH
OH
(b)
(c)
26 MHR • Unit 1  Organic Chemistry
15. Draw each alcohol.
(a) methanol
(b) 2-propanol
(c) 2,2-butanediol
(d) 3-ethyl-4-methyl-1-octanol
(e) 2,4-dimethyl-1-cyclopentanol
16. Identify any errors in each name. Give the correct name for
the alcohol.
(a) 1,3-heptanol
OH
HO CH2
CH2
CH CH2
CH3
(b) 3-ethyl-4-ethyl-1-decanol
OH
(c) 1,2-dimethyl-3-butanol
CH3
CH2
CH
CH CH3
CH3
OH
17. Sketch a three-dimensional diagram of methanol. Hint: Recall that
the shape around an oxygen atom is bent.
Table 1.6 lists some common physical properties of alcohols. As
you learned earlier in this chapter, alcohols are polar molecules that
experience hydrogen bonding. The physical properties of alcohols
depend on these characteristics.
Table 1.6 Physical Properties of Alcohols
Polarity of functional group
Hydrogen bonding
Solubility in water
Melting and boiling points
The O(cid:3)H bond is very polar. As the number of carbon
atoms in an alcohol becomes larger, the alkyl group’s
non-polar nature becomes more important than the polar
O(cid:3)H bond. Therefore small alcohols are more polar
than alcohols with large hydrocarbon portions.
Alcohols experience hydrogen bonding with other
alcohol molecules and with water.
The capacity of alcohols for hydrogen bonding makes
them extremely soluble in water. Methanol and ethanol
are miscible (infinitely soluble) with water. The
solubility of an alcohol decreases as the number of
carbon atoms increases.
Due to the strength of the hydrogen bonding, most
alcohols have higher melting and boiling points than
alkanes with the same number of carbon atoms. Most
alcohols are liquids at room temperature.
Additional Characteristics of Alcohols
• Alcohols are extremely ﬂammable, and should be treated with caution.
• Most alcohols are poisonous. Methanol can cause blindness or death
when consumed. Ethanol is consumed widely in moderate quantities,
but it causes impairment and/or death when consumed in excess.
Chapter 1  Classifying Organic Compounds • MHR
27
Alkyl Halides
An alkyl halide (also known as a haloalkane) is an alkane in which one
or more hydrogen atoms have been replaced with halogen atoms, such
as F, Cl, Br, or I. The functional group of alkyl halides is R(cid:3)X, where X
represents a halogen atom. Alkyl halides are similar in structure, polarity,
and reactivity to alcohols. To name an alkyl halide, ﬁrst name the parent
hydrocarbon. Then use the preﬁx ﬂuoro-, chloro-, bromo-, or iodo-, with a
position number, to indicate the presence of a ﬂuorine atom, chlorine
atom, bromine atom, or iodine atom. The following Sample Problem
shows how to name an alkyl halide.
Sample Problem
Naming an Alkyl Halide
Problem
Name the following compound.
Br
1
6
5
4
2
3
CH3
Br
Solution
The parent hydrocarbon of this compound is cyclohexane. There are two
bromine atoms attached at position numbers 1 and 3. Therefore, part
of the preﬁx is 1,3-dibromo-. There is also a methyl group at position
number 4. Because the groups are put in alphabetical order, the full
preﬁx is 1,3-dibromo-4-methyl-. (The ring is numbered so that the
two bromine atoms have the lowest possible position numbers. See
the Problem Tip on page 18.) The full name of the compound is
1,3-dibromo-4-methylcyclohexane.
Practice Problems
18. Draw a condensed structural diagram for each alkyl halide.
(a) bromoethane
(b) 2,3,4-triiodo-3-methylheptane
19. Name the alkyl halide at the right.
Then draw a condensed structural
diagram to represent it.
F
F
20. Draw and name an alkyl halide that has three carbon atoms and one
iodine atom.
21. Draw and name a second, different alkyl halide that matches the
description in the previous question.
28 MHR • Unit 1  Organic Chemistry
Ethers
Suppose that you removed the H atom from the (cid:3)OH group of an
alcohol. This would leave space for another alkyl group to attach to the
oxygen atom.
CH3CH2(cid:3)OH → CH3CH2(cid:3)O(cid:3) → CH3CH2(cid:3)O(cid:3)CH3
The compound you have just made is called an ether. An ether is an
organic compound that has two alkyl groups joined by an oxygen atom.
The general formula of an ether is R(cid:3)O(cid:3)R. You can think of alcohols
and ethers as derivatives of the water molecule, as shown in Figure 1.14.
Figure 1.15 gives two examples of ethers.
O
→
O
→
O
H
H
R
H
R
R′
water
alcohol
ether
An alcohol is equivalent to a water molecule with one hydrogen atom
Figure 1.14
replaced by an alkyl group. Similarly, an ether is equivalent to a water molecule with
both hydrogen atoms replaced by alkyl groups.
O
O
CH3CH2
CH2CH3
CH3
CH2CH2CH3
ethoxyethane
(common name:
diethyl ether)
1-methoxypropane
(common name:
methyl propyl ether)
Until fairly recently, ethoxyethane was widely used as an anaesthetic. It had
Figure 1.15
side effects, such as nausea, however. Compounds such as 1-methoxypropane are now used
instead.
To name an ether, follow the steps below. The Sample Problem then shows
how to use these steps to give an ether its IUPAC name and its common
name.
How to Name an Ether
IUPAC Name
Step 1 Choose the longest alkyl group as the parent alkane. Give it an
alkane name.
Step 2 Treat the second alkyl group, along with the oxygen atom, as an
alkoxy group attached to the parent alkane. Name it by replacing
the -yl ending of the corresponding alkyl group’s name with -oxy.
Give it a position number.
Step 3 Put the preﬁx and sufﬁx together: alkoxy group + parent alkane.
Common Name
Step 1 List the alkyl groups that are attached to the oxygen atom, in
alphabetical order.
Step 2 Place the sufﬁx -ether at the end of the name.
Chapter 1  Classifying Organic Compounds • MHR
29
Sample Problem
Naming an Ether
Problem
Give the IUPAC name and the common name of the following ether.
CH3
CH2
CH3
CH2
CH2
O
Solution
IUPAC Name
Step 1 The longest alkyl group is based on propane.
CH3
CH2
O
CH2
CH2
CH3
Step 2 The alkoxy group is based on ethane (the ethyl group). It is
located at the ﬁrst carbon atom of the propane part. Therefore, the
preﬁx is 1-ethoxy-.
Step 3 The full name is 1-ethoxypropane.
Common Name
Step 1 The two alkyl groups are ethyl and propyl.
Step 2 The full name is ethyl propyl ether.
Practice Problems
22. Use the IUPAC system to name each ether.
(a)
H3C
O
CH3
(c)
CH3
CH2
CH2
CH2
O
CH3
(b)
H3C
O
CH
CH3
CH3
23. Give the common name for each ether.
(a)
H3C
O
CH2CH3
(b)
H3C
O
CH3
24. Draw each ether.
(a) 1-methoxypropane
(c) tert-butyl methyl ether
(b) 3-ethoxy-4-methylheptane
25. Sketch diagrams of an ether and an alcohol with the same number of
carbon atoms. Generally speaking, would you expect an ether or an
alcohol to be more soluble in water? Explain your reasoning.
Table 1.7 describes some physical properties of ethers. Like alcohols,
ethers are polar molecules. Ethers, however, cannot form hydrogen bonds
with themselves. The physical properties of ethers depend on these
characteristics.
30 MHR • Unit 1  Organic Chemistry
Table 1.7 Physical Properties of Ethers
Polarity of functional group
Hydrogen bonding
The bent shape around the oxygen atom in an ether
means that the two C(cid:3)O dipoles do not counteract each
other. Because a C(cid:3)O bond is less polar than an O(cid:3)H
bond, an ether is less polar than an alcohol.
Because there is no O(cid:3)H bond in an ether, hydrogen
bonding does not occur between ether molecules. Ethers
can accept hydrogen bonding from water molecules.
Solubility in water
Ethers are usually soluble in water. The solubility of an
ether decreases as the size of the alkyl groups increases.
Melting and boiling points
The boiling points of ethers are much lower than the
boiling points of alcohols with the same number of
carbon atoms.
Additional Characteristics of Ethers
• Like alcohols, ethers are extremely ﬂammable and should be used
with caution.
Amines
An organic compound with the functional group (cid:3)NH2, (cid:3)NHR, or
(cid:3)NR2 is called an amine. The letter N refers to the nitrogen atom. The
letter R refers to an alkyl group attached to the nitrogen. The general
formula of an amine is R(cid:3)NR′2. Amines can be thought of as derivatives
of the ammonia molecule, NH3. They are classiﬁed as primary, secondary,
or tertiary, depending on how many alkyl groups are attached to the
nitrogen atom. Note that the meanings of “primary,” “seconday,” and
“tertiary” are slightly different from their meanings for alcohols.
Figure 1.16 gives some examples of amines.
primary amine
secondary amine
CH3
tertiary amine
CH3
CH3
CH2 NH2
CH3
CH2
NH
CH3
CH2
N
CH2
CH3
A primary amine has one alkyl
group and two hydrogen atoms
attached to the nitrogen.
Figure 1.16
A secondary amine has
two alkyl groups and one
hydrogen atom attached
to the nitrogen.
A tertiary amine has three alkyl
groups attached to the nitrogen atom.
To name an amine, follow the steps below. The Sample Problem
illustrates how to use these steps to name a secondary amine.
How to Name an Amine
Step 1 Identify the largest hydrocarbon group attached to the nitrogen atom
as the parent alkane.
Step 2 Replace the -e at the end of the name of the parent alkane with
the new ending -amine. Include a position number, if necessary, to
show the location of the functional group on the hydrocarbon chain.
Step 3 Name the other alkyl group(s) attached to the nitrogen atom. Instead
of position numbers, use the letter N- to locate the group(s). (If two
identical alkyl groups are attached to the nitrogen atom, use N,N-.)
This is the preﬁx.
Step 4 Put the name together: preﬁx + root + sufﬁx.
Chapter 1  Classifying Organic Compounds • MHR
31
C H E M
FA C T
It is also common and correct
to name amines with each
alkyl branch listed as an
attachment before the sufﬁx
-amine. In this system of
nomenclature, the molecules
in Figure 1.16 are ethylamine,
methyl ethyl amine, and methyl
diethyl amine. Several other
methods of naming amines
exist, but they will not be
covered in this course.
Sample Problem
Naming a Secondary Amine
Problem
Name the following secondary amine.
CH3
H3C NH
CH
CH3
Solution
Step 1 The propyl group is the largest of the two hydrocarbon groups
attached to the nitrogen atom. Therefore, the parent alkane is
propane.
Step 2 Replacing the -e with -amine gives propanamine. The position
number of the functional group in the propane chain is 2.
H3C NH
1
CH3
2
CH
3
CH3
Step 3 A methyl group is also attached to the nitrogen atom.
The corresponding preﬁx is N-methyl-.
Step 4 The full name is N-methyl-2-propanamine.
Practice Problems
26. Name each amine.
(a)
CH3
NH2
(c)
CH3
CH2
CH
CH3
NH2
CH3
(b)
C(CH3)3CH2 N
CH2CH3
(d)
N CH3
H
27. Draw a condensed structural diagram for each amine.
(a) 2-pentanamine
(c) N-methyl-1-butanamine
(b) cyclohexanamine
(d) N,N-diethyl-3-heptanamine
28. Classify each amine in the previous question as primary, secondary,
or tertiary.
29. Draw and name all the isomers with the molecular formula C4H11N.
32 MHR • Unit 1  Organic Chemistry
Amines are polar compounds. Primary and secondary amines can form
hydrogen bonds, but tertiary amines cannot. Table 1.8 lists some common
physical properties of amines.
Table 1.8 Physical Properties of Amines
Polarity of functional group
Hydrogen bonding
Solubility in water
Melting and boiling points
C(cid:3)N and N(cid:3)H bonds are polar. Thus, amines are
usually polar.
The presence of one or more N(cid:3)H bonds allows
hydrogen bonding to take place.
Because of hydrogen bonding, amines with low
molecular masses (four or less carbon atoms) are
completely miscible with water. The solubility
of an amine decreases as the number of carbon
atoms increases.
The boiling points of primary and secondary amines
(which contain N(cid:3)H bonds) are higher than the boiling
points of tertiary amines (which do not contain an N(cid:3)H
bond). The higher boiling points are due to hydrogen
bonding between amine molecules.
Additional Characteristics of Amines
• Amines are found widely in nature. They are often toxic. Many
amines that are produced by plants have medicinal properties.
(See Figure 1.17.)
• Amines with low molecular masses have a distinctive ﬁshy smell.
Also, many offensive odours of decay and decomposition are caused
by amines. For example, cadavarine, H2NCH2CH2CH2CH2CH2NH2,
contributes to the odour of decaying ﬂesh. This compound gets its
common name from the word “cadaver,” meaning “dead body.”
• Like ammonia, amines act as weak bases. Since amines are bases,
adding an acid to an amine produces a salt. This explains why
vinegar and lemon juice (both acids) can be used to neutralize the
ﬁshy smell of seafood, which is caused by basic amines.
A
NH2
B
OH
CH
CH2
NH CH3
H3CO
HO
HO
(A) Aniline is an
Figure 1.17
aromatic amine that is useful for
preparing dyes. (B) Adrenaline is
a hormone that is produced by the
human body when under stress.
(C) Quinine is an effective drug
against malarial fever.
CH
CH2
C
OH
CH
N
N
aniline (primary amine)
adrenaline (secondary amine)
quinine (tertiary amine)
Section Summary
In this section, you learned how to recognize, name, and draw members
of the alcohol, alkyl halide, ether, and amine families. You also learned
how to recognize some of the physical properties of these compounds. In
the next section, you will learn about families of organic compounds with
functional groups that contain the C(cid:2)O bond.
Chapter 1  Classifying Organic Compounds • MHR
33
Section Review
1
K/U
Name each compound.
(a)
NH2
(c)
OH
H3C
CH3
CH3
Unit Issue Prep
2
K/U
Write the IUPAC name for each compound.
(b)
CH3CH2 O CHCH2CH3
Organic compounds are
used in a wide variety of
applications all around you. If
you want to prepare for your
Unit 1 Issue, research the use
of organic compounds as fuel,
medicines, and food additives.
(a) CH3CH2CH2CH2CH2CH2CH2OH
(b) CH3CH(OH)CH2CH3
(c) CH3CH2NH2
(d) (CH3)2NH
(e) CH3CH2OCH3
(f) CH3CH(Cl)CH3
3
C
Draw a condensed structural diagram for each compound.
(a) 3-heptanol
(b) N-ethyl-2-hexanamine
(c) 3-methoxypentane
4
5
6
7
C
Draw and name three isomers that have the molecular formula
C5H12O.
I
Name the following compounds. Then rank them, from highest to
lowest boiling point. Explain your reasoning.
(a)
H3C
CH3
H3C O CH3
CH3
CH2
OH
CH3
(b)
CH3
CH2
CH3
CH3
CH2
CH2 NH2
CH3
N
CH3
C
Draw cyclohexanol and cyclohexane. Which compound do you
expect to be more soluble in water? Explain your reasoning.
I
Name the following compounds. Which compound do you expect
to be more soluble in benzene? Explain your reasoning.
OH
8
I
Name these compounds. Then rank them, from highest to lowest
molecular polarity. Explain your reasoning.
CH3
CH2
CH2
CH3
HO
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH3
CH3CH2
O
CH2CH3
34 MHR • Unit 1  Organic Chemistry
Functional Groups
With the C(cid:2)O Bond
Some of the most interesting and useful organic compounds belong to
families you are about to encounter. For example, the sweet taste of
vanilla and the spicy scent of cinnamon have something in common:
a carbonyl group. A carbonyl group is composed of a carbon atom double-
bonded to an oxygen atom. In this section, you will study the structures
and properties of organic compounds that have the C(cid:2)O group.
Aldehydes and Ketones
Aldehydes and ketones both have the carbonyl functional group. An
aldehyde is an organic compound that has a double-bonded oxygen on
the last carbon of a carbon chain. The functional group for an aldehyde is
O
CH
The general formula for an aldehyde is R(cid:3)CHO, where R is any alkyl
group. Figure 1.18 shows the ﬁrst two aldehydes.
O
HCH
methanal
(common name:
formaldehyde)
O
H3C
CH
ethanal
(common name:
acetaldehyde)
Methanal is made from methanol. It is used to preserve animal tissues and
Figure 1.18
to manufacture plastics. Ethanal is also used as a preservative, and in the manufacture of
resins and dyes.
When the carbonyl group occurs within a hydrocarbon chain, the
compound is a ketone. A ketone is an organic compound that has a
double-bonded oxygen on any carbon within the carbon chain. The
functional group of a ketone is
O
C
The general formula for a ketone is RCOR′, where R and R′ are alkyl
groups. Figure 1.19 shows the simplest ketone, propanone.
Like the other organic compounds you have encountered, the names
of aldehydes and ketones are based on the names of the parent alkanes.
To name an aldehyde, follow the steps below.
How to Name an Aldehyde
Step 1 Name the parent alkane. Always give the carbon atom of the
carbonyl group the position number 1.
Step 2 Replace the -e at the end of the name of the parent alkane with -al.
The carbonyl group is always given position number 1. Therefore,
you do not need to include a position number for it.
To name a ketone, follow the steps on the next page. The Sample Problem
that follows gives examples for naming both aldehydes and ketones.
1.4
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
(cid:2) distinguish among the
following classes of organic
compounds: aldehydes,
ketones, carboxylic acids,
esters, and amides
(cid:2) describe physical properties
of aldehydes, ketones,
carboxylic acids, esters, and
amides
(cid:2) draw and name aldehydes,
ketones, carboxylic acids,
esters, and amides using the
IUPAC system
(cid:2) identify the common names
of some organic compounds
(cid:2) build molecular models
of organic compounds
(cid:2) communicate your under-
standing of the following
terms: carbonyl group,
aldehyde, ketone, carboxylic
acid, carboxyl group,
derivative, ester, amide
O
C
CH3
CH3
propanone
(common name: acetone)
Propanone is the
Figure 1.19
main component of most nail polish
removers. It is used as a solvent,
and in the manufacture of plastics.
Chapter 1  Classifying Organic Compounds • MHR
35
How to Name a Ketone
Step 1 Name the parent alkane. Remember that the main chain must
contain the C(cid:2)O group.
Step 2 If there is one ketone group, replace the -e at the end of the name of
the parent alkane with -one. If there is more than one ketone group,
keep the -e sufﬁx and add a sufﬁx such as -dione or -trione.
Step 3 For carbon chains that have more than four carbons, a position
number is needed for the carbonyl group. Number the carbon chain
so that the carbonyl group has the lowest possible number.
Sample Problem
Drawing and Naming Aldehydes and Ketones
Problem
Draw and name seven isomers with the molecular formula C5H10O.
Solution
O
O
O
O
2-pentanone
3-pentanone
pentanal
3-methylbutanal
O
O
O
3-methyl-2-butanone
2,2-dimethylpropanal
2-methylbutanal
Practice Problems
30. Name each aldehyde or ketone.
O
O
(a)
HC
CH2
CH2
CH3
(d)
CH3
CH2
CH
CH
CH2CH3
O
(e)
CH2
CH2
CH3
O
O
C
(b)
(c)
CH3
CH
CH3
31. Draw a condensed structural diagram for each aldehyde or ketone.
(a) 2-propylpentanal
(c) 4-ethyl-3,5-dimethyloctanal
(b) cyclohexanone
32. Is a compound with a C(cid:2)O bond and the molecular formula C2H4O
an aldehyde or a ketone? Explain.
33. Draw and name ﬁve ketones and aldehydes with the molecular
formula C6H12O.
36 MHR • Unit 1  Organic Chemistry
Table 1.9 Physical Properties of Aldehydes and Ketones
Polarity of
functional group
The C(cid:2)O bond is polar, so aldehydes and ketones are
usually polar.
Hydrogen bonding
Hydrogen bonding cannot
occur between molecules
of these compounds, since
there is no O(cid:3)H bond.
The oxygen atom, however,
can accept hydrogen bonds
from water, as shown here.
O
O
H
H
H
H
O
Solubility in water
Aldehydes and ketones with low molecular masses are very
soluble in water. Aldehydes and ketones with a large non-polar
hydrocarbon part are less soluble in water.
Melting and
boiling points
The boiling points of aldehydes and ketones are lower
than the boiling points of the corresponding alcohols. They are
higher than the boiling points of the corresponding alkanes.
Additional Characteristics of Aldehydes and Ketones
• In general, aldehydes have a strong pungent smell, while ketones
smell sweet. Aldehydes with higher molecular masses have a pleasant
smell. For example, cinnamaldehyde gives cinnamon its spicy smell.
(See Figure 1.20.) Aldehydes and ketones are often used to make
perfumes. The rose ketones (shown in Figure 1.21) provide up to 90%
of the characteristic rose odour. Perfumers mix organic compounds,
such as the rose ketones, to obtain distinctive and attractive scents.
• Since aldehydes and ketones are polar, they can act as polar solvents.
Because of the non-polar hydrocarbon part of their molecules, aldehydes
and ketones can also act as solvents for non-polar compounds. For
example, 2-propanone (common name: acetone) is an important organic
solvent in the chemical industry.
• Table 1.10 compares the boiling points of an alkane, an alcohol, and an
aldehyde with the same number of carbon atoms. You can see that the
boiling point of an alcohol is much greater than the boiling point of an
alkane or an aldehyde.
Table 1.10 Comparing Boiling Points
Compound
propane
CH3CH2CH3
Structure
Boiling point
42.1˚C
97.4˚C
48.8˚C
1-propanol
CH3CH2CH2OH
propanal
CH3CH2CHO
O
O
beta-ionone
damascenone
O
O
HC
CH C H
cinnamaldehyde
Cinnemaldehyde
Figure 1.20
gives cinnamon its spicy smell.
beta-damascone
Figure 1.21
provide the sweet smell of a rose.
The rose ketones
Chapter 1  Classifying Organic Compounds • MHR
37
Tools
& Techniques
Infrared Spectroscopy
How do researchers know when they have produced
or discovered a new compound? How do they
analyze the structure of a molecule?
A technique called infrared (IR) spectroscopy
is valuable in the study of organic compounds. This
technique allows researchers to determine the kinds
of bonds and functional groups that are present
in a molecule. Using a more advanced analysis,
researchers are even able to determine other groups
and bonds that are nearby. This information, paired
with the molecular formula of a compound, helps
researchers puzzle out the precise structure of an
unknown molecule.
An infrared spectrometer works by shining
infrared light through a sample of a compound.
Organic molecules absorb light at certain frequencies
in the range of 450 nm to 4000 nm. A sensor on the
other side of the sample detects the amount of light
that is absorbed by the sample at each wavelength.
When a molecule absorbs light at a certain
frequency, it means that a speciﬁc bond is stretch-
ing, bending, or vibrating. The frequency where
each bond absorbs light energy to stretch, bend,
or vibrate is very speciﬁc. The absorption results in
a decrease in intensity of the light transmitted, as
measured by the sensor. This is how an infrared
spectrum is formed for a molecule. The spectrum is
as speciﬁc to a certain molecule as your ﬁngerprint
is to you. The table below shows some typical loca-
tions for peaks on an infrared spectrum.
Table 1.11
Bond or functional group
Wavelength (µm)
O(cid:3)H
N(cid:3)H
C(cid:3)H
carboxylic acid group
aldehyde
ketone
ester
alkene
alkyne
haloalkane
2.8–3.1
2.9–3.0
3.4–3.5
2.8–4.0 and 5.8–5.9
3.4–3.7 and 5.7–5.8
5.8–5.9
5.7–5.8 and 7.7–8.5
5.9–6.2
4.5–4.8
13.4–20
The shape of the peak for each functional group is
affected by other groups and atoms in the vicinity.
Examine the spectrum for 2-pentanone, shown
below. This compound has many C(cid:3)H bonds, and
one C(cid:2)O bond. The jagged peak in the range of 3.4
µm to 3.5 µm is caused by the various C(cid:3)H bonds
in the molecule absorbing light and stretching. The
peak between 5.8 µm and 5.9 µm is caused by the
C(cid:2)O bond stretching. The peaks between 6.7 µm
and 7.7 µm represent the C(cid:3)H bonds bending.
2.2
2.3 2.4 2.5 2.6 2.7 2.8 2.9 3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15 16 17
Wavelength, (µm)
100
80
60
40
20
0
4600
0.0
0.5
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.7
1.0
2.0
4200
3800
3400
3000
2600
2200
2000
1800
1600
1400
1200
1000
800
600
WAVENUMBERS (cm–1)
38 MHR • Unit 1  Organic Chemistry
Carboxylic Acids
You are already familiar with one carboxylic acid. In fact, you may
sprinkle it over your French fries or your salad, as shown in Figure 1.22.
Vinegar is a 5% solution of acetic acid in water. The IUPAC name for
acetic acid is ethanoic acid, CH3COOH.
A carboxylic acid is an organic compound with the following
functional group:
O
C
This (cid:3)COOH group is called the carboxyl group. The general formula
for a carboxylic acid is R(cid:3)COOH. Figure 1.23 shows some common
carboxylic acids.
OH
O
HC
OH
methanoic acid
(common name:
formic acid)
O
C
OH
O
C
OH
CH3
ethanoic acid
(common name:
acetic acid)
O
C
HO
CH2
O
C
C
OH
CH2CH2
O
C
OH
benzoic acid
Figure 1.23
Common carboxylic acids
OH
citric acid
To name a simple carboxylic acid, follow the steps below. Figure 1.24
gives some examples of carboxylic acid names.
How to Name a Carboxylic Acid
Step 1 Name the parent alkane.
Many salad
Figure 1.22
dressings contain vinegar.
Step 2 Replace the -e at the end of the name of the parent alkane with
-oic acid.
Step 3 The carbon atom of the carboxyl group is always given position
number 1. Name and number the branches that are attached to the
compound.
CH3
4
CH2
3
CH2
2
O
C
1
OH
HO
O
C
1
CH3
CH2
2
CH CH2
3
4
CH3
5
C O U R S E
C H A L L E N G E
In the Course Challenge at
the end of this book, you will
practise recognizing organic
compounds. Prepare a list
of tips to help you recognize
each type of organic com-
pound you have encountered.
butanoic acid
3-methylpentanoic acid
Figure 1.24
Examples of carboxylic acid names
Chapter 1  Classifying Organic Compounds • MHR
39
Organic compounds that have
one or two carbon atoms are
usually known by their com-
mon names. These common
names are based on the Latin
words formica (ant) and
acetum (vinegar). Give the
IUPAC names for
formaldehyde, formic acid,
acetaldehyde, and acetic acid.
Practice Problems
34. Name each carboxylic acid.
O
C
(a)
HO
CH2
CH3
CH3
O
(b)
CH3
CH2
C
C
OH
CH3
O
OH
(c)
35. Draw a condensed structural diagram for each carboxylic acid.
(a) hexanoic acid
(b) 3-propyloctanoic acid
(c) 3,4-diethyl-2,3,5-trimethylheptanoic acid
36. Draw a line structural diagram for each compound in question 35.
37. Draw and name two carboxylic acids with the molecular formula
C4H8O2.
Table 1.12 lists some of the physical properties of carboxylic acids. Notice
that carboxylic acids have even stronger hydrogen bonding than alcohols.
Table 1.12 Physical Properties of Carboxylic Acids
Polarity of functional group
Due to the presence of the polar O(cid:3)H and C(cid:2)O bonds,
carboxylic acids are polar compounds.
Hydrogen bonding
Solubility in water
Melting and boiling points
The hydrogen bonding
between carboxylic acid
molecules is strong, as
shown here:
Hydrogen bonding also
occurs between carboxylic
acid molecules and
water molecules.
O
CH3
C
O
H
O
C
H
CH3
O
Carboxylic acids with low molecular masses are very
soluble in water. The first four simple carboxylic acids
(methanoic acid, ethanoic acid, propanoic acid, and
butanoic acid) are miscible with water.
Like alcohols, ketones, and aldehydes, the solubility
of  carboxylic acids in water decreases as the number of
carbon atoms increases.
Because of the strong hydrogen bonds between
molecules, the melting and boiling points of carboxylic
acids are very high.
40 MHR • Unit 1  Organic Chemistry
Additional Characteristics of Carboxylic Acids
• Carboxylic acids often have unpleasant odours. For example, butanoic
acid has the odour of stale sweat.
• The (cid:3)OH group in a carboxylic acid does not behave like the basic
hydroxide ion, OH−. Oxygen has a high electronegativity (attraction
to electrons) and there are two oxygen atoms in the carboxylic acid
functional group. These electronegative oxygen atoms help to carry the
extra negative charge that is caused when a positive hydrogen atom
dissociates. This is why the hydrogen atom in a carboxylic acid is able
to dissociate, and the carboxylic acid behaves like an acid.
O
H2O
R
C OH
O
R
C O−  +  H3O+
correct
O
H2O
R
C+  +  OH−  +  H2O
incorrect
• Figure 1.25 compares the melting and boiling points of a carboxylic
acid with the melting and boiling points of other organic compounds.
As you can see, the melting and boiling points of the carboxylic acid
are much higher than the melting and boiling points of the other
compounds. This is due to the exceptionally strong hydrogen bonding
between carboxylic acid molecules.
CH3CH2CH2CH3
<
CH3CH2CH2CH
/
CH3CH2CCH3
<
CH3CH2CH2CH2OH
<
CH3CH2CH2COH
O
O
O
b.p. −0.5˚C
m.p. −138.4˚C
b.p. 75.7˚C
m.p. −99˚C
b.p. 79.6˚C
m.p. − 86.3˚C
b.p. 117.2˚C
m.p. − 89.5˚C
b.p. 165.5˚C
m.p. −4.5˚C
alkane
aldehyde / ketone
alcohol
carboxylic acid
Figure 1.25
Derivatives of Carboxylic Acids
Exchanging the hydroxyl group of a carboxylic acid with a different group
produces a carboxylic acid derivative. In the following investigation, you
will react two carboxylic acids with primary alcohols to produce different
organic compounds.
Chapter 1  Classifying Organic Compounds • MHR
41
MICROSCALE
Predicting
S K I L L   F O C U S
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
Preparing a Carboxylic
Acid Derivative
The reaction between a carboxylic acid and an
alcohol produces an organic compound that
you have not yet seen. In this investigation, you
will prepare this new type of compound and
observe one of its properties.
Questions
What kind of compound will form in the reaction
of a carboxylic acid with an alcohol? What
observable properties will the new compounds
have?
Safety Precautions
• The products of these reactions are very
ﬂammable. Before starting, make sure that
there is no open ﬂame in the laboratory. Use
a hot plate, not a Bunsen burner.
• Carry out all procedures in a well-ventilated
area. Use a fume hood for steps involving
butanoic acid.
• Concentrated sulfuric acid, ethanoic acid, and
butanoic acid are all extremely corrosive. Wear
goggles, gloves, and an apron while performing
this investigation. Treat the acids with
extreme care. If you spill any acid on your
skin, wash it with plenty of cold water and
notify your teacher.
Materials
retort stand with two clamps
thermometer
hot plate
2 small beakers (50 or 100 mL)
100 mL beaker
2 large beakers (250 mL)
4 plastic micropipettes
2 graduated cylinders (10 mL)
medicine dropper
stopper or paper towel
42 MHR • Unit 1  Organic Chemistry
distilled water
6 mol/L sulfuric acid
ethanoic acid (glacial acetic acid)
butanoic acid
ethanol
1-propanol
ice
Procedure
1. Before starting the investigation, read through
the Procedure. Then prepare your equipment
as follows.
(a) Make sure that all the glassware is very
clean and dry.
(b) Prepare a hot-water bath. Heat about
125 mL of tap water in a 250 mL beaker
on the hot plate to 60˚C. Adjust the hot
plate so the temperature remains between
50˚C and 60˚C.
(c) Prepare a cold-water bath. Place about
125 mL of a mixture of water and ice
chips in the second 250 mL beaker.
As long as there are ice chips in the
water, the temperature of the cold-water
bath will remain around 0˚C.
(d) Place about 5 mL of distilled water in a
small beaker (or graduated cylinder). You
will use this in step 8.
(e) Set up the retort stand beside the hot-water
bath. Use one clamp to hold the thermo-
meter in the hot-water bath. Make sure that
the thermometer is not touching the walls
or the bottom of the beaker. Use a stopper
or wrap a piece of paper towel around the
thermometer to hold the thermometer in
place carefully but ﬁrmly. You will use the
other clamp to steady the micropipettes
after you ﬁll them with reaction mixture
and place them in the hot-water bath.
(f) Label three pipettes according to each trial:
• ethanoic acid + ethanol
• ethanoic acid + 1-propanol
• butanoic acid + ethanol
(g) Cut off the bulb of one of the micropip-
pettes, halfway along the wide part of the
bulb (see the diagram below.) You will use
the bulb as a cap to prevent vapours from
escaping during the reactions.
2. Use the graduated cylinder to measure 1.0 mL
of ethanol into the 100 mL beaker. As you do
so, you will get a whiff of the odour of the
alcohol. (
vapour directly.) Record your observations.
Do not inhale the alcohol
CAUTION
3. Use the graduated cylinder to add 1.0 mL
of ethanoic acid to the ethanol. As you do so,
you will get a whiff of the odour of the acid.
(
Record your observations.
Do not inhale the acid directly.)
CAUTION
4. Your teacher will carefully add 4 drops of
sulfuric acid to the alcohol/acid mixture.
5. Suction the mixture up into the appropriately
labelled micropipette. Invert the micropipette.
Place it, bulb down, in the hot-water bath.
(See the diagram below.) Place the cap over
the tip of the pipette. Use a clamp to hold the
pipette in place.
thermometer
cap
micropipette
beaker
hot plate
clamp
retort stand
water
6. Leave the pipette in the hot water for about
10 min to 15 min. Use the thermometer to
monitor the temperature of the hot water.
The temperature should stay between 50˚C
and 60˚C.
7. After 10 to 15 min in the hot-water bath, place
the pipette in the cold-water bath. Allow it to
cool for about 5 min.
8. Carefully squeeze a few drops of the product
onto a watch glass. Mix it with a few drops
of distilled water. To smell the odour of the
compound, take a deep breath. Use your hand
to wave the aroma toward your nose as you
breathe out. Record your observations of
the aroma.
9. Repeat the procedure for the other two trials.
CAUTION
Butanoic acid has a strong odour.
(
Do not attempt to smell it.)
Note: While the ﬁrst reaction mixture is being
heated, you may wish to prepare the other
mixtures and put them in the hot-water bath.
Working carefully, you should be able to
stabilize more than one micropipette with
the clamp. If you choose to do this, make sure
that your materials are clearly labelled. Also
remember to keep a record of the time at which
each micropipette was introduced to the
hot-water bath.
10. Dispose of all materials as your teacher directs.
Clean all glassware thoroughly with soap
and water.
Analysis
1. Make up a table to organize your data.
What physical property did you observe?
2. How do you know that a new product
was formed in each reaction? Explain.
Conclusion
3. Describe the odour of each product that was
formed. Compare the odours to familiar
odours (such as the odours of plants, ﬂowers,
fruits, and animals) to help you describe them.
Application
4. Research the organic compounds that are
responsible for the smell and taste of oranges,
pineapples, pears, oil of wintergreen, and
apples. Find and record the chemical
structure of each compound.
Chapter 1  Classifying Organic Compounds • MHR
43
Carboxylic Acid Derivatives
The strong-smelling compounds you prepared in Investigation 1-A do not
ﬁt into any of the organic families you have studied so far. According to
their molecular formulas, however, they are isomers of carboxylic acids.
They are esters. Because an ester is obtained by replacing the (cid:3)OH
group of a carboxylic acid with a different group, it is called a derivative
of a carboxylic acid. Carboxylic acids have several important derivatives.
In this section, you will study two of these derivatives: esters and amides.
Esters
An ester is an organic compound that has the following functional group:
O
R
C O
The general formula for an ester is RCOOR′, where R is a hydrogen atom
or a hydrocarbon, and R′ is a hydrocarbon. You can think of an ester as
the product of a reaction between a carboxylic acid and an alcohol, as
shown in Figure 1.26.
R′
P R O B E W A R E
If you have access to
probeware, do Probeware
Investigation 1-A, or a similar
investigation from a
probeware company.
O
O
CH3CH2CH2C
OH  +  HO CH2CH3
→
CH3CH2CH2C
O CH2CH3  +  H2O
carboxylic acid
alcohol
ester
water
Figure 1.26
ethyl butanoate.
When heated, butanoic acid reacts with ethanol to produce an ester called
To name an ester, you must recognize that an ester can be thought of as
having two distinct parts. The main part of the ester contains the (cid:3)COO
group. This part comes from the parent acid. When numbering the main
chain of a carboxylic acid, the carbon atom in the carboxyl group is always
given position number 1. The second part of an ester is the alkyl group.
To name an ester, follow the steps below.
How to Name an Ester
Step 1 Identify the main part of the ester, which contains the C(cid:2)O group.
This part comes from the parent acid. Begin by naming the parent
acid.
Step 2 Replace the -oic acid ending of the name of the parent acid with
-oate.
Step 3 The second part of an ester is the alkyl group that is attached to the
oxygen atom. Name this as you would name any other alkyl group.
Step 4 Put the two names together. Note that esters are named as two
words. (See Figure 1.27.)
O
CH3CH2CH2C
O CH2CH3
parent acid
alkyl group
Figure 1.27
ester is an ethyl group. The full name is ethyl- + -butanoate → ethyl butanoate
The main part of this molecule is based on butanoic acid. The other part of the
44 MHR • Unit 1  Organic Chemistry
Sample Problem
Naming and Drawing Esters
Problem
Name and draw three esters that have the molecular formula C4H8O2.
Solution
O
O
CH3CH2C
O CH3
CH3C
O CH2CH3
methyl propanoate
ethyl ethanoate
O
C
H
O
CH2CH2CH3
propyl methanoate
Practice Problems
38. Name each ester.
O
(a)
CH3CH2
O CH
O
(b)
CH3CH2CH2C
O CH3
O
(c)
CH3CH2CH2CH2C
O CH2CH2CH2CH2CH3
39. For each ester in the previous question, name the carboxylic acid and
the alcohol that are needed to synthesize it.
40. Draw each ester.
(a) methyl pentanoate
(b) heptyl methanoate
(c) butyl ethanoate
(d) propyl octanoate
(e) ethyl 3,3-dimethylbutanoate
41. Write the molecular formula of each ester in the previous question.
Which esters are isomers of each other?
42. Draw and name ﬁve ester isomers that have the molecular formula
C5H10O2.
Table 1.13, on the next page, describes some of the physical properties
of esters. As you will see, esters have different physical properties than
carboxylic acids, even though esters and carboxylic acids are isomers of
each other.
Chapter 1  Classifying Organic Compounds • MHR
45
Table 1.13 Physical Properties of Esters
Polarity of functional group
Like carboxylic acids, esters are usually polar molecules.
Hydrogen bonding
Solubility in water
Melting and boiling points
Esters do not have an O(cid:3)H bond. Therefore, they cannot
form hydrogen bonds with other ester molecules.
Esters can accept hydrogen bonds from water. Therefore,
esters with very low molecular masses are soluble in
water. Esters with carbon chains that are longer than
three or four carbons are not soluble in water.
Because esters cannot form hydrogen bonds, they have
low boiling points. They are usually volatile liquids at
room temperature.
Additional Characteristics of Esters
• Esters often have pleasant odours and tastes, so they are used to
produce perfumes and artiﬁcial ﬂavours. In fact, the characteristic tastes
and smells of many fruits come from esters. (See Figure 1.28.)
Amides
An ester can be thought of as the combination of a carboxylic acid and
an alcohol. Similarly, you can think of an amide as the combination of
a carboxylic acid and ammonia or an amine. An amide is an organic
compound that has a carbon atom double-bonded to an oxygen atom and
single-bonded to a nitrogen atom.
Amides have the functional group below:
O
NC
O
O
Figure 1.28
found in oranges.
Octyl ethanoate is
The general formula for an amide is R(cid:3)CO(cid:3)NR2. R can stand for a
hydrogen atom or an alkyl group. Figure 1.29 gives some examples
of amides.
O
HC NH2
methanamide
O
CH3C
NH2
ethanamide
O
O
CH3CH2C
NH2
CH3CH2C
NH CH3
propanamide
N-methylpropanamide
Figure 1.29
Examples of amides
To name an amide, follow the steps on the next page. The Sample
Problem that follows illustrates how to use these steps. Later, Table 1.14
describes some physical properties of amides.
46 MHR • Unit 1  Organic Chemistry
46 MHR • Unit 1  Organic Chemistry
How to Name an Amide
Step 1 Locate the part of the amide that contains the C(cid:2)O group. Name
the parent carboxylic acid that this part derives from. Note: The
carbon in the C(cid:2)O group is always given position number 1.
Step 2 Replace the -oic acid ending of the name of the parent acid with the
sufﬁx -amide.
Step 3 Decide whether the compound is a primary, secondary, or tertiary
amide:
• If there are two hydrogen atoms (and no alkyl groups) attached
to the nitrogen atom, the compound is a primary amide and
needs no other preﬁxes.
• If there is one alkyl group attached to the nitrogen atom, the
compound is a secondary amide. Name the alkyl group, and
give it location letter N- to indicate that it is bonded to the
nitrogen atom.
• If there are two alkyl groups, the compound is a tertiary amide.
Place the alkyl groups in alphabetical order. Use location letter
N- before each group to indicate that it is bonded to the nitrogen
atom. If the two groups are identical, use N,N-.
Step 4 Put the name together: preﬁx + root + sufﬁx.
Sample Problem
Naming a Secondary Amide
Problem
Name the following compound.
O
C
CH3
CH
CH3
Solution
NH
CH2CH2CH3
Step 1 The parent acid is 2-methylpropanoic acid.
O
C
CH3
CH
CH3
NH
CH2CH2CH3
Step 2 The base name for this compound is 2-methylpropanamide.
(The root is -propan-, and the sufﬁx is -amide.)
Step 3 A propyl group is attached to the nitrogen atom. Thus, the
compound’s preﬁx is N-propyl-.
Step 4 The full name of the compound is N-propyl-2-methylpropanamide.
Chapter 1  Classifying Organic Compounds • MHR
47
Practice Problems
43. Name each amide.
O
(a)
CH3CH2CH2C
NH2
(c)
O
(b)
H3C
NH CCH2CH2CH2CH2CH3
44. Draw each amide.
N
O
(a) nonanamide
(c) N-ethyl-N-propylpropanamide
(b) N-methyloctanamide
(d) N-ethyl-2,4,6-trimethyldecanamide
45. Name each amide.
(a) CH3CONH2
(b) CH3CH2CH2CH2CH2CH2CONHCH3
(c) (CH3)2CHCON(CH3)2
46. Draw a line structural diagram for each amide in the previous question.
Table 1.14 Physical Properties of Amides
Polarity of functional group
Hydrogen bonding
Solubility in water
Melting and boiling points
Because the nitrogen atom attracts electrons more
strongly than carbon or hydrogen atoms, the C(cid:3)N and
N(cid:3)H bonds are polar. As a result, the physical
properties of amides are similar to the physical
properties of carboxylic acids.
Because primary amides have two N(cid:3)H bonds, they have
even stronger hydrogen bonds than carboxylic acids.
Secondary amides also experience hydrogen bonding.
Amides are soluble in water. Their solubility decreases
as the non-polar hydrocarbon part of the molecule
increases in size.
Primary amides have much higher melting and boiling
points than carboxylic acids. Many simple amides are
solid at room temperature.
O
C
NH
Additional Characteristics of Amides
• An amide called acetaminophen is a main component of many
CH3
painkillers.
• Urea, another common example of an amide, is made from the reaction
between carbon dioxide gas, CO2, and ammonia, NH3. Urea was the ﬁrst
organic compound to be synthesized in a laboratory. It is found in the
urine of many mammals, including humans, and it is used as a fertilizer.
Comparing Physical Properties
In this chapter, you have learned how to recognize many different types
of organic compounds. In the ﬁrst section, you learned how to use polar
bonds and the shape of a molecule to determine its molecular polarity.
The following investigation allows you to apply what you have learned
to predict and compare the physical properties of various organic
compounds.
OH
acetaminophen
O
H2N
NH2
urea
48 MHR • Unit 1  Organic Chemistry
S K I L L   F O C U S
Predicting
Performing and recording
Comparing Physical Properties
In this investigation, you will examine the
differences between molecules that contain
different functional groups. As you have learned,
the polarity and hydrogen bonding abilities of
each functional group affect how these molecules
interact among themselves and with other
molecules. You will examine the shape of each
molecule and the effects of intermolecular forces
in detail to make predictions about properties.
Prediction
How can you predict the physical properties of
an organic compound by examining its structure?
Materials
molecular model kit
Procedure
1. Choose a parent alkane that has four to ten
carbon atoms (butane to decane).
2. By adding functional groups to your parent
alkane, build a model of a molecule from each
class of organic compounds:
• aromatic hydrocarbons (section 1.2)
• alcohols, ethers, amines (section 1.3)
• aldehydes, ketones, carboxylic acids, esters,
amides (section 1.4)
3. Draw a condensed structural diagram and a line
structural diagram of each compound. Include
the IUPAC name of the compound.
Analysis
1. Look at your aromatic hydrocarbon, your
alcohol, your ether, and your carboxylic acid.
Rank these compounds from
• least polar to most polar
• lowest to highest boiling point
Record your rankings, and explain them.
2. Compare the alcohol you made with an
alcohol that has a different number of carbon
atoms, made by a classmate. Which alcohol
is more soluble in water, yours or your
classmate’s? Which alcohol is more polar?
Explain your reasoning.
3. Choose two of your compounds at random.
Which compound do you think has the higher
melting point? Explain your reasoning.
4. Consider all the compounds you made. Which
compound do you think is the most soluble in
water? Explain your reasoning.
5. Which compound do you think is the most
soluble in benzene? Explain your reasoning.
6. Where possible, predict the odour of each
organic compound you made.
Conclusions
7. Look up the boiling point, melting point,
and solubility of each compound in a refer-
ence book, such as The CRC Handbook
of Chemistry and Physics. Compare your
ﬁndings with the predictions you made in
the Analysis.
8. Challenge a classmate to name each com-
pound you made and identify its functional
group.
Application
9. Use reference books and the Internet to
discover any useful applications of the
compounds you made. Prepare a short report
for your class, explaining how you think each
compound’s physical properties may affect its
usefulness in real life.
Chapter 1  Classifying Organic Compounds • MHR
49
Section Summary
In this chapter, you learned how to recognize, name, and predict the
physical properties of organic compounds that belong to the alcohol,
ether, amine, aldehyde, ketone, carboxylic acid, ester, and amide families.
You discovered many important uses for organic compounds. You know
that 2-propanol (isopropyl alcohol) is used as an antiseptic. Acetone
(a ketone) is the main component of nail polish remover. Esters give many
fruits and processed foods their distinctive odours and tastes. In the next
chapter, you will learn about different chemical reactions that are typical
of each functional family. You will take a detailed look at some common
organic compounds in your life, and learn about some of the beneﬁts and
risks of using organic compounds.
Electronic Learning Partner
The Chemistry 12 Electronic
Learning Partner has a review
activity to practise naming
functional groups.
Section Review
1
K/U
Write the IUPAC name for each compound.
(a)
CH3OH
O
(e)
HCH
O
(b)
CH3CH2OH
(f)
CH3C
OH
OH
CH3
(c)
CH3CHCH3
(g)
O
(d)
CH3CCH3
2
3
K/U
Write the common name for each compound in question 1.
K/U
Name each compound.
(a)
O
O
CH2CH3
(b)
HO C
CH CH CH2
CH2
CH3
CH2CH3
O
(c)
CH3CH2C
NH
CH2CH3
O
(d)
H3C
CO
CH2CH2CH2CH2CH2CH2CH3
50 MHR • Unit 1  Organic Chemistry
4
I
Identify the family that each organic compound belongs to.
(a) CH3CH2CONH2
(b) CH3CH2CH(CH3)CH2CH2COOH
(c) CH3CH2C(CH3)2CH2CHO
(d) CH3COOCH3
5
6
7
8
K/U
Name each organic compound in question 4.
C
Draw and name one carboxylic acid and one ester with the
molecular formula C6H12O2.
C
Draw and name one primary amide, one secondary amide, and
one tertiary amide with the molecular formula C6H13ON.
I
Identify the functional groups in each molecule.
(a) vanillin, a ﬂavouring agent
OH
O
CH3
O
CH
(b) DEET, an insect repellant
CH3
O
C
N
CH2CH3
CH2CH3
(c) penicillin V, an antibiotic (This compound also contains a
functional group that is unfamiliar to you. Identify the atom(s)
in the unfamiliar functional group as part of your answer.)
O
NH
O
O
S
C
N
O
OH
9
K/U
Consider the compounds CH3CH2COH, CH3CH2COOH, and
CH3COOCH3. Which compound has the highest boiling point?
Use diagrams to explain your reasoning.
10
K/U
How could you use your sense of smell to distinguish an amine
from a ketone?
Chapter 1  Classifying Organic Compounds • MHR
51
Review
Reﬂecting on Chapter 1
Summarize this chapter in the format of your
choice. Here are a few ideas to use as guidelines:
• Explain the appropriate use of the terms
“natural,” “organic,” and “chemical.”
• Explain how the polarity of a molecule depends
on its shape and on any polar bonds that are
present.
• Describe the shape and structure of a benzene
molecule.
• Draw and name an example of an alcohol,
an alkyl halide, an ether, and an amine.
• Draw and name an example of an aldehyde,
a ketone, a carboxylic acid, an ester, and an
amide.
Reviewing Key Terms
For each of the following terms, write a sentence
that shows your understanding of its meaning.
organic compounds
organic chemistry
trigonal planar
tetrahedral
bent
linear
polar
bond dipole
hydrocarbons
molecular polarity
aromatic hydrocarbon
aliphatic hydrocarbon
cycloalkane
alkane
functional group
alkene
alkyl group
alkyne
(cid:3)OH (hydroxyl) group
general formula
hydrogen bonding
intermolecular forces
dispersion forces
dipole-dipole
interactions
alcohol
alkyl halide (haloalkane)
alkoxy group
carbonyl group
ketone
carboxyl group
ester
parent alkane
ether
amine
aldehyde
carboxylic acid
derivative
amide
Knowledge/Understanding
1. What is an organic compound?
2. Examine the following molecules. Then answer
the questions below.
C H4
CH3
O
C
CH3
CH3
C H CH2
52 MHR • Unit 1  Organic Chemistry
(a) Predict the shape around the central
carbon atom in each molecule.
(b) Identify any polar bonds that are present
in each molecule.
(c) Describe each molecule as polar or
non-polar.
3. Classify each molecule as polar or non-polar.
(c) CH3NH2
(d) H2C(cid:2)CH2
4. Describe, in words, the functional group for
(a) CH3OH
(b) CH3CH3
(e) H2C(cid:2)O
each type of organic compound.
(a) alkene
(b) alcohol
(c) amine
(d) ketone
(e) carboxylic acid
5. Give the general formula for each type of
organic compound.
(a) alcohol
(b) amine
(c) ester
(d) amide
6. What is the difference between each two
organic compounds?
(a) alcohol and ether
(b) amine and amide
(c) carboxylic acid and ester
(d) cyclic alkene and benzene
7. What is the difference between a saturated
compound and an unsaturated compound?
8. Use the sufﬁx to name the functional family
of each type of organic compound.
(a) ethanamine
(b) 2,3-dimethyloctane
(c) cyclohexanol
(d) methyl propanoate
(e) N-methylpentanamide
(f) 3-ethyl heptanoic acid
9. Identify the functional group(s) in each
molecule.
OH
NH2
(a)
CH3CH2CHCH2CH3
(b)
(c)
CH3
CH
CH
CH
CH3
CH2
O C
O
CH3
C
(d) HC
C
CH2
O
C
CH2
CH2
O
CH3
(e)
O
NH
Cl
COOH
(f)
CH3CH2CHCH2CH2CHO
10. Classify each type of organic compound.
(a)
CH3 NH2
(b)
CH3CH2CHCH3
CH2CH3
O
(c)
CH3
CH2
CH
(d)
CH3
O
O
C
CH2
CH
CH3
CH3
CH2
CH3
CH
CH2
CH3
O
C
(e)
HO
O
(f)
CH3CH(CH3)CH2CCH3
11. Identify each alcohol as primary, secondary,
or tertiary.
OH
(a)
CH3
CH CH3
(c)
CH3
(b)
CH3
CH2
C
OH
(d)
OH
OH
CH2CH3
12. Identify each amine as primary, secondary,
or tertiary.
CH3
CH3
N
(a)
NH2
(c)
CH3
CH2
CH
CH3
(b)
CH3
NH
CH3
(d)
N
CH3
13. (a) Suppose that you have an alcohol and a
ketone with the same molecular mass.
Which compound has a higher boiling point?
(b) Use your understanding of hydrogen
bonding to explain your answer to part (a).
14. (a) Benzene is a non-polar solvent. Is an alcohol
or an alkane more soluble in benzene?
(b) Use molecular polarity to explain your
answer to part (a).
15. Give the IUPAC name for each compound.
Br
OH
(a)
CH3
CH
CH3
(b)
O
C
(c)
HO
CH2
CH2
CH3
CH2
O
(d)
CH3
CH2
C
O CH2
CH3
CH3
CH3
(e)
CH3
CH
C
CH2
O
C
CH2
CH3
CH2
CH3
16. Name each compound. Then identify the
family of organic compounds that it belongs to.
CH3
CH3
(a)
(b)
CH3
(c)
CH3
CH2CH3
(d)
OH
OH
O
CH3
(e)
CH3
CH2
CH2
CH2 N CH2
CH3
O
(f)
CH3CH2C
NH
CH2CH2CH2CH3
Chapter 1  Classifying Organic Compounds • MHR
53
17. Give the common name for each compound.
20. Draw a structural diagram for each compound.
Hydrogen bonding
Boiling
point
Odour
Molecular
polarity
23. Draw and name all the isomers that have the
molecular formula C4H10O.
17˚C
fishy
polar
24. Draw and name six isomers that have the
(a) 3,4-dimethylheptanoic acid
(b) 3-ethyl-3-methyl-1-pentyne
(c) N-ethyl-2,2-dimethyl-3-octanamine
(d) N-ethyl-N-methylhexanamide
(e) 1,3-dibromo-5-chlorobenzene
21. Draw a structural diagram for each compound.
Then identify the family of organic compounds
that it belongs to.
(a) 4-ethylnonane
(b) 4-propylheptanal
(c) 3,3-dimethyl-2-hexanamine
(d) 2-methoxypentane
(e) para-dimethylbenzene
22. Identify the error in each name. Then correct
the name.
(a) 2-pentanal
(b) 1,3-dimethylpropane
(c) 2,2-dimethylbenzene
(d) N,N-diethyl-N-methylpentanamide
(e) 1-methylpropanoic acid
molecular formula C4H8O2.
Making Connections
25. List at least three common organic compounds.
Describe how these compounds are used in
everyday life.
26. The terms “organic,” “chemical,” and “natural”
have slightly different meanings in science
than they do in everyday life.
(a) Compare the use of the term “organic” in the
phrases “organic vegetables” and “organic
compound.” Where might each phrase be
used?
(b) Are chemicals harmful when added to food?
In your answer, consider the true meaning of
the word “chemical.”
(c) Are natural compounds always safer and
more healthy than artiﬁcial compounds?
Give reasons for your answer.
(a)
CH3
CH2 OH
(d)
CH3
(b)
CH3 OH
(e)
CH3
O
C
OH
CH3
O
C
O
C
OH
(c)
H
H
(f)
CH3
CH
CH3
Inquiry
18. Suppose that you are working with ﬁve
unknown compounds in a chemistry laboratory.
Your teacher tells you that these compounds
are ethane, ethanol, methoxymethane,
ethanamine, and ethanoic acid.
(a) Use the following table of physical proper-
ties to identify each unknown compound.
d
n
u
o
p
m
o
C
A
B
C
D
E
Solubility
in water
infinitely
soluble
not
soluble
soluble
infinitely
soluble
infinitely
soluble
−89˚C
odourless non-polar
−25˚C
sweet
polar
strong
none
accepts hydrogen
bonds from water,
but cannot form
hydrogen bonds
between its
molecules
very strong
78˚C
extremely strong
118˚C
very polar
very polar
sharp,
antiseptic
smell
sharp,
vinegar
smell
(b) Draw a complete structural diagram for each
compound.
Communication
19. Draw a condensed structural diagram for each
compound.
(a) 1-propanamine
(b) 3-ethylpentane
(c) 4-heptanol
(d) propanoic acid
(e) cyclobutanol
(f) methoxyethane
(g) 1,1-dibromobutane
(h) 2-methyl-3-octanone
(i) hexanal
(j) N-ethylpropanamide
(k) methyl butanoate
54 MHR • Unit 1  Organic Chemistry
Answers to Practice Problems and
Short Answers to Section Review Questions:
Practice Problems: 3. C(cid:3)O, O(cid:3)H, C(cid:2)O  4. polar,
non-polar, non-polar, polar  5.(a) ethane (b) cyclobutene
(c) 2-methyl-2-pentene (d) 3-methylhexane
(e) 3-ethyl-2-methyl-2-heptene (f) 1,2-dimethylcyclohexane
(g) 2-pentyne  7.(a) 2,2,3-trimethylbutane
(b) 5-ethyl-3-methylnonane
(c) 3-methyl-4,5-diethyl-2-nonene  8.(a) 3-hexene
(b) 2,4-hexadiyne  9.(a) 3-methyl-2-hexene
(b) 4-methyl-2-heptene (c) 2-methylpentane
10. 1,3,5-trimethylbenzene  12.(a) meta-ethylmethylbenzene
13. some isomers include ortho-, meta-, and para-diethyl-
benzene; 1,2,3,4-tetramethylbenzene; and
1-methyl-2-propylbenzene  14.(a) 1-propanol; primary
(b) 2-butanol; secondary (c) cyclobutanol; secondary
(d) 2,3-pentanediol; secondary (e) 2,4-dimethyl-1-heptanol;
primary 16.(a) 1,3-pentanediol (b) 3,4-diethyl-1-decanol,
(c) 3-methyl-2-pentanol  19. 1,2-diﬂuorocyclohexane
20. 1-iodopropane 21. 2-iodopropane  22.(a) methoxymethane
(b) 2-methoxypropane (c) 1-methoxybutane  23.(a) ethyl
methyl ether (b) dimethyl ether  25. alcohol
26.(a) methanamine (b) N-ethyl-2, 2-dimethyl-1-propanamine
(c) 2-butanamine  (d) N,N-dimethylcyclopentanamine
28.(a) primary (b) primary (c) secondary (d) tertiary
29. 1-butanamine, 2-butanamine, 2-methyl-1-propanamine,
N-methyl-1-propanamine, N-methyl-2-propanamine,
N-ethylethanamine, N,N-dimethylethanamine,
2-methyl-2-propanamine  30.(a) butanal (b) 3-octanone
(c) 2-methyl-3-hexanone (d) 2-ethylbutanal
(e) 4-ethyl-3-methyl-2-heptanone 32. aldehyde  33. hexanal,
2-hexanone, 3-hexanone, 3-methyl-2-pentanone,
3,3-dimethylbutanal; many other isomers are possible
34.(a) propanoic acid (b) 2,2-dimethylbutanoic acid
(c) 2-ethyl-4,5-dimethylhexanoic acid  37. butanoic acid,
2-methylpropanoic acid  38.(a) ethyl methanoate (b) methyl
butanoate (c) pentyl pentanoate  41.(a) and (c); (b) and (e)
42. methyl butanoate, ethyl propanoate, propyl ethanoate,
butyl methanoate, methyl 2-methylpropanoate; other iso-
mers exist  43.(a) butanamide (b) N-methylhexanamide
(c) N,N-diethyl-3-methylheptanamide  45.(a) ethanamide
(b) N-methyheptanamide
(c) N,N-dimethyl-2-methylpropanamide
Section Review: 1.1: 2.(a) polar (b) non-polar (c) polar
(d) non-polar (e) polar  3.(a) tetrahedral (b) trigonal planar
4.(a) non-polar (b) polar  1.2: 1.(a) heptane
(b) 3,4-diethyloctane (c) 4-methyl-1-pentene,
(d) ethylbenzene  3. butane, 2-methylpropane  5. 1-hexyne,
2-hexyne, 3-hexyne, cyclohexene, 1-methylcyclopentene,
3-methylcyclopentene, 4-methylcyclopentene,
1,2-dimethylcyclobutene, 1,3-dimethylcyclobutene,
2,3-dimethycyclobutene, 1-ethylcyclobutene,
3-ethylcyclobutene  7. 1-pentene, cyclopentane,
trans-2-pentene, cis-2-pentene, 2-methyl-2-butene,
2-methyl-1-butene, 3-methyl-1-butene, methylcyclobutane,
ethylcyclopropane, 1,1-dimethylcyclopropane,
1,2-dimethylcyclopropane  1.3: 1.(a) 1-butanamine
(b) 2-ethoxybutane (c) 2,3-dimethylcyclopentanol
2.(a) 1-heptanol (b) 2-butanol (c) ethanamine
(d) N-methylmethanamine (e) methoxyethane
(f) 2-chloropropane  4. 1-butanol, 2-butanol, 2-methyl-2-
propanol, methoxypropane, ethoxyethane  5.(a) ethanol >
methoxymethane > ethane (b) 1-propanamine > N,N-
dimethylmethanamine > propane  6. cyclohexanol
7. propane, 2-propanol; propane
8. 1-butanol > ethoxyethane > butane  1.4: 1.(a) methanol
(b) ethanol (c) 2-propanol (d) 2-propanone (e) methanal
(f) ethanoic acid (g) methylbenzene  2.(a) wood alcohol
(b) grain alcohol (c) rubbing alcohol (d) acetone
(e) formaldehyde (f) acetic acid (g) toluene  3.(a) pentanal
(b) 2,3-diethylhexanoic acid (c) N-ethylpropanamide
(d) methyl octanoate  4.(a) amide (b) carboxylic acid
(c) aldehyde (d) ester  5.(a) propanamide (b) 4-methylhexanoic
acid (c) 3,3-dimethylpentanal (d) methyl ethanoate
6. hexanoic acid, propyl propanoate
7. hexanamide, N-methylpentanamide,
N,N-dimethylbutanamide  8.(a) benzene ring, methoxy
group, aldehyde group, hydroxyl group (b) benzene ring,
amide group (c) benzene ring, ether linkage, two amide
groups, acid group, sulfur atom  9. CH3CH2COOH
10. An amine has a distinctive “ﬁshy” smell. A ketone
smells sweet.
Chapter 1  Classifying Organic Compounds • MHR
55
Reactions of Organic
Compounds
Cancer is one of the leading causes of death in Canada. It is a disease in
which cells mutate and grow at uncontrolled rates, disrupting the body’s
normal functions. TAXOL, shown at the bottom of the page, is an organic
compound that is found in the bark of the Paciﬁc yew tree. After many tests
and reviews, TAXOL was approved for use in treating ovarian cancer.
The bark of a large yew tree yields only enough TAXOL for a single
treatment. However, cancer patients require repeated treatments over a
long period of time. Working in a laboratory, chemists found the ﬁrst
solution to this problem. They developed several different methods to
make, or synthesize, TAXOL, from simple, widely available chemicals.
Unfortunately, these methods are expensive and time-consuming.
When studying the Paciﬁc yew’s close relative, the European yew,
chemists made an exciting discovery that led to the second solution.
The needles and twigs of the European yew contain 10-deacetylbaccatin
III, shown at the bottom of the page. A few reaction steps can transform
10-deacetylbaccatin III into TAXOL. Instead of destroying an entire
Paciﬁc yew tree for a single treatment of TAXOL, scientists can now
use the needles from a European yew. The parent tree is not harmed.
As you have already learned, the study of organic chemistry is really
the study of functional groups. Each functional group undergoes speciﬁc,
predictable reactions. Chemists used their knowledge of functional groups
to design the reactions that convert 10-deacetylbaccatin III into TAXOL.
In this chapter, you will learn how to predict the products of various
organic reactions, such as addition, substitution, and elimination reactions.
C h a p t e r   P r e v i e w
2.1
2.2
The Main Types of
Organic Reactions
Reactions of
Functional Groups
2.3 Molecules on a
Larger Scale:
Polymers and
Biomolecules
2.4
Organic Compounds
and Everyday Life
P r e r e q u i s i t e
C o n c e p t s   a n d   S k i l l s
Before you begin this chapter,
review the following concepts
and skills:
(cid:2) identifying functional
groups (Chapter 1,
sections 1.3 and 1.4)
(cid:2) naming and drawing
organic compounds
(Chapter 1, sections 1.3
and 1.4)
O
CH3
O
O
OHO
OH
O
CO
O
O
O
CH3
NH O
O
OH
TAXOL™
56 MHR • Unit 1  Organic Chemistry
HO
OHO
HO
HO
O
CO
O
O
O
CH3
10-deacetylbaccatin III
The Main Types
of Organic Reactions
Figure 2.1(A) shows raw fruit. The crisp, sharp-tasting fruit becomes soft
and sweet when it is cooked. Figure 2.1(B) shows a chemist accelerating
the tranformation of ethanol into ethanoic acid, by adding potassium
dichromate and sulfuric acid.
What do these reactions have in common? They are both examples of
organic reactions. In this section, you will take a quick look at the main
types of organic reactions. You will concentrate on simply recognizing
these types of organic reactions. In the next section, you will examine the
reactions of speciﬁc functional groups and learn how to predict the prod-
ucts of organic reactions.
2.1
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
(cid:2) describe different types of
organic reactions, including
addition, substitution,
elimination, oxidation, and
reduction
(cid:2) predict the products of
organic reactions, including
addition, substitution,
elimination, oxidation, and
reduction
(cid:2) communicate your under-
standing of the following
terms: addition reaction,
substitution reaction,
elimination reaction,
oxidation, reduction,
condensation reaction,
hydrolysis reaction
A
B
Figure 2.1
Organic reactions take place all around you, not only in a science lab.
Addition, Substitution, and Elimination Reactions
Addition reactions, substitution reactions, and elimination reactions are
the three main types of organic reactions. Most organic reactions can be
classiﬁed as one of these three types.
Addition Reactions
In an addition reaction, atoms are added to a double or triple bond. One
bond of the multiple bond breaks so that two new bonds can form. To
recognize an addition reaction, remember that two compounds usually
react to form one major product. (Sometimes two isomers are formed.)
The product has more atoms bonded to carbon atoms than the organic
reactant did. A general example of addition to an alkene is given below.
CH CH
+ XY
→
CH CH
X
Y
Addition reactions are common for alkenes and alkynes. Addition
reactions can also occur at a C(cid:2)O bond. Some examples of addition
reactions are shown on the next page.
Chapter 2  Reactions of Organic Compounds • MHR
57
You can express an addition
reaction algebraically, using
the equation a + b → ab.
Come up with similar
equations for substitution
and elimination reactions.
Example 1
H
H
C
C
H
H
+
HBr
→
H
Br
C
H
H
C
H
H
ethene
hydrobromic acid
bromoethane
Example 2
Br Br
H
C
C
CH2
CH3
+
Br2
→
H
C
C
CH2
CH3
butyne
bromine
1,2-dibromobutene
Substitution Reactions
In a substitution reaction, a hydrogen atom or a functional group is
replaced by a different functional group. To help you recognize this
type of reaction, remember that two compounds usually react to form
two different products. The organic reactant(s) and the organic product(s)
have the same number of atoms bonded to carbon.
C
X
+ AY
→
C
Y
+ AX
Alcohols, alkyl halides, and aromatic compounds commonly undergo
substitution reactions, as shown in these examples.
Example 1
CH3
CH2 OH
+
HI
→
CH3
CH2
I
+
ethanol
hydroiodic acid
iodoethane
HOH
water
Example 2
Br
NH2
CH3
CH
CH2
CH3
+
NH3 →
CH3
CH
CH2
CH3
+
HBr
2-bromobutane
ammonia
2-butanamine
hydrobromic
acid
Example 3
H
H
H
H
H
H
+
HNO2
→
H
H
NO2
H
H
H
+
HOH
benzene
nitrous acid
nitrobenzene
water
58 MHR • Unit 1  Organic Chemistry
Elimination Reactions
In an elimination reaction, atoms are removed from a molecule to form a
double bond. This type of reaction is the reverse of an addition reaction.
One reactant usually breaks up to give two products. The organic product
typically has fewer atoms bonded to carbon atoms than the organic
reactant did.
X
C
Y
C
→
C
C
+
XY
Alcohols often undergo elimination reactions when they are heated in
the presence of strong acids, such as sulfuric acid, H2SO4, which acts
as a catalyst. (See the ﬁrst example below.) Alkyl halides also undergo
elimination reactions to produce alkenes. (See the second example.)
Example 1
H
OH
H
H C
C
C
H
H2SO4
H
HH
2-propanol
Example 2
H
C
H
Br
C
H
→
HH
bromoethane
H
H C
C
C
H
H
H
H
+
HOH
propene
water
In the ﬁrst example of an
elimination reaction, the strong
acid, H2SO4, does not count
as a reactant. It is not directly
involved in the reaction. It is
a catalyst : a compound that
speeds up a reaction but is not
consumed by it.
H
H
C
C
H
H
+
HBr
ethene
hydrobromic acid
Oxidation and Reduction
An important type of organic reaction occurs when there is a change in
the number of hydrogen or oxygen atoms that are bonded to carbon. In
Unit 5, you will take a close look at oxidation-reduction reactions in terms
of the transfer of electrons. As you will learn, oxidation and reduction
always occur together. One reactant is oxidized while the other reactant
is reduced. In this unit, however, you will focus on the organic reactant
only. Therefore, you will deal with oxidation and reduction separately, as
they apply to organic compounds. In organic chemistry, oxidation and
reduction are deﬁned by the changes of the bonds to carbon atoms in the
organic reactant.
Chapter 2  Reactions of Organic Compounds • MHR
59
Oxidation
In organic chemistry, oxidation is deﬁned as a reaction in which a carbon
atom forms more bonds to oxygen, O, or less bonds to hydrogen, H. An
oxidation that involves the formation of double C(cid:2)O bonds may also be
classiﬁed as an elimination reaction.
For example, alcohols can be oxidized to produce aldehydes and
ketones. Oxidation occurs when an organic compound reacts with an
oxidizing agent. Common oxidizing agents include acidiﬁed potassium
permanganate, KMnO4, acidiﬁed potassium dichromate, K2Cr2O7, and
ozone, O3. The symbol [O] is used to symbolize an oxidizing agent, as
shown below. Note that equations for the oxidation of organic compounds
are often left unbalanced. The purpose of the equation is to show the
changes in the organic reactant only.
OH
C H
alcohol
O
C
H
+
+
[O]
→
O
C
oxidizing agent
aldehyde or ketone
[O]
→
O
C
OH
aldehyde
oxidizing agent
carboxylic acid
To identify an oxidation, count and compare the number of C(cid:3)H
and C(cid:3)O bonds in both the reactant and product. Try it for the
following example.
H
C
OH
C
H
H
HH
ethanol
Reduction
+
[O]
→
H
OH
C
H
C
H
ethanal
In organic chemistry, reduction is deﬁned as a reaction in which a
carbon atom forms fewer bonds to oxygen, O, or more bonds to hydrogen,
H. Often, a C(cid:2)O bond or C(cid:2)C bond is reduced to a single bond by
reduction. A reduction that transforms double C(cid:2)C or C(cid:2)O bonds to
single bonds may also be classiﬁed as an addition reaction. Aldehydes,
ketones, and carboxylic acids can be reduced to become alcohols. Alkenes
and alkynes can be reduced by the addition of H2 to become alkanes.
Reduction occurs when an organic compound reacts with a reducing
agent. Common reducing agents are lithium aluminum hydride, LiAlH4,
and hydrogen gas over a platinum catalyst, H2/Pt . The symbol [H] is used
to symbolize a reducing agent. As is the case for oxidation, equations
showing the reduction of organic compounds are often left unbalanced.
60 MHR • Unit 1  Organic Chemistry
O
C
aldehyde or ketone
C
C
alkene
+
+
[H]
reducing agent
[H]
reducing agent
→
→
OH
C H
alcohol
HH
C
C
alkane
To identify a reduction, count and compare the number of C(cid:3)H and
C(cid:3)O bonds in both the reactant and the product. Try it for the following
example.
O
C
H3C
CH3
+
[H] →
H3C
OH
C
H
CH3
propanone
2-propanol
Other Important Organic Reactions
In this chapter, you will also encounter the following classes of organic
reactions: condensation reactions and hydrolysis reactions. Condensation
and hydrolysis reactions are both types of substitution reactions.
Condensation Reactions
In a condensation reaction, two organic molecules combine to form a
single organic molecule. A small molecule, usually water, is produced
during the reaction. For example, a carboxylic acid and an alcohol can
condense to form an ester.
C H E M
FA C T
When you see two arrows
that point in opposite directions
in a chemical equation, the
reaction can proceed in both
directions. This type of reaction
is called an equilibrium
reaction. You will learn more
about equilibrium reactions
in Unit 4.
O
CH3
H3C
C OH
HO+
CH2
CH2
CH
CH3
H2SO4
H3C
O
C
CH3
O
CH2
CH2
CH CH3
carboxylic acid
alcohol
ester
+
H2O
water
Hydrolysis Reactions
In a hydrolysis reaction, water adds to a bond, splitting it in two. This
reaction is the reverse of a condensation reaction. For example, water
can add to an ester or amide bond. A carboxylic acid and an alcohol are
produced if an ester bond is hydrolyzed, as shown in the example below.
A carboxylic acid and an amine are produced if an amide bond
is hydrolyzed.
O
C
H3C
CH3
O
CH3
O
CH2
CH2
CH CH3
ester
H2SO4
+
H2O
water
H3C
C OH
HO+
CH2
CH2
CH
CH3
carboxylic acid
alcohol
The following Sample Problems show how to identify different types of
organic reactions.
Chapter 2  Reactions of Organic Compounds • MHR
61
Sample Problem
Identifying Addition, Substitution, and Elimination Reactions
Problem
Identify each reaction as an addition, substitution, or elimination reaction.
(a) HO(cid:3)CH2CH2CH3 → CH2(cid:2)CHCH3 + H2O
(b) H2C(cid:2)CHCH2CH3 + H2 → CH3CH2CH2CH3
(c) CH3CH(CH3)CH2CH2Br + NaOH →CH3CH(CH3)CH2CH2OH + NaBr
Solution
(a) A double bond is formed. One reactant becomes two products.
The organic product has fewer atoms bonded to carbon. Thus,
this reaction is an elimination reaction.
(b) A double bond becomes a single bond. Two reactants become one
product. The organic product has more atoms bonded to carbon.
Thus, this reaction is an addition reaction.
(c) No double bond is broken or formed. Two reactants form two
products. An atom in the organic reactant (Br) is replaced by a
different group of atoms (OH). Thus, this is a substitution reaction.
Sample Problem
Identifying Oxidation and Reduction
Problem
Identify each reaction as an oxidation or a reduction. (The oxidizing and
reducing agents are not shown.)
O
OH
OH
O
(a)
CH3CH2CH2CH
→
CH3CH2CH2CH2
(b)
→
Solution
(a) Count the number of C(cid:3)H bonds and C(cid:3)O bonds in the reactant
and in the product.
Reactant: 8 C(cid:3)H bonds, 2 C(cid:3)O bonds (or 1 C(cid:2)O bond)
Product: 9 C(cid:3)H bonds, 1 C(cid:3)O bond
The product has gained a C(cid:3)H bond and lost a C(cid:3)O bond. Thus,
this is a reduction.
(b) Count the number of C(cid:3)H bonds and C(cid:3)O bonds in the reactant
and in the product. Although the C(cid:3)H bonds are not shown, you
know that a carbon atom forms a total of four bonds.
Reactant: 11 C(cid:3)H bonds, 1 C(cid:3)O bond
Product: 10 C(cid:3)H bonds, 2 C(cid:3)O bonds (or 1 C(cid:2)O bond)
The product has lost a C(cid:3)H bond and gained a C(cid:3)O bond.
Thus, this is an oxidation.
62 MHR • Unit 1  Organic Chemistry
Practice Problems
1. Identify each reaction as an addition, substitution, or elimination
reaction.
OH
Br
(a)
CH3
CH2
CH
CH3 + HBr  → CH3
(b)
CH3
CH2
Cl
CH CH3 + HOH
Cl
CH3
CH3
CH CH CH
CH3 +  Cl2  →  CH3
CH CH CH
CH3
Cl
(c)
→
+    HCl
2. Identify each reaction as an oxidation or a reduction. The oxidizing
and reducing agents are not shown.
(a)
CH3
O
CH3
O
CH3
CH
CH
CH2
CH  →  CH3
CH
CH
CH2
C OH
CH2CH3
CH2CH3
CH3
→  CH3CH2CH2CHCH3
CH3
CH3
(b)
(c)
CH3CH2
C
C
H
→
O
O
OH
OH
3. Classify each reaction in two different ways: for example, as
oxidation and as an elimination reaction.
CH3
H
(a)
C
C
H
CH2CH3
+  H2  → CH3CH2CH2CH2CH3
O
C
(b)
CH3
OH  +  HO
CH3
CH3
O
C
O
CH3  +  HOH
4. Identify the type of reaction.
OH
(a)
CH3
CH CH2  +  HOH   →  CH3
CH CH3
OH
(b)
CH3
CH2
CH
CH2
CH3
→
CH3
CH2
O
C
CH2
CH3
Chapter 2  Reactions of Organic Compounds • MHR
63
Section Summary
In this section, you were introduced to some of the main types of organic
reactions: addition, substitution, and elimination reactions; oxidation and
reduction; and condensation and hydrolysis reactions. In the next section,
you will take a close look at each type of reaction. You will ﬁnd out how
organic compounds, such as alcohols and carboxylic acids, can react in
several different ways.
Section Review
1
K/U
Identify each reaction as an addition, substitution, or
elimination reaction.
Br Br
(a)
H2C
CH2  +  Br2  →  H2C
CH2
OH
(b)
CH3CH2CHCH3  → CH3CH
CHCH3 + H2O
(c)
FeBr3
+  Cl2
+  HCl
Cl
(d) CH3CH2CH2Br + H2NCH2CH3 → CH3CH2CH2NHCH2CH3 + HBr
2
K/U
Identify each reaction as an oxidation or a reduction.
(Oxidizing and reducing agents are not shown.)
O
(a)
CH3CH2CH2OH  → CH3CH2CH
OH
O
(b)
CH3CH2CCH3
→
CH3CH2CHCH3
(c)
H2C
CHCH3  →  CH3CH2CH3
O
O
(d)
H   →
OH
(e)
CH3C
CCH3  →  CH3CH2CH2CH3
3
(a)
K/U
Draw a complete structural diagram for each compound that
is involved in the following reaction.
N-ethylpentanamide + water → pentanoic acid + ethanamine
Is this reaction a condensation reaction or a hydrolysis
K/U
(b)
reaction? Explain your reasoning.
4
C
In your own words, describe each type of organic reaction.
Include an example for each type.
(a) addition
(b) substitution
(c) elimination
5
C
The following reaction can be classiﬁed as an addition reaction.
It can also be classiﬁed as a reduction. Explain why this reaction ﬁts
into both classes.
CH3CH CHCH3  +  H2  →  CH3CH2CH2CH3
64 MHR • Unit 1  Organic Chemistry
Reactions of Functional Groups
In the past, mirrors were rare and valuable, made from sheets of polished
copper or silver. Although they were expensive, they usually produced
only warped and dim images. Modern mirrors are everywhere. They are
cheaply made of glass, with a very thin layer of silver over the back of the
glass. Because the surface of the glass and the layer of silver are so
smooth, the image is almost perfect. One method for depositing a thin
layer of silver over glass is shown in Figure 2.2.
2.2
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
(cid:2) describe various addition,
substitution, elimination,
oxidation, reduction,
condensation, and
hydrolysis reactions
(cid:2) predict, draw, and name the
products of various organic
reactions
(cid:2) investigate the oxidation of
alcohols
(cid:2) communicate your under-
standing of the following
terms: Markovnikov’s rule,
esteriﬁcation reaction
The “silver mirror test” is used to distinguish an aldehyde from a ketone.
Figure 2.2
Tollen’s reagent, Ag(NH3)2OH, acts as an oxidizing agent. When it is mixed with an aldehyde,
the aldehyde oxidizes to the salt of a carboxylic acid. The silver ions in Tollen’s reagent are
reduced to silver atoms, and coat the glass of the reaction container with solid silver metal.
In this section, you will learn how to predict the reactions of different
functional groups. You studied the most common reaction of alkanes,
combustion, in your previous chemistry course. For this reason, the
reactions of alkanes will not be considered here. The reactions of amines
and ethers will be left for a later chemistry course.
Reactions of Alkenes and Alkynes
Because alkenes and alkynes have reactive double or triple bonds, they
undergo addition reactions. Some common atoms and groups of atoms
that can be added to a double or triple bond include
• H and OH (from H2O)
• H and X (from HX), where X = Cl, Br, or I
• X and X (from X2), where X = Cl, Br, or I
• H and H (from H2)
Depending on which atoms are added to the multiple bond, the product
may be an alcohol, alkyl halide, alkane, or alkene (if atoms are added to a
triple bond).
Chapter 2  Reactions of Organic Compounds • MHR
65
Addition to Alkenes
The product of an addition reaction depends on the symmetry of the
reactants. A symmetrical alkene has identical groups on either side of the
double bond. Ethene, CH2(cid:2)CH2, is an example of a symmetrical alkene.
An alkene that has different groups on either side of the double bond is
called an asymmetrical alkene. Propene, CH3CH(cid:2)CH2, is an example of
an asymmetrical alkene.
The molecules that are added to a multiple bond can also be classiﬁed
as symmetrical or asymmetrical. For example, chlorine, Cl2, breaks into
two identical parts when it adds to a multiple bond. Therefore, it is a
symmetrical reactant. Water, HOH, breaks into two different groups (H and
OH) when it adds to a multiple bond, so it is an asymmetrical reactant.
In Figures 2.3 and 2.4, at least one of the reactants is symmetrical.
When one or more reactants in an addition reaction are symmetrical, only
one product is possible.
OH H
CH3CH CHCH3
+
HOH
→
CH3CH CHCH3
2-butene
(symmetrical)
water
(asymmetrical)
2-butanol
Figure 2.3
The addition of water to 2-butene
H2C
CHCH2CH3
+
Cl2
→
1-butene
(asymmetrical)
chlorine
(symmetrical)
Figure 2.4
The addition of chlorine to 1-butene
Cl Cl
H2C
CHCH2CH3
1,2-dichlorobutane
When both reactants are asymmetrical, however, more than one product
is possible. This is shown in Figure 2.5. The two possible products are
isomers of each other.
H Br
Br H
H2C
CHCH2CH3
+
HBr
→
H2C
CHCH2CH3
+
H2C
CHCH2CH3
1-butene
(asymmetrical)
hydrobromic acid
(asymmetrical)
2-bromobutane
1-bromobutane
Figure 2.5
The addition of hydrobromic acid to 1-butene
Although both products are possible, 2-bromobutane is the observed
product. This observation is explained by Markovnikov’s rule.
Markovnikov’s rule states that the halogen atom or OH group in an addition
reaction is usually added to the more substituted carbon atom—the carbon
atom that is bonded to the largest number of other carbon atoms. Think of
the phrase “the rich get richer.” The carbon with the most hydrogen atoms
receives even more hydrogen atoms in an addition reaction. According
to Markovnikov’s rule, the addition of two asymmetrical reactants forms
primarily one product. Only a small amount of the other isomer is formed.
The following Sample Problem shows how to use Markovnikov’s rule to
predict the products of addition reactions.
66 MHR • Unit 1  Organic Chemistry
Sample Problem
Using Markovnikov’s Rule
Problem
Draw the reactants and products of the following incomplete reaction.
2-methyl-2-pentene + hydrochloric acid →?
Use Markovnikov’s rule to predict which of the two isomeric products
will form in a greater amount.
Solution
According to Markovnikov’s rule, the hydrogen atom will go to the
double-bonded carbon with the larger number of hydrogen atoms.
Thus, the chlorine atom will go to the other carbon, which has the larger
number of C(cid:3)C bonds. The product 2-chloro-2-methylpentane will
form in the greater amount. Small amounts of 3-chloro-2-methylpentane
will also form.
CH3
CH3
C
CH
CH2
CH3
+
HCl
→
2-methyl-2-pentene
hydrochloric acid
CH3
CH3
C
Cl
CH2
CH2
CH3
+
CH3
CH
CH
CH2
CH3
CH3
Cl
2-chloro-2-methylpentane
(major product)
3-chloro-2-methylpentane
(minor product)
Practice Problems
5. Draw the reactants and products of the following reaction.
3-ethyl-2-heptene + HOH → 3-ethyl-3-heptanol + 3-ethyl-2-heptanol
Use Markovnikov’s rule to predict which of the two products will
form in the greater amount.
6. Name the reactants and products of each reaction. Use Markovnikov’s
rule to predict which of the two products will form in the greater
amount.
(a) CH2
CHCH2CH2CH2CH3  +  HBr  →
Br
CH3CHCH2CH2CH2CH3  +  Br
CH2CH2CH2CH2CH2CH3
Continued ...
Chapter 2  Reactions of Organic Compounds • MHR
67
C H E M
FA C T
Addition reactions form the
basis for tests that distinguish
alkenes and alkynes from alka-
nes. Bromine, Br2, has a deep
reddish-brown colour. When
bromine is added to an alkene
or alkyne, an addition reaction
takes place. As the bromine is
used up, the brown colour of
the bromine disappears. Since
alkanes cannot undergo addi-
tion reactions, no reaction
takes place when bromine is
added to an alkane.
Electronic Learning Partner
Go to the Chemistry 12
Electronic Learning Partner for
more information about the
bonding in ethyne.
Continued ...
CH3
(b)
CH3
C
CH
CH2
CH3  +  HOH  →
CH3
CH3
CH3
C
CH2
CH2
CH3  +  CH3
CH
CH
CH2
CH3
OH
OH
7. Draw the major product of each reaction.
(a) CH3CH(cid:2)CH2 + Br2 → (c) CH2(cid:2)CHCH2CH3 + HBr →
(b) CH2(cid:2)CH2 + HOH →
(d) (CH3)2C(cid:2)CHCH2CH2CH3 + HCl →
8. For each reaction, name and draw the reactants that are needed to
produce the given product.
(a) ? + ? → CH3CH(Cl)CH3
(b) ? + ? → Br(cid:3)CH2CH2(cid:3)Br
OH
(c) ? + HOH →
CH3CH2CCH2CH3
(d) CH2(cid:2)CHCH3 + ? → CH3CH2CH3
CH3
Addition to Alkynes
Since alkynes have triple bonds, two addition reactions can take place in
a row. If one mole of a reactant, such as HCl, Br2, or H2O, is added to one
mole of an alkyne, the result is a substituted alkene.
Br
CH
C
CH3            +         Br2            →       H
C
C
CH3
propyne
(1 mol)
bromine
(1 mol)
Br
1,2-dibromopropene
If two moles of the reactant are added to one mole of an alkyne, the
reaction continues one step further. A second addition reaction takes
place, producing an alkane.
Br Br
H
C
C
CH3            +          2Br2        →       H
C
C
CH3
propyne
(1 mol)
bromine
(2 mol)
Br
Br
1,1,2,2-tetrabromopropane
Like alkenes, asymmetrical alkynes follow Markovnikov’s rule when an
asymmetrical molecule, such as H2O or HBr, is added to the triple bond.
An example is given below.
CH
C
CH2CH3            +          HBr             →       H2C
Br
C
Br
CH2CH3            +          HC
CH
CH2CH3
1-butyne
(1 mol)
hydrobromic acid
(1 mol)
2-bromo-1-butene
(major product)
1-bromo-1-butene
(minor product)
68 MHR • Unit 1  Organic Chemistry
Canadians
in Chemistry
Dusanka Filipovic
When Dusanka Filipovic was a teenager, she liked
hiking, playing volleyball, and working as a camp
counsellor. Now she is a successful chemical
engineer who develops and markets technology
that helps the environment. What do her early
pursuits have to do with her engineering career?
“Both require creativity, persistence, and an ability
to work under pressure,” says Filipovic.
Filipovic was born and grew up in Belgrade, in
the former Yugoslavia. She attended the University
of Belgrade, and graduated with a degree in
chemical engineering. Attracted by Canada’s
technical advances, she came here after winning
a scholarship to study at McMaster University in
Hamilton, Ontario. Canada has become her home.
Filipovic has worked hard to break down barriers
for women in the ﬁelds of engineering and business.
In 1974, she became the ﬁrst female professional
engineer employed by a major chemical producing
company. The National Museum of Science and
Technology in Ottawa, Ontario, has featured her
work as part of an exhibit on women inventors.
Since the 1980s, Filipovic has concentrated on
developing environmentally friendly technologies.
She is the co-inventor of a patented process known
as Blue Bottle™ technology. This process is used
to recover and recycle halogenated hydrocarbons,
such as chloroﬂuorocarbons (CFCs) and other
ozone-depleting substances (ODS), from damaged
or unused residential refrigerators and automotive
air conditioners.
Using adsorption, the binding of molecules or
particles to a surface, Blue BottleTM technology acts
as a selective molecular sieve to capture refrigerant
gases so that they can be safely stored and re-used.
A non-pressurized Blue BottleTM cylinder, packed
with an adsorbent, synthetic zeolite called
HaloziteTM, is connected to the back of a refrigera-
tion or air-conditioning unit. Zeolites are porous
aluminosilicate minerals that commonly contain
sodium and calcium as major cations (positively
charged ions) and are capable of ion exchange.
(Zeolites contain water molecules that allow
reversible dehydration, and they are often used
as water softeners.) The HaloziteTM adsorbs the
refrigerants that are released from the unit at
ambient temperatures, under atmospheric pressure.
Once the adsorbent is saturated, the Blue
BottleTM cylinder is sent to a central reclamation
facility, where the refrigerants are reclaimed and
stored. The Blue BottleTM cylinders can be re-used
after the refrigerants have been collected.
Reclaimed halogenated hydrocarbons can be used
as refrigerants, solvents, cleaners, fumigants, and
ﬁre retardants.
In 1991, Filipovic formed her own company to
commercialize Blue BottleTM technology. In 1999,
she founded a new company, which uses a process
similar to Blue BottleTM technology to capture and
convert greenhouse gas emissions from hospital
operating rooms. These emissions had previously
been discharged into the atmosphere.
Filipovic has this advice for aspiring engineers
and scientists: “Once you recognize what it is you
want to pursue, make sure you take advantage of
every training opportunity offered to you. I became
an engineer because I wanted to be able to create
something new, and monitor and enjoy the results
of my work . . . I am working to make a signiﬁcant
contribution that will live on after me.”
Chapter 2  Reactions of Organic Compounds • MHR
69
Reactions of Aromatic Compounds
As you learned in Chapter 1, aromatic compounds do not react in the
same way that compounds with double or triple bonds do. Benzene’s
stable ring does not usually accept the addition of other atoms. Instead,
aromatic compounds undergo substitution reactions. A hydrogen atom
or a functional group that is attached to the benzene ring may be replaced
by a different functional group. Figure 2.6 shows two possible reactions
for benzene. Notice that iron(III) bromide, FeBr3, is used as a catalyst in
the substitution reaction. An addition reaction does not occur because the
product of this reaction would be less stable than benzene.
Electronic Learning Partner
Br
+    Br2
FeBr3
+    HBr
hydrobromic acid
and
bromobenzene
(actual product)
benzene
bromine
Go to the Chemistry 12
Electronic Learning Partner
for more information about
aspects of material covered
in this section of the chapter.
Br
Br
5,6-dibromo-1,3-cyclohexadiene
(does not form)
Figure 2.6
H atoms on the benzene ring is replaced with a Br atom in a substitution reaction.
The bromine does not add to benzene in an addition reaction. Instead, one of the
Reactions of Alcohols
Alcohols can react in several ways, depending on the reactants and on the
conditions of the reaction. For example, alcohols can undergo substitution
with halogen acids, elimination to form alkenes, and oxidation to form
aldehydes, ketones, or carboxylic acids.
Substitution Reactions of Alcohols
When a halogen acid, such as HCl, HBr, or HI, reacts with an alcohol,
the halogen atom is substituted for the OH group of the alcohol. This is
shown in Figure 2.7(A). The reverse reaction takes place when an alkyl
halide reacts with OH− in a basic solution. See Figure 2.7(B).
A
B
CH3
CH2 OH   +   HCl   →   CH3
CH2
Cl +
H2O
CH3
CH2
Cl   +   OH−     →   CH3
CH2 OH +
Cl−
(A) Ethanol reacts with hydrochloric acid to produce chloroethane. (B) In a
Figure 2.7
basic solution, the reverse reaction takes place. A hydroxide ion reacts with chloroethane
to produce ethanol.
Elimination Reactions of Alcohols
When an alcohol is heated in the presence of the strong acid and
dehydrating agent, H2SO4, an elimination reaction takes place. This type
of reaction is shown in Figure 2.8, on the next page. The OH group and
one H atom leave the molecule, and water is produced. As a result, the
molecule forms a double bond. Because water is produced, this type of
reaction is also called a dehydration (meaning “loss of water”) reaction.
70 MHR • Unit 1  Organic Chemistry
H
H
C
H
OH
C
H
H
ethanol
H2SO4
∆
H
H
C
C
H
H
+
H2O
ethene
water
Figure 2.8
The ∆ symbol is used in chemistry to represent heat added to a reaction.
Oxidation of Alcohols
In the presence of an oxidizing agent, an alcohol is oxidized to form an
aldehyde or a ketone.
• A primary alcohol is oxidized to an aldehyde. If the aldehyde is
oxidized further, it becomes a carboxylic acid.
OH
R
C H
+
[O]
→
H
primary alcohol
O
C
R
H
aldehyde
+
[O]
→
O
C
R
OH
carboxylic acid
• A secondary alcohol is oxidized to a ketone. All the carbon bonding
sites are now occupied with bonds to carbon and oxygen, so no further
oxidation is possible.
OH
R
C H
+
[O]
→
R
secondary alcohol
O
C
R
R
ketone
+
[O]
→
no reaction
• A tertiary alcohol cannot be oxidized. Carbon can form up to four
bonds, but all possible bonding sites are already occupied. C(cid:3)H bonds
can be broken by an oxidizing agent. On the carbon atom of a tertiary
alcohol, however, there is no hydrogen atom available to be removed.
C(cid:3)C bonds are too strong to be broken by an oxidizing agent.
R
OH
C
R
R
+
[O]
→
no reaction
tertiary alcohol
The following Sample Problem shows how to predict the products of
reactions of alcohols.
Chapter 2  Reactions of Organic Compounds • MHR
71
Sample Problem
Predicting the Reaction of an Alcohol
Problem
Name each type of reaction. Then predict and name the products.
OH
(a)
CH3
CH2
CH
CH3   +   [O]   →
OH
(b)
CH3
CH
CH3
H2SO4
∆
OH
(c)
CH3
CH
CH3
+ HBr
→
Solution
(a) The reactant is a secondary alcohol, and an oxidizing agent is present.
Therefore, this must be oxidation. You know that a secondary alcohol
is oxidized to a ketone. The ketone must have the same carbon-carbon
bonds, and the same number of carbon atoms, as the reacting alcohol.
Therefore, the ketone must be 2-butanone.
OH
CH3
CH2
CH
CH3   +   [O]   →   CH3
CH2
O
C
CH3
2-butanol
oxidizing
agent
2-butanone
PROBLEM TIP
In many elimination reactions,
water is produced. The forma-
tion of water is a strong driving
force for many reactions.
(b) This reaction takes place in the presence of heat and sulfuric acid,
H2SO4. It is an elimination reaction. The product is an alkene, with
the same number of carbon atoms as the reacting alcohol. Since this
reaction is an elimination reaction, a small molecule (in this case,
water) must be eliminated as the second product. The organic
product is propene.
OH
CH3
CH
CH3
H2SO4
∆
CH3
CH CH3    +    H2O
2-propanol
propene
water
(c) In this reaction, an alcohol reacts with hydrobromic acid, HBr. This is
a substitution reaction. The product is an alkyl halide, with the same
carbon-carbon bonds, and the same number of carbon atoms, as the
reacting alcohol. The alkyl halide is 2-bromopropane. The second
product is water.
OH
CH3
CH
CH3     +     HBr    →    CH3
Br
CH
CH3   +   H2O
2-propanol
hydrobromic
acid
2-bromopropane
water
72 MHR • Unit 1  Organic Chemistry
Practice Problems
9. Name each type of reaction.
(a) 1-propanol + HCl → 1-chloropropane + H2O
(b) 1-butanol + [O] → butanal
(c) CH3CH2CH2Cl + NaOH → CH3CH2CH2OH + NaCl
OH
(d)
CH3
CH
CH2
CH2
CH3
H2SO4
∆
10. Draw the structures of the reactants and products in parts (a) and (b)
CH3
CH
CH
CH2
CH3 + H2O
of question 9.
11. Name each type of reaction.
(a)
CH3
CH2
CH2
CH2 OH
H2SO4
∆
(b)
CH3
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2 OH   +   [O]   →
(i)   +   [O]   →   (ii)
OH
(c)
CH3
CH
CH
CH3
+ HBr
→
CH3
CH3
(d)
CH3
CH
CH2
Br   +   NaOH   →
OH
(e)
CH3
CH2
CH CH3   +   [O]   →
OH
(f)
+   HCl   →
12. Draw and name the products of each reaction in question 11.
13. Is the following reaction possible? Why or why not?
CH3
CH3
CH2
CH2
C OH   +   [O]   →
CH3
In the following investigation, you will carry out the oxidation of different
alcohols.
Chapter 2  Reactions of Organic Compounds • MHR
73
S K I L L   F O C U S
Predicting
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
2. Prepare each of the following mixtures, one
at a time.
• Test tube 1: 3 mL KMnO4, 3 mL
2-propanol, 2 mL acid
• Test tube 2: 3 mL KMnO4, 3 mL 1-butanol,
2 mL acid
• Test tube 3: 3 mL KMnO4, 3 mL
2-methyl-2-propanol, 2 mL acid
3. Place a stopper in each test tube, and shake
the test tube gently to mix the contents.
Record the reaction time for each mixture.
Use the change in the colour to determine
if a reaction has taken place.
4. Dispose of your mixtures as directed by your
teacher.
Analysis
1. Draw the structure of each alcohol you used.
Label each alcohol as primary, secondary, or
tertiary.
2. (a) Which alcohol(s) reacted with the potassium
permanganate? How did you know?
(b) Which alcohol(s) did not react with the
potassium permanganate? Explain your
observations.
3. Which alcohol(s) reacted the most quickly?
Which reacted slowly? Make a general
statement that summarizes your observations.
4. Write a chemical equation for each reaction.
Conclusions
5. Which alcohol reacted the fastest: primary,
secondary, or tertiary?
6. Were there any sources of experimental error?
What could you improve if you did this
investigation again?
Oxidizing Alcohols
Acidiﬁed potassium permanganate solution,
KMnO4(aq), acts as an oxidizing agent when
it comes in contact with alcohols. In this
investigation, you will discover how potassium
permanganate reacts with a primary, a secondary,
and a tertiary alcohol.
Questions
How do primary, secondary, and tertiary alcohols
react with an oxidizing agent?
Prediction
Predict which of the following alcohols will
react with an oxidizing agent. Draw and name
the product you expect for each reaction.
• 2-propanol
• 1-butanol
• 2-methyl-2-propanol
Safety Precautions
Handle the sulfuric acid solution with care. It
is corrosive. Wipe up any spills with copious
amounts of water, and inform your teacher.
Materials
2-propanol, 1-butanol, 2-methyl-2-propanol
0.01 mol/L KMnO4 solution
1 mol/L H2SO4
distilled water
5 test tubes with stoppers
dropper
stopwatch or clock
Procedure
1. Place 3 mL KMnO4, 3 mL water, and 2 mL
acid in a test tube. This mixture should not
oxidize quickly. You will use it as a standard
to compare the colour of the other test tubes.
74 MHR • Unit 1  Organic Chemistry
Reactions of Aldehydes and Ketones
As you observed in the investigation, different alcohols react differently
with an oxidizing agent. In the same way, aldehydes and ketones react
differently with oxidizing and reducing agents, even though aldehydes
and ketones have similar structures.
Oxidation of Aldehydes
In the presence of an oxidizing agent, an aldehyde is oxidized to produce
a carboxylic acid. The hydrogen atom that is bonded to the carbon atom
of the C(cid:2)O bond is replaced with an OH group.
O
C
H
+     [O]    →
O
C
OH
aldehyde
carboxylic acid
Ketones do not usually undergo oxidation. Like tertiary alcohols,
ketones do not have a hydrogen atom that is available to be removed.
Carbon-carbon bonds are too strong to be broken by an oxidizing agent.
O
C
ketone
+     [O]    →    no reaction
Reduction of Aldehydes and Ketones
You learned earlier that primary alcohols are oxidized to aldehydes, and
secondary alcohols are oxidized to ketones. You can think of the reduc-
tion of aldehydes and ketones as the reverse of these reactions. Aldehydes
can be reduced to produce primary alcohols. Ketones can be reduced to
produce secondary alcohols.
Explain why the transformation
of an aldehyde into an alcohol
is a reduction not an oxidation.
O
C
R
H
OH
+     [H]    →
R
HC
H
aldehyde
primary alcohol
O
C
R
R
OH
+     [H]    →
R
HC
R
ketone
secondary alcohol
Chapter 2  Reactions of Organic Compounds • MHR
75
Reactions of Carboxylic Acids
Like other acids, a carboxylic acid reacts with a base to produce a salt
and water.
CH3
CH2
CH2
CH2
C OH   +   NaOH         CH3
CH2
CH2
CH2
O
O
C
pentanoic acid
(acid)
sodium
hydroxide (base)
sodium pentanoate
(salt)
O−Na+   +   H2O
water
As you learned earlier, a carboxylic acid reacts with an alcohol to produce
an ester. Water is the second product of this reaction. A strong acid, such
as H2SO4, is used to catalyze (speed up) the reaction. The reverse reaction
can also occur. (See “Reactions of Esters and Amides,” below.)
O
C
R
OH    +    HO
R´
H2SO4
carboxylic acid
alcohol
O
R
C O
ester
R´    +    H2O
water
The reaction of a carboxylic acid with an alcohol to form an ester is
called an esteriﬁcation reaction. An esteriﬁcation reaction is one type of
condensation reaction. In a similar type of condensation reaction, an
amide can be formed from a carboxylic acid and an amine, but this
process is slightly longer and will not be discussed here.
Carboxylic acids can be reduced to form aldehydes and alcohols.
Reactions of Esters and Amides
Both esters and amides undergo hydrolysis reactions. In a hydrolysis
reaction, the ester or amide bond is cleaved, or split in two, to form two
products. As mentioned earlier, the hydrolysis of an ester produces a
carboxylic acid and an alcohol. The hydrolysis of an amide produces a
carboxylic acid and an amine. There are two methods of hydrolysis: acidic
hydrolysis and basic hydrolysis. Both methods are shown in Figure 2.9.
Hydrolysis usually requires heat. In acidic hydrolysis, the ester or amide
reacts with water in the presence of an acid, such as H2SO4. In basic
hydrolysis, the ester or amide reacts with the OH− ion, from NaOH or
water, in the presence of a base. Soap is made by the basic hydrolysis of
ester bonds in vegetable oils or animal fats.
O
O
A
CH3CH2C
NH CH3
+
H2O
H2SO4
∆
CH3CH2C
OH
+
H2N CH3
N-methylpropanamide
(amide)
water
propanoic acid
(carboxylic acid)
methanamine
(amine)
O
O
B
CH3CH2CH2C
O CH2CH3
+
NaOH
∆
CH3CH2CH2C
O−Na+
+
CH3CH2OH
ethyl butanoate
(ester)
sodium butanoate
(salt of a carboxylic acid)
ethanol
(alcohol)
Figure 2.9
(B) The basic hydrolysis of an ester produces the salt of a carboxylic acid and an alcohol.
(A) The acid hydrolysis of an amide produces a carboxylic acid and an amine.
76 MHR • Unit 1  Organic Chemistry
Sample Problem
Predicting the Products of More Organic Reactions
Problem
Identify each type of reaction. Then predict and name the product(s).
O
C
H
H
+     [O]    →
O
C
+     [H]    →
(a)
(b)
H3C
CH3
O
(c)
CH3COH
+
CH3CH2OH (cid:2)(cid:3)
Solution
(a) This reaction involves an aldehyde and an oxidizing agent. Thus, it is
an oxidation. (If the reactant were a ketone, no reaction would occur.)
The product of this reaction is a carboxylic acid called methanoic acid.
O
C
+          [O]         →
O
C
H
H
H
OH
methanal
oxidizing agent
methanoic acid
(b) This reaction involves a ketone and a reducing agent. Thus, it is a
reduction. The product of this reaction is an alcohol called 2-propanol.
O
C
H3C
CH3
+          [H]         →
H3C
OH
C
H
CH3
propanone
reducing agent
2-propanol
(c) This reaction occurs between a carboxylic acid and an alcohol. It is
an esteriﬁcation, or condensation, reaction. The product of this
reaction is an ester called ethyl ethanoate.
O
O
CH3COH
ethanoic acid
+
CH3CH2OH (cid:2)(cid:3)
ethanol
CH3COCH2CH3
ethyl ethanoate
Chapter 2  Reactions of Organic Compounds • MHR
77
Practice Problems
14. Identify each type of reaction. (Oxidizing and reducing agents are
not shown.)
O
OH
(a)
→
O
(CH3)3C
C(CH3)3
→
(b)
C
(c) 2-pentanone → 2-pentanol
(cid:2)(cid:3)
(d) hexanoic acid + ethanol
(e) butyl methanoate + water
OH
(CH3)3C
CH
C(CH3)3
ethyl hexanoate + water
H2SO4
∆
methanoic acid + 1-butanol
15. (a) Name the reactants and products of the ﬁrst two reactions in
question 14.
(b) Draw the reactants and products of the last three reactions in
question 14.
16. Name and draw the product(s) of each reaction.
(a) hexanal + [O] →
(b) octanal + [H] →
(c) propanoic acid + methanol
(d) propyl ethanoate + water
(e) 3-hexanone + [H] →
(f) 2-propanol + 3-methylpentanoic acid
(cid:2)(cid:3)
H2SO4
∆
(cid:2)(cid:3)
17. Name and draw the reactant(s) in each reaction.
(a) ? + [H] → CH3CH2CH(CH3)CH2OH
(b) ? + [O] → ? + [O] → CH3CH2CH2CH2COOH
(c) ? + ? →
O
O
Concept Organizer
Organic Reactions
addition of HX or X2
reduction
alkane
alkene
alkyne
alkyl halide
elimination
substitution
substitution
elimination
alcohol
addition of H2O
oxidation
reduction
aldehyde
carboxylic
acid
oxidation
ketone
condensation
hydrolysis
ester
78 MHR • Unit 1  Organic Chemistry
Section Summary
In this section, you learned about the reactions of alkenes, alkynes,
aromatic compounds, alcohols, aldehydes, ketones, carboxylic acids,
amides, and esters. You learned how to use Markovnikov’s rule to predict
the major product of an elimination reaction. You also learned how to
predict the products of other types of reactions. In the next section,
you will encounter a special branch of organic chemistry, which deals
with much larger molecules.
Section Review
1
K/U
Identify each reaction as one of the following types of reactions:
addition, substitution, elimination, oxidation, reduction, condensation,
or hydrolysis.
(a)
HO
CH2
CH2
CH CH3
CH3
H2SO4
∆
Cl
Cl
CH2
CH
CH CH3   +   H2O
CH3
(b)
CH2
CH
CH3
+ Cl2 →
CH2
CH
CH3
(c)
CH3OH   +   [O]   →
O
C
H
H
O
C
(d)
CH3
CH3   +   H2   →
CH3
(e)
+   Cl2
FeBr3
CH3
OH
C
H
Cl
Br
OH
(f)
CH3
CH
CH CH2
CH3   +   OH−   →
CH3
CH
CH CH2
CH3   +   Br−
CH3
O
CH3
O
(g)
CH3
CH2
CH2
C OH   +   CH3
OH
H2SO4
CH3
CH2
CH2
C O
CH3  +  H2O
2
I
Draw and name the product(s) of each addition or elimination
reaction.
(a) CH3CH(cid:2)CHCH3 + Br2 →
(b) CH2(cid:2)CHCH2CH3 + HCl →
(c)
CH3CH2CH2CH2CH2CH2OH
H2SO4
∆
CH3 Br
(d)
CH3
C
CH CH3
H2SO4
∆
CH3
Chapter 2  Reactions of Organic Compounds • MHR
79
3
I
Draw and name the products of each substitution reaction.
(a) benzene + bromine
(b) CH3CH2CH2CH2CH2OH + HBr →
FeBr3
4
I
Draw and name the product of each oxidation or reduction.
(a) 2-pentanol + [O] →
(b) propanal + [O] →
(c) 2,3-dimethyl-1-butanol + [O] →
(d) CH2(cid:2)CH2 + [H] →
(e) 3-pentanone + [H] →
(f) CH3CH2C(cid:4)CH + [H] → (i) + [H] → (ii)
(g) 2-ethyl-3,4-dimethyloctanal + [H] →
5
I
Name and draw the reactant(s) in each reaction.
(a) ? + H2O → (CH3)2CHOH + CH3CH2COOH
(b) ? + [H] →
(c) ? + ? → 2-butyl methanoate
(d) ? + [O] →
O
(e) ? + H2O → ethanamine + heptanoic acid
6
(a)
K/U
State Markovnikov’s rule. Under what circumstances is this
rule important?
(b)
K/U
Which product of the following reaction is formed in the
greater amount?
CH3
Br
CH3
Br
CH3
CH2
CHCH2CHCH3   +   HBr   →   CH2CH2CH2CHCH3   +   CH3CHCH2CHCH3
7
I
At least one of the following reactions is not possible. Identify the
impossible reaction(s), and explain your reasoning.
O
(a)
CH3CH2CCH3   +   [O]
(b)
CH3
CH2
OH   +   [O]
CH3
O
C
OH
(c)
+   Cl2
OH
Cl
Cl
(d)
CH3
C
CH2
CH3   +   [O]   →
CH3
8
C
Copy the Concept Organizer into your notebook. Then make
it more complete by giving an example of each type of reaction.
80 MHR • Unit 1  Organic Chemistry
Molecules on a Larger Scale:
Polymers and Biomolecules
2.3
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
(cid:2) communicate your under-
standing of addition and
condensation polymerization
(cid:2) synthesize a polymer
(cid:2) describe some organic com-
pounds in living organisms,
and explain their function
(cid:2) describe the variety and
importance of polymers and
other plastics in your life
(cid:2) analyze some risks and
beneﬁts of the production
and use of polymers
(cid:2) communicate your
understanding of the
following terms: polymer,
monomers, plastics, addition
polymerization, condensa-
tion polymerization, nylons,
polyamides, polyesters,
biochemistry, protein,
amino acids, carbohydrate,
saccharide, monosaccha-
ride, disaccharide,
polysaccharide, starch,
DNA (2-deoxyribonucleic
acid), nucleotides, RNA
(ribonucleic acid), lipids,
fats, oils, waxes
Try to imagine a day without plastics. From simple plastic bags to furni-
ture and computer equipment, plastics are an intergral part of our homes,
schools, and work places. So far in this unit, you have encountered fairly
small organic molecules. Many of the organic molecules that are used
industrially, such as plastics, and many of the essential molecules in your
body, are much larger in size.
A polymer is a very long molecule that is made by linking together
many smaller molecules called monomers. To picture a polymer, imagine
taking a handful of paper clips and joining them into a long chain. Each
paper clip represents a monomer. The long chain of repeating paper clips
represents a polymer. Many polymers are made of just one type of
monomer. Other polymers are made from a combination of two or more
different monomers. Figure 2.10 shows an example of joined monomers in
a polymer structure.
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
one unit, or
”paper clip“
small segment of polyethylene
terephthalate (PET) polymer
Figure 2.10
soft drink bottles.
Polyethylene terephthalate (PET) is the plastic that is used to make
Polymers that can be heated and moulded into speciﬁc shapes and forms
are commonly known as plastics. All plastics are synthetic (artiﬁcially
made) polymers. For example, polyethene is a common synthetic polymer
that is used to make plastic bags. Ethene, CH2(cid:2)CH2, is the monomer for
polyethene. Adhesives, rubber, chewing gum, and Styrofoam™ are other
important materials that are made from synthetic polymers.
Natural polymers are found in living things. For example, glucose,
C6H12O6, is the monomer for the natural polymer starch. You will learn
more about natural polymers later in this section.
Some polymers, both synthetic and natural, can be spun into long,
thin ﬁbres. These ﬁbres are woven into natural fabrics (such as cotton,
linen, and wool) or synthetic fabrics (such as rayon, nylon, and polyester).
Figure 2.11, on the next page, shows some polymer products.
Chapter 2  Reactions of Organic Compounds • MHR
81
Web
L I N K
www.mcgrawhill.ca/links/
chemistry12
There are two main types of
plastics: thermoplastics and
thermosets. What is the differ-
ence between them? What is
each type of plastic used for?
Polyethylene terephthalate
(PET) can be recycled
successfully into new and
interesting materials. Research
the trade name Ecospun™
on the Internet. What is this
material, what is it made from,
and what is it used for?
To answer these questions, go
to the web site above and click
on Web Links.
Why does “polyethene” end
with the sufﬁx -ene, if it does
not contain any double bonds?
Figure 2.11
Both synthetic and natural polymers are used to make clothing.
Making Synthetic Polymers:
Addition and Condensation Polymerization
Synthetic polymers are extremely useful and valuable. Many polymers
and their manufacturing processes have been patented as corporate
technology. Polymers form by two of the reactions you have already
learned: addition reactions and condensation reactions.
The name of a polymer is usually written with the preﬁx poly-
(meaning “many”) before the name of the monomer. Often the common
name of the monomer is used, rather than the IUPAC name. For example,
the common name of ethene is ethylene. Polyethene, the polymer
that is made from ethene, is often called polyethylene. Similarly,
the polymer that is made from chloroethene (common name: vinyl
chloride) is named polyvinylchloride (PVC). The polymer that is made
from propene monomers (common name: propylene) is commonly called
polypropylene, instead of polypropene.
Addition polymerization is a reaction in which monomers with
double bonds are joined together through multiple addition reactions
to form a polymer. Figure 2.12 illustrates the addition polymerization
reaction of ethene to form polyethene. Table 2.1, on the next page, gives
the names, structures, and uses of some common polymers that are
formed by addition polymerization.
H2C
CH2
H2C
CH2   +   H2C
CH2   →
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H2C
CH2
etc.
Figure 2.12
The formation of polyethene from ethene
82 MHR • Unit 1  Organic Chemistry
Table 2.1 Examples of Addition Polymers
Name
polyethene
Structure of monomer
H2C
CH2
…
polystyrene
ethene
H2C
CH
H
C
H
Structure of polymer
HHHH
C
H
C
C
HH
C
H
polyethene
H
C
H
…
…
CH2
CH
CH2
CH
…
styrene
polystyrene
polyvinylchloride
(PVC, vinyl)
Cl
…
CH2
CH
CH2
CH
…
polyacrylonitrile
CH
H2C
vinyl chloride
Cl
Cl
polyvinylchloride (PVC)
H2C
CH
CN
acrylonitrile
H
C
…
HHH
C
C
C
…
H CN
H
CN
polyacrylonitrile
Uses
•plastic bags
•plastic milk, juice,
and water bottles
•toys
•styrene and
Styrofoam™ cups
•insulation
•packaging
•building and
construction
materials
•sewage pipes
•medical
equipment
•paints
•yarns, knit fabrics,
carpets, and wigs
Condensation polymerization is a reaction in which monomers are joined
together by the formation of ester or amide bonds. A second smaller
product, usually water, is produced by this reaction. For condensation
polymerization to occur, each monomer must have two functional groups
(usually one at each end of the molecule).
Nylon-66 is made by the condensation polymerization of the
dicarboxylic acid adipic acid, and 1,6-diaminohexane, an amine. (The
number 66 comes from the fact that each of the two reactants contains six
carbon atoms.) This reaction results in the formation of amide bonds
between monomers, as shown in Figure 2.13. Condensation polymers
that contain amide bonds are called nylons or polyamides. Condensation
polymers that contain ester bonds are called polyesters. Polyesters result
from the esteriﬁcation of diacids and dialcohols.
Electronic Learning Partner
Go to the Chemistry 12
Electronic Learning Partner
for more information about
Nylon-66.
H
NH
(CH2)6
H
N
H
HO
O
C
1,6-diaminohexane
O
C
(CH2)4
adipic acid
H
OH
NH
(CH2)6
H
N
H
1,6-diaminohexane
…
NH
(CH2)6
NH
O
C
O
C
(CH2)4
NH
(CH2)6
NH
…
+   H2O
amide bond
amide bond
water
Figure 2.13
Nylon-66 is made from adipic acid and 1,6-diaminohexane.
Chapter 2  Reactions of Organic Compounds • MHR
83
Table 2.2 shows two common polymers that are formed by condensation.
Notice that Dacron™, a polyester, contains ester linkages between monomers.
Nylon-6, a polyamide, contains amide linkages between monomers.
Table 2.2  Examples of Condensation Polymers
Structure
O
…
C
O
C
O
CH2CH2
O
O
C
O
C O
CH2CH2
O
…
Name
Dacron™
(a polyester)
Nylon-6
(a polyamide)
…
NH (CH2)5
O
C
NH (CH2)5
O
C
NH (CH2)5
O
C
…
Uses
•synthetic
fibres used
to make
fabric for
clothing
and surgery
•tires
•synthetic
fibres used
to make rope
and articles
of clothing,
such as
stockings
The following Sample Problem shows how to classify a polymerization
reaction.
Sample Problem
Classifying a Polymerization Reaction
Problem
Tetraﬂuoroethene polymerizes to form the slippery polymer that is
commonly known as Teﬂon™. Teﬂon™ is used as a non-stick coating
in frying pans, among other uses. Classify the following polymerization
reaction, and name the product. (The letter n indicates that many
monomers are involved in the reaction.)
n F2C
CF2   →   …
Solution
F
C
F
F
C
F
F
C
F
F
C
F
F
C
F
F
C
F
…
The monomer reactant of this polymerization reaction contains a double
bond. The product polymer has no double bond, so an addition reaction
must have occurred. Thus, this reaction is an addition polymerization
reaction. Since the monomer’s name is tetraﬂuoroethene, the product’s
name is polytetraﬂuoroethene.
Practice Problems
18. A monomer called methylmethacrylate polymerizes to form an
addition polymer that is used to make bowling balls. What is the
name of this polymer?
84 MHR • Unit 1  Organic Chemistry
Electronic Learning Partner
Go to the Chemistry 12
Electronic Learning Partner
for more information about
aspects of material covered
in this section of the chapter.
19. Classify each polymerization reaction as an addition or condensation
polymerization reaction.
(a)
nHO
…
O
C
O
C
O
C
O
C
OH  +  nHO
CH2
CH2
OH  →
O
CH2
CH2
O
…
CN
CN
CN
(b)
nCH2
CH  →  …
CH2
CH
CH2
CH
…
(c)
nHO
CH2
O
C
O
OH  →
…
O
CH2
OC
CH2
O
C
…
20. Draw the product of each polymerization reaction. Include at least
two linkages for each product.
(a)
nHO
CH2CH2CH2
OH  +  nHO C
CH2
O
O
C
OH  →
CH3
(b)
nH2C
CH  →
O
O
(c)
nH2NCH2
CH2NH2   +  nHO
C(CH2)6C
OH  →
21. Classify each polymer as an addition polymer (formed by addition
polymerization) or a condensation polymer (formed by condensation
polymerization). Then classify each condensation polymer as either a
polyester or a nylon (polyamide).
(a)
…
CH2
CH
CH2
CH
…
Br
Br
O
…
(b)
NH CH2
NH
C
CH2CH2
…
(c)
O
CH2CH2
O
C
O
CH2CH2
O
O
O
C
O
C
NH
CH2
NH
…
O
C
…
O
CH2CH2
O
O
…
(d)
O
O CCH2C
O
O
CCH2C
…
22. Draw the structure of the repeating unit for each polymer in question
21. Then draw the structure of the monomer(s) used to prepare each
polymer.
In the following investigation, you will examine three polymers and
synthesize a cross-linked addition polymer.
Chapter 2  Reactions of Organic Compounds • MHR
85
Synthesis of a Polymer
In this investigation, you will examine three
different polymers. First, you will examine the
addition polymer sodium polyacrylate. This
polymer contains sodium ions trapped inside
the three-dimensional structure of the polymer.
When placed in distilled water, the concentration
of sodium ions inside the polymer is much
greater than the concentration of sodium
ions outside the polymer. The concentration
imbalance causes water molecules to move
by diffusion into the polymer. As a result, the
polymer absorbs many times its own mass in
distilled water.
…
CH2
CH
CH2
CH
…
O
C O
O−Na+
OC
O−Na+
sodium polyacrylate
You will also examine polyvinyl alcohol, another
addition polymer. Polyvinyl alcohol is made by
the polymerization of hydroxyethene, also
known as vinyl alcohol.
…
CH2
CH
CH2
CH
…
OH
OH
polyvinyl alcohol
Using an aqueous solution of polyvinyl alcohol,
you will prepare a cross-linked polymer,
commonly known as “Slime.”
Questions
How much water can sodium polyacrylate
absorb? What properties do polymers have in
common? How do polymers differ?
S K I L L   F O C U S
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
Prediction
How can you tell if polymerization has occurred?
List one or more changes you would expect to
see in a liquid solution as polymerization takes
place.
Materials
Part 1
about 0.5 g sodium polyacrylate powder
distilled water
500 mL beaker
100 mL graduated cylinder
sodium chloride
balance
Part 2
10 mL graduated cylinder
50 mL beaker
20 cm × 20 cm piece of a polyvinyl alcohol bag
(Alternative: Your teacher will prepare a
solution of 40 g polyvinyl alcohol powder in
1 L of water. You will be given 20 mL of this
solution.)
25 mL hot tap water
stirring rod
food colouring
5 mL of 4% borax solution (sodium tetraborate
decahydrate)
Safety Precautions
• Wear an apron, safety glasses, and gloves while
completing this investigation.
• Wash your hands thoroughly after this
investigation.
• Sodium polyacrylate is irritating to eyes and
nasal membranes. Use only a small amount,
and avoid inhaling the powder.
86 MHR • Unit 1  Organic Chemistry
Analysis
1. Calculate the mass of water that was
absorbed by the sodium polyacrylate polymer.
(Note: 1 mL of water = 1 g)
2. Use the mass of the sodium polyacrylate
polymer and the mass of the water it
absorbed to calculate the mass/mass ratio
of the polymer to water.
3. What practical applications might the sodium
polyacrylate polymer be used for?
4. What happened when you added the salt?
Come up with an explanation for what you
observed. Search for a discussion of sodium
polyacrylate on the Internet to check your
explanation.
Conclusions
5. How do you think a plastic bag made of
polyvinyl alcohol might be useful?
6. What change(s) alerted you to the fact that
polymerization was occurring when you
added borax to the dissolved solution of
polyvinyl alcohol? Explain your observations.
7. Compare the properties of the three polymers
you observed in this investigation. Were there
any similarities? How were they different?
Applications
8. Sodium polyacrylate absorbs less tap water
than distilled water. Design and carry out
an investigation to compare the mass of tap
water absorbed to the mass of distilled water
absorbed by the same mass of powder.
9. Research the use of polyvinyl alcohol (PVA)
bags in hospitals.
Procedure
Part 1  Examination of a Water-Absorbent
Polymer
1. Examine the sodium polyacrylate powder.
Record your observations.
2. Record the mass of a dry, empty 500 mL
beaker. Place about 0.5 g of the powder in
the bottom of the beaker. Record the mass
of the beaker again, to ﬁnd the exact mass
of the powder.
3. Use a graduated cylinder to measure 100 mL
of distilled water. Very slowly, add the water
to the beaker. Stop frequently to observe what
happens. Keep track of how much water you
add, and stop when no more water can be
absorbed. (You may need to add less or more
than 100 mL.) Record the volume of water at
which the powder becomes saturated and will
no longer absorb water.
4. Add a small amount of sodium chloride to the
beaker. Record your observations. Continue
adding sodium chloride until no more
changes occur. Record your observations.
5. Dispose of excess powder and the gelled
material as directed by your teacher. Do not
put the powder or gel down the sink!
Part 2  Synthesis of a Cross-Linked Addition
Polymer
1. Before starting, examine the polyvinyl alcohol
bag. Record your observations.
2. Place 25 mL of hot tap water into a small
beaker.
3. Add the piece of polyvinyl alcohol bag to the
hot water. Stir the mixture until the polymer
has dissolved.
4. Add a few drops of food colouring to the
mixture, and stir again.
5. Add 5 mL of the borax solution, and stir.
6. Examine the “Slime” you have produced.
Record your observations.
Chapter 2  Reactions of Organic Compounds • MHR
87
Risks of the Polymer Industry
In the 1970s, workers at an American plastics manufacturing plant
began to experience serious illnesses. Several workers died of liver
cancer before the problem was traced to its source: prolonged exposure
to vinyl chloride. Vinyl chloride (or chloroethene, C2H3Cl) is used to
make polyvinylchloride (PVC). Unfortunately, vinyl chloride is a
powerful carcinogen. Government regulations have now restricted
workers’ exposure to vinyl chloride. Trace amounts of this dangerous
chemical are still present, however, as pollution in the environment.
The manufacture and disposal of PVC creates another serious
problem. Dioxin, shown in Figure 2.14, is a highly toxic chemical. It is
produced during the manufacture and burning of PVC plastics.
Cl
Cl
O
O
Cl
Cl
Dioxin has been shown to be extremely carcinogenic to some animals. As
Figure 2.14
well, it is suspected of disrupting hormone activity in the body, leading to reduced fertility
and birth defects.
Many synthetic polymers, including most plastics, do not degrade in the
environment. What can be done with plastic and other polymer waste?
One solution may be the development and use of degradable plastics.
These are polymers that break down over time when exposed to
environmental conditions, such as light and bacteria. The Chemistry
Bulletin on the next page gives more information about degradable plastics.
Natural Polymers
Much of our technology has been developed by observing and imitating
the natural world. Synthetic polymers, such as those you just encoun-
tered, were developed by imitating natural polymers. For example, the
natural polymer cellulose provides most of the structure of plants. Wood,
paper, cotton, and ﬂax, are all composed of cellulose ﬁbres. Figure 2.15
shows part of a cellulose polymer.
CH2OH
O
O
HO
HO
O
OH
CH2OH
cellulose
OH
O
CH2OH
O
O
HO
O
OH
Figure 2.15
structural ﬁbre in plants, and it makes up the ﬁbre in your diet.
Like other polymers, cellulose is made of repeating units. It is the main
Biochemistry is the study of the organic compounds and reactions
that occur in living things. Proteins, starches, and nucleic acids are
important biological polymers. Some biological monomers, like amino
acids and sugars, are biologically important all on their own. You will
also encounter lipids, a class of large biological molecules that are
not polymers.
88 MHR • Unit 1  Organic Chemistry
Chemistry Bulletin
Degradable Plastics:
Garbage That Takes Itself Out
Did you know that the ﬁrst plastics were consid-
ered too valuable to be thrown out? Today, many
plastics are considered disposable. Plastics now
take up nearly one third of all landﬁll space, and
society’s use of plastics is on the rise. Recycling
initiatives are helping to reduce plastic waste.
Another solution to this problem may involve the
technology of degradable plastics.
All plastics are polymers, long molecules
made of repeating units. Because polymers
are extremely stable, they resist reaction. Most
conventional plastics require hundreds or even
thousands of years to break down.
Degradable plastics are an important step
forward in technology. These new plastics can
break down in a relatively short time— within six
months to a year. There are two main kinds of
degradable plastics: biodegradable plastics and
photodegradable plastics. Biodegradable plastics
are susceptible to decay processes that are similar
to the decay processes of natural objects, such as
plants. Photodegradable plastics disintegrate when
they are exposed to certain wavelengths of light.
The ability of a degradable plastic to decay
depends on the structure of its polymer chain.
Biodegradable plastics are often manufactured
from natural polymers, such as cornstarch and
wheat gluten. Micro-organisms in the soil can
break down these natural polymers. Ideally,
a biodegradable plastic would break down com-
pletely into carbon dioxide, water, and biomass
within six months, just like a natural material.
Photodegradable plastic is a Canadian
contribution to the environmental health of the
planet. It was developed in Canada more than 25
years ago by Dr. James Guillet, of the University of
Toronto. This plastic incorporates light-absorbing,
or chromomorphic, molecular groups as part of its
backbone chain. The chromomorphic groups
change their structure when they are exposed to
particular frequencies of light (usually ultraviolet).
The structural changes in these groups cause
the backbone to break apart. Although the
photodegradable process is not very effective
at the bottom of a landﬁll, it is ideally suited to
the marine environment. Plastics that are discarded
in oceans and lakes usually ﬂoat at the surface,
and thus are exposed to light. The rings that
are used to package canned drinks can strangle
marine wildlife. These rings are now made with
photodegradable technology in many countries.
Several nations are conducting further research
into other marine uses for this technology.
Making Connections
1. When a degradable plastic decays, the starch or
cellulose backbone may break down completely
into carbon dioxide, water, and organic matter.
What do you think happens to F, Cl, or other
heteroatom groups on the polymer chain as
the backbone decays? Why might this be a
problem?
2. Several notable scientists have cautioned
against the use of biodegradable and photo-
degradable plastics in landﬁlls. The bottom
of a landﬁll has no light, or oxygen for the
metabolism of bacteria. Why is this a problem?
What changes must be made to landﬁll design,
if biodegradable and photodegradable plastics
are going to be included in landﬁlls?
3. Do degradable plastics disappear as soon as
they are discarded? What are the dangers
of public conﬁdence in the degradability of
plastics?
Chapter 2  Reactions of Organic Compounds • MHR
89
Amino Acids and Proteins
A protein is a natural polymer that is composed of monomers called
amino acids. Proteins are found in meat, milk, eggs, and legumes.
Wool, leather, and silk are natural materials that are made of proteins.
Your ﬁngernails, hair, and skin are composed of different proteins.
Proteins carry out many important functions in your body, such as
speeding up chemical reactions (enzymes), transporting oxygen in your
blood (hemoglobin), and regulating your body responses (hormones).
There are 20 common amino acids in the human body. All amino
acids contain a carboxylic acid group and an amino group. Amino acids
can be linked by amide bonds to form proteins. Each amino acid has a
different side chain, which is attached to the centre carbon atom. Figure
2.16, below, shows the structure of an amino acid. The letter G represents
the side chain of the amino acid. Examples of side chains include (cid:3)CH3
(for the amino acid alanine), (cid:3)CH2CH2CONH2 (for glutamine), and
(cid:3)CH2OH (for serine).
OH
C
OH
H2N
C
G
Biology
L I N K
Studies have shown that honey
has the same quick absorption
and long-lasting energy-burst
effect that many sports drinks
do. This is because honey is
high in fructose, a simple fruit
sugar that has been found to
be the best sugar for athletes.
Unpasteurized honey also
contains hydrogen peroxide
and enzymes, which aid in
digestion.
Figure 2.16
The structure of an amino acid
The shape and biological function of a protein depends on its sequence of
amino acids. A typical protein, such as insulin, contains at least 50 amino
acid groups. Depending on the sequence of these amino acids, an inﬁnite
number of different proteins are possible. Each species of animal has its
own distinct proteins. The DNA in your body contains the blueprints for
making speciﬁc proteins for your body’s structure and function.
Carbohydrates
A carbohydrate (also called a saccharide) is a biological molecule that
contains either an aldehyde or ketone group, along with two or more
hydroxyl groups. The C(cid:2)O group at one end of a simple saccharide
reacts with an OH group at the other end to produce the most common
formation, a ring. Figure 2.17 shows the ring forms of some of the
simplest carbohydrates.
glucose
fructose
sucrose
water
CH2OH
O
HO
HO
HOCH2
O
OH
+
HO
CH2OH
→
OH
OH
OH
Glucose is the simplest carbohydrate. It is found in grapes
Figure 2.17
and corn syrup. Fructose gives fruit its sweet taste. A condensation reaction
between glucose and fructose produces sucrose, commonly called table
sugar. Sucrose is found in sugar cane and sugar beets.
90 MHR • Unit 1  Organic Chemistry
CH2OH
O
HO
HO
OH
O
HOCH2
O
+
H2O
HO CH2OH
OH
Carbohydrates are found in foods such as bread, pasta, potatoes, and
fruits. They are the primary source of energy for the body. In a process
called cellular respiration, carbohydrates combine with inhaled oxygen
and are oxidized to produce carbon dioxide and water, plus energy. As
shown in Figure 2.18, carbon dioxide and water vapour from cellular
respiration are expelled in your breath.
Figure 2.18
with the air, forming a visible cloud.
On a cold day, the water vapour in your breath condenses on contact
A monosaccharide is composed of one saccharide unit. Thus, it is the
smallest molecule possible for a carbohydrate. A monosaccharide is often
called a simple carbohydrate, or simple sugar. Glucose, seen in Figure 2.17,
on the previous page, is one example of a monosaccharide. Other mono-
saccharides include fructose, galactose, and mannose.
Sucrose (shown in Figure 2.17) is a disaccharide, containing two
saccharide monomers. To produce a disaccharide, an (cid:3)OH group on
one monomer reacts with an (cid:3)OH group on another monomer to form
an ether (cid:3)O(cid:3) linkage (also shown in Figure 2.17). This reaction is a
condensation, because two molecules combine and produce a molecule
of water. During digestion, carbohydrates undergo hydrolysis reactions,
which break the ether bonds between the monomers.
Polysaccharides are polymers that contain many saccharide units.
The most important polysaccharides are those in which glucose is the
monomer. Plants use the glucose polysaccharide cellulose as a structural
material. (See Figure 2.15 for the structure of cellulose.) They store
energy in the starches amylose and amylopectin. A starch is a glucose
polysaccharide that is used by plants to store energy. Humans can digest
starches. Animals store energy in the glucose polysaccharide glycogen,
illustrated in Figure 2.19
C O U R S E
C H A L L E N G E
How can you use your
knowledge of organic
chemistry to identify reactions
between biological molecules?
You will apply your learning
later on, in the Chemistry
Course Challenge.
glucose
unit
Glycogen is the major storage
Figure 2.19
polysaccharide in animals. This tiny portion of a
tangled glycogen granule shows the highly
branched polymer, made of glucose units.
Chapter 2  Reactions of Organic Compounds • MHR
91
Nucleotides and Nucleic Acids
Humans and cats both begin life as fertilized eggs, which look fairly
similar. Why does a fertilized cat egg develop into a kitten, while a
fertilized human egg develops into a child (Figure 2.20)? A very special
type of polymer, located in the cell nucleus, directs the formation of the
proteins from which an organism develops.
(C) A SIMILARLY-SIZED
CAT FACE
109(02)1496
DNA in the cells of your body direct the production of proteins. Since your
Figure 2.20
bones, muscles, and organs are built from proteins that are speciﬁc to humans, your body
is different from the body of a cat.
DNA (short for 2-deoxyribonucleic acid) is the biological molecule that
determines the shape and structure of all organisms. It is found mostly
in the nuclei of cells. Each strand of DNA is a polymer that is composed
of repeating units, called nucleotides. A single strand of DNA may have
more than one million nucleotides. Each nucleotide consists of three
parts: a sugar, a phosphate group, and a base.
DNA is one type of nucleic acid. The other type of nucleic acid is
called RNA (short for ribonucleic acid). RNA is present throughout a cell.
It works closely with DNA to produce the proteins in the body. Table 2.3,
on the next page, shows the structures of RNA and DNA.
92 MHR • Unit 1  Organic Chemistry
Table 2.3 Structures of DNA and RNA
phosphate
sugar
base
polymerization
…
…
single nucleotide
nucleotide chain (DNA or RNA)
The main structure of a nucleotide is based on a simple saccharide, or sugar. The sugar
that is used to make DNA is 2-deoxyribose. The sugar that is used to make RNA is ribose.
HO
O
OH
HO
O
OH
HO
2-deoxyribose
HO
OH
ribose
Each sugar unit is attached to a phosphate group. The phosphate group on one nucleotide
bonds with a hydroxyl group on the sugar of another nucleotide to form a sugar-phosphate
chain.
O
PO
OH
OH
phosphate group
sugar
phosphate
There are five possible bases, shown below. DNA is made using the bases adenine,
thymine, guanine, and cytosine. RNA is made using the bases adenine, uracil, guanine,
and cytosine. The specific sequence of the bases in a strand of DNA makes up a specific
code. The code contains all the information that is needed to make a particular organism.
base
NH2
N
N
N
N
H
O
N
H
HN
O
CH3
O
N
H
HN
O
O
N
HN
H2N
NH2
N
N
H
N
O
N
H
adenine (A)
thymine (T)
uracil (U)
guanine (G)
cytosine (C)
Chapter 2  Reactions of Organic Compounds • MHR
93
P
P
S
P
S
S
P
P
S
S
P
S
P
S
P
S
S
P
S
P
S
S
P
S
P
S
P
P
S
P
S
S
P
S
P
S
S
P
P
S
P
S
P
S
P
S
O
−
O
CH2
O
P
O
S
P
S
O
−
O
O
P
O
CH2
S
H
H N
O
N
H
N
H
HN
N
O
O
H
N
H N
H
Two strands of DNA
Figure 2.21
are held together by hydrogen bonds
to form a double-helix molecule.
A fat or an oil is
Figure 2.22
produced when three long-chain
carboxylic acids, called fatty acids,
bond with a glycerol unit to form
three ester bonds. (Note that the
three fatty acids are not always
identical.) A hydrolysis reaction
can split these three ester bonds to
produce glycerol and a combina-
tion of the salts of fatty acids, better
known as soap.
A complete molecule of DNA consists of two complementary strands.
These strands are held together by hydrogen bonds between the bases
on the nucleotide units, as shown in Figure 2.21.
DNA has two main functions in the body:
• It replicates itself exactly whenever a cell divides. Thus, every cell in
an organism contains the same information.
• It contains codes that allow each type of protein that is needed by the
body to be made by the body’s cells. RNA assists in this process.
Lipids
The last biological molecules that you will examine in this course are
not polymers. They are, however, very large in size. Lipids are deﬁned
as biological molecules that are not soluble in water, but are soluble in
non-polar solvents, such as benzene and hexanes.
From your previous studies of solubility, you might hypothesize
that lipid molecules must have large hydrocarbon parts, since they are
soluble in hydrocarbon solvents. Your hypothesis would be correct.
Lipids contain large hydrocarbon chains, or other large hydrocarbon
structures.
Several types of lipids may be familiar to you. Fats, oils, and some
waxes are examples of lipids. Fats are lipids that contain a glycerol
molecule, bonded by ester linkages to three long-chain carboxylic acids.
Oils have the same structure as fats, but are classiﬁed as being liquid at
room temperature, while fats are solids at room temperature. Waxes are
esters of long-chain alcohols and long-chain carboxylic acids.
Other lipids include steroids, such as cholesterol, and terpenes,
which are plant oils such as oil of turpentine, or oil of cedar. Figure 2.22
shows the lipid glyceryl trioleate, which is present in olive oil.
H
O
H
C O C
(CH2)7
CH
CH
(CH2)7
CH3
O
H
C O C
(CH2)7
CH
CH
(CH2)7
CH3
O
H
C O C
(CH2)7
CH
CH
(CH2)7
CH3
H
glycerol
3 fatty acids
glyceryl trioleate
Lipids carry out many important functions in the body. Their most
important function is the long-term storage of energy. One gram of fat con-
tains two-and-a-quarter times more energy than a gram of carbohydrate or
protein. When an animal consumes more carbohydrates than are needed
at the time, the body converts the excess carbohydrates to fat. Later, when
insufﬁcient carbohydrates are available for energy, the body may break
down some of these fats to use for energy. Carbohydrates are still needed
in your diet, however, for the proper functioning of your cells.
94 MHR • Unit 1  Organic Chemistry
In addition to storing energy, lipids have other vital functions:
• Cell membranes are made of a double layer of phospholipids. These
are lipids that are polar at one end and non-polar at the other end.
• Lipids such as cholesterol and testosterone act as hormones to regulate
body functions. (Not all hormones are lipids. Some hormones are
proteins. Other hormones are neither lipids nor proteins.)
• Several vitamins (such as vitamins A, D, and E) are lipids. These
vitamins are known as fat-soluble.
• The fatty tissues in your body are made from lipids. They act like
protective “packaging” around fragile organs, such as the heart. They
insulate the body from excessive heat or cold, and they act as padding
to reduce impact from collisions.
Section Summary
In this section, you learned how to recognize addition and condensation
polymerization reactions. You examined the structures and functions of
several important biological molecules, such as proteins, amino acids,
carbohydrates, DNA, and lipids. In the next section, you will examine the
risks and beneﬁts of manufacturing and using organic compounds.
Section Review
1
K/U
In this section, you learned about biological polymers.
Unit Issue Prep
Before you research your
issue on organic chemistry,
think about the importance of
organic compounds in every-
day life. How are polymers
important in medicine? How
are they important in industry?
(a) Name three types of biological polymers.
(b) Give an example of each type of biological polymer.
(c) Name the monomer unit for each type of biological polymer.
2
K/U
Classify each polymerization reaction as an addition reaction
or a condensation reaction.
F
F
F
(a)
nH2C
CH   →  …
CH2
CH
CH2
CH
…
(b)
nHO
OH   +   nHO
O
C
…
O
O
C
O
(CH2)4
O
C
OH   →
O
…
(CH2)4
O
C
O
3
I
Draw the product of each polymerization reaction, and classify the
reaction. Then circle and identify any amide or ester bonds in the
product.
(a)
nH2C
CH2   →
(b)
nHO CH2
OH   +   nHO
O
C
O
C
OH   →
O
C
(CH2)3
O
C
(c)
nHO
OH   +   nH2N
CH
NH2   →
CH3
Chapter 2  Reactions of Organic Compounds • MHR
95
4
C
What function does each type of biological molecule perform
in living organisms?
(a) carbohydrate
(b) protein
(c) DNA
(d) lipid
5
I
Identify each type of biological molecule. Copy the structure into
your notebook, and circle the functional group(s).
(a)
H2N
CH
CH3
HO
(b)
O
C
OH
(d)
H2C
O
O
OH
HC
O
OH
CH2OH
H2C
O
O
C
O
C
O
C
(CH2)14
CH3
(CH2)12
CH3
(CH2)16
CH3
OH
O
C
(c)
H2N
CH
CH2
CH2OH
O
HO
OH
(e)
HO
OH
O
O
HO
OH
CH2OH
OH
6
MC
Gore-tex™ is a popular fabric that provides protection from rain
while allowing perspiration to escape. What polymer coating is used to
make Gore-tex™ fabric? What special properties does this polymer
have? What else is this polymer used for? Research the answers to
these questions.
96 MHR • Unit 1  Organic Chemistry
2.4
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
(cid:2) discuss the variety and
importance of organic
compounds in your life
(cid:2) analyze the risks and bene-
ﬁts of the production and
use of organic compounds
(cid:2) explain how organic chem-
istry has helped to solve
problems related to human
health and the environment
Organic Compounds and
Everyday Life
You are already aware that organic compounds are an inescapable part of
your daily life. As you know, much of your body is composed of organic
compounds. The food you eat is made from organic compounds, as are the
clothes you wear. The fuel that heats your home and powers buses and
cars is also organic. When you are sick or injured, you may use organic
compounds to ﬁght infection or to reduce pain and swelling. Modern
processed foods include many ﬂavourings and colourings—another use
of organic compounds. (See Figure 2.23.)
CH3
OH
H3C
CH
CH3
menthol
In Chapter 1, you learned about esters that are used as ﬂavourings. Not all
Figure 2.23
ﬂavourings belong to the ester family. Menthol is an organic compound that is found in the
mint plant. It is used as a ﬂavouring in many substances, including toothpaste, chewing gum,
and cough syrups. What functional group is present in menthol? How might you guess this
from the name?
In this section, you will examine the uses of some common organic
compounds. You will also carry out an analysis of some of the risks and
beneﬁts that are involved in making and using organic compounds.
Risk-Beneﬁt Analysis
How can you make the most informed decision possible when analyzing
the risks or beneﬁts of a product or issue? The following steps are one
way to carry out a risk-beneﬁt analysis for the manufacture and use of an
organic compound.
Step 1 Identify possible risks and beneﬁts of the organic product. Ask
questions such as these:
• What are the direct uses of this product? (For example, is it used
as a pharmaceutical drug for a speciﬁc disease or condition? Is it
an insecticide for a speciﬁc insect “pest”?)
• What are the indirect uses of this product? (For example, is it used
in the manufacture of a different organic or inorganic product?)
• What are the direct risks of making or using this product?
(For example, is the product an environmental pollutant, or does
it contain compounds that may be harmful to the environment?
Can the workers who manufacture this product be harmed by
exposure to it?)
Chapter 2  Reactions of Organic Compounds • MHR
97
• What are the indirect risks of making or using this product? (For
example, are harmful by-products produced in the manufacture
of this product? How much energy does the manufacture of this
product require, and where does the energy come from? What, if
any, side effects does this product cause?)
Step 2 Research the answers to your questions from step 1. Ensure that
your information comes from reliable sources. If there is controversy
on the risks and beneﬁts of the product, ﬁnd information that covers
both sides of the issue.
Step 3 Decide on your own point of view. In your opinion, are the beneﬁts
greater than the risks? Do the risks outweigh the beneﬁts?
Step 4 Consider possible alternatives that may lessen the risks. Ask
questions such as the following:
• Does a similar, less harmful, product exist?
• Is there a better way to manufacture or dispose of this product?
• What safety precautions can be taken to reduce the risks?
Risks and Beneﬁts of Organic Compounds
The next four tables outline common uses of various organic compounds,
as well as possible complications resulting from each use. The
ThoughtLab that follows provides an opportunity for you to work with
and extend the information in the tables. Of course, the compounds listed
are only a few of the many useful organic compounds that are available to
society.
Table 2.4  Uses and Possible Complications of Selected Pharmaceutical Drugs
Organic compound
salbutalmol
(Ventolin®)
lidocaine
morphine
acetylsalicylic acid
(A.S.A., Aspirin®)
Source
• developed from ephedrine,
a compound that occurs
naturally in the ma huang
(ephedra) plant
• developed from cocaine, a
compound that occurs
naturally in the coca leaf
• occurs naturally in the
opium poppy plant, which
is still the simplest and
cheapest source of
morphine
• developed from salicin,
found in the bark of the
willow tree
Common uses
• used as asthma medication
• used as a local anaesthetic,
in throat sprays and
sunburn sprays
• one of the strongest
pain-killers known
• reduces fever,
inflammation, and pain
• used to prevent heart
attacks by thinning blood
acetaminophen
(Tylenol™)
• developed from acetyl
• reduces fever and pain
salicylic acid
Side effects and /or concerns
• possible side effects
include tremors, nausea,
heart palpitations,
headaches, and
nervousness
• possible side effects
include skin rash or
swelling
• highly addictive
• possible side effects
include dizziness,
drowsiness, and breathing
difficulty
• possible side effects
include stomach upset
• more rare side effects
include stomach bleeding
and Reye’s syndrome
• possible side effects
include stomach upset
• can cause liver damage in
high doses
98 MHR • Unit 1  Organic Chemistry
Table 2.5  Uses and Possible Complications of Selected Pesticides
Pesticide
Common uses
Side effects and /or concerns
parathion
carbaryl
• insecticide
• kills insects by disrupting
their nerve impulses
• insecticide
• similar to parathion, but
safer for humans
• one of the most toxic
organophosphate pesticides
• highly toxic to humans,
birds, aquatic invertebrates,
and honeybees
• more expensive than
parathion
• generally low toxicity to
humans and most other
mammals
• highly toxic to fish, aquatic
invertebrates, and honey
bees
endrin
• insecticide
• also controls rodents, such
as mice
pyrethrin
• natural pesticide
• breaks down quickly in the
environment
• persists in soil up to
12 years
• highly toxic to fish
• banned in some countries
and restricted use in many
others
• irritating to skin, eyes,
respiratory system
• highly toxic
• can be dangerous to
resmethrin
• synthetic pyrethroid
pesticide
• 75 times less toxic to
humans and pets than
pyrethrin
humans and pets within
range of the pesticide
application
• very toxic to aquatic life
• low toxicity to humans and
other mammals (causing
skin, eye, and respiratory
system irritation)
• irritating to skin, eyes, and
respiratory system
• highly toxic to fish and
honey bees
Table 2.6  Uses and Possible Complications of Selected Food Additives
Organic Compound
aspartame
Common uses
• artificial sweetener
Side effects and /or concerns
• significant controversy over
possible health risks
menthol
• flavouring in many
• may cause allergic reaction
substances, including
toothpaste, chewing gum,
and cough syrups
• flavour enhancer for foods
MSG
(monosodium-
glutamate)
• may cause allergic reaction
known as MSG symptom
complex, with symptoms
such as nausea and
headache
• may worsen already severe
asthma
Red #40
• food colouring
• may cause allergic reaction
Chapter 2  Reactions of Organic Compounds • MHR
99
Table 2.7  Uses and Possible Complications
of Selected Common Organic Compounds
Organic compound
tetrachloroethene
(Perc™)
Common uses
• solvent used to dry-clean
clothing
Side effects and /or concerns
• toxic
• may damage central
nervous system, kidneys,
and liver
ethylene glycol
• automobile antifreeze
• toxic, especially to small
acetone
• nail polish remover
• industrial solvent
pets and wildlife
• may damage central
nervous system, kidneys,
and heart
• highly flammable
• irritating to throat, nose,
and eyes
ThoughtLab
Risk-Benefit Analyses of Organic Products
As you know, organic products provide many of the
necessities and comforts of your life. They are also
responsible for a great deal of damage, including
environmental pollution and harm to human health.
In this Thought Lab, you will perform risk-beneﬁt
analyses on three organic compounds.
Procedure
1. Choose three of the organic compounds listed in
Tables 2.4 through 2.7. Research and record the
chemical structure of each compound.
2. Follow the four steps for a risk-beneﬁt analysis,
given at the beginning of this section. You will
need to carry out additional research on the
compounds of your choice.
Analysis
For each compound, answer the following
questions.
1. What are the practical purposes of this organic
compound?
2. (a) What alternative compounds (if any) can be
used for the same purpose?
(b) What are the beneﬁts of using your particular
compound, instead of using the alternatives
in part (a)?
3. (a) What are the direct risks of using this
compound?
(b) What are the indirect risks of using this
compound?
4. In your opinion, should this compound continue
to be used? Give reasons for your answer.
5. What safety precautions could help to reduce
possible harm— to people as well as to the
environment —resulting from this compound?
Problem Solving With Organic Compounds
Many chemicals and products have been developed as solutions to health,
safety, and environmental problems. Sometimes, however, a solution to
one problem can introduce a different problem. Read the three articles on
the next few pages. Then complete the ThoughtLab that follows.
100 MHR • Unit 1  Organic Chemistry
Replacing CFCs—At What Cost?
At  the  beginning  of  the  twentieth
century,
refrigeration  was  a
relatively  new  technology.  Early
the
refrigerators  depended  on
use  of
such  as
toxic  gases,
ammonia  and  methyl  chloride.
Unfortunately, these  gases  some-
times  leaked  from  refrigerators,
leading to fatal accidents. In 1928,
a  new, “miracle” compound  was
developed  to  replace  these  toxic
gases.  Dichlorodifluoromethane,
commonly known as Freon®, was a
safe, non-toxic alternative. Freon®
and  other
chlorofluorocarbon
compounds, commonly referred to
as  CFCs, were  also  used  for
numerous  other  products  and
applications.  They  were  largely
responsible for the development of
many  conveniences, such  as  air-
conditioning, that we now take for
granted.
Today  we  know  that  CFCs
break  up  when  they  reach  the
ozone  layer,
releasing  chlorine
atoms. The chlorine atoms destroy
ozone  molecules  faster  than  the
ozone can regenerate from oxygen
gas.  Studies  in  the  past  ten  years
have  shown  dramatic  drops  in
ozone  concentration  at  specific
locations.  Since  ozone  protects
Earth  from  the  Sun’s  ultraviolet
radiation, this  decrease  in  ozone
has led to increases in skin cancer,
as  well  as  damage  to  plants  and
animals.  In  addition, CFCs  are
potent  greenhouse  gases  and  con-
tribute to global warming. Through
the  Montréal  Protocol, and  later
“Earth  Summit” gatherings, many
countries—including  Canada—
have banned CFC production.
Substitutes  for  CFCs  are
available, but  none  provide  a
completely satisfactory alternative.
Hydrofluorocarbons  (HFCs)  are
organic  compounds  that  behave
like  CFCs, but  do  not  harm
the  ozone  layer.  For  example,
1,1,1,2-tetrafluoroethane
and
1,1-diﬂuoroethane  are  HFCs  that
can  be  used  to  replace  CFCs  in
refrigerators  and  air  conditioners.
Unfortunately, HFCs  are  also
greenhouse gases.
Simple hydrocarbons can also
be  used  as  CFC  substitutes.
Hydrocarbons  such  as  propane,
2-methylpropane  (common  name:
isobutane), and butane are efﬁcient
aerosol  propellants.  These  hydro-
carbons are stable and inexpensive,
but they are extremely ﬂammable.
H3C
CH CH3
CH3CH2CH3
CH3CH2CH2CH3
CH3
isobutane
propane
butane
FH
HF
F
C
C
F
F
C
C
H
FH
HH
1,1,1,2-tetrafluoroethane
1,1-difluoroethane
Chapter 2  Reactions of Organic Compounds • MHR 101
Chapter 2  Reactions of Organic Compounds • MHR 101
Revisiting DDT: Why Did it Happen?
Dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane,
better  known  as  DDT, is  a  well-
known  pesticide  that  has  caused
signiﬁcant  environmental  damage.
It is easy to point ﬁngers, blaming
scientists  and  manufacturers  for
having  “unleashed” this  organic
compound  on  an  unsuspecting
world. It is more difﬁcult, however,
to  understand  why  this  environ-
mental disaster took place.
Insects  consume  more  than
one third of the world’s crops each
year.  In  addition, insects  such  as
mosquitoes  spread  life-threatening
including  malaria  and
diseases,
encephalitis.  Weeds  reduce  crop
yields  by  taking  over  space, using
up nutrients, and blocking sunlight.
Some  weeds  even  poison  the
animals that the crops are intended
to  feed.  Crop  damage  and  low
crop yield are signiﬁcant problems
for  countries  undergoing  food
shortages and famines.
DDT  was  one  of  the  first
pesticides  that  was  developed.
For  many  years, it  was  used  suc-
cessfully to protect crops and ﬁght
disease  epidemics.  Paul  Mueller,
the  scientist  who  discovered
DDT’s  use  as  a  pesticide, was
awarded the Nobel Prize in 1948.
Cl
Cl
Cl
CH
C
Cl
Cl
DDT
Later, however, tests  revealed  that
DDT  does  not  readily  decompose
in  the  environment.  Instead, DDT
remains  present  in  the  soil  for
decades after use. The hydrocarbon
part of this molecule makes it solu-
ble  in  the  fatty  tissues  of  animals.
As  it  passes  through  the  food
chain, DDT  accumulates. Animals
that  are  higher  in  the  food  chain,
such as large birds and ﬁsh, contain
dangerous  concentrations  of  this
chemical  in  their  tissues.  A  high
DDT concentration in birds causes
them  to  lay  eggs  with  very  thin
shells, which  are  easily  destroyed.
Today DDT is no longer produced
or  used  in  Canada.  It  is  still  used,
however,
in  many  developing
countries.
Knocking on the Car Door
Automobile fuels are graded using
octane  numbers, which  measure
the combustibility of a fuel. A high
octane  number  means  that  a  fuel
temperature
requires  a  higher
and/or  higher  pressure  to  ignite.
Racing cars with high-compression
engines  usually  run  on  pure
methanol, which  has  an  octane
number of 120.
too
Gasoline  with
low
an  octane  number  can  cause
“knocking” in the engine of a car,
when the fuel ignites too easily and
burns  in  an  uncontrolled  manner.
Knocking  lowers  fuel  efﬁciency,
and it can damage the engine.
As  early  as  1925, two  of  the
ﬁrst  automobile  engineers  became
aware  of  the  need  to  improve  the
octane  number  of  fuels.  Charles
Kettering  advocated  the  use  of  a
newly developed compound called
tetra-ethyl  lead, Pb(C2H5)4.  This
compound  acts  as  a  catalyst  to
102 MHR • Unit 1  Organic Chemistry
increase  the  efficiency  of  the
hydrocarbon  combustion  reaction.
Henry  Ford  believed  that  ethanol,
another  catalyst, should  be  used
instead of tetra-ethyl lead. Ethanol
could  be  produced  easily  from
locally  grown  crops.  As  we  now
know, ethanol  is  also  much  better
for the environment.
Tetra-ethyl  lead  became  the
chosen  fuel  additive.  Over  many
decades, lead  emissions  from  car
exhausts  accumulated  in  urban
ponds  and  water  systems.  Many
waterfowl  that  live  in  urban  areas
experience lead poisoning. Lead is
also dangerous to human health.
Leaded  fuels  are  now  banned
across  Canada.  In  unleaded  gaso-
line, simple  organic  compounds
are  added  instead  of  lead  com-
pounds.  These  octane-enhancing
compounds  include  methyl-t-butyl
ether,
t-butyl  alcohol, methanol,
and  ethanol.  Like  lead  catalysts,
these  compounds  help  to  reduce
engine knocking. In addition, burn-
ing ethanol and methanol produces
fewer  pollutants
than  burning
hydrocarbon  fuels, which  contain
contaminants.  Since  they  can  be
made  from  crops, these  alcohols
are a renewable resource.
CH3
H3C
CO
CH3
CH3
2-methoxy-2-methyl propane
(methyl tert-butyl ether)
CH3
HO
C
CH3
CH3
1,1-dimethyl ethanol
(tert-butyl alcohol)
ThoughtLab
Problem Solving with Organic Compounds
In this ThoughtLab, you will consider several
situations in which organic compounds were used
to help solve a health, safety, or environmental
problem.
Procedure
1. Choose two of the situations that are discussed
in the three newspaper articles. Come up with a
third situation, involving organic compounds,
that you have heard or read about recently. For
the three situations you have chosen, answer
the following questions.
(a) What was the original problem?
(b) How was this problem resolved? What part
did organic compounds play in the solution?
(c) What further problems (if any) were
introduced by the solution in part (b)?
(d) Have these additional problems been
resolved? If so, how have they been resolved?
(e) Do you foresee any new problems arising
from the solutions in part (d)? Explain why
or why not.
Analysis
1. Use your knowledge of organic chemistry to
describe how organic chemistry has helped
to provide a solution to
(a) a human health problem
(b) a safety problem
(c) an environmental problem
2. In your opinion, is it worth coming up with
solutions to problems, if the solutions carry
the possibility of more problems? Explain
your answer.
Section Summary
In this section, you encountered some of the ways that organic compounds
make our lives easier.  As well, you learned about some of the risks
involved in using organic compounds. You carried out risk-beneﬁt analyses
on several organic compounds. Finally, you examined some situations in
which organic chemistry has helped to solve problems related to human
health, safety, and the environment.
Section Review
1
MC
Think about the risks and beneﬁts of organic compounds.
(a) Describe ﬁve speciﬁc beneﬁts you obtain from organic compounds.
(b) Describe two risks from organic compounds, and explain how these
risks may affect you.
2
C
Prepare a brochure, booklet, or web page explaining the practical
uses of organic compounds to a younger age group. Your booklet
should include the following information:
• a simple explanation of what an organic compound is
• a description of some beneﬁts of organic compounds
• speciﬁc examples of at least three different organic compounds that
you studied in this chapter, plus their uses
• speciﬁc examples of at least three different organic compounds that
you did not study in this chapter, plus their uses
Unit Issue Prep
Before researching your issue
at the end of Unit 1, decide
how you will use the informa-
tion and skills you learned in
this section. What are some
possible direct and indirect
risks and beneﬁts involved in
the issue you have chosen?
Chapter 2  Reactions of Organic Compounds • MHR 103
3
C
Research persistent organic pollutants (POPs) on the Internet. Use
your research to prepare a poster about POPs for your community.
Include the following information:
• examples of three POPs, with descriptions of their negative effects
on the environment and/or human health
• a description of what the Canadian government has done to address
the problem of POPs
• suggestions for ways that your community can avoid or reduce harm
from organic pollutants
4
MC
In section 2.3, you learned about some of the risks and beneﬁts
of polymers. Choose a synthetic polymer from section 2.3. Carry out
a risk-beneﬁt analysis of this polymer.
5
C
Scientists and horticulturalists who work with and sell the
synthetic pesticide pyrethroid are concerned about public perception.
Many people buy the natural pesticide pyrethrin, even though it is
more toxic than pyrethroid. Why do you think this happens? Do you
think this happens for other products that have natural and synthetic
alternatives? Write a brief editorial outlining your opinions and advice
to consumers, to help them make informed product choices.
104 MHR • Unit 1  Organic Chemistry
Review
Reﬂecting on Chapter 2
Summarize this chapter in the format of your
choice. Here are a few ideas to use as guidelines:
• Describe the different types of organic reactions,
and give an example of each type.
• Compare addition polymerization reactions with
condensation polymerization reactions.
• List the biomolecules you learned about in this
chapter, and give an example of each.
• List some beneﬁts of the use of organic
compounds.
• List some risks from the use of organic
compounds.
Reviewing Key Terms
For each of the following terms, write a sentence
that shows your understanding of its meaning.
substitution reaction
addition reaction
oxidation
elimination reaction
condensation reaction
reduction
esteriﬁcation reaction
hydrolysis reaction
monomers
Markovnikov’s rule
addition polymerization
polymer
nylons
plastics
polyamides
condensation
biochemistry
amino acids
saccharide
disaccharide
starch
nucleotides
polyesters
protein
carbohydrate
monosaccharide
polysaccharide
DNA (2-deoxyribonucleic lipids
polymerization
acid)
RNA (ribonucleic acid)
waxes
oils
fats
Knowledge/Understanding
1. Describe each type of organic
reaction, and give an example.
(a) addition
(b) substitution
(c) elimination
(d) oxidation
(e) reduction
(f) condensation
(g) hydrolysis
2. What is the connection between a condensation
reaction and an esteriﬁcation reaction?
3. How is an addition reaction related to an
elimination reaction?
4. (a) In your own words, deﬁne an esteriﬁcation
reaction and a hydrolysis reaction. Give two
examples of each type of reaction.
(b) Explain the connection between these two
types of reactions.
5. Identify each reaction as an addition reaction,
a substitution reaction, or an elimination
reaction.
(a) CH2(cid:2)CH2 + H2 → CH3CH3
I
(b)
+     I2
FeBr3
+     HI
(c) CH3CH2CH2OH → CH3CH(cid:2)CH2 + H2O
(d) CH3CH2CH2OH + HCl →
CH3CH2CH2Cl + H2O
(e) CH3CH(CH3)CH(cid:2)CH2 + HBr →
(f) CH3CH2CH(cid:2)CHCH2CH3 + H2O →
CH3CH(CH3)CH(Br)CH3
CH3CH2CH(OH)CH2CH2CH3
(g) CH3CH2Br + NH3 → CH3CH2NH2 + HBr
6. Identify each reaction as an oxidation or a
reduction. (Oxidizing and reducing agents
are not shown.)
O
O
(a)
CH3CH2CHCH
→
CH3CH2CHCOH
CH3
O
→
CH3
OH
O
(b)
(c)
HO
CH2
CH2
CH
CH3
→
HC
CH2
CH
CH3
CH2
OH
HC
O
Chapter 2  Reactions of Organic Compounds • MHR 105
7. Describe each type of polymerization, and give
17. (a) What is the generic monomer of a
an example.
(a) addition polymerization
(b) condensation polymerization
8. What is the difference between a nylon and a
polyester? How are they similar?
9. How can the following reaction be an example
of both an addition reaction and a reduction?
CH2(cid:2)CH2 + H2 → CH3CH3
10. (a) What is Markovnikov’s rule? Why does it
apply to the following reaction?
CH3CH(cid:2)CH2 + HBr → ?
(b) Name and draw the two isomeric products of
this reaction.
(c) Which product is formed in the greater
amount?
11. Classify the following oxidation as an addition,
substitution, or elimination reaction. Explain
your reasoning.
CH3CH2OH + [O] → CH3CHO
12. Consider the reaction of an aldehyde with
lithium aluminum hydride, LiAlH4, to produce
an alcohol. Why is this reaction a reduction,
not an oxidation?
13. A short section of the polymer polypropene is
shown below.
…(cid:3)CH2(cid:3)CH(CH3)(cid:3)CH2(cid:3)CH(CH3)(cid:3)…
(a) Draw and name the monomer that is used
to make this polymer.
(b) What type of polymer is polypropene?
Explain your reasoning.
(c) What is the common name of this polymer?
polysaccharide polymer?
(b) What is the monomer of cellulose?
Inquiry
18. Draw and name the product(s) of each incom-
plete reaction. (Hint: Do not forget to include
any second products, such as H2O or HBr.)
(a) CH3CH(cid:2)CHCH3 + Br2 →
(b) HO(cid:3)CH2CH2CH2CH2CH3 + HBr →
O
(c)
CH3CH2CH
+ →
[O]
(d)
HO CH2CH2CH3
H2SO4
∆
OH
(e)
+   [O]  →
O
CH3CH2COH + HOCH3
(f)
(g) CH3CH(cid:2)CHCH2CH3 + H2 →
H2SO4
O
C
(h)
CH3
O
CH2CH3   +   H2O
H2SO4
∆
19. Draw the product(s) of each incomplete reac-
tion. Hint: Do not forget to include the second
product, such as H2O or HBr, for a substitution
reaction.
O
CH3CH2
OH + CH3CH2CH2OH →
(a)
(b) CH3CH2C(cid:4)CH + Cl2 → (i) + Cl2 → (ii)
C
14. (a) What is the difference between a protein and
OH
an amino acid?
(b) How are proteins important to living
organisms?
15. (a) Deﬁne the term “lipid.”
(b) Give three different examples of lipids.
(c) List four foods you eat that contain lipids.
(d) How are lipids important to your body?
16. (a) Distinguish between monosaccharides,
disaccharides, and polysaccharides.
(b) Draw and name an example of each.
(c) How are carbohydrates important to
living organisms?
106 MHR • Unit 1  Organic Chemistry
(c)
(d)
O
C
(e) CH3
H2SO4
∆
O
O
+   H2O
H2SO4
∆
CH
CH3
+
[H]
→
CH3
(f) H2C(cid:2)CHCH2CH(CH3)2 + HOH →
(i) (major product) + (ii) (minor product)
(g) CH3CH2CH2CH2CH2(cid:3)OH + [O] →
(i) + [O] → (ii)
(h)
+   Cl2
FeBr3
(i) CH3CH2CH(Br)CH3 + OH− →
O
(j)
HO
CH2CH2CH2CH3   +   HC
OH  →
(k)
nCH2
CH
polymerization
OH
O
O
(l)
nHO(CH2)7OH + nHOCCH2COH
polymerization
polymerization
(i)
?
…
CH2
CH
CH2
CH
…
CH2CH3
CH2CH3
21. Identify each type of reaction in questions 18,
19, and 20.
22. (a) Write a brief procedure that you could use
to carry out the following reactions in a
laboratory.
• oxidation of 1-pentanol
• oxidation of 2-pentanol
• oxidation of 2-methyl-2-butanol
(b) Describe the results you would expect.
(c) Write a chemical equation for each reaction.
Show the products, if any.
20. Draw and name the reactant(s) in each reaction.
23. In Investigation 1-A in Chapter 1, you carried
Cl
Cl
(a)
?
+
→Cl2
H
C
C
H
HH
O
(b)
?   +   [O]   →   HCCH2CH3
(c)
HC
C
CH3
+ ?
→
Br
H
C
C
Br
CH3
OH
(d)
?
+
→[H]
CH3
CH
CH
CH3
CH3
O
(e)
?   +   ?  →  CH3CH2COCH2CH2CH2CH3
(f)
?
+
→[H]
OH
(g)
? +
+
?
→[O]
→[O]
?
+
→[O]
→
(h)
?
H2SO4
∆
+ H2O
O
OH
out a condensation reaction to produce an ester
called ethyl ethanoate. In this chapter, you
learned about the reverse reaction: hydrolysis.
(a) Write a balanced chemical equation,
showing the reactants and the products
of the hydrolysis of ethyl ethanoate.
(b) Write a step-by-step procedure to carry out
the acid hydrolysis of ethyl ethanoate.
(c) List the materials and equipment you would
need to carry out this reaction.
24. At the beginning of section 2.2, you learned
about Tollen’s reagent. Tollen’s reagent oxidizes
aldehydes to produce the salt of a carboxylic
acid. How does this reagent work as a test to
distinguish between aldehydes and ketones?
25. One type of condensation reaction (which
you did not study in this chapter) takes place
when an acid, usually H2SO4, is added to an
alcohol at temperatures that are lower than the
temperatures for an elimination reaction. In
this type of condensation reaction, two alcohol
molecules combine to form an ether. A water
molecule is eliminated as a second product of
the reaction.
(a) Write a chemical equation to show the
condensation reaction of ethanol to produce
ethoxyethane.
Chapter 2  Reactions of Organic Compounds • MHR 107
(b) Classify this condensation reaction as an
(b) What are some common examples of
addition reaction, a substitution reaction,
or an elimination reaction. Explain your
answer.
(c) A different reaction occurs if the acid HCl is
used instead of H2SO4. Name this type of
reaction, and write the equation for it.
Communication
26. Use a molecular model kit to build an example
of a DNA nucleotide monomer. Join your
nucleotide to your classmates’ nucleotides
to build a short strand of DNA.
27. Make a list of ﬁve materials or substances you
use every day that are made from organic com-
pounds. Write a paragraph that describes how
your life would be different without these ﬁve
materials or substances.
28. How has organic chemistry helped to solve the
problems caused by the use of the following
substances?
(a) leaded gasoline
(b) CFCs
Making Connections
29. Suppose that the Canadian government
proposed a $3 million grant to scientists who
are working on the development of synthetic
pesticides. Would you support this grant?
Write a brief paragraph that explains your
point of view.
30. Styrofoam™ “clamshells” were used for
packaging fast food until a few years ago.
Today, large fast food corporations use paper
packaging instead. Why has Styrofoam™
use been reduced? What problems does this
product cause? Research Styrofoam™ (made
from a polymer called polystyrene) to answer
these questions.
31. Do you think Canada should cut back on the
manufacture and use of synthetic polymers?
Write a brief paragraph that explains your point
of view. Include at least three good reasons to
back up your point of view. If necessary,
research the information you need.
32. Steroids are one type of lipid. Research
answers to the following questions.
(a) What is the structure of a steroid?
108 MHR • Unit 1  Organic Chemistry
steroids? How are steroids used in medicine?
(c) How are steroids misused in sports?
33. Muscle-building athletes sometimes drink
beverages that contain amino acids.
(a) Why might this type of drink help to
build muscles?
(b) Research the beneﬁts and risks of this type
of drink.
34. Early settlers in Canada often made their own
soap using animal fats and lye.
(a) What type of chemical would you expect lye
to be? Explain your reasoning.
(b) Use a reference book or dictionary to ﬁnd the
chemical name for lye.
(c) Look through books about early pioneer life
to ﬁnd an early recipe for making soap.
(d) Use the recipe you found to write a full
laboratory procedure for making soap
like the early settlers did. Include a list
of materials and a diagram, if necessary.
Answers to Practice Problems and Short Answers to
Section Review Questions
Practice Problems: 1.(a) substitution (b) addition
(c) elimination  2.(a) oxidation (b) reduction (c) reduction
3.(a) addition/reduction (b) condensation/substitution
4.(a) addition (b) oxidation  5. 3-ethyl-3-heptanol
6.(a) 1-bromohexane (minor), 2-bromohexane (major)
(b) 2-methyl-2-pentanol (major), 2-methyl-3-pentanol
(minor)  8.(a) propene + hydrochloric acid
(b) ethene + bromine (c) 3-methyl-2-pentene,
2-ethyl-1-butene (d) hydrogen gas  9.(a) substitution
(b) oxidation (c) substitution (d) elimination  11. (a) elimination
(b) oxidation (c) substitution (d) substitution (e) oxidation
(f) substitution  12.(a) 1-butene + water (b) pentanal,
pentanoic acid (c) 2-bromo-3-methylbutane + water
(d) 2-methyl-1-propanol + NaBr (e) butanone
(f) chlorocyclohexane + water  13. no, because tertiary
alcohols cannot be oxidized.  14.(a) reduction (b) reduction
(c) reduction (d) esteriﬁcation (e) hydrolysis
15.(a) cyclobutanone, cyclobutanol; 2,2,4,4-tetramethyl-3-
pentanone, 2,2,4,4-tetramethyl-3-pentanol  16.(a) hexanoic
acid (b) 1-octanol (c) methyl propanoate + water
(d) 1-propanol + ethanoic acid (e) 3-hexanol (f) 2-propyl
(or isopropyl) 3-methylpentanoate  17.(a) 2-methylbutanal
(b) 1-pentanol, pentanal (c) 1-propanol, 3-methylhexanoic
acid  18. polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA)
19.(a) condensation (b) addition (c) condensation
21.(a) addition (b) condensation; nylon
(c) condensation; polyester (d) condensation; polyester
Section Review: 2.1: 1.(a) addition (b) elimination
(c) substitution (d) substitution  2.(a) oxidation (b) reduction
(c) reduction (d) oxidation (e) reduction  3.(b) hydrolysis
2.2: 1.(a) elimination (b) addition (c) oxidation
(d) reduction or addition (e) substitution (f) substitution
(g) condensation  2.(a) 2,3-dibromobutane
(b) 1-chlorobutane (minor) + 2-chlorobutane (major)
(c) 1-hexene + water (d) 3,3-dimethyl-1-butene + HBr
3.(a) bromobenzene (b) 1-bromopentane + water
4.(a) 2-pentanone (b) propanoic acid (c) 2,3-dimethylbutanal
(d) ethane (e) 3-pentanol (f) 1-butene, butane (g) 2-ethyl-3,4-
dimethyl-1-octanol  5.(a) 2-propyl propanoate (b) cyclopen-
tene (c) methanoic acid, 2-butanol (d) cyclohexanol
(e) N-ethyl heptanamide  6.(b) 2-bromo-4-methylpentane
7.(a), (c), and (d) 2.3: 1.(a) protein, starch, nucleic acid
(b) insulin, amylose, DNA (c) amino acid, monosaccharide
(glucose), nucleotide  2.(a) addition (b) condensation
3.(a) addition polymerization (b) condensation polymeriza-
tion (c) condensation polymerization  5.(a) amino acid
(b) monosaccharide (c) amino acid (d) lipid (e) disaccharide
Chapter 2  Reactions of Organic Compounds • MHR 109
U N I T   1   An  Issue  to  Analyze
Current Issues
Related to Organic
Chemistry
Background
Have you ever heard the saying “necessity is the
mother of invention”? Almost all new products are
developed to meet a need. As you have seen in this
unit, however, new products carry risks as well as
beneﬁts. Often, the development of a new product is
opposed by groups of people who are concerned
with possible risks.
There may be several points of view about any
scientiﬁc development. These points of view are
inﬂuenced by various factors such as the economy,
society, and politics.
In this unit issue, you will explore the develop-
ment of new products through organic chemistry.
You will choose one issue from the list below, and
research the different points of view. Then you will
present your ﬁndings, and your own point of view,
to your class.
• Can biofuel be used to replace petroleum-based
fuels? Biofuel can be made from biological
materials, such as plants and animal fats.
Biodiesel and ethanol are the two most common
biological fuels. As part of your research, ﬁnd
out what biofuel is used for. Think about factors
that may be holding back the sale of biofuel on
the Canadian market.
• Are Canadian processes for approving new phar-
maceutical drugs adequate, too extensive, or not
extensive enough? Some Canadians complain
about the long waiting period for a new foreign
drug to be approved in Canada. Why is there a
long waiting period? What testing processes are
needed for approval of a new drug in Canada?
• Why are some drugs so expensive? The
Canadian government recently increased its drug
patents from 17 years to 20 years. This should
help drug companies make sufﬁcient proﬁts to
cover the enormous costs of developing and test-
ing new drugs. Find out about the costs and pro-
cedures that are involved in developing and test-
ing new drugs. Who ﬁnances drug research? Is it
fair for drug companies to hold patents? What
happens when these patents are not honoured?
110 MHR • Unit 1  Organic Chemistry
• Should all plastics that are made in the future
be biodegradable? Biopolymers, such as pro-
teins and starches, are used to produce one type
of biodegradable plastic. Find out more about
biodegradable plastics. How are they made, and
how do they break down? What are the risks
and beneﬁts?
• Are food additives necessary? Should they be
regulated more closely? Almost all processed
foods contain food additives. Choose three
or more food additives, not including any
compounds that you may have researched in
Chapter 2. Research the uses, structures, and
purposes of the food additives you have chosen.
• Decide on a different current issue to research
and analyze. If you want to research a different
issue, have your teacher approve your plan
before you begin.
Plan and Present
1
Choose an issue to research.
2
Who is involved in the issue? Research and
report on the different points of view of action
groups, corporations, and government groups.
Ensure that your research covers a wide range of
sources and resources. Some possible contacts
are given below:
• environmental groups, which often provide
one strong point of view on an issue
• research scientists at universities, who may
present information on the development of
a technology
• Environment Canada and other Canadian
government agencies, which can usually
provide scientiﬁcally sound information on
a range of topics
3
4
5
6
Find out general public opinion on the issue by
taking a survey in your community.
Decide on your own point of view, and provide
information to back up your opinion.
When researching, consider the following
question: Does everyone who is involved in the
issue have a good understanding of the related
science? If your answer is no, provide speciﬁc
proof to back up your opinion. For example,
include quotations from your sources, where
applicable. Could the issue be resolved by
providing factual information? Explain.
Prepare a presentation for your class. Your
presentation can take the form of a pamphlet,
an illustrated research report, a poster, an
oral or multimedia presentation, a video,
a web page, or another creative method that
has been approved by your teacher. Include the
following information:
• a description of the factors or needs that led
to the development of the process, technology,
or product you are analyzing
• structures and equations for any speciﬁc organic
compounds and reactions that relate to the issue
• a list of the beneﬁts and risks that are
involved in the issue
• a description of the various points of view on
the issue, along with your own point of view
• a list of groups or people who might beneﬁt
from the process, technology, or product
• a list of groups or people who might beneﬁt if
the process, technology, or product was
stopped or changed
• a list of government and/or industry inﬂuences
(Who ﬁnanced the research? Have any laws or
bills been passed to regulate the development
of the process, technology, or product?)
Evaluate the Results
1
Take notes on the presentations of other mem-
bers of your class. If you have a class debate,
take notes on the various points of view.
2
What did you learn? Has your point of view on
any issue changed? If so, how?
Assessment
After you have explored this issue, answer the following
questions to assess your work.
(cid:2) Was your analysis scientiﬁcally accurate? Was it
complete? Was it objective?
(cid:2) Was your explanation of the related science clear
and concise?
(cid:2) Did you use at least three primary research
sources? Did you reference these sources in your
presentation or report?
(cid:2) Did you include interesting or unusual information?
(cid:2) Did you consider all points of view in your
presentation?
(cid:2) Did your research inﬂuence the opinions of others
in your class?
Web
L I N K
www.mcgrawhill.ca/links/chemistry12
Go to the web site above, and click on Web Links to ﬁnd
appropriate sites related to this unit issue.
Unit 1 An Issue to Analyze • MHR 111
Review
Knowledge/Understanding
7. The compound CH3CH(CH3)CH2CH2OH has the
Multiple Choice
In your notebook, write the letter for the best
answer to each question.
1. Carbon atoms can bond with each other to form
(a) single bonds only
(b) double bonds only
(c) single and double bonds
(d) single, double, and triple bonds
(e) single, double, triple, and quadruple bonds
2. The three-dimensional shape around a single-
bonded carbon atom is
(a) linear
(b) trigonal planar
(c) tetrahedral
(d) pyramidal
(e) bent
3. The length of a carbon-carbon bond in a
benzene molecule is
(a) halfway between a single bond and a
double bond
(b) halfway between a double bond and a
triple bond
(c) the same as a single bond
(d) the same as a double bond
(e) the same as a triple bond
4. The functional group of an alcohol is
(a) (cid:2)OH
(b) (cid:2)C(cid:3)C(cid:2)
(c) (cid:2)NR2
(d) (cid:2)C(O)NR2
(e) (cid:2)OR
5. The functional group of an amide is
(a) (cid:2)OH
(b) (cid:2)C(cid:3)C(cid:2)
(c) (cid:2)NR2
(d) (cid:2)C(O)NR2
(e) (cid:2)OR
6. The compound NH2CH2CH2CH3 has the IUPAC
name
(a) methanamine
(b) ethanamine
(c) propanamine
(d) butanamine
(e) butanamide
112 MHR • Unit 1  Organic Chemistry
IUPAC name
(a) 1-pentanol
(b) 1-butanol
(c) 2-methyl-4-butanol
(d) 3-methyl-1-butanol
(e) 3-methyl-1-pentanol
8. The compound CH3CH2CH2C(O)CH2CH3 has
the IUPAC name
(a) ethoxypentane
(b) ethoxypropane
(c) ethyl butanoate
(d) 3-pentanone
(e) 3-hexanone
9. CH3CH2C(CH3)2CH2CH2CH2COOH has the
IUPAC name
(a) 5,5-dimethylheptanoic acid
(b) 3,3-dimethylheptanoic acid
(c) 4,4-dimethylheptanoic acid
(d) 2,2-dimethylheptanoic acid
(e) 3,3-dimethyl heptanoate
10. The oxidation of pentanal produces
(a) pentanol
(b) pentanal
(c) pentanoic acid
(d) pentanamine
(e) pentanamide
11. The esteriﬁcation of methanol and butanoic
acid produces
(a) 1-methyl butanoic acid
(b) 4-methyl butanoic acid
(c) butyl methanoate
(d) methyl butanoate
(e) butanol and methanoic acid
12. The polymerization of propene, CH3CH(cid:3)CH2,
can be classiﬁed as
(a) a hydrolysis reaction
(b) an elimination reaction
(c) a substitution reaction
(d) a condensation reaction
(e) an addition reaction
13. Ketones are reduced to produce
(a) primary alcohols
(b) secondary alcohols
(c) tertiary alcohols
(d) aldehydes
(e) carboxylic acids
14. Choose the most correct deﬁnition.
(a) Organic compounds are based on carbon,
and they usually contain carbon-nitrogen
and carbon-silicon bonds.
(b) Organic compounds are based on nitrogen,
and they usually contain carbon-nitrogen
and carbon-hydrogen bonds.
(c) Organic compounds are based on carbon,
and they usually contain carbon-hydrogen
and carbon-carbon bonds.
(d) Organic compounds are based on hydrogen,
and they usually contain carbon-hydrogen
and carbon-oxygen bonds.
(e) Organic compounds are based on oxygen,
and they usually contain carbon-oxygen and
carbon-carbon bonds.
15. Which statement is not correct?
(a) A C(cid:2)O bond is polar.
(b) An N(cid:2)H bond is polar.
(c) An O(cid:2)H bond is polar.
(d) A C(cid:2)C bond is polar.
(e) A C(cid:2)Cl bond is polar.
16. Which description of an addition reaction
is accurate?
(a) Two molecules are combined, and a small
molecule, such as water, is produced as a
second product.
(b) A hydrogen atom or functional group is
replaced with a different functional group.
(c) Atoms are added to a double or triple
carbon-carbon bond.
(d) A double carbon-carbon bond is formed
when atoms are removed from a molecule.
(e) Carbon atoms form more bonds to oxygen or
less bonds to hydrogen.
Short Answer
In your notebook, write a sentence or a short
paragraph to answer each question.
17. Is it accurate to say that most healthy foods are
chemical-free? Explain your answer.
18. What is the difference between an amide and
an amine? Use examples to explain your
answer.
19. Do hydrocarbons have functional groups? Use
examples to explain your answer.
20. Are the boiling points of carboxylic acids higher
or lower than the boiling points of alcohols?
Explain your answer.
21. A primary amine can form intermolecular
hydrogen bonds, but a tertiary amine cannot.
Explain this statement.
22. What happens when an oxidizing agent, such as
potassium permanganate, is added to a tertiary
alcohol? Explain.
23. What happens when an oxidizing agent is
added to a secondary alcohol? Explain.
24. What is the common name for ethanol?
25. What is the IUPAC name for acetic acid?
26. The aldehyde CH3CH2CHO is named propanal,
rather than 1-propanal. Why is the position
number unnecessary?
27. Name and draw the product of the oxidation
of 3-ethyl-4-methyl-1-hexanol. If this product
is oxidized further, what second product will
be formed?
Inquiry
28. Write the IUPAC name for each compound.
(a) CH3CH2CH2COOH
(b) CH3OH
(c) CH3CH2CH2CH2COOCH3
(d) CH3CH2C(O)CH3
(e) CH3CH2NHCH3
(f) CH3CH2CH(CH3)CH(CH3)CH2CH2CHO
29. Give a common name for each compound.
(a) methanol
(b) 2-propanol
(c) ethoxyethane
30. Write the IUPAC name for each compound.
CH2CH3
(a)
CH3
CH2
CH
CH
CH
CH2
CH3
(b)
CH3
O
CH2
CH2
CH3
(c)
H2N
CH2
CH2
CH
CH3
OH
(d)
CH2CH3
Unit 1 Review • MHR 113
(e)
O
CH3
CH2
OC
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH3
31. Name each compound.
(a)
O
OH
(b)
CH3
CH2
NH
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH3
(c)
(d)
CH3
CH2
CH2
O
C
NH2
32. What is wrong with the following names? Use
each incorrect name to draw a structure. Then
correctly rename the structure you have drawn.
(a) 2-propyl-4-pentanone
(b) 3,3-trimethylhexane
(c) 2,5-octanol
33. Imagine that you dip one ﬁnger into a beaker
of rubbing alcohol and another ﬁnger into a
beaker of water. When you take your ﬁngers out
of the beakers, you observe that one ﬁnger feels
colder than the other. Which ﬁnger feels colder,
and why?
34. You are given two beakers. One contains
1-pentanol, and the other contains pentanoic
acid. Describe the materials you would need
to distinguish between the two liquids, in a
laboratory investigation.
(e)
(f)
O
OH
CH2CH3
CH3
O
CH3
CH3
(g)
CH
CH2
CH2
C
CH2
C
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3CH2
(h)
CH3
(i)
CH3 N
O
C
CH3
CH2CH3
CH3
CH3
(j)
CH3
O
114 MHR • Unit 1  Organic Chemistry
35. You are given three test tubes that contain
colourless liquids. One test tube contains
benzene, another contains ethanol, and the
third contains 2,4-hexadiene. Design a
procedure that will tell you the contents
of each test tube. Describe your expected
observations.
procedure in a lab. Benzene is carcinogenic.
Do not try your
CAUTION
36. Predict the product(s) of each reaction.
(a) CH3CH2CH(cid:3)CHCH3 (cid:4) I2 →
(b) CH3CH2CH2OH (cid:4) HCl →
(c) CH3CH(CH3)CHO (cid:4) [O] →
(d) 1-propanol (cid:4) methanoic acid →
H2SO4
∆
(e) 1-heptanol
37. Predict the product(s) of each reaction.
(a) CH2(cid:3)CHCH3 + H2O →
(b) propyl decanoate (cid:4) water →
(c) CH3CH(CH3)CH2CH2Br (cid:4) H2O →
(d) CH3CH(OH)CH3 (cid:4) KMnO4 →
(e) CH2(cid:3)CHCH2CH2OH (cid:4) 2HCI →
38. Draw and name the missing reactant(s) in each
reaction.
(a) ? (cid:4) HBr → CH2(cid:3)CHBr
(b) ? + H2O → CH3CH2CH2CH(CH3)CH2OH +
(c) ? + ? → butyl heptanoate (cid:4) H2O
(d) ? + [H] → 2-methylpropanal
(e) ? + [O] → 3-ethyl-4,4-dimethyl-2-pentanone
HCl
Communication
39. Draw a structural diagram for each compound.
(a) methanamine
(b) 2-octanol
(c) 1,2-dichlorobutane
(d) pentanamide
(e) methoxynonane
40. Draw a structural diagram for each compound.
(a) propyl propanoate
(b) 2,2,4,5-tetramethylheptanal
(c) 2-methylpropanoic acid
(d) N-ethyl-N-methyl butanamide
(e) 4-ethyl-3,3-dimethyl-2-heptanone
41. Prepare a poster that describes condensation
polymerization to students who do not take
science. Use the polymerization of Nylon-6
as an example. Include information on the
practical uses of Nylon-6. What natural product
was nylon designed to replace? When nylon
was ﬁrst invented in the 1930s, what consumer
products were made from it? What part did
nylon play in World War II?
42. Draw a concept web that summarizes what you
have learned about organic chemistry. Include
the following topics:
• functional groups
• physical properties of organic compounds
• reactivity of organic compounds
• polymers, both natural and synthetic
• biological molecules and their functions
• practical applications of organic chemistry
• risks and beneﬁts of organic chemistry
43. In your opinion, are the risks of manufacturing
and using pesticides greater or less than the
beneﬁts? Write a short (half-page) essay that
explains your point of view. Include speciﬁc
examples to back up your argument. (You may
want to carry out further research on pesticides,
and the effects of pesticides, before writing
your essay.)
44. How are organic compounds important to your
health and lifestyle? Write a short paragraph
that describes any beneﬁts you obtain from
organic compounds.
45. Choose one of the biological molecules
described in Chapter 2. Research this molecule
until you discover three interesting facts about
it, which you did not know before. Share your
ﬁndings with your class.
Making Connections
46. When was plastic cling wrap ﬁrst invented?
What problem was it created to solve? Use the
Internet or other resources to ﬁnd the answers
to these questions.
47. Organic pollutants can build up in living things
by a process called bioaccumulation.
(a) Use the Internet to research bioaccumulation.
Where do most organic pollutants accumulate
in the body of an animal?
(b) Explain your answer to the previous
question, using your knowledge of the
solubility of organic compounds.
48. Most dyes are organic compounds. Before
artiﬁcial dyes were invented, people prepared
natural dyes from roots, berries, leaves, and
insects.
(a) Research some dyes used in the past and in
the present. Find the chemical structure of
each dye. Identify the functional group(s) in
each dye.
(b) How do artiﬁcial dyes differ from natural
dyes? How have artiﬁcial dyes affected the
fashion industry?
C O U R S E
C H A L L E N G E
The Chemistry of Human Health
Think about these questions as you plan for your
Chemistry Course Challenge.
• How can you identify the family to which an
organic compound belongs?
• What reactions do each functional group
commonly undergo?
Unit 1 Review • MHR 115
Structure and
Properties
In 1958, an astonished television
audience watched as Dr. Harry
Coover used a tiny drop of a
substance called cyanoacrylate to
lift a game show host off the ground.
Cyanoacrylate is an amazingly
powerful adhesive. This stunt
helped launch the commercial
career of superglue, now used for
everything from building circuit
boards to sealing human tissue in
surgery.
Superglue is just one example
of an astounding variety of com-
pounds with useful properties.
Whether synthesized by design or
discovered by trial and error, each
new compound does more than
provide a potentially useful product.
It also contributes to scientists’
understanding of the relationship
between structure at the molecular
level and properties at the
macroscopic level.
In this unit, you will investigate
the structure and properties of
atoms, ions, and molecules, and the
natural and synthetic products that
result from their interactions.
U N I T   2   C O N T E N T S
CHAPTER  3
Atoms, Electrons, and Periodic
Trends
CHAPTER  4
Structure and Properties
of Substances
UNIT 2 OVERALL  EXPECTATIONS
What is the quantum
mechanical model of the atom,
and how does a understanding
of atomic structure enable
chemists to explain the
properties of substances and
their chemical bonding?
How do the properties of
liquids and solids compare,
and how can you use bonding
theory to predict the shape of
simple molecules?
Which technologies have
advanced our understanding
of atomic and molecular
theory, and how have those
theories contributed to
the development of other
technologies and products?
Unit Project Prep
Look ahead to the project at the
end of Unit 2. Plan in advance for
the challenge by making a list of
skills and information you will need
as you progress through the unit.
116
Atoms, Electrons, and
Periodic Trends
The northern lights, also called the aurora borealis, are a ﬂeeting feature
of the night sky in northern parts of the world. For centuries, people who
saw the shimmering, dancing sheets of coloured lights were awed by the
phenomenon, and tried to explain it. Inuit that lived near Hudson’s Bay
told that the lights were caused by torches held by spirits to lead souls of
the dead to the afterlife. In Greenland and Labrador, people thought the
lights could help predict the weather. In Europe in the Middle Ages, their
appearance was an omen of impending war or plague.
Today, scientists explain the northern lights as resulting from streams
of protons and electrons—plasma—emanating from the Sun. When the
electrons from the plasma interact with gaseous atoms in Earth’s upper
atmosphere, the atoms emit coloured light.
Nineteenth-century atomic theory could not explain why the aurora
exhibits a limited range of speciﬁc wavelengths, rather than the full
visible spectrum. Early in the twentieth century, however, scientists
developed a revolutionary new model of the atom. This model, and the
theory that supports it, helped to account for many puzzling phenomena
that the existing atomic theory had failed to explain. Among these
phenomena are the characteristic colours of the northern lights.
In this chapter, you will learn about the developments that led to the
modern model of the atom. You will also learn about the model itself and
how it relates to periodic trends and the periodic table.
The green colours in the northern lights come
from the interaction of accelerated electrons
with oxygen atoms. The red colours usually
come from nitrogen atoms. How do these
interactions lead to atoms of different elements
emitting light with characteristic wavelengths?
C h a p t e r   P r e v i e w
3.1
3.2
3.3
The Nuclear Atomic
Model
The Quantum
Mechanical Model
of the Atom
Electron
Conﬁgurations and
Periodic Trends
P r e r e q u i s i t e
C o n c e p t s   a n d   S k i l l s
Before you begin this chapter,
review the following concepts
and skills:
(cid:2) identifying subatomic
particles and their
properties (from previous
studies)
(cid:2) describing the structure
and organization of the
periodic table (from
previous studies)
(cid:2) explaining periodic trends
for properties such as
atomic radius, ﬁrst
ionization energy, and
electron afﬁnity (from
previous studies)
118 MHR • Unit 2  Structure and Properties
The Nuclear Atomic Model
Toward the close of the nineteenth century, chemists had two invaluable
conceptual tools to aid them in their understanding of matter. The ﬁrst
was John Dalton’s atomic theory, which you have studied intensively in
previous chemistry courses. Dalton’s atomic theory, ﬁrst published in
1809, provided chemists with a framework for describing and explaining
the behaviour of matter during chemical reactions. As you can see in
Figure 3.1, the model of the atom that resulted from this theory was
very simple.
The second conceptual tool was Dmitri Mendeleev’s periodic table,
which listed the known elements in order of increasing atomic mass. The
resulting organizational chart arranged elements so that those with similar
chemical properties were grouped together in the same column.
As you know, Dalton’s atomic theory no longer applies in its original
form, and Mendeleev’s periodic table has undergone many changes. For
example, scientists later discovered that atoms are not the most basic unit
of matter because they are divisible. As well, the modern periodic table
lists the elements in order of their atomic number, not their atomic mass.
Of course, it also includes elements that had not been discovered in
Mendeleev’s time. Even so, in modiﬁed form, both of these inventions are
still studied and used today in every chemistry course around the world.
When Mendeleev invented the periodic table, he was well-acquainted
with Dalton’s atomic theory. He knew nothing, however, about subatomic
particles, and especially the electron, which is the foundation for the
modern periodic table’s distinctive shape. Because the original periodic
table developed out of experimental observations, chemists did not need
an understanding of atomic structure to develop it. (As you will see in
section 3.3, however, the periodic table easily accommodates details about
atomic structure. In fact, you will learn that the modern periodic table’s
distinctive design is a natural consequence of atomic structure.)
The First Step Toward the Modern Atomic Model
Chemists needed Dalton’s atomic theory to advance their understanding
of matter and its behaviour during chemical reactions. His atomic model,
however, was inadequate for explaining the behaviour of substances.
For example, Dalton designed a system of symbols to show how atoms
combine to form other substances. Figure 3.2 on the next page shows
several of these symbols. As you will no doubt notice, Dalton correctly
predicted the formulas for carbon dioxide and sulfur trioxide, but ran into
serious trouble with water, ammonia, and methane. Dalton’s attempt at
molecular modelling highlights a crucial limitation with his atomic
model. Chemists could not use it to explain why atoms of elements
combine in the ratios in which they do. This inability did not prevent
chemists from pursuing their studies. It did, however, suggest the need
for a more comprehensive atomic model.
3.1
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
(cid:2) describe and explain the
experimental observations
that led to Rutherford’s
nuclear model of the atom
(cid:2) describe and explain the
modiﬁcations that Niels Bohr
made to the nuclear model
of the atom
(cid:2) distinguish between a
quantized model of the atom
and the model proposed by
Rutherford
(cid:2) communicate your under-
standing of the following
terms: nuclear model, emis-
sion spectrum, absorption
spectrum, quantum, photons
In your notebook, list the
main ideas in Dalton’s atomic
theory. Explain how this theory
enabled chemists to explain
the three mass laws: the law
of conservation of mass,
the law of deﬁnite proportions,
and the law of multiple
proportions.
The model of the
Figure 3.1
atom in 1809. The atom, as Dalton
pictured it, was a tiny, solid,
indestructible sphere.
Chapter 3  Atoms, Electrons, and Periodic Trends • MHR 119
hydrogen
nitrogen
sulfur
water
carbon
ammonia
oxygen
methane
carbon dioxide
sulfur trioxide
Figure 3.2
Examples of Dalton’s system of symbols for atoms and molecules
The Discovery of the Electron Requires a New Atomic Model
In 1897, Dalton’s idea of an indivisible atom was shattered with a startling
announcement. A British scientist, Joseph John Thomson, had discovered
the existence of a negatively charged particle with mass less than  1
that of a hydrogen atom. This particle was, of course, the electron.
(Later calculations showed that the mass of an electron is  1
1837 that
of a hydrogen atom.) It took several years for chemists to consider the
consequences of this discovery. They realized that if atoms contain
electrons, atoms must also contain a positive charge of some kind to
balance the negative charge. The atomic model that Thomson eventually
proposed is shown in Figure 3.3. Keep in mind that scientists had not
yet discovered the proton. Therefore, in this model, the entire sphere
carries a uniform, positive charge.
1000
electrons
C H E M
FA C T
Scientists initially described
radioactivity solely in terms
of radiation. The idea of
radioactive particles ﬁrst
appeared around the turn of
the twentieth century. In 1909,
Ernest Rutherford reported
conﬁdently that the alpha
particle was, in fact, a helium
nucleus, 4
2He, with a 2+
charge. Scientists still had
not discovered the proton
by this time, so the nature of
the helium nucleus (or any
other atomic nucleus) was
still unknown. In 1919, the
existence of the proton was
conﬁrmed experimentally
by, appropriately enough,
Rutherford himself.
positively charged sphere
The atomic model in 1903. Thomson viewed the atom as a positively
Figure 3.3
charged sphere embedded with sufﬁcient numbers of electrons to balance (neutralize)
the total charge.
Rutherford’s Nuclear Model of the Atom
In the last four years of the nineteenth century, scientists in France —
notably Henri Becquerel and Marie and Pierre Curie—discovered that
certain elements are radioactive. That is, their atoms naturally emit
positively charged particles (alpha particles), negatively charged particles
(beta particles), and energy (gamma radiation).
Working in his laboratory at Montreal’s McGill University, Ernest
Rutherford studied the chemistry of radioactive elements intensively from
1898 to 1907. His efforts would lead to a Nobel Prize in Chemistry in
1908. Greater achievements lay ahead, however.
120 MHR • Unit 2  Structure and Properties
In 1909, two of Rutherford’s students reported observations that cast
doubts on Thomson’s atomic model. As part of ongoing investigations into
the nature and properties of radioactive emissions, they aimed alpha (α)
particles at extremely thin metal foils. A small number of the alpha parti-
cles, about one in every 8000, were deﬂected signiﬁcantly by the atoms
that made up the metal foils. These observations were inconsistent with
Thomson’s atomic model. The researchers expected the alpha particles
to pass through the metal atoms with, at most, deﬂections averaging  1
200
of a degree. Therefore, deﬂections of 90˚ and more strained the credibility
of Thomson’s model. Rutherford encouraged further investigation. Either
the observations and data were ﬂawed, or Thomson’s atomic model was.
As you may recall from earlier studies, the ﬂaw lay in Thomson’s
model. In 1911, Rutherford published the results of the now-famous
gold-foil experiment, shown in Figure 3.4. On the basis of this experi-
ment, Rutherford suggested that the deﬂections he and his students
observed were caused by an encounter between an alpha particle and
an intense electric ﬁeld at the centre of the atom.
A
Hypothesis: Expected result
based on Thomson’s model
incoming
α particles
little or no
deflection
cross-section of gold foil
showing Thomson’s atoms
5
Major deflections
are observed rarely
B
Experiment
C
Actual Result
1
Radioactive sample emits
beam of α particles
2 Beam of α particles
meets gold foil
incoming
α particles
major
deflection
minor
deflection
gold foil
cross-section of gold foil
composed of atoms with
tiny, massive nucleus
4
Minor deflections (exaggerated here)
are observed occasionally
3
Flashes of light observed when α
particles strike screen show that
most are transmited with little
or no deflection
The hypothesis, experiment, and results of Rutherford’s gold foil experiment.
Figure 3.4
The experimental hypothesis and design owed much to the contributions of Rutherford’s
students, Hans Geiger (of Geiger-counter fame) and Ernest Marsden.
Rutherford performed several calculations that led him to an inescapable
conclusion: the atom is made up mainly of empty space, with a small,
massive region of concentrated charge at the centre. Soon afterward, the
charge on this central region was determined to be positive, and was
named the atomic nucleus. Because Rutherford’s atomic model, shown
in Figure 3.5 on the next page, pictures electrons in motion around an
atomic nucleus, chemists often call this the nuclear model of the atom.
You may also see it referred to as a planetary model because the electrons
resemble the planets in motion around a central body.
Chapter 3  Atoms, Electrons, and Periodic Trends • MHR 121
C H E M
FA C T
Contrary to common belief,
Rutherford’s 1911 paper on the
discovery of the nucleus does
not associate the nucleus with
a positive charge. In fact,
Rutherford acknowledged that
the results of his experiment
were independent of the sign
of the charge. He suggested
that the charge of the nucleus,
as well as other questions
raised by his paper, were sub-
jects for later investigation.
Sometime between 1911 and
1913, someone identiﬁed the
charge on the nucleus as
positive. Whether or not this
person was Rutherford is
not clear.
Technology
L I N K
Chemists used spectral
analysis during the nineteenth
century to analyze substances
and, sometimes, to discover
new elements. Another
common technique for analyz-
ing substances, often used in
conjunction with spectral
analysis is a ﬂame test. One of
the foremost practitioners of
this technique was a chemist
named Robert Bunsen. Find
out why he invented his
famous burner. Carry on your
research to investigate other
ways that chemists use
spectral analysis to examine
the composition of substances.
Select an appropriate medium
to report your ﬁndings.
nucleus (later determined
to be positively charged)
electrons around nucleus
The atomic model in 1911. A Japanese scientist, Hantaro Nagaoka, proposed a
Figure 3.5
similar, disk-shaped model with electrons orbiting a positively charged nucleus, in 1904.
Rutherford notes in his 1911 paper that his results would be the same if Nagaoka’s model
were correct.
Prelude to a New Atomic Model
Rutherford’s atomic model solved problems inherent in Thomson’s
atomic model, but it also raised others. For example, an atomic nucleus
composed entirely of positive charges should ﬂy apart due to electrostatic
forces of repulsion. Furthermore, Rutherford’s nuclear atom could not
adequately explain the total mass of an atom. The discovery of the
neutron, in 1932, eventually helped to settle these questions.
There was a more signiﬁcant problem, however. Rutherford’s atomic
model seemed to contradict the laws of nineteenth-century physics.
According to these assumptions, an electron in motion around a central
body must continuously give off radiation. Consequently, one should be
able to observe a continuous spectrum (a “rainbow”) of light energy as the
electron gives off its radiation.
Because the electron should also lose energy as a result of this
radiation, the radius of its orbit should continuously decrease in size
until it spirals into the nucleus. This predicted annihilation of the atom
would occur in a fraction of a second. However, atoms were not seen to
destabilize as predicted by this model.
Nineteenth-century physics could not explain why Rutherford’s
model corresponded to a stable atom. The solution to this problem
marked a turning point in the history of chemistry and physics. To
appreciate the scope of the problem, and the impact of its eventual
solution, it is necessary to remain a short while longer in the nineteenth
century. In the following pages, you will examine a phenomenon that
scientists of the time could not explain.
The Problem of Atomic Spectra
You probably recall that visible light is part of a broader continuum
of energy called the electromagnetic spectrum. Figure 3.6 reviews the key
properties of the electromagnetic spectrum of energy.
122 MHR • Unit 2  Structure and Properties
A Despite differences in
wavelengths and frequency,
all electromagnetic radiation
travels at the same speed
in a vacuum: 3.00 × 10−8 m/s.
This value, the speed of light,
is a constant represented by
the symbol c.
−2
10
100
102
104
106
108
1010
1012
wavelength (nm)
gamma
ray
x-ray
ultra-
ultra-
-
violet
violet
rays
e
l
b
i
s
i
v
infrared
Infrared
microwave
radio frequency
1020
1018
1016
14
1014
1012
1012
1010
1010
108
106
104
−1)
frequency (s
400
500
600
700
750 nm
visible light region
frequency (ν) in s−1 (Hz)
higher
amplitude
(brighter)
lower
amplitude
(dimmer)
B The relationship between
frequency (symbol ν, measured
in Hz) and wavelength (symbol λ,
usually measured in nm or m,
depending on the energy). As
wavelength increases, frequency
decreases. As wavelength
decreases, frequency increases.
(Note that 1 Hz = 1 s−1. Note also
that the frequency symbol, ν,
is the Greek letter nu, not the
letter  v.)
1 second
wavelength
λ
λ
λ
4 s−1 (4 Hz)
8 s−1 (8 Hz)
16 s−1 (16 Hz)
wavelength, λ
C The amplitude (height) of a
wave represents its intensity.
A wave with a higher
amplitude has a greater
intensity (is brighter) than a
wave with a lower amplitude.
Figure 3.6
The electromagnetic spectrum and its properties
The visible portion of the electromagnetic spectrum is called a continuous
spectrum, because the component colours are indistinct. They appear
“smeared” together into a continuum of colour. According to nineteenth-
century physics, part of the energy emitted by electrons should be
observable as a continuous spectrum. This is not, however, the case.
Instead, when atoms absorb energy (for example, when they are exposed
to an electric current), you observe a pattern of discrete (distinct),
coloured lines separated by spaces of varying length. See Figure 3.7. You
can also observe this line spectrum for hydrogen, and for other atoms, in
Investigation 3-A.
400
500
600
750 nm
Figure 3.7
hydrogen atoms. No other atoms display this pattern of coloured lines.
The discrete, coloured lines of this spectrum are characteristic of
Chapter 3  Atoms, Electrons, and Periodic Trends • MHR 123
S K I L L   F O C U S
Analyzing and interpreting
Communicating results
Atomic Emission Spectra
(Teacher Demonstration)
When a high voltage current is passed through
a glass tube that contains hydrogen gas at low
pressure, the gas glows with a pinkish-purple
colour. If you observe this gas discharge tube
through a spectroscope or a diffraction grating,
you can see distinct, coloured lines. This type
of spectrum is called a line spectrum or an
emission spectrum. Chemists ﬁrst observed
spectra like this in the mid-1800s.
Question
Can the Rutherford model of the atom explain
the emission spectra of elements?
Predictions
The Rutherford model of the atom described
electrons as tiny masses in motion around a
nucleus. According to this model, excited atoms
should emit a continuous spectrum of light
energy as their electrons give off radiation. In
fact, according to this model, atoms should
continually radiate energy whether they are
excited or not. Read through the procedure and
predict whether your observations will support
or contradict the Rutherford model. Give reasons
for your answer.
Safety Precautions
• A very high voltage is required to operate the
gas discharge tubes. Do not come into contact
with the source while viewing the tubes.
• Do not work with the gas discharge tubes
yourself. Your teacher will demonstrate how
it works.
400
H
Materials
gas discharge tube apparatus (teacher use only)
low pressure hydrogen gas tube and tubes for
other available elements
spectroscope or diffraction grating
Procedure
1. Practise using the spectroscope or diffraction
grating by observing an incandescent light
bulb. Point the slit of the spectroscope toward
the bulb and move the spectroscope until you
can clearly see the spectrum.
2. Record the appearance of the spectrum from
the incandescent bulb.
3. Your teacher will set up the gas discharge
tube apparatus to demonstrate the emission
spectra of hydrogen and other elements.
4. Observe the hydrogen discharge tube, and
note its colour when high-voltage current is
applied to it.
5. With the lights dimmed, examine the
hydrogen emission spectrum with the
aid of a spectroscope or diffraction grating.
Make a careful sketch to record your
observations. Note in particular the colours
you see. Estimate their wavelengths.
(Use the ﬁgure below to help you estimate the
wavelengths.)
6. Follow steps 4 and 5 for the emission spectra
produced by other gas discharge tubes that
your teacher has available.
500
600
750 nm
124 MHR • Unit 2  Structure and Properties
Analysis
1. According to Rutherford’s model of the atom
and nineteenth-century physics, electrons
could emit or absorb any quantity of energy.
Conclusion
6. Reread your prediction and state whether
it was accurate or not. Explain your answer
in detail.
(a) Compare the spectrum you observed for
the incandescent bulb to the spectrum that
Rutherford’s model predicts for hydrogen.
(b) Compare the spectrum you observed for
hydrogen to the spectrum you observed for
the incandescent bulb. Do your observations
seem to support or contradict Rutherford’s
model? Explain your answer.
(c) How do you think Rutherford’s model
would have to be modiﬁed in order to
account for your observations?
2. How do you think the lines you observed in
the hydrogen emission spectrum relate to the
energy of the electrons in a hydrogen atom?
Include a diagram in your answer.
3. Compare the hydrogen emission spectrum
to the other spectra you observed. Why do
you think emission spectra are different for
different elements?
4. Why do you think that scientists initially
focused their attention on the hydrogen
emission spectrum rather than the emission
spectrum of another element?
5. Each element has a characteristic emission
spectrum. Why is it only possible to observe
the emission spectra of selected elements in
a high school laboratory?
Na
Applications
7. The emission spectrum of each element is
characteristic of that element. In other
words, it is a “ﬁngerprint” that can be used
to identify the element.
(a) Suggest reasons to explain why each
element has a distinct and characteristic
emission spectrum.
(b) Helium was discovered in the Sun before
it was discovered on Earth. How do you
think this was possible? Use print resources
or the Internet to help you answer the
question.
8. Examine the spectrum below. It is the
absorption spectrum for sodium. Absorption
spectra are produced when atoms absorb light
of speciﬁc wavelengths.
(a) If you examined the emission spectrum for
sodium in the laboratory, compare it to the
absorption spectrum for sodium. (If you
did not, look for a picture of the emission
spectrum for sodium in a book or on the
Internet.)
(b) In general, how do you think emission
spectra compare to absorption spectra?
(c) Instruments based on absorption
spectra are used extensively in analytical
chemistry. One such instrument is an
atomic absorption spectrophotometer. Use
print and electronic resources to ﬁnd out
how the instrument works, and for what
applications it is used.
Chapter 3  Atoms, Electrons, and Periodic Trends • MHR 125
electron orbits
The Bohr Model of the Atom
nucleus
The model of the atom
Figure 3.8
in 1913. Although Bohr pictured
the atom in three dimensions, it is
presented here, in two dimensions,
to simplify some of Bohr’s
revolutionary concepts.
Web
L I N K
www.mcgrawhill.ca/links/
chemistry12
The concept of quantization
enabled physicists to solve
problems that nineteenth-
century physics could not. One
of these involved the thermal
properties of solids when they
are heated to incandescence.
The other involved the induc-
tion of electrical current in
metals when they are exposed
to only speciﬁc frequencies of
electromagnetic radiation.
Use the Internet to investigate
the phenomena known as
blackbody radiation and the
photoelectric effect. Write a
brief report outlining the
nature of these phenomena,
why nineteenth-century
physics could not explain
them, and how the new idea
of quantization could. Go to
the web site above. Click on
Web Links to ﬁnd out where to
go next.
Scientists of the nineteenth century lacked the concepts necessary to
explain line spectra. Even in the ﬁrst decade of the twentieth century, a
suitable explanation proved elusive. This changed in 1913 when Niels
Bohr, a Danish physicist and student of Rutherford, proposed a new
model for the hydrogen atom. This model retained some of the features of
Rutherford’s model. More importantly, it was able to explain the line spec-
trum for hydrogen because it incorporated several new ideas about energy.
As you can see in Figure 3.8, Bohr’s atomic model pictures electrons in
orbit around a central nucleus. Unlike Rutherford’s model, however, in
which electrons may move anywhere within the volume of space around
the nucleus, Bohr’s model imposes certain restrictions.
The Bohr Atomic Model
1. The atom has only speciﬁc, allowable energy levels, called
stationary states. Each stationary state corresponds to the atom’s
electrons occupying ﬁxed, circular orbits around the nucleus.
2. While in one of its stationary states, atoms do not emit energy.
3. An atom changes stationary states by emitting or absorbing a
speciﬁc quantity of energy that is exactly equal to the difference
in energy between the two stationary states.
On what basis could Bohr make these claims? In 1900, a physicist named
Max Planck proposed an idea that was so revolutionary that he himself
was unwilling to accept its implications. Planck suggested that matter, at
the atomic level, can absorb or emit only discrete quantities of energy.
Each of these speciﬁc quantities is called a quantum of energy. In other
words, Planck said that the energy of an atom is quantized. Something
that is quantized can exist only in certain discrete amounts. It is not
continuous. In this sense, the rungs of a ladder are quantized, while the
smooth slope of a ramp is not. Unlike ladders and ramps, however, a
quantum is an extremely small “packet” of energy.
Although Planck said that the energy of matter is quantized, he con-
tinued to describe energy as travelling in the form of waves. He was, in
fact, unwilling to consider that energy might have particle-like properties.
In 1905, however, Albert Einstein was prepared to make just such an
assertion. Light, according to Einstein, is also quantized. It occurs as
quanta of electromagnetic energy that have particle-like properties. These
particle-like “packets” of energy were later called photons. In Einstein’s
view, light (and, by extension, all electromagnetic energy) travels in the
form of photons of energy. Light is emitted as photons of energy, and light
is absorbed as photons of energy.
How Bohr’s Atomic Model
Explains the Spectrum for Atomic Hydrogen
If you re-read the key points of Bohr’s atomic model above, you can see
that he is applying the new ideas of quanta in his model. Bohr proposed
that the energy that is emitted and absorbed by an atom must have
speciﬁc values. The change in energy when an electron moves to higher
or lower energy levels is not continuous. It is, rather, quantized.
126 MHR • Unit 2  Structure and Properties
Look again at the line spectrum for hydrogen shown in Figure 3.7.
The energy that is associated with the coloured lines in this spectrum
corresponds to the change in energy of an electron as it moves to higher
or lower energy levels. For example, when a hydrogen atom is exposed
to electrical current, or to another form of electromagnetic energy, its
electron absorbs photons of energy. The atom is now said to be in an
excited state. Another common way for atoms to become excited is
through atomic collisions. For example, when two hydrogen atoms
collide, some of the kinetic energy from one atom is transferred to the
other atom. The electron of the second hydrogen atom absorbs this energy
and is excited to a higher energy level.
When the electron of a hydrogen atom that has been excited to the
third energy level falls to the second energy level, it emits light of certain
energy. Speciﬁcally, an electron that makes a transition from the third
energy level to the second energy level emits a photon of red light with
a wavelength of 656 nm. Because line spectra result when atoms in an
excited state emit photons as they fall to a lower energy level, these
spectra are also called emission spectra.
Figure 3.9 shows the energy transitions that are responsible for the
coloured lines in hydrogen’s emission spectrum. Notice the use of the
symbol n to designate the allowed energy levels for the hydrogen atom:
n = 1, n = 2, and so on. This symbol, n, represents a positive integer (such
as 1, 2, or 3), and is called a quantum number. You will learn more about
the signiﬁcance of quantum numbers in section 3.2.
400
500
600
750 nm
n = 6
n = 5
n = 4
n = 3
n = 2
n = 1
y
g
r
e
n
e
n = 1
n = 2
n = 3
n = 4
n = 5
n = 6
A
Note: Orbits are not drawn to scale.
B
Note: In its unexcited state, hydrogen‘s electron is in
the energy level closest to the nucleus: n = 1. This is
the lowest-possible energy level, representing a state
of greatest stability for the hydrogen atom.
How the Bohr model explains the coloured lines in hydrogen’s emission
Figure 3.9
spectrum. When an excited electron falls from a higher energy level to a lower energy level
(shown by the downward-pointing arrows), it emits a photon with a speciﬁc wavelength that
corresponds to one of the coloured lines in the spectrum.
Chapter 3  Atoms, Electrons, and Periodic Trends • MHR 127
Another kind of spectrum that is related to an atom’s emission spec-
trum is an absorption spectrum. This kind of spectrum results when
electrons of atoms absorb photons of certain wavelengths, and so are
excited from lower energy levels to higher energy levels. Figure 3.10
shows the absorption spectrum for hydrogen. As you can see, discrete,
dark lines appear in the precise locations (wavelengths) as those of the
coloured lines in hydrogen’s emission spectrum.
400 nm
500 nm
600 nm
700 nm
When light passes through gaseous hydrogen atoms, the electrons in the
Figure 3.10
hydrogen atoms absorb photons of red, green, blue, and purple light at speciﬁc wavelengths.
When the electrons return to lower energy levels, they re-emit photons with these same
wavelengths. However, most of the photons are emitted in a different direction from the one in
which the electrons absorbed the light. As a result, dark lines appear in the spectrum where
photons of those particular wavelengths are absent.
The Successes and Limitations of the Bohr Atomic Model
Bohr’s realization that the atom’s energy is quantized—that electrons are
restricted to speciﬁc energy levels (orbits)—was an astounding achieve-
ment. As you have seen, this model successfully predicted the coloured
lines in the visible-light portion of hydrogen’s emission spectrum. It
also successfully predicted other lines, shown in Figure 3.11, that earlier
chemists had discovered in the ultraviolet and infrared portions of
hydrogen’s emission spectrum.
0
)
m
o
t
a
/
J
(
0
2
0
1
×
y
g
r
e
n
E
−100
−200
−218
n
∞
6
5
4
3
2
1
infrared
visible
ultraviolet
100
wavelength (nm)
200
Math
L I N K
An atom has an inﬁnite num-
ber of energy levels. In other
words, n ranges from 1 to ∞
(inﬁnity). What is the change
in energy when a hydrogen
atom is excited from n = 1
to n = ∞? Use the equation
below to determine the value.
Then consult the periodic table
in Appendix C and examine
hydrogen’s atomic properties.
To what property of hydrogen
does this value correspond? Is
this ﬁnding surprising to you?
Explain why.
∆E = Eﬁnal − Einitial
= −2.18 × 10−18J
1
(cid:2)
−
1
n2
ﬁnal
n2
initial
(cid:3)
The ultraviolet series of lines appear as a result of electrons falling from higher
Figure 3.11
energy levels to n = 1. The infrared lines appear as a result of electrons falling from higher
energy levels to n = 3.
128 MHR • Unit 2  Structure and Properties
There was a problem with Bohr’s model, however. It successfully
explained only one-electron systems. That is, it worked ﬁne for
hydrogen and for ions with only one electron, such as He+, Li2+, and Be3+.
Bohr’s model was unable, however, to explain the emission spectra
produced by atoms with two or more electrons. Either Bohr’s model was
a coincidence, or it was an oversimpliﬁcation in need of modiﬁcation.
Further investigation was in order.
Careers
in Chemistry
Nuclear Medicine
This scan, a product of a nuclear medical technology called
PET, shows changes in metabolic activity in different parts of
the brain. The red colour indicates greater activity.
The discovery of the atomic nucleus affected all
sciences, including biology and its applications in
the ﬁeld of medicine. During her graduate studies
at the University of Western Ontario, Dr. Karen
Goulenchyn excelled in theoretical mathematics,
but switched to medicine because she was drawn
to practical applications of science in people’s
lives. An interest in computers led her to nuclear
medicine, which she now practices at the Civic
Hospital in Ottawa.
Nuclear medicine is used chieﬂy in medical
diagnosis. A radiopharmaceutical — a relatively
harmless compound with a low dose of radiation—
is swallowed or injected into the patient and tracked
through the bloodstream by instruments such as a
PET (positron emission tomography) camera. The
nuclear physician can use the results to create a
three-dimensional computer image that evaluates
the function as well as the structure of an organ.
This procedure enables the physician to diagnose
cancers and other tissue irregularities without the
need for more invasive techniques such as
exploratory surgery.
The dose of radiation that patients receive is
similar to that of a diagnostic x-ray. However,
because many patients are alarmed by the word
“nuclear,” Dr. Goulenchyn says that her team must
explain the procedure tactfully “so that they don’t
run away.” Some physicians ease fears by calling
the discipline “molecular medicine.”
Dr. Goulenchyn sees an increase of 6 to12
percent of patients annually, primarily for suspected
cancer or heart disease. Her greatest frustration
is the time she must spend lobbying for new
equipment, particularly for PET, a technique for
measuring the concentrations of positron-emitting
radioisotopes within the tissues. Positrons are a
form of radiation identical to a beam of electrons,
except that the charge of a positron is positive. PET
scans can assess biochemical changes in the body,
especially abnormal ones. These scans provide
greater accuracy in determining whether a current
or proposed therapy is effective.
A career in nuclear medicine, Dr. Goulenchyn
notes, requires excellence in computers, science,
and people skills, with a strong background in
physiology. It also offers an unusual beneﬁt for a
physician: regular working hours. She appreciates
the time this provides for her family, as well as for
her work with the Canadian Association of Nuclear
Medicine, for which she served as president from
1996 to 1998.
Chapter 3  Atoms, Electrons, and Periodic Trends • MHR 129
Section Summary
You have seen how scientists in the late nineteenth and early twentieth
century developed and modiﬁed the atomic model. Changes in this model
resulted from both experimental evidence and new ideas about the nature
of matter and energy. By 1913, chemists and physicists had a working
model that pointed tantalizingly in a promising direction. During the
third decade of the twentieth century, the promise was fulﬁlled. In the
next section, you will learn how physicists extended the ideas of Planck,
Einstein, and Bohr to develop an entirely new branch of physics, and a
new model of the atom.
Section Review
1
(a)
K/U
In what ways did Rutherford’s model of the atom differ from
Thomson’s?
(b) On the basis of what evidence did Rutherford propose his model?
2
K/U
Why did Rutherford’s atomic model require modiﬁcation? Be as
speciﬁc as possible in your answer.
3
(a)
C
Imagine that you are Niels Bohr. Explain your ideas about the
atom to scientists who are familiar with the work of Planck and
Einstein.
(b) Imagine that you are a nineteenth-century scientist who has never
heard of Planck and Einstein’s ideas. You have just reviewed Bohr’s
proposed model for the atom. Write a paragraph describing your
response to Bohr’s model.
4
C
List and arrange the types of electromagnetic radiation
(a) in order from longest wavelength to shortest wavelength
(b) in order from highest frequency to lowest frequency
5
6
C
Compare visible light radiation to ultraviolet radiation. How are
they different? How are they the same?
I
Explain the signiﬁcance, in terms of absorption or emission of
photons, of the following statements.
(a) An electron moves from n = 1 to n = 6.
(b) An electron moves from n = 5 to n = 2.
(c) An electron moves from n = 4 to n = 3.
7
Arrange the following in order from lowest energy to highest
C
energy, and justify your sequence: n = 7, n = 2, n = 5, n = 4, n = 1.
130 MHR • Unit 2  Structure and Properties
The Quantum Mechanical Model
of the Atom
3.2
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
(cid:2) describe the quantum
mechanical model of the
atom and its historical
development
(cid:2) state the meaning and
signiﬁcance of the ﬁrst
three quantum numbers
(cid:2) communicate your under-
standing of the following
terms: quantum mechanical
model of the atom, orbitals,
ground state, principal
quantum number (n),
orbital-shape quantum
number (l), magnetic
quantum number (ml)
You have seen how Bohr’s model of the atom explains the emission spec-
trum of hydrogen. The emission spectra of other atoms, however, posed a
problem. A mercury atom, for example, has many more electrons than a
hydrogen atom. As you can see in Figure 3.12, mercury has more spectral
lines than hydrogen does. The same is true for other many-electron atoms.
Observations like these forced Bohr and other scientists to reconsider the
nature of energy levels. The large spaces between the individual colours
suggested that there are energy differences between individual energy
levels, as stated in Bohr’s model. The smaller spaces between coloured
lines, however, suggested that there were smaller energy differences
within energy levels. In other words, scientists hypothesized that there are
sublevels within each energy level. Each of these sublevels has its own
slightly different energy.
Hg
400
450
500
550
600
650
700
750 nm
H
400
450
500
550
600
650
700
750 nm
Figure 3.12
than the emission spectrum for hydrogen.
The emission spectrum for mercury shows that it has more spectral lines
It was fairly straightforward to modify Bohr’s model to include the idea
of energy sublevels for the hydrogen spectrum and for atoms or ions with
only one electron. There was a more fundamental problem, however. The
model still could not explain the spectra produced by many-electron
atoms. Therefore, a simple modiﬁcation of Bohr’s atomic model was not
enough. The many-electron problem called for a new model to explain
spectra of all types of atoms. However, this was not possible until another
important property of matter was discovered.
The Discovery of Matter Waves
By the early 1920s, it was standard knowledge that energy had matter-like
properties. In 1924, a young physics student named Louis de Broglie
stated a hypothesis that followed from this idea. What if, de Broglie
wondered, matter has wave-like properties?
He developed an equation that enabled him to calculate the wave-
length associated with any object — large, small, or microscopic. For
example, a baseball with a mass of 142 g and moving with a speed of
25.0 m/s has a wavelength of 2 × 10−34 m. Objects that you can see and
interact with, such as a baseball, have wavelengths so small that they
do not have any signiﬁcant observable effect on the object’s motion.
However, for microscopic objects, such as electrons, the effect of wave-
length on motion becomes very signiﬁcant. For example, an electron
moving at a speed of 5.9 × 106 m/s has a wavelength of 1 × 10−10 m. The
size of this wavelength is greater than the size of the hydrogen atom to
which it belongs. (The calculated atomic radius of hydrogen is
5.3 × 10−11 m.)
Chapter 3  Atoms, Electrons, and Periodic Trends • MHR 131
The model of the
Figure 3.13
atom in 1927. The fuzzy, spherical
region that surrounds the nucleus
represents the volume in which
electrons are most likely to be
found.
De Broglie’s hypothesis of matter waves received experimental
support in 1927. Researchers observed that streams of moving electrons
produced diffraction patterns similar to those that are produced by waves
of electromagnetic radiation. Since diffraction involves the transmission
of waves through a material, the observation seemed to support the idea
that electrons had wave-like properties.
The Quantum Mechanical Model of the Atom
In 1926, an Austrian physicist, Erwin Schrödinger, used mathematics and
statistics to combine de Broglie’s idea of matter waves and Einstein’s idea
of quantized energy particles (photons). Schrödinger’s mathematical
equations and their interpretations, together with another idea called
Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle (discussed below), resulted in the birth
of the ﬁeld of quantum mechanics. This is a branch of physics that uses
mathematical equations to describe the wave properties of sub-microscopic
particles such as electrons, atoms, and molecules. Schrödinger used
concepts from quantum mechanics to propose a new atomic model: the
quantum mechanical model of the atom. This model describes atoms as
having certain allowed quantities of energy because of the wave-like
properties of their electrons.
Figure 3.13 depicts the volume surrounding the nucleus of the atom
as being indistinct or cloud-like because of a scientiﬁc principle called the
uncertainty principle. The German physicist Werner Heisenberg proposed
the uncertainty principle in 1927. Using mathematics, Heisenberg showed
that it is impossible to know both the position and the momentum of an
object beyond a certain measure of precision. (An object’s momentum is a
property given by its mass multiplied by its velocity.) According to this
principle, if you can know an electron’s precise position and path around
the nucleus, as you would by deﬁning its orbit, you cannot know with
certainty its velocity. Similarly, if you know its precise velocity, you
cannot know with certainty its position. Based on the uncertainty
principle, Bohr’s atomic model is ﬂawed because you cannot assign
ﬁxed paths (orbits) to the motion of electrons.
Clearly, however, electrons exist. And they must exist somewhere. To
describe where that “somewhere” is, scientists used an idea from a branch
of mathematics called statistics. Although you cannot talk about electrons
in terms of certainties, you can talk about them in terms of probabilities.
Schrödinger used a type of equation called a wave equation to deﬁne the
probability of ﬁnding an atom’s electrons at a particular point within the
atom. There are many solutions to this wave equation, and each solution
represents a particular wave function. Each wave function gives informa-
tion about an electron’s energy and location within an atom. Chemists
call these wave functions orbitals.
In further studies of chemistry and physics, you will learn that the
wave functions that are solutions to the Schrödinger equation have no
direct, physical meaning. They are mathematical ideas. However, the
square of a wave function does have a physical meaning. It is a quantity
that describes the probability that an electron is at a particular point
within the atom at a particular time. The square of each wave function
(orbital) can be used to plot three-dimensional probability distribution
graphs for that orbital. These plots help chemists visualize the space in
which electrons are most likely to be found around atoms. These plots are
132 MHR • Unit 2  Structure and Properties
also referred to as electron probability density graphs. Note: Although
orbitals are wave functions without associated physical characteristics
like shape and size, chemists often use the term orbitals when they mean
three-dimensional probability distribution graphs. To simplify discussion,
this textbook will discuss the size and shapes of orbitals. However, what
is really meant is their associated probability distribution graph, which is
calculated using the square of the wave function.
Each orbital has its own associated energy, and each represents
information about where, inside the atom, the electrons would spend
most of their time. Scientists cannot determine the actual paths of the
moving electrons. However, orbitals indicate where there is a high
probability of ﬁnding electrons.
Figure 3.14A represents the probability of ﬁnding an electron at any
point in space when the electron is at the lowest energy level (n = 1) of a
hydrogen atom. Where the density of the dots is greater, there is a higher
probability of ﬁnding the electron. This graph is “fuzzy-looking” because
the probability of ﬁnding the electron anywhere in the n = 1 energy
level of a hydrogen atom is never zero. Farther from the nucleus, the
probability becomes very small, but it will still never reach zero.
Therefore, because the shape of the n = 1 orbital for hydrogen represents
the level of probability of ﬁnding an electron, and since the probability
never reaches zero, you have to select a “cut-off ” level of probability.
A level of probability is usually expressed as a percentage. Therefore,
the contour line in Figure 3.14B deﬁnes an area that represents 95 percent
of the probability graph. This two-dimensional shape is given three
dimensions in Figure 3.14C. What this means is that, at any time, there
is a 95 percent chance of ﬁnding the electron within the volume deﬁned
by the spherical contour.
A
B
C
+
+
+
Electron density probability graphs for the lowest energy level in the hydrogen
Figure 3.14
atom. These diagrams represent the probability of ﬁnding an electron at any point in this
energy level.
Quantum Numbers and Orbitals
Figure 3.14 showed electron-density probabilities for the lowest energy
level of the hydrogen atom. This is the most stable energy state for
hydrogen, and is called the ground state. The quantum number, n, for a
hydrogen atom in its ground state is 1. When n = 1 in the hydrogen atom,
its electron is associated with an orbital that has a characteristic energy
and shape. In an excited state, the electron is associated with a different
orbital with its own characteristic energy and shape. This makes sense,
because the electron has absorbed energy in its excited state, so its total
energy increases and its motion changes. Figure 3.15 on the next page
compares the sizes of hydrogen’s atomic orbitals when the atom is in its
ground state and when it is in an excited state.
Distinguish clearly between an
electron orbit, as depicted in
Bohr’s atomic model, and an
electron orbital, as depicted in
the quantum mechanical model
of the atom.
Chapter 3  Atoms, Electrons, and Periodic Trends • MHR 133
n = 1
n = 2
n = 3
The relationship
Figure 3.15
between orbital size and quantum
number for the hydrogen atom.
As n increases, the electron’s
energy increases and orbital size
increases.
Orbitals have a variety of different possible shapes. Therefore,
scientists use three quantum numbers to describe an atomic orbital. One
quantum number, n, describes an orbital’s energy level and size. A second
quantum number, l, describes an orbital’s shape. A third quantum number,
ml, describes an orbital’s orientation in space. These three quantum
numbers are described further below. The Concept Organizer that follows
afterward summarizes this information. (In section 3.3, you will learn
about a fourth quantum number, ms, which is used to describe the
electron inside an orbital.)
The First Quantum Number:
Describing Orbital Energy Level and Size
The principal quantum number (n) is a positive whole number that
speciﬁes the energy level of an atomic orbital and its relative size. The
value of n, therefore, may be 1, 2, 3, and so on. A higher value for n
indicates a higher energy level. A higher n value also means that the
size of the energy level is larger, with a higher probability of ﬁnding
an electron farther from the nucleus. The greatest number of electrons
that is possible in any energy level is 2n2.
The Second Quantum Number: Describing Orbital Shape
The second quantum number describes an orbital’s shape, and is a posi-
tive integer that ranges in value from 0 to (n − 1). Chemists use a variety
of names for the second quantum number. For example, you may see it
referred to as the angular momentum quantum number, the azimuthal
quantum number, the secondary quantum number, or the orbital-shape
quantum number.
Regardless of its name, the second quantum number refers to the
energy sublevels within each principal energy level. The name that this
book uses for the second quantum number is orbital-shape quantum
number (l ), to help you remember that the value of l determines orbital
shape. (You will see examples of orbital shapes near the end of this
section.)
The value of n places precise limits on the value of l. Recall that l
has a maximum value of (n − 1). So, if n = 1, l = 0 (that is, 1 − 1). If n = 2,
l may be either 0 or 1. If n = 3, l may be either 0, 1, or 2. Notice that the
number of possible values for l in a given energy level is the same as the
value of n. In other words, if n = 2, then there are only two possible sub-
levels (two types of orbital shapes) at this energy level.
Each value for l is given a letter: s, p, d, or f.
• The l = 0 orbital has the letter s.
• The l = 1 orbital has the letter p.
• The l = 2 orbital has the letter d.
• The l = 3 orbital has the letter f.
To identify an energy sublevel (type of orbital), you combine the value
of n with the letter of the orbital shape. For example, the sublevel with
n = 3 and l = 0 is called the 3s sublevel. The sublevel with n = 2 and l = 1
is the 2p sublevel.
134 MHR • Unit 2  Structure and Properties
There are, in fact, additional sublevels beyond l = 3 . However, for
chemical systems known at this time, only the s, p, d, and f sublevels are
required.
The Third Quantum Number: Describing Orbital Orientation
The magnetic quantum number (ml) is an integer with values ranging
from −l to +l, including 0. This quantum number indicates the orientation
of the orbital in the space around the nucleus. The value of ml is limited
by the value of l. If l = 0 , ml can be only 0. In other words, for a given
value of n, there is only one orbital, of s type (l = 0 ). If l = 1 , ml may have
one of three values: −1, 0, or +1. In other words, for a given value of n,
there are three orbitals of p type (l = 1 ). Each of these p orbitals has the
same shape and energy, but a different orientation around the nucleus.
Notice that for any given value of l, there are (2l + 1) values for ml.
The total number of orbitals for any energy level n is given by n2 .
For example, if n = 2, it has a total of 4 (that is, 22) orbitals (an s orbital
and three p orbitals). The Sample Problem below shows further use of
this calculation.
C H E M
FA C T
The letters used to represent
energy sublevels are
abbreviations of names that
nineteenth-century chemists
used to describe the coloured
lines in emission spectra.
These names are sharp,
principal, diffuse, and
fundamental.
Concept Organizer
The Relationship Among the First Three Quantum Numbers
principal quantum number, n
(cid:2) describes size and energy of
an orbital
(cid:2) allowed values: 1, 2, 3, …
orbital shape quantum number, l
(cid:2) describes shape of an orbital
(cid:2) allowed values: 0 to (n − 1)
magnetic quantum number,  ml
(cid:2) describes orientation of orbital
(cid:2) allowed values: −l, …0, …+l
Quantum Numbers
1
2
3
0
0
1
0
1
2
0
0
−1
0
+1
0
−1
0
+1
−2
−1
0
+1 +2
Sample Problem
Determining Quantum Numbers
Problem
(a) If n = 3, what are the allowed values for l and ml, and what is the
total number of orbitals in this energy level?
(b) What are the possible values for ml if n = 5 and l = 1 ? What kind of
orbital is described by these quantum numbers? How many orbitals
can be described by these quantum numbers?
Continued ...
Chapter 3  Atoms, Electrons, and Periodic Trends • MHR 135
Continued ...
Solution
(a) The allowed values for l are integers ranging from 0 to (n − 1). The
allowed values for ml are integers ranging from −l to +l including 0.
Since each orbital has a single ml value, the total number of values
for ml gives the number of orbitals.
To ﬁnd l from n:
If n = 3, l may be either 0, 1, or 2.
To ﬁnd ml from l:
If l = 0 , ml = 0
If l = 1 , ml may be −1, 0, +1
If l = 2 , ml may be −2, −1, 0, +1, +2
Since there are a total of 9 possible values for ml, there are 9 orbitals
when n = 3.
(b) You determine the type of orbital by combining the value for n with
the letter used to identify l. You can ﬁnd possible values for ml from
l, and the total of the ml values gives the number of orbitals.
To name the type of orbital:
l = 1 , which describes a p orbital
Since n = 5, the quantum numbers represent a 5p orbital.
To ﬁnd ml from l:
If l = 1 , ml may be −1, 0, +1
Therefore, there are 3 possible 5p orbitals.
Check Your Solution
(a) Since the total number of orbitals for any given n is n2, when n = 3,
the number of orbitals must be 9 (that is, 32).
(b) The number ml values is equivalent to 2l + 1 : 2(1) + 1 = 3 . Since the
number of orbitals equals the number of ml values, the answer of 3
must be correct.
Practice Problems
1. What are the allowed values for l in each of the following cases?
(a) n = 5
(b) n = 1
2. What are the allowed values for ml, for an electron with the following
quantum numbers:
(a) l = 4
(b) l = 0
3. What are the names, ml values, and total number of orbitals described
by the following quantum numbers?
(a) n = 2, l = 0
(b) n = 4, l = 3
4. Determine the n, l, and possible ml values for an electron in the 2p
orbital.
5. Which of the following are allowable sets of quantum numbers for an
atomic orbital? Explain your answer in each case.
(a) n = 4, l = 4 , ml = 0
(b) n = 3, l = 2 , ml = 1
(c) n = 2, l = 0 , ml = 0
(d) n = 5, l = 3 , ml = −4
136 MHR • Unit 2  Structure and Properties
Shapes of Orbitals
An orbital is associated with a size, a three-dimensional shape, and an
orientation around the nucleus. Together, the size, shape, and position
of an orbital represent the probability of ﬁnding a speciﬁc electron
around the nucleus of an atom. Figure 3.16 shows the probability shapes
associated with the s, p, and d orbitals. (The f orbitals have been omitted
due to their complexity. You may study these orbitals in post-secondary
school chemistry courses.)
Notice that the overall shape of an atom is a combination of all its
orbitals. Thus, the overall shape of an atom is spherical. Be careful, how-
ever, to distinguish for yourself between the overall spherical shape of the
atom, and the spherical shape that is characteristic of only the s orbitals.
Finally, it is important to be clear about what orbitals are when you
view diagrams such as those in Figure 3.16. Orbitals, remember, are solu-
tions to mathematical equations. Those solutions, when manipulated,
describe the motion and position of the electron in terms of probabilities.
Contour diagrams, such as those shown here and in numerous print and
electronic resources, appear solid. It therefore becomes easy to begin
thinking about orbitals as physical “containers” that are “occupied” by
electrons. In some ways, this is unavoidable. Try to remind yourself,
now and then, of the following:
• Electrons have physical substance. They have a mass that can be
measured, and trajectories that can be photographed. They exist in
the physical universe.
• Orbitals are mathematical descriptions of electrons. They do not have
measurable physical properties such as mass or temperature. They exist
in the imagination.
s orbitals
p orbitals
z
n = 1
(cid:2) = 0
y
x
n = 2
(cid:2) = 1
n = 2
(cid:2) = 0
z
z
y
x
n = 2
(cid:2) = 1
n = 3
(cid:2) = 0
y
x
n = 2
(cid:2) = 1
d orbitals
z
z
z
z
z
z
y
x
y
x
n = 3
(cid:2) = 2
y
x
y
x
y
x
n = 3
(cid:2) = 2
n = 3
(cid:2) = 2
n = 3
(cid:2) = 2
n = 3
(cid:2) = 2
Figure 3.16
along or between perpendicular x, y, and z axes.
Shapes of the s, p, and d orbitals. Orbitals in the p and d sublevels are oriented
Chapter 3  Atoms, Electrons, and Periodic Trends • MHR 137
Section Summary
In this section, you saw how the ideas of quantum mechanics led to a
new, revolutionary atomic model—the quantum mechanical model of
the atom. According to this model, electrons have both matter-like and
wave-like properties. Their position and momentum cannot both be deter-
mined with certainty, so they must be described in terms of probabilities.
An orbital represents a mathematical description of the volume of space
in which an electron has a high probability of being found. You learned
the ﬁrst three quantum numbers that describe the size, energy, shape,
and orientation of an orbital. In the next section, you will use quantum
numbers to describe the total number of electrons in an atom and the
energy levels in which they are most likely to be found in their ground
state. You will also discover how the ideas of quantum mechanics explain
the structure and organization of the periodic table.
Section Review
1
2
3
4
Explain how the quantum mechanical model of the atom differs
K/U
from the atomic model that Bohr proposed.
List the ﬁrst three quantum numbers, give their symbols, and
K/U
identify the property of orbitals that each describes.
Design a chart that shows all the possible values of l and ml for an
C
electron with n = 4.
C
Agree or disagree with the following statement: The meaning of the
quantum number n in Bohr’s atomic model is identical to the meaning
of the principal quantum number n in the quantum mechanical atomic
model. Justify your opinion.
5
I
Identify any values that are incorrect in the following sets of
quantum numbers.
(a) n = 1, l = 1 , ml = 0; name: 1p
(b) n = 4, l = 3 , ml = +1; name: 4d
(c) n = 3, l = 1 , ml = −2; name: 3p
6
Fill in the missing values in the following sets of quantum numbers.
I
(a) n =?, l =?, ml = 0; name: 4p
(b) n = 2, l = 1 , ml = 0; name: ?
(c) n = 3, l = 2 , ml = −2; name: ?
(d) n =?, l =?, ml =?; name: 2s
138 MHR • Unit 2  Structure and Properties
Electron Conﬁgurations
and Periodic Trends
For the hydrogen atom (and other single-electron systems), all orbitals that
have the same value for n have the same energy. You can see this in the
energy level diagram shown in Figure 3.17. Hydrogen’s single electron is
in its lowest (most stable) energy state when it is in the 1s orbital. In other
words, the 1s orbital is the ground state for hydrogen. When a hydrogen
atom is in an excited state, its electron may be found in any of its other
orbitals, depending on the amount of energy absorbed.
3d
3p
2p
3s
2s
1s
y
g
r
e
n
E
For the hydrogen atom, orbital energy depends only on the value of n. For
Figure 3.17
example, all four n = 2 orbitals have the same energy. All nine n = 3 orbitals have the same
energy. What must the value of l be for each of these orbitals?
Atoms with two or more electrons have orbitals with shapes that are
similar to those of hydrogen. However, the interactions among the
additional electrons result in orbitals with the same value of n, but
different energies. For example, Figure 3.18 shows an energy level
diagram for the lithium atom, which has three electrons. You can see that
the 2s orbital has a lower energy than the 2p orbitals. Similarly, the 3p
orbitals are lower in energy than the 3d orbitals. Notice, however, that all
the orbitals within a sublevel have the same energy. For example, the
three p orbitals in the 3p sublevel have the same energy.
3.3
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
(cid:2) write electron conﬁgura-
tions and draw orbital
diagrams for atoms of
elements in the periodic
table
(cid:2) explain the signiﬁcance of
the exclusion principle
and Hund’s rule in writing
electron conﬁgurations
(cid:2) list characteristics of the s,
p, d, and f blocks of
elements in the periodic
table
(cid:2) explain the relationship
between electron
conﬁgurations and the
position and properties of
elements in the periodic
table
(cid:2) communicate your
understanding of the
following terms: spin
quantum number (ms), Pauli
exclusion principle, electron
conﬁguration, aufbau
principle, orbital diagram,
Hund’s rule, atomic radius,
ionization energy, electron
afﬁnity
3d
3p
2p
y
g
r
e
n
E
3s
2s
1s
Figure 3.18
energy sublevels differ in energy.
In the lithium atom, and for all other multi-electron atoms, orbitals in different
Chapter 3  Atoms, Electrons, and Periodic Trends • MHR 139
Since low energy usually means stability, it is reasonable that the
most stable energy state (ground state) for any atom is one in which its
electrons are in the lowest possible energy level. As you know, this is the
1s orbital (n = 1). However, the electrons of most atoms are not “packed”
into this orbital. In fact, experimental evidence shows that only two atoms
have all their electrons in the 1s orbital: hydrogen and helium. To explain
how and why this is the case, you must consider another property of the
electron.
The Fourth Quantum Number: A Property of the Electron
As you learned from the previous section, three quantum numbers —n, l,
and ml —describe the energy, size, shape, and spatial orientation of an
orbital. A fourth quantum number describes a property of the electron that
results from its particle-like nature. Experimental evidence suggests that
electrons spin about their axes as they move throughout the volume of
their atoms. Like a tiny top, an electron can spin in one of two directions,
each direction generating a magnetic ﬁeld. The spin quantum number
(ms) speciﬁes the direction in which the electron is spinning. This
quantum number has only two possible values: + 1
2 or − 1
2 .
In 1925, an Austrian physicist, Wolfgang Pauli, proposed that only two
electrons of opposite spin could occupy an orbital. This proposal became
known as the Pauli exclusion principle. What the exclusion principle
does is place a limit on the total number of electrons that may occupy any
orbital. That is, an orbital may have a maximum of two electrons only,
each of which must have the opposite spin direction of the other. It may
also have only one electron of either spin direction. An orbital may also
have no electrons at all.
Summarizing the Four Quantum Numbers for Electrons in Atoms
Quantum
Number Name
principal
orbital-shape
magnetic
spin
Symbol
Allowed Values
Property
n
l
ml
ms
positive integers (1, 2, 3, etc.)
integers from 0 to (n − 1)
integers from −l to +l
+ 1
2
− 1
2
or
orbital size and energy
orbital shape
orbital orientation
electron spin direction
The Pauli Exclusion Principle and Quantum Numbers
Another way of stating the exclusion principle is that no two electrons
in an atom have the same four quantum numbers. This important idea
means that each electron in an atom has its own unique set of four
quantum numbers. For example, compare the quantum numbers
that distinguish a ground state hydrogen atom from a helium atom. (Recall
that a helium atom has two electrons. Note also that ms quantum number
is given as + 1
2 . By convention,
chemists usually use the positive value ﬁrst.)
2 . It could just as easily have a value of − 1
Atom
Hydrogen
Helium
Electron
Quantum numbers
lone
first
second
n = 1, l = 0, ml = 0, ms = + 1
—
2
n = 1, l = 0, ml = 0, ms = + 1
—
2
n = 1, l = 0, ml = 0, ms = − 1
—
2
140 MHR • Unit 2  Structure and Properties
Each of a lithium atom’s three electrons also has its own unique set of
quantum numbers, as you can see below. (Assume these quantum
numbers represent a ground state lithium atom.)
Atom
Lithium
Electron
Quantum numbers
first
second
third
n = 1, l = 0, ml = 0, ms = + 1
—
2
n = 1, l = 0, ml = 0, ms = − 1
—
2
n = 2, l = 0, ml = 0, ms = + 1
—
2
Consider the signiﬁcance of lithium’s quantum numbers. The ﬁrst two
electrons occupy the 1s orbital, and have the same sets of quantum
numbers as helium’s two electrons. According to the Pauli exclusion
principle, the 1s orbital (n = 1) is now “full” because it contains the
maximum number of electrons: two. For lithium’s third electron, n
cannot equal 1. Therefore, the next principal energy level for the electron
is n = 2. If n = 2, l may have a value of 0 or 1. Remember that an atom’s
ground state represents its lowest energy state. Because an orbital with
l = 0 (an s orbital) has a lower energy than an orbital with l = 1
(a p orbital), you would expect a high probability of ﬁnding lithium’s
third electron in the s orbital given by n = 2, l = 0 . In fact, experimental
evidence supports this expectation. You know that if l = 0 , ml has only
one possible value: 0. Finally, by convention, ms is + 1
2 .
It is possible to distinguish atoms by writing sets of quantum numbers
for each of their electrons. However, writing quantum numbers for an
atom such as uranium, which has 92 electrons, would be mind-bogglingly
tedious. Fortunately, chemists have developed a “shortcut” to represent
the number and orbital arrangements of electrons in each atom. As you
will see shortly, these electron conﬁgurations, as they are called, are
intimately connected to the structure and logic of the periodic table.
In learning how to write electron conﬁgurations, you will discover this
connection. You will also ﬁnd out why orbital energies differ (for
example, why a 2s orbital is lower in energy than a 2p orbital).
Note: Before proceeding, it is important to keep the following in mind.
According to quantum mechanics:
• Electrons do not “occupy” orbitals. Nor do orbitals “contain” electrons.
• Electrons do not “ﬁll” orbitals one at a time. Nor do electrons have
properties that designate individual electrons as ﬁrst, second, third,
fourth, etc.
• Orbitals do not really have substance or shapes. Orbitals, recall,
are mathematical equations that can be used to calculate probability
densities for electrons. The shapes, and the impression of substance,
result from the contour lines used to set a limit on the extent of
those probabilities.
Nevertheless, it takes time and experience for most people to think
about and talk about atoms in completely quantum mechanical terms. It is
much simpler to think about orbitals as if they have substance. Therefore,
in the text that follows, you will read about electrons “occupying” and
“ﬁlling” orbitals. Strictly speaking, this terminology is not scientiﬁcally
correct. However, it will help you understand some challenging concepts
more easily.
Write a set of quantum num-
bers for each electron of the
following atoms: beryllium
(Be), boron (B), and carbon (C).
Look closely for evidence of
a pattern. Write a short
paragraph describing this
pattern and explaining why
you would have expected it.
Chapter 3  Atoms, Electrons, and Periodic Trends • MHR 141
An Introduction to Electron Conﬁgurations
5f
4f
6d
5d
4d
3d
7p
6p
5p
4p
3p
2p
7s
6s
5s
4s
3s
2s
1s
y
g
r
e
n
E
Figure 3.19
Atomic orbitals and their relative energies
Figure 3.19 shows the total number of orbitals in which electrons are
likely to be found for all naturally occurring atoms and most synthetic
atoms. The orbitals, represented by boxes, are listed in order of increasing
energy. You will refer to this diagram often as you learn to write electron
conﬁgurations.
An atom’s electron conﬁguration is a shorthand notation that shows
the number and arrangement of electrons in its orbitals. Because the
value of n ranges to inﬁnity, there are an inﬁnite number of electron
conﬁgurations that are possible for each atom. For each atom, all but
one of these represent the atom in an excited state. However, an atom’s
chemical properties are mainly associated with its ground state electron
conﬁguration. Therefore, unless stated otherwise, you can assume that
any given electron conﬁguration in this book represents an atom in its
ground state. For example, the ground state electron conﬁguration for a
hydrogen atom is 1s1 (pronounced “one ess one”). The superscript 1 indi-
cates that only one electron is in the s orbital. The ground state electron
conﬁguration for a helium atom is 1s2 (pronounced “one ess two”), where
the superscript 2 indicates that there are two electrons in the s orbital. For
a lithium atom, it is 1s22s1. Again, the superscript numbers indicate the
number of electrons in each of the orbitals.
When you are learning to write electron conﬁgurations, it is helpful to
start with the ﬁrst element in the periodic table (hydrogen), and “build
up” the electronic structure of its atom by adding an electron to its lowest
available energy level. Then you move on to the next element (helium) by
adding a proton (and several neutrons) to the nucleus, and by adding an
electron to the appropriate orbital. This imaginary process of building up
the ground state electronic structure for each atom, in order of atomic
number, is called the aufbau principle. (Aufbau comes from a German
word that means “to build up.”)
Refer to the sets of quantum
numbers for hydrogen and
helium that you saw earlier.
Then use the quantum
numbers for lithium to infer
why a lithium atom has
the ground state electron
conﬁguration that it does.
142 MHR • Unit 2  Structure and Properties
Writing Electron Conﬁgurations
Electron conﬁgurations, as they are used in this book, provide information
about the ﬁrst two quantum numbers, n and l. (Electron conﬁgurations
may also reﬂect the third quantum number, ml, but this notation goes
beyond the scope of this chemistry course.) The electron conﬁguration
below represents a boron atom in its ground state.
number of electrons
in each energy sublevel
1s22s22p1
principal quantum numbers
letter designations based on
orbital shape quantum number
From the few examples of electron conﬁgurations that you have seen so
far, you may have noticed that they do not include information about
the spin direction of the electron. Once you have considered the electron
conﬁgurations for a variety of atoms, you will see that you can safely infer
where electrons with opposite spins have been paired together.
There is, however, a system that chemists use alongside electron
conﬁgurations to help them plot and keep track of electrons in their
orbitals. An orbital diagram uses a box for each orbital in any given
principal energy level. (Some chemists use a circle or a line instead of
a box.) An empty box
represents an orbital in which there are no
electrons (an “unoccupied” orbital). A box that has an upward-pointing
arrow
represents an orbital with an electron that spins in one
direction. A box with a downward-pointing arrow
represents an
orbital with an electron that spins in the opposite direction. You can
probably surmise that a box with oppositely pointing arrows
represents a ﬁlled orbital.
You are nearly ready to begin “building up” the electronic structures of
the atoms, using both electron conﬁgurations and orbital diagrams. Below
you will ﬁnd some guidelines to help you. Refer to these guidelines and
to Figure 3.19 as you work your way through the information that follows.
Guidelines for “Filling” Orbitals
1. Place electrons into the orbitals in order of increasing energy level.
2. Each set of orbitals of the same energy level must be completely
ﬁlled before proceeding to the next orbital or series of orbitals.
3. Whenever electrons are added to orbitals of the same energy sub-
level, each orbital receives one electron before any pairing occurs.
4. When electrons are added singly to separate orbitals of the same
energy, the electrons must all have the same spin.
Guidelines 3 and 4 together comprise what is known as Hund’s rule.
If you “obey” Hund’s rule, no two electrons can have the same set of
quantum numbers. Thus, this rule follows from Pauli’s exclusion principle.
Chapter 3  Atoms, Electrons, and Periodic Trends • MHR 143
Writing Electron Conﬁgurations for Periods 1 and 2
Below are the electron conﬁgurations for atoms of the ﬁrst ten elements,
along with their orbital diagrams.
Figure 3.20 presents the same basic information about the ﬁrst ten
elements, arranged in the form of the periodic table. Using these electron
conﬁgurations, orbital diagrams, and Figure 3.20, you can probably follow
the logic that leads to the electronic structure of each atom. As you
examine and compare this information, note the following.
• The energy of each orbital (or each group of orbitals) increases as you
move from left to right.
• Boron’s ﬁfth electron must go into the 2p energy sublevel. Since l = 1 ,
ml may be −1, 0, or +1. The ﬁfth electron can go into any of these
orbitals, because they all have the same energy. When you draw orbital
diagrams, it is customary to place the electron in the ﬁrst available box,
from left to right.
• With carbon, you must apply Hund’s rule. In other words, carbon’s sixth
electron must go into the next unoccupied 2p orbital. (Experimental
evidence conﬁrms that the spin of this sixth electron is, in fact, the
same direction as the ﬁfth electron.)
• With oxygen, as with helium’s 1s orbital and beryllium’s 2s orbital, the
last-added (eighth) electron is paired with a 2p electron of opposite
spin. In other words, the Pauli exclusion principle applies.
H
(Z = 1)
He
(Z = 2)
Li
(Z = 3)
Be
(Z = 4)
B
C
N
O
F
(Z = 5)
(Z = 6)
(Z = 7)
(Z = 8)
(Z = 9)
Ne
(Z = 10)
1s
1s
1s 2s
2p
1s 2s
2p
1s 2s
2p
1s 2s
2p
1s 2s
2p
1s 2s
2p
1s 2s
2p
1s 2s
2p
1s1
1s2
1s22s1
1s22s2
1s22s22p1
1s22s22p2
1s22s22p3
1s22s22p4
1s22s22p5
1s22s22p6
144 MHR • Unit 2  Structure and Properties
18(VIIIA)
2
He
1s2
2(IIA)
4
Be
1s22s2
13(IIIA)
5
B
1s22s22p1
14(IVA)
6
C
1s22s22p2
15(VA)
16(VIA)
17(VIIA)
7
N
1s22s22p3
8
O
1s22s22p4
9
F
1s22s22p5
10
Ne
1s22s22p6
1(IA)
1
H
1s1
3
Li
1s22s1
1
d
o
i
r
e
P
2
d
o
i
r
e
P
Figure 3.20
How orbitals are ﬁlled for atoms of the ﬁrst 10 elements of the periodic table
Electron Conﬁgurations and Orbital Diagrams for Period 3
To write the electron conﬁgurations and draw the orbital diagrams for
atoms of Period 3 elements, you follow the same process as for Period 2.
The practice problems below give you the chance to write and draw these
representations. In doing so, you will observe a pattern that enables you to
take a “shortcut” in writing electron conﬁgurations. As the atomic number
increases, electron conﬁgurations become longer and longer. You know
that chemical reactivity depends mainly on an atom’s valence electrons:
the electrons in the outermost-occupied principle energy level. To
highlight these electrons, you can use a simpliﬁed notation called a
condensed electron conﬁguration. This notation places the electron
conﬁguration of the noble gas of the previous period in square brackets,
using its atomic symbol only. Then you continue with the conﬁguration of
the next energy level that is being ﬁlled.
The condensed electron conﬁguration for a nitrogen atom, for
example, is [He]2s22p3. The notation [He] is used to represent 1s2. For a
sodium atom (Z = 11), the condensed electron conﬁguration is [Ne]3s1.
Here, [Ne] represents, 1s22s22p6. Be aware that condensed electron
conﬁgurations are simply convenient short forms. Thus, [Ne]3s1 does not
mean that a sodium atom is the same as a neon atom plus one electron.
Sodium and neon are different elements because the nuclei of their atoms
are completely different.
Practice Problems
6. Use the aufbau principle to write complete electron conﬁgurations
and complete orbital diagrams for atoms of the following elements:
sodium, magnesium, aluminum, silicon, phosphorus, sulfur, chlorine,
and argon (atomic numbers 11 through 18).
7. Write condensed electron conﬁgurations for atoms of these
same elements.
Continued ...
Chapter 3  Atoms, Electrons, and Periodic Trends • MHR 145
Continued ...
8. Make a rough sketch of the periodic table for elements 1 through 18,
including the following information: group number, period number,
atomic number, atomic symbol, and condensed electron conﬁguration.
9. A general electron conﬁguration for atoms belonging to any element of
group 1 (IA) is ns1, where n is the quantum number for the
outermost occupied energy level. Based on the patterns you can
observe so far for elements 1 to 18, predict the general electron
conﬁguration for the outermost occupied energy levels of groups
2 (IIA), 13 (IIIA), 14 (IVA), 15 (VA), 16 (VIA), 17 (VIIA), and 18 (VIIIA).
Electron Conﬁgurations and Orbital Diagrams for Period 4
You may have noticed that period 3 ended with electrons ﬁlling the 3p
energy sublevel. However, when n = 3, l may equal 0, 1, and 2. Perhaps
you wondered what happened to the 3d orbitals (l = 2 ).
Electrons do not start occupying 3d orbitals until the 4s orbital is
ﬁlled. Therefore, the 3d orbitals are ﬁlled starting in period 4. The reason
for this change in the expected orbital ﬁlling order is that the 4s orbital
has a lower energy than the 3d orbitals. Remember that usually you ﬁll
orbitals in order of increasing energy. (If necessary, refer to the Guidelines
for “Filling” Orbitals and Figure 3.19 to refresh your memory.)
The chart below shows electron conﬁgurations and partial orbital
diagrams for the 18 elements of period 4. You would expect the ﬁlling
pattern shown for potassium (Z = 19) through vanadium (Z = 23).
However, an unexpected deviation from the pattern occurs with chromi-
um (Z = 24). The same thing happens with copper (Z = 29). All other
conﬁgurations for period 4 conform to the aufbau principle.
Why do Cr and Cu have electron conﬁgurations that are different from
what you would predict? The guidelines that you have been using state
that you ﬁll orbitals according to increasing energy. In most cases, this
results in the most stable ground state conﬁguration for the atom.
Experimental evidence indicates, however, that some atoms achieve
greater stability with electron conﬁgurations that do not conform to
predicted patterns. For chromium, the greatest ground state stability
results from a conﬁguration in which its 4s and 3d orbitals are half-ﬁlled.
For copper, a half-ﬁlled 4s orbital and a completely ﬁlled set of 3d orbitals
gives the most stable conﬁguration. Similar situations arise for a number
of atoms in the remaining periods.
Electron Configurations and Partial Orbital Diagrams for Atoms of Period 4 Elements
Element
Atomic
Number
K
Ca
Sc
Ti
Z = 19
Z = 20
Z = 21
Z = 22
Orbital Diagram (4s, 3d, and 4p Orbitals Only)
4s
3d
4p
Complete
Electron Configuration
Condensed
Electron Configuration
[1s22s22p63s23p6]4s1
[1s22s22p63s23p6]4s2
[Ar]4s1
[Ar]4s2
[1s22s22p63s23p6]4s23d1
[Ar]4s23d1
[1s22s22p63s23p6]4s23d 2
[Ar]4s23d2
146 MHR • Unit 2  Structure and Properties
4s
3d
4p
V
Cr
Z = 23
Z = 24
Mn
Z = 25
Fe
Co
Ni
Cu
Zn
Ga
Ge
As
Se
Br
Kr
Z = 26
Z = 27
Z = 28
Z = 29
Z = 30
Z = 31
Z = 32
Z = 33
Z = 34
Z = 35
Z = 36
[1s22s22p63s23p6]4s23d3
[Ar]4s23d3
[1s22s22p63s23p6]4s13d5
[Ar]4s13d5
[1s22s22p63s23p6]4s23d5
[Ar]4s23d5
[1s22s22p63s23p6]4s23d 6
[Ar]4s23d6
[1s22s22p63s23p6]4s23d 7
[Ar]4s23d7
[1s22s22p63s23p6]4s23d 8
[Ar]4s23d8
[1s22s22p63s23p6]4s13d 10
[Ar]4s13d 10
[1s22s22p63s23p6]4s23d 10
[Ar]4s23d 10
[1s22s22p63s23p6]4s23d 104p1
[Ar]4s23d 104p1
[1s22s22p63s23p6]4s23d 104p2
[Ar]4s23d 104p2
[1s22s22p63s23p6]4s23d 104p3
[Ar]4s23d 104p3
[1s22s22p63s23p6]4s23d 104p4
[Ar]4s23d 104p4
[1s22s22p63s23p6]4s23d 104p5
[Ar]4s23d 104p5
[1s22s22p63s23p6]4s23d 104p6
[Ar]4s23d 104p6
Electron Conﬁgurations and the Periodic Table
So far, you have “built up” atoms of the ﬁrst 36 elements of the periodic
table. There are more than 80 elements still remaining. You do not,
however, have to build up atoms of these elements to write their electron
conﬁgurations. You can do it simply by consulting the periodic table!
All you need is to recognize the signiﬁcance of several patterns. You have
already observed many of these.
In the process of examining the patterns outlined below, you will
learn the ﬁlling order for atoms of elements in periods 5, 6, and 7. You
will also see why the shape and organization of the periodic table is a
direct consequence of the electronic structure of the atoms.
Arranging Elements by Electron Conﬁgurations
Figure 3.21 on the next page shows the entire periodic table, with certain
segments colour-coded and labelled according to the type of orbital that
is being ﬁlled. If you built up an atom of every element, ﬁlling orbitals in
order of increasing energy, you would construct a chart with precisely this
shape and organization. Figure 3.22 highlights the ﬁlling order, and there-
fore the energy order, of the orbitals when you read the periodic table
from left to right.
Elements that appear in the s block and the p block are called either
the main group elements or the representative elements. Chemists give
them these names because, collectively, these elements are representative
of a wide range of physical and chemical properties. Among the main
group elements, for example, you will ﬁnd metals, non-metals, metalloids,
Chapter 3  Atoms, Electrons, and Periodic Trends • MHR 147
The long form of the
Figure 3.21
periodic table, with the four energy
sublevel blocks identiﬁed.
highly reactive elements, moderately reactive elements, and unreactive
elements. While most main group elements are solids at room tempera-
ture, roughly one quarter of them are gases, and one is a liquid.
Elements that appear in the d block are called the transition elements.
They mark the transition from the p orbital ﬁlling order to the d orbital
ﬁlling order. By the same reasoning, the f block elements are called
the inner transition elements, because they mark a transition from the
d orbital ﬁlling order to the f orbital ﬁlling order.
1
(IA)
1s
2
(IIA)
2s
3s
4s
5s
6s
7s
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
3
(IIIB)
s block
(main group
elements)
3
(IIIB)
4
(IVB)
5
(VB)
6
(VIB)
7
(VIIB)
8       9     10
(VIIIB)
11
(IB)
12
(IIB)
3d
4d
5d
6d
4f
5f
f block
(inner transition elements)
d block
(transition elements)
18
(VIIIA)
13
(IIIA)
14
(IVA)
15
(VA)
16
(VIA)
17
(VIIA)
2p
3p
4p
5p
6p
p block
(main elements)
1s
2s
3s
4s
5s
6s
7s
2p
3p
4p
5p
6p
3d
4d
5d
6d
4f
5f
Reading the periodic
Figure 3.22
table from left to right, starting at
the top and ﬁnishing at the bottom,
displays the ﬁlling order and the
energy order of the atomic orbitals.
Patterns Involving Group Numbers and Period Numbers
Elements in a group have similar chemical properties because they have
similar outer electron conﬁgurations. That is, they have the same number
of valence electrons. This observation gives rise to three patterns that you
can deduce from the periodic table.
• For main group elements, the last numeral of the group number is the
same as the number of valence electrons. For example, phosphorus in
group 15 has 5 valence electrons. Strontium in group 2 has 2 valence
electrons. (If you use the roman-numeral system for numbering groups,
the group number is the number of valence electrons.) The only
exception to this pattern is helium (group 18), which has only two
valence electrons. Nevertheless, helium’s outermost occupied energy
level is complete with two electrons.
• The n value of the highest occupied energy level is the period number.
For example, atoms of elements that have electrons with n = 3 appear
in period 3. Atoms of elements that have electrons with n = 6 appear in
period 6.
• The square of the n value (n2 ) equals the total number of orbitals in
that energy level. Furthermore, since each orbital may have a maximum
of two electrons, the maximum number of electrons in any principle
energy level is 2n2. For example, with n = 2, there are four orbitals: one
2s orbital and three 2p orbitals. Squaring the n value gives 22 = 4. The
total number of electrons in this energy level is eight, given by 2n2.
Notice that there are eight elements in period 2. This is no coincidence.
Compare this result with the next period. Does the pattern hold? For
period 3 elements, n = 3. The number of orbitals is n2 = 9. (Verify that
for yourself.) The number of electrons is 2n2 = 18. However, there are
only eight elements in period 3. Why? The 4s orbital has a lower energy
than the 3p orbitals, and thus ﬁlls ﬁrst. The 3d orbitals ﬁll after the 4s
orbitals. Therefore, there are 18 elements in period 4. Recall that the 4f
orbitals do not ﬁll until after the 6s orbital ﬁlls.
148 MHR • Unit 2  Structure and Properties
A teacher asks the class to
write electron conﬁgurations
for magnesium, iron, and tin.
Lois does not have a periodic
table available. Edward’s
advice is to use a memory aid
that is shown below. Write a
short paragraph to explain
how to use this memory aid.
1s
2s
2p
3s
3p
3d
4s
4p
4d
4f
5s
5p
5d
5f
6s
6p
6d
7s
7p7p
Summarizing Characteristics of s, p, d, and f Block Elements
The s block includes hydrogen, helium, and the elements of groups
1 (IA) and 2 (IIA). Valence electrons occupy only the ns orbitals
in this block. Hydrogen atoms and atoms of group 1 have partially ﬁlled
s orbitals, represented by the general electron conﬁguration ns1. Helium
and atoms of group 2 elements have s orbitals ﬁlled with the maximum
number of valance electrons, represented by the general notation ns2.
Because s orbitals can hold a total of two electrons, the s block elements
span two groups.
The p block includes elements of groups 13 (IIIA) through 18 (VIIIA).
Electron conﬁgurations of the p block atoms take the general form ns2npa,
where a represents a value ranging from 1 to 6. Because the three p orbitals
can hold a maximum of six electrons, the p block elements span six groups.
Unique among the p block elements are the atoms of group 18 (VIIIA)
elements: the noble gases, renowned for their chemical stability. Their
electron conﬁguration takes the general form ns2np6, representing a
ground state outer energy level with fully occupied s and p orbitals. The
stability of this conﬁguration is a key factor that drives the formation of
chemical bonds.
The d block includes all the transition elements. In general, atoms of
d block elements have ﬁlled ns orbitals, as well as ﬁlled or partially ﬁlled
d orbitals. Generally, the ns orbitals ﬁll before the (n − 1)d orbitals.
However, there are exceptions (such as chromium and copper) because
these two sublevels are very close in energy, especially at higher values
of n. Because the ﬁve d orbitals can hold a maximum of ten electrons, the
d block spans ten groups.
The f block includes all the inner transition elements. Atoms of
f block elements have ﬁlled s orbitals in the outer energy levels, as
well as ﬁlled or partially ﬁlled 4f and 5f orbitals. In general, the notation
for the orbital ﬁlling sequence is ns, followed by (n − 2)f, followed by
(n − 1)d, followed by (for period 6 elements) np. However, there are
many exceptions that make it difﬁcult to predict electron conﬁgurations.
Because there are seven f orbitals, with a maximum of fourteen electrons,
the f block spans fourteen groups.
Sample Problem
Determining Quantum Numbers
Problem
You do not have a periodic table. You are told that the condensed
electron conﬁguration for strontium is [Kr]5s2. Identify the group
number, period number, and orbital block in which strontium appears
on the periodic table. Show your reasoning.
Solution
From the electron conﬁguration, you can deduce the energy level of the
valence electrons, which tells you the period number for strontium. The
number of valence electrons and their sublevel enable you to deduce the
group number and the block. Therefore:
Continued ...
Chapter 3  Atoms, Electrons, and Periodic Trends • MHR 149
C H E M
FA C T
The d block elements known
to nineteenth century chemists
posed a puzzle. Many of these
metals were known to react
with neutral molecules.
In particular, chemists
observed that nickel could
bond with carbon monoxide.
The resulting compound,
nickel tetracarbonyl, Ni(CO)4,
is a gas. At the time, the
nature of the bonding in this
compound was unexplainable.
Even so, chemists could easily
produce and decompose
Ni(CO)4. The chemical
reactions involved were used
to purify nickel, and led to the
establishment of a company
that later became International
Nickel Company, INCO.
Continued ...
The conﬁguration for the valence electrons, s2, indicates that stron-
tium is in group 2 (IIA). The value of 5 in 5s2 tells you that strontium is
in period 5. The notation s2 means that strontium’s valence electrons ﬁll
the s orbital. Thus, strontium must be in the s block.
Check Your Solution
All elements in group 2 (IIA) have electron conﬁgurations that end with
the notation s2. The link between n value and period number is correctly
applied. Strontium has an electron conﬁguration with the general
notation ns2, which is characteristic of s block elements.
Practice Problems
10. Without looking at a periodic table, identify the group number,
period number, and block of an atom that has the following
electron conﬁgurations.
(a) [Ne]3s1
(c) [Kr]5s24d105p5
(b) [He]2s2
11. Use the aufbau principle to write complete electron conﬁgurations for
the atom of the element that ﬁts the following descriptions.
(a) group 2 (IIA) element in period 4
(b) noble gas in period 6
(c) group 12 (IIB) element in period 4
(d) group 16 (VIA) element in period 2
12. Identify all the possible elements that have the following valence
electron conﬁgurations.
(a) s2d1
(b) s2p3
(c) s2p6
13. For each of the elements below, use the aufbau principle to write the
full and condensed electron conﬁgurations and draw partial orbital
diagrams for the valence electrons of their atoms. You may consult
the periodic table in Appendix C, or any other periodic table that
omits electron conﬁgurations.
(a) potassium
(b) nickel
(c) lead
Electron Conﬁgurations, Atomic Properties, and Periodic Trends
Electron conﬁgurations—representations of the electronic structure of
atoms—help to determine the atomic and chemical properties of the
elements. Properties such as atomic radius, ionization energy, metallic
character, and electron afﬁnity are periodic. That is, they follow recurring
trends in the periodic table. In a previous chemistry course, you studied
these properties and noted their general trends. With your newly
developed understanding of the periodic table, you are in a position to re-
examine these properties and consider the exceptions to the general
trends. Before doing so, carry out the following ThoughtLab, which
applies and synthesizes your understanding of the quantum mechanical
model of the atom, quantum numbers, electron conﬁgurations, and the
periodic arrangement of the elements.
150 MHR • Unit 2  Structure and Properties
ThoughtLab
Periodic Connections
The arrangement of elements in the periodic table
is a direct consequence of the allowed values for
the four quantum numbers. If the laws of physics
allowed these numbers to have different values,
the appearance of the periodic table would change.
In this activity, you will examine the effect on the
periodic arrangement of the elements when one of
the quantum numbers has a different set of allowed
values.
Part 1
Procedure
Analysis
1. Explain why there is only one orbital of a given
type for each principal quantum number, n.
2. What is the principal quantum number of the ﬁrst
d block elements, 13 and 14?
3. What are the atomic numbers of the elements
that are the noble gases in our universe?
4. Which elements would you expect to form
cations with a charge of 2+?
5. Which elements would you expect to form
anions with a charge of 1−?
1. Suppose, in a different universe, that the
6. What is the principal quantum number of the
quantum number ml has only one allowed
value, ml = 1. All other allowed values for the
remaining quantum numbers are unchanged.
Therefore, the set of allowed values for all
quantum numbers is:
n = 1, 2, 3, . . .
l = 0, 1, 2, . . .(n − 1)
ml = 1
ms = + 1
2
Write a memory aid for the relative order of
orbital energies for the ﬁrst six energy levels.
, − 1
2
2. Assume that the exclusion principle and Hund’s
rule are followed. Demonstrate that the periodic
table for the ﬁrst 30 elements would be as shown
below:
s block
1
2
3
1
3
7
2
4
8
p block
5
9
6
10
d block
4
11
12
13
14
15
16
5
17
18
19
20
21
22
6
23
24
27
28
29
30
d
o
i
r
e
p
25
26
f block
f block elements, 25 and 26?
7. What are the atomic numbers of the elements in
this alternative universe that would correspond
to the noble gases of our universe?
Part 2
Procedure
1. In another different universe, the quantum
number ml has the allowed values of
ml = 0, 1, 2. . . + l. That is, the values of ml are
positive integers, to a maximum value of +l. All
other allowed values are unchanged, so the set
of allowed values is:
n = 1, 2, 3, . . .
l = 0, 1, 2, . . .(n − 1)
ml = 0, 1, 2 . . . + l
ms = + 1
2
Design the periodic table for the ﬁrst
30 elements.
, − 1
2
2. Label the s, p, and d block elements.
3. Shade or colour the noble gas-like elements.
Analysis
1. Explain why the number of p orbitals in this
imaginary periodic table is less than the number
in the real periodic table.
2. What are the atomic numbers of the elements in
this new universe that are likely to have proper-
ties similar to the alkali metals of our universe?
3. How many of the ﬁrst 30 elements are probably
non-metals?
4. What is the electron conﬁguration of atomic
number 20?
Chapter 3  Atoms, Electrons, and Periodic Trends • MHR 151
Periodic Trends in Atomic Radius
As you know, atoms are not solid spheres. Their volumes (the extent of
their orbitals) are described in terms of probabilities. Nevertheless, the
size of an atom — its atomic radius — is a measurable property. Chemists
can determine it by measuring the distance between the nuclei of bonded,
neighbouring atoms. For example, for metals, atomic radius is half the
distance between neighbouring nuclei in a crystal of the metal element.
For elements that occur as molecules, which is the case for many non-
metals, atomic radius is half the distance between nuclei of identical
atoms that bonded together with a single covalent bond. In Figure 3.23,
the radii of metallic elements represent the radius of an atom in a metallic
crystal. The radii of all other elements represent the radius of an atom of
the element participating in a single covalent bond with one additional,
like atom.
1
(IA)
H
37
8
(VIIIA)
He
31
2
(IIA)
3
(IIIA)
4
(IVA)
5
(VA)
6
(VIA)
7
(VIIA)
Li
152
Be
112
B
85
C
77
N
75
O
73
F
72
Ne
71
Na
186
Mg
160
Al
143
Si
118
P
110
S
103
Cl
100
Ar
98
K
227
Ca
197
Ga
135
Ge
122
As
120
Se
119
Br
114
Kr
112
Rb
248
Sr
215
In
167
Sn
140
Sb
140
Te
142
I
133
Xe
131
Cs
265
Ba
222
Tl
170
Pb
146
Bi
150
Po
168
At
(140)
Rn
(140)
Fr
(270)
Ra
(220)
3
(IIIB)
4
(IVB)
5
(VB)
6
(VIB)
7
(VIIB)
8            9          10
(VIIIB)
11
(IB)
12
(IIB)
Sc
162
Ti
147
V
134
Cr
128
Mn
127
Fe
126
Co
125
Ni
124
Cu
128
Zn
134
Y
180
Zr
160
Nb
146
Mo
139
Tc
136
Ru
134
Rh
134
Pd
137
Ag
144
Cd
151
La
187
Hf
159
Ta
146
W
139
Re
137
Os
135
Ir
136
Pt
138
Au
144
Hg
151
d
o
i
r
e
P
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
4
5
6
Representations of atomic radii for main group and transition elements.
Figure 3.23
(Values for atomic radii are given in picometres. Those in parentheses have only two
signiﬁcant digits.)
152 MHR • Unit 2  Structure and Properties
Figure 3.23 shows the periodic trends associated with the atomic
radius. You can see that atomic radii generally decrease across a period.
Furthermore, atomic radii generally increase down a group. Two factors
affect differences in atomic radii.
One factor affecting atomic radii is changing n. As n increases, there
is a higher probability of ﬁnding electrons farther from their nucleus.
Therefore, the atomic volume is larger. In other words, atomic radius
tends to increase with increasing n, and decrease with decreasing n.
The other factor that affects atomic radii is changing nuclear charge —
speciﬁcally, the effective nuclear charge. Effective nuclear charge is the
net force of attraction between electrons and the nucleus they surround.
Only hydrogen’s single electron experiences the full positive charge of
its nucleus. For hydrogen, the nuclear charge experienced by the electron
is Z, its atomic number. For all other atoms, the nuclear charge that any
given electron experiences is offset to some degree by other electrons.
Depending on the electron density between the nucleus and any
particular electron, the net force of attraction—the effective nuclear
charge, Zeff — may be large or small.
As Zeff increases, electrons are attracted more strongly to the nucleus,
and the size of the atom decreases. As Zeff decreases, electrons experience
a reduced force of attraction, and the size of the atom increases. Valence
electrons, especially, experience a smaller Zeff than inner electrons
because the inner electrons shield or screen them from the attractive force
of the nucleus.
For the main group elements, the combined inﬂuences of n, Zeff, and
this shielding effect have the following outcomes.
• n governs the trend of increasing atomic radius down a group. Down a
group, atoms of each subsequent element have one more level of inner
electrons, increasing the shielding effect. Because of the additional
shielding, Zeff for the valence electrons changes only slightly. The
increase in atomic size, therefore, results from the increasing value of n.
• Zeff governs the trend of decreasing atomic radius across a period.
Across a period, atoms of each element have one more electron added
to the same outer energy level — n does not change. The shielding effect
changes only slightly. However, Zeff changes considerably. The decrease
in atomic size across a period, therefore, results from increasing Zeff.
The atoms of transition elements do not display the same general trend as
the main group elements. A key reason for this is that electrons are added
to inner energy levels — the d orbitals — rather than to the outer energy
levels. As a result, Zeff changes relatively little, so atomic size remains
fairly constant. In later chemistry courses, you will learn a more complete
explanation for the atomic radii of transition-element atoms.
Periodic Trends in Ionization Energy
For the hydrogen atom, the difference in energy between n = 1 and n = ∞
represents the energy change associated with the complete removal of its
electron. (By convention, when n = ∞, an electron is considered to be
completely removed from its atom.) The energy needed to completely
remove one electron from a ground state gaseous atom is called the
ionization energy. Energy must be added to the atom to remove an
electron in order to overcome the force of attraction exerted on the
electron by the nucleus. Since multi-electron atoms have two or more
electrons, they also have more than one ionization energy.
Chapter 3  Atoms, Electrons, and Periodic Trends • MHR 153
A gaseous atom’s ﬁrst ionization energy is the least energy required to
remove an electron from the outermost occupied energy level. The second
ionization energy is always greater than the ﬁrst ionization energy,
because the electron must be removed from a positively charged ion. The
same reasoning applies for successive ionization energies.
First ionization energy (IE1) is closely linked to an atom’s chemical
reactivity. Atoms with a low IE1 tend to form cations during chemical reac-
tions. Notice in Figure 3.24 that the atoms with the lowest IE1 are those
belonging to group 1 elements. These elements, also known as the alkali
metals, are among the most reactive elements in the periodic table. Atoms
of elements with high IE1 tend to form anions: negatively charged ions.
(A notable exception is the noble gases, which do not form ions naturally.)
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
)
l
o
m
/
J
k
(
y
g
r
e
n
e
n
o
i
t
a
z
i
n
o
i
t
s
r
i
F
He
Ne
Ar
Kr
Xe
Rn
Li
Na
K
Rb
Cs
Periodic trends
Figure 3.24
involving ﬁrst ionization energy
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Atomic number
Figure 3.24 illustrates several trends associated with ionization energy.
• Ionization energy generally decreases down a group. Notice that this
trend is the inverse of the trend for atomic radius. The two trends are,
in fact, linked. As atomic radius increases, the distance of valence
electrons from the nucleus also increases. There is a decrease, therefore,
in the force of attraction exerted by the nucleus on the valence
electrons. Thus, less energy is needed to remove one such electron.
• Ionization energy generally increases across a period. Again, this trend
is linked to the atomic radius. Across a period, the atomic radius
decreases because Zeff increases. The force of attraction between the
nucleus and valence electrons is subsequently increased. Therefore,
more energy is needed to remove one such electron.
Several minor variations in these trends occur. The variations involve
boron and aluminum in group 13 (IIIA) and oxygen and sulfur in group 16
(VIA). The drop in IE1 with group 13 occurs because electrons start to ﬁll
the np orbitals. These orbitals are higher in energy than the ns orbital, so
the additional electron is more easily removed. Group 16 marks the ﬁrst
pairing of the p orbital electrons. The np3 conﬁguration of nitrogen is
more stable than the np4 conﬁguration of oxygen. Electron repulsions
154 MHR • Unit 2  Structure and Properties
increase the orbital energy in oxygen. Therefore, less energy is required to
remove the fourth p sublevel electron in oxygen.
Periodic trends in ionization energy are linked to trends involving the
reactivity of metals. In general, the chemical reactivity of metals increases
down a group and decreases across a period. These trends, as well as a
further trend from metallic to non-metallic properties across a period, and
increasing metallic properties down a group, are shown in Table 3.1.
Table 3.1 Periodic Trends in Reactivity of Metals
Reaction
Group 1
Group 2
Group 13
Group 14
Transition Metals
(for example, Fe,
Co, Ni, Cu, Zn,
Ag, Au)
With oxygen
in the air
React rapidly to form
oxides with the
general formula M2O.
These compounds
are strong bases.
React moderately to
form basic oxides
with the general
formula MO.
React slowly.
Aluminum forms an
oxide coating that
protects the metal;
the compound Al2O3
can act as a base or
an acid.
C and Si are non-
metals, and form
acidic oxides. Ge
is a metalloid, and
forms an acidic oxide.
SnO2 can act as an
acid or a base. PbO2
is unreactive.
Zn is the most
reactive transition
metal, and forms ZnO
when the metal is
burned in air. Ag and
Au do not react.
With water
React vigorously
with cold water,
generating H2(g)
and forming a
strong base with
the general
formula MOH.
React slowly in
cold water,
generating H2(g)
and forming a
strong base,
M(OH)2.
Al displaces H2(g)
from steam.
Reaction with
dilute acids
The reaction is
dangerously
violent, igniting
H2(g) generated.
React quickly
generating H2(g).
Al reacts readily
if the protective
oxide coating is
removed, to
generate H2(g) .
The most metallic
elements, Sn and
Pb, do not react
with water.
Sn and Pb react
slowly to form
H2(g) .
Zn and Fe
displace H2(g)
from steam. Fe
rusts slowly at
room temperature.
Zn reacts readily
to generate H2(g),
Cu, Ag, and Au
do not react.
Magnesium ribbon reacting
with oxygen in air
Potassium reacting
with water
Nickel reacting with
dilute acid
Chapter 3  Atoms, Electrons, and Periodic Trends • MHR 155
Periodic Trends in Electron Afﬁnity
Electron afﬁnity is the change in energy that occurs when an electron is
added to a gaseous atom. As was the case with ionization energy, there is
more than one value for electron afﬁnity. The ﬁrst electron afﬁnity results
in the formation of an anion with a charge of 1−. For example, when a
neutral ﬂuorine atom acquires an electron, as in a bonding situation,
the resulting electron conﬁguration of the ﬂuoride ion is the same as that
of the noble gas, neon:
−
F (1s22s22p5) + e− → F
(1s22s22p6) ∆E = EA1
Fluorine is a highly reactive element. The relative ease with which
it gains an electron when it forms bonds is reﬂected in its high
electron afﬁnity.
1
(IA)
H
− 72.8
2
(IIA)
13
(IIIA)
14
(IVA)
15
(VA)
16
(VIA)
17
(VIIA)
18
(VIIIA)
He
(+21)
Li
− 59.6
Be
(+241)
B
− 26.7
C
− 122
N
0
O
− 141
F
− 328
Ne
(+29)
Na
− 52.9
Mg
(+230)
Al
− 42.5
Si
− 134
P
− 72.0
S
− 200
Cl
− 349
Ar
(+34)
K
− 48.4
Ca
(+156)
Ga
− 28.9
Ge
− 119
As
− 78.2
Se
− 195
Br
− 325
Kr
(+39)
Rb
− 46.9
Sr
(+167)
In
− 28.9
Sn
− 107
Sb
− 103
Te
− 190
I
− 295
Xe
(+40)
Cs
− 45.5
Ba
(+52)
Tl
− 19.3
Pb
− 35.1
Bi
− 91.3
Po
− 183
At
− 270
Rn
(+41)
Electron afﬁnities for the main group elements. Negative values mean that
Figure 3.25
anions form with the release of energy. Positive values mean that energy is absorbed in order
to form the anion. The positive values are estimated, because the anions formed for atoms of
groups 2 and 18 are unstable.
Figure 3.25 shows electron afﬁnities for atoms of the main group ele-
ments. Positive values mean that energy is required to add an electron.
Negative values mean that energy is given off when an electron is added.
High negative numbers mean a high electron afﬁnity. Low negative num-
bers and positive numbers mean a low electron afﬁnity.
Trends for electron afﬁnity are more irregular than those for atomic
radius and ionization energy, because factors other than atomic size and
Zeff are involved. In future chemistry courses, you will learn about these
factors and how they explain the irregularities. However, the property of
electron afﬁnity is still signiﬁcant when you consider it in combination
with ionization energy. The trends that result from this combination are
important for chemical bonding.
• Atoms of elements in group 17 (VIIA), and to a lesser degree group 16
(VIA), have high ionization energies and high electron afﬁnities. As
a result, it takes a great deal of energy to remove electrons from these
atoms. However, these atoms attract electrons strongly, and form
negative ions in ionic compounds.
156 MHR • Unit 2  Structure and Properties
• Atoms of elements in group 1 (IA) and group 2 (IIA) have low ionization
energies and low electron afﬁnities. Atoms of these elements give up
electrons easily, but attract them poorly. Therefore, they form positive
ions in ionic compounds.
• Atoms of elements in group 18 (VIIIA) have very high ionization ener-
gies and very low electron afﬁnities. Therefore, in nature, they do not
gain, give up or share electrons at all. (Under laboratory conditions,
only the larger group 18 atoms can be made to form compounds.)
Section Summary
In this section, you have seen how a theoretical idea, the quantum
mechanical model of the atom, explains the experimentally determined
structure of the periodic table, and the properties of its elements. Your
understanding of the four quantum numbers enabled you to write electron
conﬁgurations and draw orbital diagrams for atoms of the elements. You
also learned how to “read” the periodic table to deduce the electron con-
ﬁguration of any element.
Since the start of high school science courses, you have used the
periodic table to help you investigate the composition and behaviour of
the elements. Your early experiences with the periodic table were limited
largely to the ﬁrst 20 elements, because you could explain their electron
structure without the concepts of orbitals and electron conﬁgurations.
The modern, quantum mechanical model of the atom has broadened
your understanding of the elements, the composition of their atoms,
and their chemical and physical behaviour in the world around you.
You will draw upon these concepts in the next chapter, as you expand
your understanding of the forces that are responsible for the millions of
kinds of matter in the universe: chemical bonds.
Section Review
1
(a)
K/U
What is the fourth quantum number, and in what way is it
different from the other three quantum numbers?
(b) Explain why the fourth quantum number is an example of a
quantized value.
2
C
Compare the orbitals of a hydrogen atom with the orbitals of all
other atoms. In what ways are they similar? In what ways are they
different?
3
C
Identify the group number, period number, and orbital block of the
periodic table for elements whose atoms have the following electron
conﬁgurations.
(a) [Kr]5s24d1
(b) [Ar]4s23d104p3
(c) [He]2s22p6
(d) [Ne]3s23p1
4
5
C
Which requires more energy: removing a valence electron from its
atom or removing an electron from an inner energy level? Explain why.
K/U
On which side of the periodic table would you ﬁnd an element
whose atom is likely to form a cation? Which atomic property is
related to this question?
Chapter 3  Atoms, Electrons, and Periodic Trends • MHR 157
6
K/U
In what ways are each of the following related to or affected by
one another?
(a) the aufbau principle, the exclusion principle, and Hund’s rule
(b) electron conﬁgurations and orbital diagrams
(c) ionization energy and atomic radius
(d) ionization energy and electron afﬁnity
(e) effective nuclear charge and valence electrons
(f) the periodic table and chemical properties of the elements
(g) electron conﬁgurations and the periodic table
(h) electron conﬁgurations and quantum numbers
(i) electron conﬁgurations, period number, and group number
(j) the quantum mechanical model of the atom and the periodic table
7
C
Use the aufbau principle to write complete and condensed electron
conﬁgurations for the most common ions for the elements listed below,
and explain the signiﬁcance of any patterns you observe in their
electronic structures.
(a) sodium
(b) calcium
(c) chlorine
(d) sulfur
8
I
The following data lists the ionization energies for a given atom:
IE1 = 738 kJ/mol; IE2
the valence electron conﬁguration for this atom, and explain your
reasoning.
= 7733 kJ/mol . Predict
= 1451 kJ/mol; IE3
158 MHR • Unit 2  Structure and Properties
Review
Reﬂecting on Chapter 4
Summarize this chapter in the format of your
choice. Here are a few ideas to use as guidelines:
• Compare the Rutherford, Bohr, and quantum
mechanical models of the atom.
• Distinguish between the view of matter and
energy in the macroscopic world (the world of
everyday experience) and the view of matter
and energy in the quantum mechanical world.
• Describe, using examples, the relationship
between the four quantum numbers and the
electron conﬁgurations of atoms.
• Explain the relationship between the electronic
structure of atoms and the arrangement of
elements in the periodic table.
• Illustrate the trends associated with several
atomic and chemical properties of the elements.
Reviewing Key Terms
For each of the following terms, write a sentence
that shows your understanding of its meaning.
nuclear model
absorption spectrum
photons
emission spectrum
quantum
quantum mechanical
model of the atom
orbitals
principal quantum
number (n)
magnetic quantum
number (ml)
Pauli exclusion
principle
aufbau principle
Hund’s rule
ionization energy
ground state
orbital-shape
quantum number (l)
spin quantum
number (ms)
electron conﬁguration
orbital diagram
atomic radius
electron afﬁnity
Knowledge/Understanding
1. Explain the experimental observations and
inferences that led Rutherford to propose the
nuclear model of the atom.
2. Explain how the Bohr atomic model differs
from the Rutherford atomic model, and explain
the observations and inferences that led Bohr to
propose his model.
3. Both the Rutherford and Bohr atomic models
have been described as planetary models. In
what ways is this comparison appropriate? In
what ways is this comparison misleading?
4. Brieﬂy describe the contributions made by the
following physicists to the development of the
quantum mechanical model of the atom.
(a) Planck
(b) de Broglie
(c) Einstein
(d) Heisenberg
(e) Schrödinger
5. List characteristics of the s, p, d, and f blocks to
clearly distinguish among the atoms of their
elements.
6. Explain how Pauli’s exclusion principle and
Hund’s rule assist you in writing electron
conﬁgurations.
7. Give the energy level and type of orbital
occupied by the electron with the following
set of quantum numbers: n = 3, l = 1 ,
ml = 0, ms = + 1
2
.
8. Differentiate between a ground state sulfur
atom and an excited state sulfur atom.
Use electron conﬁgurations to illustrate this
difference.
9. Which of the following pairs of atoms would
you expect to have a larger atomic radius?
Explain your choice.
(a) Na, Mg
(b) Cl, K
(c) Ca, Sr
(d) Al, Ga
(e) O, F
(f) Cl, Br
10. Locate each of the following elements on a
periodic table, and state the orbital block in
which each element is found: U, Zr, Se, Rb, Re,
Sr, Dy, Kr.
11. The chemical formulas for the oxides of
lithium, beryllium, and boron are: Li2O, BeO,
and B2O3. Write the formulas for the oxides
of sodium, potassium, magnesium, calcium,
aluminum, and gallium. Explain how you
determined their formulas.
12. (a) How many electron-containing orbitals does
an arsenic atom have in the ground state?
(b) How many of the orbitals are completely
ﬁlled?
(c) How many of the orbitals are associated with
the atom’s fourth principal energy level?
(d) How many possible orbitals could electrons
occupy if the atom were excited?
Chapter 3  Atoms, Electrons, and Periodic Trends • MHR 159
(j) a transition metal for which the aufbau
principle predicts an electron conﬁguration
that would be incorrect (Note: There are
several possible answers; you are required
to provide only one.)
17. On your copy of the periodic table from
question 16, colour-code and label the four
orbital blocks.
18. Imagine that scientists have successfully
synthesized element X, with atomic number
126. Predict the values of n and l for the
outermost electron in an atom of this element.
State the number of orbitals there would be in
this energy sublevel.
Communication
19. In terms of the general periodic trends for
groups and periods, explain why ranking the
following pairs might prove tricky.
(a) K and Sr, according to atomic size
(b) Mn and Fe, according to ﬁrst
ionization energy
(c) Na and Ca, according to metallic character
20. Explain why it is not possible to measure the
size of an atom directly.
21. Identify elements whose atoms have the
following valence electron conﬁgurations:
(a) 5s1
(b) 4s23d2
(c) 3s2
(d) 4s23d104p3
22. Why are there no p block elements in period 1
of the periodic table?
23. At one time, scandium (Z = 21) was placed
in the same group of the periodic table as
aluminum (Z = 13).
(a) Use the aufbau principle to write the ground
state electron conﬁgurations for atoms of
these two elements.
(b) What ionic charge would each have in
common? How might this have led chemists
to place them originally in the same group?
(c) Identify and explain all the evidence you
can think of to support their current
locations in the periodic table.
Inquiry
13. Which of the following is the correct orbital
diagram for the third and fourth principal
energy levels of a vanadium atom (Z = 23)?
Justify your answer.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
14. Each of the following orbital diagrams is
incorrect. Identify the errors, explain how you
recognized them, and use the aufbau principle
to write electron conﬁgurations using the
corrected orbital diagrams.
(a) carbon:
(b) iron:
(c) bromine:
15. The electron conﬁgurations below represent
atoms in excited states. Identify each atom, and
write its ground state electron conﬁguration.
(a) 1s22s2sp63s13p1
(b) 1s22s22p63s23p44s1
(c) 1s22s22p63s23p64s23d44p1
(d) 1s22s22p63s23p64s23d104p65s14d2
16. Sketch a blank periodic table into your
notebook to ﬁll, roughly, half a page. Write
the letters of the questions below in their
appropriate place in the periodic table.
(a) smallest atomic radius in period 3
(b) lowest IE1 in period 5
(c) highest EA in period 17 (VIIA)
(d) largest atomic radius in period 6
(e) most metallic character in period 14 (IVA)
(f) group 3 (IIIA) atom that forms the most
basic oxide
(g) forms a 2+ ion with the electron
conﬁguration [Ar]4s2
(h) has a condensed ground state electron
conﬁguration of [Ne]3s23p2
(i) period 4 element whose atom, in the ground
state, has an outermost energy level that is
completely full
160 MHR • Unit 2  Structure and Properties
(c) Zn:1s22s22p63s23p64s23d10 (d) O:1s22s22p4
12.(a) Sc, Y, La, Ac (b) N, P, As, Sb, Bi (c) Ne, Ar, Kr, Xe, Rn
13.(a) K:1s22s22p63s23p64s1; [Ar]4s1;
(b) Ni:1s22s22p63s23p64s23d8; [Ar]4s23d8 ;
(c) Pb:1s22s22p63s23p64s23d104p65s24d105p66s24f 145d106p2 ;
[Xe]6s24f 145d106p2
Section Review 3.1: 1.(a) mostly empty space; contains a
central, massive, concentration of charge. (b) scattering of
alpha particles that pass through gold foil  4.(a) radio waves,
microwaves, infrared, visible light, ultraviolet,
x-rays, gamma rays (b) opposite of (a)  5. UV has higher
energy and frequency, lower wavelength; both travel at the
same speed and have wave and particle-like properties
6.(a) photons absorbed to excite electron to higher energy
level (b) photons emitted as electron falls to lower energy
level (c) photons emitted as electrons falls to lower energy
level  7. n = 1, n = 2, n = 4, n = 5, n = 7 3.2: 2. Principal
quantum number, n, size and energy; orbital-shape
quantum number, l, shape; magnetic quantum number, ml,
orientation  5.(a) l = 0 , 1s (b) 4f (c) ml ≠ −2, but could be 0, ±1
6.(a) n = 4, l = 1 (b) 2p (c) 3d (d) n = 2, l = 0 3.3: 1. magnetic
spin quantum number, ms; not dependent on value of any
other quantum number, always ±1/2 for any ml value, not
derived from quantum mechanics (describes electron, not
orbital)  3.(a) group 3 (IIIB), period 5, d block (b) group 15
(VA), period 4, p block (c) group 18  (VIIIA), period 2,
p block (d) group 13 (IIIA), period 3, p block  4. removal of
inner electron, being closer to nucleus, Zeff is greater
5. left, ionization energy  7.(a) 1s22s22p6, [Ne]
(b) 1s22s22p63s23p6 [Ar] (c) 1s22s22p63s23p6 [Ar]
(d) 1s22s22p63s23p6; stable ions have a noble gas electron
conﬁguration  8. ns2, large jump between IE2 and IE3
indicates that a noble gas electron conﬁguration was
attained after 2 electrons are removed
24. The values for ionization energy in the
periodic table in Appendix C are ﬁrst
ionization energies. Construct a bar graph
to show the relative sizes of IE1 values for
the main group elements. If available, use
spreadsheet software to plot and render
your graph.
Making Connections
25. Scientists have succeeded in synthesizing
about 25 elements that do not exist in nature.
All except one of these (technetium, Z = 43)
are members of period 7. All are very dense
and radioactive. Many, such as Rutherfordium
(Z = 104 ) and Bohrium (Z = 107), are quite
short-lived, with no known applications
outside of the laboratory. An exception is the
element plutonium (Z = 94). Research several
applications of this element, and the properties
that make it well-suited for these uses. What
risks are associated with plutonium? Do the
risks outweigh the beneﬁts? Justify your
opinions.
26. Synthesizing elements requires the use of
equipment called particle accelerators.
These machines, usually the size of buildings,
are enormously expensive to build and operate.
Do you think this money could be better spent
elsewhere? Conduct research to help you exam-
ine this question thoroughly and thoughtfully.
Present your ﬁndings in the form of an editorial
that either supports or opposes theoretical
scientiﬁc research of this kind.
Answers to Practice Problems and Short Answers to
Section Review Questions
Practice Problems: 1.(a) 0, 1, 2, 3, 4 (b) 0
2.(a) ±4, ±3, ±2, ±1, 0 (b) 0  3.(a) 2s; 0; one (b) 4f ; ±3, ±2, ±1, 0 ;
seven  4. n = 2, l = 1 , 1 ml = 0, ±1 5. (b), (c), allowed
6. Na: 1s22s22p63s1; Mg:1s22s22p63s2; Al: 1s22s22p63s23p1;
Si: 1s22s22p63s23p2 ; P: 1s22s22p63s23p3; S: 1s22s22p63s23p4;
Cl: 1s22s22p63s23p5; Ar: 1s22s22p63s23p6 7. Na:[Ne]3s1;
Mg:[Ne]3s2; Al:[Ne]3s23p1; Si:[Ne]3s23p2 ; P:[Ne]3s23p3;
S:[Ne]3s23p4; Cl:[Ne]3s23p5; Ar:[Ne]3s23p6 9. 2 (IIA): ns2; 13
(IIIA): ns2np1; 14 (IVA): ns2np2; 15 (VA): ns2np3; 16 (VIA):
ns2np4; 17 (VIIA): ns2np5; 18 (VIIIA): ns2np6 10.(a) group1
(IA), period 3, s block (b) group 2 (IIA), period 2, s block
(c) group17 (VIIA), period 5, p block
11.(a) Ca:1s22s22p63s23p64s2
(b) Rn:1s22s22p63s23p64s23d104p65s24d105p66s24f 145d106p6
Chapter 3  Atoms, Electrons, and Periodic Trends • MHR 161
Structures and
Properties of Substances
A water molecule has a bent shape, while a carbon dioxide molecule
is linear. An ammonia molecule looks like a pyramid, and sulfur
hexaﬂuoride (one of the most dense and most stable gaseous compounds)
is shaped like an octahedron. In fact, all molecules in nature have a
speciﬁc shape, which is important to their chemistry.
Why does the shape of a molecule matter? To answer this question,
consider that, right now, each nerve cell in your brain is communicating
with adjacent nerve cells by releasing molecules called neurotransmitters
from one cell to the next. Enzymes are assisting in the chemical break-
down of food in your digestive system. The aroma of cologne, desk wood,
or cleansers that you may be smelling is a result of odorous molecules
migrating from their sources to speciﬁc sites in your nasal passages.
Each of these situations depends on the ability of one molecule with a
speciﬁc shape to “ﬁt” into a precise location with a corresponding shape.
The properties of substances derive from the ways in which particles
bond together, the forces that act within and among the compounds they
form, and the shapes that result from these interactions.
In this chapter, you will review and extend your understanding of
chemical bonding. You will discover how and why each molecule has a
characteristic shape, and how molecular shape is linked to the properties
of substances. You will also consider the importance of molecular shape
to the development of materials with speciﬁc applications in the world
around you.
What atomic and molecular
properties explain the macroscopic
properties of the fabric used to
make these protective gloves?
C h a p t e r   P r e v i e w
4.1 Chemical Bonding
4.2 Molecular Shape and
Polarity
4.3 Intermolecular Forces
in Liquids and Solids
P r e r e q u i s i t e
C o n c e p t s   a n d   S k i l l s
Before you begin this chapter,
review the following concepts
and skills:
(cid:2) identifying the number
of valence electrons in
an atom (from previous
studies; Chapter 3,
section 3.2)
(cid:2) writing the ground state
electron conﬁgurations
of atoms (Chapter 3,
section 3.2)
(cid:2) predicting bond type
using electronegativity
(from previous studies)
162 MHR • Unit 2  Structure and Properties
Chemical Bonding
Of the more than one hundred elements that occur in nature or that have
been produced synthetically, only the noble gases exist naturally as single,
uncombined atoms. The atoms of all other elements occur in some
combined form, bonded together. Chemical bonds are electrostatic forces
that hold atoms together in compounds.
Why, however, do atoms form bonds at all? The answer to this
question involves energy. In nature, systems of lower energy tend to be
favoured over systems of higher energy. In other words, lower-energy
systems tend to have greater stability than higher-energy systems. Bonded
atoms, therefore, tend to have lower energy than single, uncombined
atoms.
Using Lewis Structures to Represent Atoms in Chemical Bonding
Chemical bonding involves the interaction of valence electrons—the
electrons that occupy the outermost principal energy level of an atom.
You have used Lewis structures in previous studies to indicate the
valence electrons of atoms. Recall that to draw the Lewis structure of an
atom, replace its nucleus and inner electrons with its atomic symbol.
Then add dots around the atomic symbol to symbolize the atom’s valence
electrons. Many chemists place the dots starting at the top and continue
adding dots clockwise, at the right, then bottom, then left. After you have
drawn the ﬁrst four dots, you begin again at the top, as shown below.
4.1
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
(cid:2) compare ionic, covalent,
and metallic bonding
(cid:2) predict the polarity of vari-
ous covalent bonds, using
electronegativity values
(cid:2) observe and analyze the
properties of substances,
and infer the type of bonding
(cid:2) communicate your under-
standing of the following
terms: chemical bond, ionic
bond, covalent bond, lattice
energy, bond energy, polar
covalent bond, free-electron
model, metallic bond
•
Na
•
•
Mg
•
Al
•
•
•
•
Si
•
•
•
• •
•P
•
•
• •
•
•S
•
•
• •
Cl
• •
•
•
• •
•
•
Ar
• •
•
•
In this chapter, you will use Lewis structures often to represent
molecules and the simplest formula unit of an ionic solid. Drawing a
Lewis structure for a molecule lets you see exactly how many electrons
are involved in each bond, and helps you to keep track of the number of
valence electrons. In the example below, notice that there are two ways
to show the bonding pairs of electrons. Some chemists use dots only.
Other chemists show the bonding pairs as lines between atoms. Dots are
reserved for representing a lone pair (a non-bonding pair) of electrons.
You will see the second example, with lines for bonding pairs, used more
often in this textbook.
• •
O
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•C •
•
• •
O
•
•
or
• •
O
•
•
C
• •
O
•
•
(four lone pairs)
Bonding and the Properties of Substances
Chemists classify substances according to their bonds and the forces of
attraction that exist between their particles. In the following investigation,
you will observe and record data about the properties of ﬁve solids. Each
solid represents a particular type of bonding. Experimental evidence from
this investigation will support some of the explanations you will
encounter later in the chapter. Keep a record of your observations and
ideas for future reference.
Chapter 4  Structures and Properties of Substances • MHR 163
S K I L L   F O C U S
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
Properties of Substances
In this investigation, you will study the properties
of ﬁve different types of solids: non-polar cova-
lent, polar covalent, ionic, network, and metallic.
You will be asked to identify each substance as
one of the ﬁve types. In some cases, this will
involve making inferences and drawing on past
knowledge and experience. In others, this may
involve process-of-elimination. The emphasis is
on the skills and understandings you use to make
your decisions. Later, you will be able to assess
the validity of your decisions.
Question
What are some of the properties of the different
types of solids?
Safety Precautions
• Tie back long hair and any loose clothing.
• Before you light the candle or Bunsen burner,
check that there are no ﬂammable solvents nearby.
• Use only a pinch of SiO2 in steps 6 and 7.
Materials
samples of parafﬁn wax, C20H42 (shavings and
a block)
samples of sucrose, C12H22O11 (granular and a
large piece, such as a candy)
samples of sodium chloride, NaCl (granular and
rock salt)
samples of silicon dioxide, SiO2 (sand and
quartz crystals)
samples of tin, Sn (granular and foil)
distilled water
100 mL beaker and stirrer
metal plate (iron or aluminum)
conductivity tester
candle
Bunsen burner
retort stand with ring clamp
timer
164 MHR • Unit 2  Structure and Properties
Procedure
1. Read the entire Procedure before you begin.
Design a table to record your observations.
2. Rub one solid onto the surface of another.
Rank the relative hardness of each solid on a
scale of 1 to 5. A solid that receives no scratch
marks when rubbed by the other four is the
hardest (5). A solid that can be scratched by
the other four is the softest (1).
3. One at a time, place a small quantity (about
0.05 g) of each solid into 25 mL of distilled
water in a 100 mL beaker. Observe and record
the solubility of each solid.
4. For solids that dissolved in step 3, test the
solution for electrical conductivity.
5. Test each of the ﬁve large solid samples for
electrical conductivity.
6. One at a time, put a small sample of each
solid on the metal plate. Place the plate on
the ring stand and heat it with the burning
candle. The plate should be just above the
ﬂame. Observe how soon the solid melts.
7. Repeat step 6 with a Bunsen ﬂame. Observe
how soon the solid melts.
Analysis
1. Based on what you know about bonding,
classify each solid as non-polar covalent,
polar covalent, ionic, network, or metallic.
Give reasons to support your decision.
2. Determine the electronegativity difference
between the elements in each of the
substances. How does this difference relate
to the properties you observed?
Conclusion
3. Based on the properties you observed, write a
working deﬁnition of each type of solid.
Ionic Bonding
The force of attraction between oppositely charged ions (cations and
anions) constitutes an ionic bond. Ionic bonding occurs between atoms
of elements that have large differences in electronegativity — usually a
metal with a very low electronegativity and a non-metal with a very high
electronegativity. The units of ionic compounds such as sodium chloride
and magnesium ﬂuoride cannot be separated easily by direct heating of the
crystal salts. The ions that make up the ionic solid are arranged in a specif-
ic array of repeating units. In solid sodium chloride, for example, the ions
are arranged in a rigid lattice structure. In such systems, the cations and
anions are arranged so that the system has the minimum possible energy.
Because of the large differences in electronegativity, the atoms in an
ionic compound usually come from the s block metals and the p block
non-metals. For example, magnesium in Group 2 (IIA) and ﬂuorine in
Group 17 (VIIA) combine to form the ionic compound magnesium
ﬂuoride, MgF2. Figure 4.1 shows a repeating unit in the crystal model
of magnesium ﬂuoride. The process that results in the formation of ions
can be illustrated with an orbital diagram or with Lewis structures, as
shown in Figures 4.2 and 4.3. Use them as a guide for the Practice
Problems below. Through bonding, the atoms of each element obtain a
valence electron conﬁguration like that of the nearest noble gas. In this
case, the nearest noble gas for both ions is neon. This observation reﬂects
the octet rule.
Mg
F
Figure 4.1
magnesium ﬂuoride crystal
A repeating unit in a
F
→→ →→ →→ →→ →
1s 2s
2p
Mg
→→ →→ →→ →→ →→ →→
3s
1s 2s
2p
F
→→ →→ →→ →→ →
1s 2s
2p
Mg
+
•
•
• •
F
• •
• •
F
• •
•
•
•
•
Practice Problems
Figure 4.2
MgF2
An orbital diagram for
F−
→→ →→ →→ →→ →→
1s 2s
2p
Mg2+
→→ →→ →→ →→ →→
1s 2s
2p
F−
→→ →→ →→ →→ →→
1s 2s
2p
• •
•
• F
• •
−
•
Mg
2+
•
−
• •
F
• •
•
•
Figure 4.3
for MgF2
A Lewis structure
1. Write electron conﬁgurations for the following:
(a) Li+
(c) Br−
(b) Ca2+
(d) O2−
2. Draw Lewis structures for the chemical species in question 1.
3. Draw orbital diagrams and Lewis structures to show how the follow-
ing pairs of elements can combine. In each case, write the chemical
formula for the product.
(a) Li and S
(c) K and Cl
(b) Ca and Cl
(d) Na and N
Continued ...
Chapter 4  Structures and Properties of Substances • MHR 165
Continued ...
4. To which main group on the periodic table does X belong ?
(a) MgX
(c) X2O3
(b) X2SO4
(d) XCO3
Properties of Ionic Solids
Magnesium ﬂuoride has many properties that are characteristic of ionic
solids. In general, ionic solids have the following properties:
• crystalline with smooth, shiny surfaces
• hard but brittle
• non-conductors of electricity and heat
• high melting points
Many ionic solids are also soluble in water. Magnesium ﬂuoride, however,
is an exception. It has a very low solubility in water.
Lattice Energy and Ionic Bonding
The reaction between gaseous magnesium ions and gaseous ﬂuorine ions
is highly exothermic. Chemists have determined that 2957 kJ of energy is
(g) and 2 mol of F−
released when 1 mol of Mg2+
the stable ionic solid, MgF2.
(g) react to form 1 mol of
The amount of energy given off when an ionic crystal forms from the
gaseous ions of its elements is called the lattice energy. Thus, the lattice
energy of MgF2 is 2957 kJ/mol. The same amount of energy must be
added to break the ionic crystal back into its gaseous ions. What is the
relationship between lattice energy and the formation of an ionic bond?
For example, when solid magnesium and gaseous ﬂuorine react to form
magnesium ﬂuoride, the energy change is 1123 kJ/mol. How does this
energy change relate to magnesium ﬂuoride’s lattice energy of 2957 kJ/mol?
Remember that, in general, the lower the total energy of a system is,
the higher is its stability. Any process that requires the addition of energy
usually decreases the stability of the ionic arrangement. Any process
that gives off energy usually increases that stability. Ionic crystals such
as magnesium ﬂuoride have very high melting points. This means that a
large amount of energy is required to break the bonds that hold the ions
together in their rigid lattice structure. You might wonder if this energy
comes from the process of ionization. However, this is not the case. The
ionization energy of the metal is always larger than the electron afﬁnity of
the non-metal. In other words, the transfer of electrons between gaseous
ions always requires energy. In fact, it is the lattice energy given off
(2957 kJ/mol for MgF2) that favours the formation of ionic bonds.
For magnesium ﬂuoride, the overall decrease in energy of 1123 kJ/mol
is accounted for mainly by its large lattice energy. The lattice energies
of the magnesium halides decrease from ﬂuoride to iodide. The melting
points of these halides reveal a trend in the same direction, with magne-
sium ﬂuoride having the highest melting point and magnesium iodide
having the lowest melting point. In other words, the compound with the
largest lattice energy has the highest melting point—it requires the most
energy to disrupt the lattice structure.
Math
L I N K
, where
The electrostatic force of
attraction, F, between two
charges, q1 and q 2, separated
by a distance, d, is given by
the formula: F = kq1q2
d 2
k is a constant. How would the
charge (q) on two oppositely
charged ions, and the internu-
clear distance between the
ions (d ) in the crystal lattice,
affect the force of attraction
between the ions?
166 MHR • Unit 2  Structure and Properties
Covalent Bonding
Covalent bonding involves a balance between the forces of attraction
and repulsion that act between the nuclei and electrons of two or
more atoms. This idea is represented in Figure 4.4, with a molecule of
hydrogen, H2. There is an optimum separation for two hydrogen atoms
at which their nucleus-electron attractions, nucleus-nucleus repulsions,
and electron-electron repulsions achieve this balance. This optimum
separation favours a minimum energy for the system, and constitutes the
covalent bond between the two hydrogen atoms. Unlike ionic bonding,
in which electrons behave as if they are transferred from one atom to
another, covalent bonding involves the sharing of pairs of electrons.
In Chapter 3 you learned how the quantum mechanical model applies
to the atom. The model can also be extended to explain bonding. A
covalent bond may form when two half-ﬁlled atomic orbitals from two
atoms overlap to share the same region of space. A covalent bond involves
the formation of a new orbital, caused by the overlapping of atomic
orbitals. The new orbital has energy levels that are lower than those of
the original atomic orbitals. Since electrons tend to occupy the lowest
available energy level, the new orbitals provide a more energetically
favourable conﬁguration than the two atoms had before they interacted.
Characteristics of Covalent Bonding
In many cases, electron-sharing enables each atom in a covalent bond to
acquire a noble gas conﬁguration. For a hydrogen molecule, each atom
acquires a ﬁlled valence level like that of helium by treating the shared
pair of electrons as if it is part of its own composition. As you can see in
Figure 4.5, a single shared pair of electrons—a bonding pair — ﬁlls the
valence level of both hydrogen atoms at the same time.
The period 2 non-metals from carbon to ﬂuorine must ﬁll their 2s and
their three 2p orbitals to acquire a noble gas conﬁguration like that of
neon. Covalent bonding that involves these elements obeys the octet rule.
In the formation of the diatomic ﬂuorine molecule, F2 , for example, the
bonding (shared) pair of electrons gives each ﬂuorine atom a complete
valence level.
bonding pair
lone pairs
• •
• •
• •
• •
•
•
•
• F
• •
F
•
•
•
•
or
•
• F
• •
•
•
F
•
•
Each ﬂuorine atom also has three unshared pairs of electrons. These
pairs of electrons, called lone pairs, are not involved in bonding.
The covalent bond that holds molecules of hydrogen, ﬂuorine, and
hydrogen ﬂuoride together is a single bond. It involves a single bonding
pair of electrons. Some molecules are bonded together with two shared
pairs of electrons. These are called double bonds. Carbon dioxide is an
example of a covalent molecule that consists of double bonds.
• •
O
• •
•
•
•
•
•
•C •
•
• •
O
• •
or
• •
O
• •
C
• •
O
• •
Molecules that are bonded with three shared pairs of electrons have
triple bonds. Nitrogen, N2, another diatomic molecule, is a triple-bonded
molecule.
•
•
N
•
•
•
•
• • N
•
•
or
•
•
N
N
•
•
electron
nucleus
−
attraction
+
repulsion
+
−
optimum
separation
Covalent bonding
Figure 4.4
involves forces of attraction and
repulsion that occur simultaneously.
A
B
H • H
region of increased
electron density
1s
1s
Representations
Figure 4.5
of a covalent bond in a molecule
of hydrogen (A) Lewis structure
(B) Overlap of two 1s orbitals
Individual atoms of hydrogen
and ﬂuorine are highly
reactive, and readily bond
together to form molecules
of hydrogen ﬂuoride. Draw a
Lewis structure for hydrogen
ﬂuoride. Label the bonding
and lone pairs, and explain
why this molecule is stable.
Chapter 4  Structures and Properties of Substances • MHR 167
Bond energy is the energy required to break the force of attraction
between two atoms in a bond and to separate them. Thus, bond energy
is a measure of the strength of a bond. You might expect that the bond
energy would increase if more electrons were shared between two atoms
because there would be an increase in charge density between the nuclei
of the bonded atoms. In other words, you might predict that double bonds
are stronger than single bonds, and that triple bonds are stronger than
double bonds. The data in Table 4.1 support this prediction.
Table 4.1 Average Bond Energies of Bonds
Between Carbon Atoms and Between Nitrogen Atoms
Bond
Bond energy (kJ/mol)
Bond
Bond energy (kJ/mol)
C
C
C
C
C
C
347
607
839
N N
N N
N N
160
418
945
Predicting Ionic and Covalent Bonds
There are several methods you can use to predict the type of bond in
an unknown substance. For example, you can consider the substance’s
physical properties. In contrast to ionic solids, covalent (molecular)
compounds typically have the following properties:
• exist as a soft solid, a liquid, or a gas at room temperature
• have low melting points and boiling points
• are poor conductors of electricity, even in solution
• may not be soluble in water (acetone, however, is one of many
exceptions; you will ﬁnd out why shortly)
What if you know the formula of a compound but don’t know how
to classify it? In this case, you can use the electronegativity difference
between the bonding atoms to predict the type of bond. For example,
two atoms with identical electronegativities, such as chlorine
(∆EN = 3.16 − 3.16 = 0) share their electrons equally. They are bonded
covalently. When two atoms have very different electronegativities, the
atom with the higher electronegativity value attracts electrons more
strongly than the atom with the lower electronegativity value. In sodium
chloride, for instance, chlorine (EN = 3.16) attracts an electron much
more strongly than sodium (EN = 0.93). Therefore, sodium’s valence
electron has a very high probability of being found near chlorine, and a
very low probability of being found near sodium. A high electronegativity
difference is characteristic of ionic compounds.
It is common for chemists to describe the formation of ionic
compounds in terms of a transferring of electrons from one atom to
another. For example, in the formation of sodium chloride, you often
read that sodium loses its valence electron and that chlorine gains an
electron. Terms such as these — electron transfer, losing electrons, gaining
electrons — make it easier to discuss and model the behaviour of atoms
during ionic bonding and the formation of ionic compounds. Figure 4.6
provides a guide to classifying chemical bonds based on their electronega-
tivity difference. Notice that this “bonding continuum,” as it is sometimes
called, avoids deﬁnitive classiﬁcations. Instead, the character of chemical
bonds changes gradually with ∆EN.
Consider the differences in
properties between covalent
compounds and ionic com-
pounds. Do these differences
imply that covalent bonds
are weaker than ionic bonds?
Give evidence to justify your
answer.
3.3
+
−
mostly ionic
(∆EN > 1.7)
2.0
∆EN
polar covalent
(∆EN 0.4 –1.7)
mostly covalent
(∆EN < 0.4)
0
The relationship
Figure 4.6
between bonding character and
electronegativity difference. The
arrow with the “t” shape near the
tail is a vector that indicates the
magnitude and direction of polarity.
You will see this symbol again in
section 4.2.
168 MHR • Unit 2  Structure and Properties
Chemists consider bonded atoms with ∆EN between 0 and 0.4 as
being mostly covalent; electrons are shared equally or nearly equally.
For bonded atoms that have ∆EN between 0.4 and 1.7, the bond is
termed polar covalent. A polar covalent bond is a covalent bond with
an unequally shared pair of electrons between two atoms. This unequal
sharing results in a bond that has partially positive and partially negative
poles. (You will learn about the signiﬁcance of molecular polarity in
section 4.2.) Bonded atoms with ∆EN between 1.7 and 3.3 are mostly
ionic; electrons are shared so unequally that one bonded atom has a
strong negative charge and the other has a strong positive charge.
The gradual change in the magnitude of ∆EN between two atoms
is paralleled by a gradual change in the physical properties of the com-
pounds they form. For example, chlorine forms compounds with each of
the main-group elements of period 3, except for argon. Figure 4.7 shows
the relationship between ∆EN and the bonding, structure, and properties
of the period 3 chlorides.
Web
L I N K
www.mcgrawhill.ca/links/
chemistry12
Another way to classify bond-
ing involves calculating the
percent ionic character of the
bond. Search for information
about this approach on the
Internet, and write a summary
of your ﬁndings. In particular,
answer this question: Can a
bond ever be 100% covalent or
100% ionic? To start your
search, access the web site
above. Click on Web Links to
ﬁnd out where to go next.
sodium
chloride
(NaCl)
magnesium
chloride
(MgCl2)
+
• •
−
Na
•
•
•
•
Cl
• •
Mg
2+
• •
•
•
•
•
Cl
• •
−
2
aluminum chloride
(AlCl3)
• •
Cl
•
•
Al
Cl •
•
• •
• •
Cl
• •
• •
Cl
• •
• •
•
•
Cl
Al
•
•
Cl
• •
•
•
•
•
• •
Cl
• •
• •
Cl
• •
silicon
tetrachloride
(SiCl4)
• •
phosphorus
trichloride
(PCl3)
disulphur
dichloride
(S2Cl2)
chlorine
(Cl2)
Cl •
•
• •
Si
• •
Cl •
•
• •
• •
•
•
Cl
• •
• •
P
•
•
•
•
Cl
• •
• •
Cl •
•
• •
• •
•
•
Cl
• •
• •
S
• •
• •
S
• •
• •
• •
• •
Cl •
•
• •
•
•
Cl
• •
Cl •
•
• •
Figure 4.7
How does ∆EN affect bond type and properties of the Period 3 chlorides?
Practice Problems
5. List the following compounds in order of decreasing bond energy:
H(cid:2)Br, H(cid:2)I, H(cid:2)Cl. Use Appendix E to verify your answer.
6. Rank the following compounds in sequence from lowest melting
point to highest melting point, and give reasons for your decisions:
AsBr3, KBr, CaBr2.
Continued ...
Chapter 4  Structures and Properties of Substances • MHR 169
Na
millions
of atoms
− sea
e
Continued ...
7. From their position in the periodic table, predict which bond in
the following groups is the most polar. Verify your predictions by
calculating the ∆EN.
(a) C(cid:2)H, Si(cid:2)H, Ge(cid:2)H
(b) Sn(cid:2)Br, Sn(cid:2)I, Sn(cid:2)F
(c) C(cid:2)O, C(cid:2)H, C(cid:2)N
8. Classify the bonding in each of the following as covalent (non-polar),
polar covalent, or ionic. Afterwards, rank the polar covalent
compounds in order of increasing polarity.
(a) S8
(b) RbCl
(c) PF3
(d) SCl2
(e) F2
(f) SF2
A representation of
Figure 4.8
the free-electron model of metallic
bonding. This model applies to
metal alloys as well as to metallic
elements.
external
stress applied
+
+ + +
+ +
+ +
+ + + +
+ + + +
+ + + +
deformed metal
+
++
+
+
+
++
+
+
+
++
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
Metals are easily
Figure 4.9
deformed because one layer of pos-
itive ions can slide over another. At
the same time, the free electrons
(shown as a yellow cloud) continue
to bind the metal ions together.
Metallic Bonding
About two-thirds of all the naturally occurring elements are metals.
Despite this great diversity, metals have many properties in common.
Metals conduct electricity and heat in both their solid and liquid states.
Most metals are malleable and ductile; that is, they can be easily stretched,
bent, and deformed without shattering of the whole solid, or can be easily
made to be with the addition of heat or pressure. While metals show a
broad range of melting and boiling points, in general, metals change state
at moderate to high temperatures. Most metals have either one or two
valence electrons. What kind of bonding model can account for these
properties?
Based on electronegativity differences, you would not expect metals
to form ionic bonds with themselves or with other metals—and they do
not. Similarly, metals do not have a sufﬁcient number of valence electrons
to form covalent bonds with one another. Metals do, however, share
electrons. Unlike the electron sharing in covalent compounds, however,
electron sharing in metals occurs throughout the entire structure of the
metal. The free-electron model shown in Figure 4.8 pictures metals as
being composed of a densely packed core of metallic cations, within a
delocalized region of shared, mobile valence electrons. The force of
attraction between the positively charged cations and the pool of valence
electrons that moves among them constitutes a metallic bond.
Properties Explained by the Free-Electron Model
The free-electron model explains many properties of metals. For example:
• Conductivity: Metals are good conductors of electricity and heat because
electrons can move freely throughout the metallic structure. This freedom
of movement is not possible in solid ionic compounds, because the
valence electrons are held within the individual ionic bonds in the lattice.
• Malleability and Ductility: The malleability of metals can be explained
by viewing metallic bonds as being non-directional. The positive ions
are often layered as ﬁxed arrays (like soldiers lined up for inspection).
When stress is applied to a metal, one layer of positive ions can slide
over another layer. The layers move without breaking the array, which is
the reason why metals do not shatter immediately along a clearly
170 MHR • Unit 2  Structure and Properties
deﬁned point of stress. The delocalized electrons continue to exert a
uniform attraction on the positive ions, as you can see in Figure 4.9.
• Melting and Boiling Points: The melting and boiling points of Group 1
(IA) metals (with an s1 electron in their condensed electron conﬁgura-
tion) are generally lower than the melting and boiling points of Group 2
(IIA) metals (with an s2 in their condensed electron conﬁguration).
You would expect this trend, because the greater number of valence
electrons and the larger positive charge of Group 2 (IIA) atoms result in
stronger metallic bonding forces. This trend is also consistent with the
fact that Group 2 metals are smaller in size than Group 1 metals. Trends
involving the transition metals are more complex, in part because they
have a greater number of unpaired electrons in their d-orbitals. Because
these d electrons and those of the valence energy level have similar
magnitudes, the d electrons can participate in metallic bonding. In
general, however, transition elements have very high melting and
boiling points.
Section Summary
In this section, you have used Lewis structures to represent bonding in
ionic and covalent compounds, and have applied the quantum mechani-
cal theory of the atom to enhance your understanding of bonding. All
chemical bonds — whether their predominant character is ionic, covalent,
or between the two — result from the atomic structure and properties of
the bonding atoms. In the next section, you will learn how the positions of
atoms in a compound, and the arrangement of the bonding and lone pairs
of electrons, produce molecules with characteristic shapes. These shapes,
and the forces that arise from them, are intimately linked to the physical
properties of substances, as you will see in the ﬁnal section of the chapter.
Section Review
1
(a)
C
Distinguish between an ionic bond, a covalent bond, and a
polar covalent bond.
(b)
C
Draw Lewis structures to illustrate how the element bromine
can take part in an ionic bond, a covalent bond, and a polar
covalent bond.
(c)
C
How would the properties differ for the compounds you
have shown?
2
3
4
Arrange the following bonded pairs in order of decreasing
K/U
electronegativity difference: H(cid:2)Br, Cl(cid:2)I, O(cid:2)H, N(cid:2)Cl, S(cid:2)O.
K/U
Select a physical property of metals. Predict and explain how
this property would vary from left to right across a period in the
periodic table.
Identify the property shown in Figure 4.10, and name the type of
bonding that accounts for this property.
Web
L I N K
www.mcgrawhill.ca/links/
chemistry12
The free-electron model is a
simpliﬁed representation of
metallic bonding. While it is
helpful for visualizing metals
at the atomic level, this model
cannot sufﬁciently explain
the properties of all metals.
Quantum mechanics offers a
more comprehensive model
for metallic bonding. Go to the
web site above, and click on
Web Links. This will launch
you into the world of molecular
orbitals and band theory. Use
a graphic organizer or write a
brief report that compares the
free-electron and band-theory
models of metallic bonding.
Chapter 4  Structures and Properties of Substances • MHR 171
−
+
−
+
+
−
+
−
−
+
−
+
+
−
+
−
−
+
−
+
+
−
+
−
−
+
−
+
+
−
+
−
−
+
−
+
+
−
+
−
−
+
−
−
+
+
−
+
−
Figure 4.10
5
MC
Tungsten is used to make the ﬁlament in an electric light bulb,
while copper is the element of choice for electric wiring. What
properties do these two metals have in common and in what way(s)
do they differ to warrant their speciﬁc uses? What other metals could
be used to substitute for tungsten and copper? Why are tungsten and
copper used more often?
6
MC
MgCl2 and MgO are being considered for use in a high-temperature
industrial environment. What properties of these two compounds
would you check to determine which would be the better choice for
this application? Refer to a reference text and determine which of the
two compounds would be the better choice.
7
(a)
C
Iron is a hard substance, but it is easily corroded by oxygen
in the presence of water to form iron(III) oxide, commonly called
rust. Rust is chemically very stable but, structurally speaking, it has
very little strength. Explain this difference in properties of iron and
iron(III) oxide, in terms of what you have learned about the type of
bonding in these substances.
(b)
C
Aluminum reacts with oxygen in air to form aluminum oxide.
Unlike rust, which ﬂakes off, aluminum oxide remains bound
to the aluminum metal, forming a protective layer that prevents
further reaction. What might account for the difference in behaviour
between iron(III) oxide and aluminum oxide and their respective
metals?
172 MHR • Unit 2  Structure and Properties
4.2
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
(cid:2) draw Lewis structures for
molecules and polyatomic
ions
(cid:2) represent molecules and
polyatomic ions that are
exceptions to the octet rule
(cid:2) predict molecular shape and
polarity of molecules using
Valence-Shell Electron-Pair
Repulsion (VSEPR) theory
(cid:2) describe advances in
molecular theory as a result
of Canadian research
(cid:2) communicate your under-
standing of the following
terms: co-ordinate covalent
bond, resonance structure,
expanded valence energy
level, linear, trigonal planar,
tetrahedral, trigonal bipyra-
midal, octahedral, dipole
Molecular Shape and Polarity
A molecule is a discrete chemical entity, in which atoms are held together
by the electrostatic attractions of covalent bonds. In previous chemistry
courses, you used Lewis structures to represent the bonding in simple
molecules. In a Lewis structure, you assume that each of the atoms in
the molecule achieves a noble gas conﬁguration through the sharing of
electrons in single, double, or triple bonds. This section introduces you
to a systematic approach to drawing Lewis structures for a broader range
molecules and for polyatomic ions. You will see that, in some cases, there
are exceptions to the octet rule. Afterwards, you will use bonding theory
to help you predict the shapes of various molecules. From the shapes of
these molecules (and the electronegativity difference of their atoms), you
will determine the polarity of the substances that are comprised of these
molecules.
Why is polarity important? It explains why, for example, water is a
liquid at room temperature, rather than a gas. In other words, it helps
explain why Earth is capable of supporting life! You will explore the
signiﬁcance of molecular polarity in greater detail in section 4.3.
Lewis Structures for Molecules and Polyatomic Ions
You can use the procedure outlined below to draw the Lewis structures
for molecules and ions that have a central atom, with other atoms around
it. The Sample Problems and additional text that follow show how to
apply these steps for several molecules and polyatomic ions that obey the
octet rule. Afterwards, use Practice Problems 9 to 13 to practice drawing
Lewis structures.
How To Draw Lewis Structures for Simple Molecules and Ions with
a Central Atom
Step 1 Position the least electronegative atom in the centre of the
molecule or polyatomic ion. Write the other atoms around this
central atom, with each atom bonded to the central atom by a
single bond. Always place a hydrogen atom or a ﬂuorine atom
at an end position in the structure.
Step 2 (a) Determine the total number of valence electrons in the
molecule or ion. For polyatomic ions, pay close attention
to the charge. For example, if you are drawing a polyatomic
2− , add two electrons to the total number
anion such as CO3
of valence electrons calculated for the structure CO3. For a
+, subtract one electron from
polyatomic cation such as NH4
the total number of valence electrons calculated for the
structure NH4.
(b) Once you have the total number of valence electrons,
determine the total number of electrons needed for each
atom to achieve a noble gas electron conﬁguration.
Chapter 4  Structures and Properties of Substances • MHR 173
(c) Subtract the ﬁrst total (number of valence electrons) from the
second total (number of electrons needed to satisfy the octet
rule) to get the number of shared electrons. Then divide this
number by 2 to give the number of bonds. Double or triple
bonds may be needed to account for this number of bonds.
Double bonds count as two bonds. Triple bonds count as
three bonds.
Step 3 Subtract the number of shared electrons from the number of
valence electrons to get the number of non-bonding electrons.
Add these electrons as lone pairs to the atoms surrounding
the central atom so that you achieve a noble gas electron
conﬁguration for each atom.
Sample Problem
Drawing the Lewis Structure of a Molecule
Problem
Draw the Lewis structure for formaldehyde (methanal), CH2O.
Solution
The molecular formula, CH2O, tells you the number of each kind
of atom in the molecule. Following steps 1 to 3 from the procedure
outlined above:
Step 1 Since H is always placed at the end position and C is less
electronegative than O, C should be the central atom. Place
the other atoms around C, attached by single bonds.
O
H
C H
Step 2 Determine the total number of valence electrons:
(1 C atom × 4 e−/C atom) + (1 O atom × 6 e−/O atom)
+ (2 H atoms × 1 e−/H atom)
= 4 e− + 6 e− + 2 e−
= 12 e−
Then, determine the total number of electrons required for each
atom in the structure to achieve a noble gas conﬁguration. This
would be 8 e− for C and 8 e− for O (to ﬁll their respective valence
energy levels) and 2 e− for each H (to ﬁll its 1s orbital). So the total
number for CH2O is:
(2 atoms × 8 e−/atom) + (2 atoms × 2 e−/atom) = 20 e−
To ﬁnd the number of shared electrons, subtract the ﬁrst total
from the second,
20 e− − 12 e− = 8 e−
Now divide the number of shared electrons by two to obtain the
number of bonds.
20 e− − 12 e− = 8 e− ÷ 2 = 4 covalent bonds
Since there are only three atoms surrounding the central atom,
you can infer that one of the bonds is likely a double bond.
174 MHR • Unit 2  Structure and Properties
Step 3 Determine the number of non-bonding electrons by subtracting
the number of shared electrons from the total number of valence
electrons:
12 valence electrons − 8 shared electrons
= 4 non-bonding valence electrons (that is, 2 lone pairs)
Since H can only form a single bond, a possible structure is:
• •
O•
•
H
C H
Check Your Solution
Each atom has achieved a noble gas electron conﬁguration. Thus,
you can be conﬁdent that this is a reasonable Lewis structure.
Co-ordinate Covalent Bonds
You know that a covalent bond involves the sharing of a pair of electrons
between two atoms; each atom contributes one electron to the shared pair.
In some cases, such as the hydronium ion, H3O+, one atom contributes
both of the electrons to the shared pair. The bond in these cases is called
a co-ordinate covalent bond. In terms of the quantum mechanical model, a
co-ordinate covalent bond forms when a ﬁlled atomic orbital overlaps with
an empty atomic orbital. Once a co-ordinate bond is formed, it behaves in
the same way as any other single covalent bond. The next Sample Problem
involves a polyatomic ion with a co-ordinate covalent bond.
Sample Problem
Lewis Structures with a Co-ordinate Covalent Bond
Problem
Draw the Lewis structure for the ammonium ion, NH4
+.
Solution
The formula, NH4
Following steps 1 to 3 from the procedure outlined above:
+, tells you the number of each kind of atom in the ion.
Step 1 Since H is always placed at the end position, N is the central atom.
H
H
N H
H
Step 2 Total number of valence electrons:
(1 N atom × 5 e−/N atom) + (4 H atom × 1 e−/H atom) − 1 e−
= 8 e−
Total number of electrons required for noble gas conﬁguration:
(1 atom × 8 e−/atom) + (4 atoms × 2 e−/atom)
= 16 e−
Continued ...
PROBLEM TIP
Because you are working
with a polyatomic cation, you
must account for the positive
charge. Remember to subtract
1 electron from the total
number of valence electrons.
Chapter 4  Structures and Properties of Substances • MHR 175
Continued ...
Number of shared electrons, and the resulting number of bonds:
16 e− − 8 e− = 8 e−
8 e− ÷ 2 = 4 covalent bonds
Step 3 Number of non-bonding electrons:
8 valence electrons − 8 shared electrons
= 0 non-bonding electrons (0 lone pairs)
A possible structure for NH4
+ is:
H
+
H
N H
H
Check Your Solution
Each atom has achieved a noble gas electron conﬁguration. The positive
charge on the ion is included. This is a reasonable Lewis structure for
NH4
+.
Note that the Lewis structure for NH4
+ does not indicate which atom
provides each shared pair of electrons around the central nitrogen atom.
However, the quantum mechanical model of the atom can explain the
bonding around this nitrogen atom. The condensed electron conﬁguration
for nitrogen is [Ne] 2s22p3. Each nitrogen atom has only three unpaired
2p electrons in three half-ﬁlled orbitals available for bonding. Since there
are four covalent bonds shown around nitrogen in the Lewis structure,
electrons in one of the bonds must have come from the ﬁlled orbitals of
nitrogen. Therefore, one of the bonds around the central nitrogen atom
must be a co-ordinate covalent bond.
Resonance Structures: More Than One Possible Lewis Structure
Imagine that you are asked to draw the Lewis structure for sulfur dioxide,
SO2. A typical answer would look like this:
•
•
• •
O
• •
• •
S
• •
O
•
•
This Lewis structure suggests that SO2 contains a single bond and
a double bond. However, experimental measurements of bond lengths
indicate that the bonds between the S and each O are identical. The two
bonds have properties that are somewhere between a single bond and a
double bond. In effect, the SO2 molecule contains two “one-and-a-half”
bonds.
To communicate the bonding in SO2 more accurately, chemists
draw two Lewis structures and insert a double-headed arrow between
them. Each of these Lewis structures is called a resonance structure.
Resonance structures are models that give the same relative position of
atoms as in Lewis structures, but show different places for their bonding
and lone pairs.
•
•
• •
O
• •
• •
S
• •
O
•
•
• •
O
•
•
• •
S
• •
O
• •
•
•
176 MHR • Unit 2  Structure and Properties
Many molecules and ions— especially organic ones—require
resonance structures to represent their bonding. It is essential to bear
in mind, however, that resonance structures do not exist in reality. For
example, SO2 does not shift back and forth from one structure to the
other. An actual SO2 molecule is a combination— a hybrid— of its two
resonance structures. It is more properly referred to as a resonance hybrid.
You could think of resonance hybrids as being like “mutts.” For example,
a dog that is a cross between a spaniel and a beagle (a “speagle”) is part
spaniel and part beagle. It does not exist as a spaniel one moment and a
beagle the next. Instead, a speagle is an average, of sorts, between the two
breeds. Similarly, a resonance hybrid is a weighted average between two
or more resonance structures.
Practice Problems
9. Draw Lewis structures for each of the following molecules.
(a) NH3
(b) CH4
(c) CF4
(d) AsH3
(e) BrO−
(f) H2S
(g) H2O2
(h) ClNO
10. Draw Lewis structures for each of the following ions. (Note: Consider
resonance structures.)
(a) CO3
2−
(b) NO+
−
(c) ClO3
(d) SO3
2−
11. Dichloroﬂuoroethane, CH3CFCl2 , has been proposed as a
replacement for chloroﬂuorocarbons (CFCs). The presence of
hydrogen in CH3CFCl2 markedly reduces the ozone-depleting
ability of the compound. Draw a Lewis structure for this molecule.
12. Draw Lewis structures for the following molecules. (Note: Neither
of these molecules has a single central atom.)
(a) N2H4
(b) N2F2
13. Although Group 18 (VIIIA) elements are inactive, chemists are able
to synthesize compounds of several noble gases, including Xe. Draw
a Lewis structure for the XeO4 molecule. Indicate if co-ordinate
covalent bonding is likely a part of the bonding in this molecule.
Central Atoms with an Expanded Valence Level
The octet rule allows a maximum of four bonds (a total of eight electrons)
to form around an atom. Based upon bond energies, however, chemists
have suggested that the bonding in some molecules (and polyatomic ions)
is best explained by a model that shows more than eight electrons in the
valence energy level of the central atom. This central atom is said to have
an expanded valence energy level. One example of a molecule with an
expanded valence energy level is phosphorus pentachloride, PCl5 . This
substance is a pungent, pale-yellow powder that is used in the agricultural,
pharmaceutical, and dyeing industries. Organic chemists also use reactions
with PCl5 to identify compounds that contain hydroxyl groups.
• •
•
•
Cl
•
•
• •
•
•
Cl
• •
P
•
•
•
•
Cl
• •
•
•
•
•
• •
Cl
Cl
• •
•
•
•
•
Chapter 4  Structures and Properties of Substances • MHR 177
Until recently, chemists explained bonding in molecules such as PCl5
by assuming that empty d orbitals of the central atom were involved.
However, experimental evidence does not support this idea. Current
thinking suggests that larger atoms can accommodate additional valence
electrons because of their size. The theory behind this idea goes beyond
the scope of this textbook. Assume that the octet rule usually applies
when drawing Lewis structures for simple molecules. Sometimes,
however, you must violate the rule to allow for more than four bonds
around a central atom.
Practice Problems
14. Draw Lewis structures for the following molecules.
(a) SF6
(b) BrF5
15. Draw Lewis structures for the following molecules.
(a) XeF4
(b) PF5
16. How does the arrangement of electrons around the central atom differ
in PI3 and ClI3? Draw the Lewis structures for these compounds to
answer this question.
17. Draw a Lewis structure for the ion, IF4
−.
Shapes and Polarity of Molecules
Up to now, you have represented molecules using Lewis structures.
These two-dimensional, formula-like diagrams help you count and keep
track of valence electrons, and communicate essential information about
the placement and bonding of atoms or ions in a molecule. Chemists often
draw Lewis structures in a way that suggests the shape of a molecule.
However, this is not their function. It is important to remember that Lewis
structures do not communicate any information about a molecule’s shape.
To represent the shapes of real molecules, you need a model that depicts
them in three-dimensions.
In 1957, an English chemist, Ronald Gillespie, joined Hamilton,
Ontario’s McMaster University for a long, distinguished career as a
professor of chemistry. Earlier that year, Gillespie, in collaboration with
a colleague, Ronald Nyholm, developed a model for predicting the shape
of molecules. Like chemistry students around the world since that time,
you are about to learn the central features of this model, called the
Valence-Shell Electron-Pair Repulsion theory. This is usually abbreviated
to VSEPR (pronounced “vesper”) theory. (Note that some chemists use the
term “shell” instead of energy level to describe atomic orbitals.)
Introducing Valence-Shell Electron-Pair Repulsion (VSEPR) Theory
The fundamental principle of the Valence-Shell Electron-Pair Repulsion
theory is that the bonding pairs and lone, non-bonding pairs of electrons
in the valence level of an atom repel one another. As you know, electron
pairs of atoms are localized in orbitals, which are shapes that describe the
space in which electrons are most likely to be found around a nucleus.
The orbital for each electron pair is positioned as far apart from the other
orbitals as possible.
178 MHR • Unit 2  Structure and Properties
The effect of this positioning minimizes the forces of repulsion
between electron pairs. A lone pair (LP) will spread out more than a bond
pair. Therefore, the repulsion is greatest between lone pairs (LP(cid:2)LP).
Bonding pairs (BP) are more localized between the atomic nuclei, so they
spread out less than lone pairs. Therefore, the BP-BP repulsions are smaller
than the LP(cid:2)LP repulsions. The repulsion between a bond pair and a
lone-pair (BP(cid:2)LP) has a magnitude intermediate between the other two.
In other words, in terms of decreasing repulsion:
LP(cid:2)LP > LP(cid:2)BP > BP(cid:2)BP.
In Unit 1, you encountered the tetrahedral shape around a single-
bonded carbon atom, the trigonal planar shape around a carbon atom
with one double bond, and the linear shape around a carbon atom with
a triple bond. These shapes result from repulsions between lone pairs
and bonding pairs of electrons. Now you will use your understanding of
LP and BP repulsions to explain the shapes you learned in Unit 1, and
to predict the shapes of other molecules. Figure 4.11 shows the ﬁve basic
geometrical arrangements that result from the interactions of lone pairs
and bonding pairs around a central atom. These arrangements involve up
to six electron groups. An electron group is usually one of the following:
• a single bond
• a double bond
• a triple bond
• a lone pair
Each of the electron-group arrangements in Figure 4.11 results in a
minimum total energy for the molecule. Variations in these arrangements
are possible, depending on whether a bonding pair or a lone pair occupies
a speciﬁc position. Therefore, it is important to distinguish between
electron-group arrangement and molecular shape. Electron-group
arrangement refers to the ways in which groups of valence electrons
are positioned around the central atom. Molecular shape refers to the
relative positions of the atomic nuclei in a molecule. When all the
electron groups are bonding pairs, a molecule will have one of the ﬁve
geometrical arrangements shown in Figure 4.11. If one or more of the
electron groups include a lone pair of electrons, variations in one of the
ﬁve geometric arrangements result.
180˚
120˚
109.5˚
linear
trigonal planar
tetrahedral
90˚
90˚
120˚
90˚
trigonal bipyramidal
octahedral
Figure 4.11
The ﬁve basic electron-group arrangements and their bond angles
Chapter 4  Structures and Properties of Substances • MHR 179
In the following ExpressLab, you will make models of the ﬁve
electron-group arrangements, and measure their bond angles. Afterwards,
you will consider some of the variations in molecular shapes that can occur
ExpressLab
Using Soap Bubbles to Model Molecular Shape
You can use soap bubbles to simulate the
molecular shapes that are predicted by VSEPR
theory. The soap bubbles represent the electron
clouds surrounding the central atom in a molecule.
6. On top of the group of three equal-sized
bubbles, blow a fourth bubble of the same size
that touches the centre. Estimate the angle that
is formed where bubbles meet.
7. On top of the group of bubbles you made in step
5, make a fourth bubble that is larger than the
other three (to simulate a lone pair). Record what
happens to the bond angles.
8. Have ﬁve students each blow a bubble of the
same size at the same time to join and ﬂoat
in the air. Identify the shape that results. If
successful, have six partners join six bubbles in
the air and identify the shape.
9. Clean your work area using dry paper towels
ﬁrst. Then wipe the area with wet paper towels.
Analysis
1. What shapes and bond angles were associated
with two, three, and four same-sized bubbles?
Give an example of a molecule that matches
each of these shapes.
2. Give an example of a molecule that matches
each of the shapes in steps 5 and 7, where you
made one bubble larger than the others.
3. What molecular shapes match the arrangements
of the bubbles in step 8?
4. If they are available, use inﬂated balloons or
molecule modeling kits to construct each of
the arrangements in Figure 4.11. How do these
models compare with your bubble models?
Safety Precautions
• Ensure that each person uses a clean straw.
• Clean up all spills immediately.
Materials
soap solution (mixture of 80 mL distilled water,
15 mL detergent, and 5 mL glycerin)
100 mL beaker
straw
protractor
hard, ﬂat surface
paper towels
Procedure
1. Obtain approximately 25 mL of the prepared
soap solution in a 100 mL beaker.
CAUTION
Clean up any spills immediately.
2. Wet a hard, ﬂat surface, about 10 cm × 10 cm in
area, with the soap solution.
3. Dip a straw into the soap solution in the beaker
and blow a bubble on the wetted surface.
CAUTION
Each person must use a clean straw.
Blow a second bubble of the same size onto
the same surface to touch the ﬁrst bubble.
Record the shape of this simulated molecule
and measure the bond angle between the centres
of the two bubbles where the nuclei of the atoms
would be located.
4. Repeat step 3 with three bubbles of the same
size (to simulate three bonding pairs). Record the
shape and the bond angle between the centres of
the bubbles.
5. Repeat step 3, but this time make one bubble
slightly larger than the other two. This will
simulate a lone pair of electrons. Record what
happens to the bond angles.
180 MHR • Unit 2  Structure and Properties
Molecular Geometry
Each of the molecules in Figure 4.12 has four pairs of electrons around
the central atom. Observe the differences in the number of bonding and
lone pairs in these molecules. Methane, CH4, has four BPs. Ammonia,
NH3, has three BPs and one LP. Water, H2O, has two BPs and two LPs.
Notice the effect of these differences on the shapes and bond angles of
the molecules. Methane, with four BPs, has a molecular shape that is the
same as the electron-group arrangement in which four electron groups
surround a central atom: tetrahedral. The angle between any two bonding
pairs in the tetrahedral electron-group arrangement is 109.5˚. This angle
corresponds to the most favourable arrangement of electron groups to
minimize the forces of repulsion among them.
Electronic Learning Partner
Your Chemistry 12 Electronic
Learning Partner can help you
visualize the geometry of
molecular shapes.
CH4
H
C
H
H
H
109.5˚
NH3
N
H
H
H
107.3˚
H2O
O
H
H
104.5˚
Figure 4.12
Comparing the bond angles in the molecules of CH4, NH3, and H2O.
When there are 1 LP and 3 BPs around a central atom, there are two
types of repulsions: LP(cid:2)BP and BP(cid:2)BP. Since LP(cid:2)BP repulsions are
greater than BP(cid:2)BP repulsions, the bond angle between the bond pairs
in NH3 is reduced from 109.5˚ to 107.3˚. When you draw the shape of a
trigonal pyramidal molecule, without the lone pair, you can see that the
three bonds form the shape of a pyramid with a triangular base. In a
molecule of H2O, there are two BPs and two LPs. The strong LP(cid:2)LP
repulsions, in addition to the LP(cid:2)BP repulsions, cause the angle
between the bonding pairs to be reduced further to 104.5˚. You encoun-
tered this variation of the tetrahedral shape in Unit 1: the bent shape
around an oxygen atom with 2 LPs and two single bonds.
Table 4.2 summarizes the molecular shapes that commonly occur. The
VSEPR notation used for these shapes adopts the letter “A” to represent
the central atom, the letter “X” to represent a bonding pair, and the letter
“E’ to represent a lone pair of electrons. For example, the VSEPR notation
for NH3 is AX3E . This indicates that ammonia has three BPs around its
central atom, and one LP.
C H E M
FA C T
A trigonal bipyramid has two
electron regions where the
repulsions are different. An
electron pair in the axial region
(green) experiences three
repulsions at 90˚, and one at
180˚. An electron pair in the
equatorial region (yellow)
experiences two repulsions at
120˚, and two at 90˚. Repulsions
between electron pairs are
much greater when 90˚ apart
as compared to 120˚. Therefore,
repulsions in the equatorial
plane are less than those in
the axial positions. Because
repulsions are less in the
equatorial region, lone pairs
and double bonds always
occupy equatorial positions
in trigonal bipyramidal
arrangements.
90˚
120˚
Chapter 4  Structures and Properties of Substances • MHR 181
Table 4.2  Common Molecular Shapes and Their Electron Group Arrangements
Number of
electron groups
Geometric arrangement
of electron groups
Type of
electron pairs
VSEPR notation
Name of Molecular shape
Example
2
3
3
4
4
4
5
5
linear
2 BP
trigonal planar
3 BP
AX2
AX3
trigonal planar
2 BP, 1 LP
AX2E
tetrahedral
4 BP
AX4
tetrahedral
3 BP, 1LP
AX3E
tetrahedral
2 BP, 2LP
AX2E2
trigonal
bipyramidal
5 BP
AX5
trigonal
bipyramidal
4 BP, 1LP
AX4E
BeF2
BF3
SnCl2
CF4
PCl3
H2S
SbCl5
TeCl4
X
X
A
linear
X
A
X
X
trigonal planar
X
A
•
•
X
angular
X
A
X
X
X
tetrahedral
• •
A
X
X
X
trigonal pyramidal
• •
A
•
•
X
X
angular
X
X
A
X
X
X
trigonal bipyramidal
X
•
•
A
X
X
X
seesaw
182 MHR • Unit 2  Structure and Properties
5
5
6
6
6
trigonal
bipyramidal
3 BP, 2LP
AX3E2
trigonal
bipyramidal
2 BP, 3LP
AX2E3
octahedral
6 BP
AX6
octahedral
5 BP, 1LP
AX5E
octahedral
4 BP, 2LP
AX4E2
BrF3
XeF2
SF6
BrF5
XeF4
X
•
•
X
A
X
•
•
•
•
T-shaped
X
A
X
•
•
•
•
linear
X
A
X
octahedral
X
A
• •
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
square pyramidal
X
X
••
A
• •
X
X
square planar
Predicting Molecular Shape
You can use the steps below to help you predict the shape of a molecule
(or polyatomic ion) that has one central atom. Refer to these steps as you
work through the Sample Problems and the Practice Problems that follow.
1. Draw a preliminary Lewis structure of the molecule based on the
formula given.
2. Determine the total number of electron groups around the central
atom (bonding pairs, lone pairs and, where applicable, account for
the charge on the ion). Remember that a double bond or a triple
bond is counted as one electron group.
3. Determine which one of the ﬁve geometric arrangements will
accommodate this total number of electron groups.
4. Determine the molecular shape from the positions occupied by the
bonding pairs and lone pairs.
Chapter 4  Structures and Properties of Substances • MHR 183
Sample Problem
Predicting Molecular Shape for a Simpler Compound
Problem
Determine the molecular shape of the hydronium ion, H3O+.
Plan Your Strategy
Follow the four-step procedure that helps to predict molecular shape.
Use Table 4.2 for names of the electron-group arrangements and
molecular shapes.
Act on Your Strategy
Step 1 A possible Lewis structure for H3O+ is:
+
H
H
O H
• •
Step 2 The Lewis structure shows 3 BPs and 1 LP. That is, there are a
total of four electron groups around the central O atom.
Step 3 The geometric arrangement of the electron groups is tetrahedral.
Step 4 For 3 BPs and 1 LP, the molecular shape is trigonal pyramidal.
Check Your Solution
This molecular shape corresponds to the VSEPR notation for this ion,
AX3E .
Sample Problem
Predicting Molecular Shape for a Complex Compound
Problem
Determine the shape of SiF6
2− using VSEPR theory.
Plan Your Strategy
Follow the four-step procedure that helps to predict molecular shape
apply. Use Table 4.2 for names of the electron group arrangements and
molecular shapes.
Act on Your Strategy
Step 1 Draw a preliminary Lewis structure for SiF6
2−.
F
F
F
Si
F
F
F
This polyatomic ion has six bonds around the central Si atom,
an obvious exception to the octet rule, so the central atom needs
an expanded valence shell.
Total number of valence electrons
= 1 Si atom × 4 e−/Si atom + 6 F atom × 7 e−/F atom + 2 e−
(ionic charge)
= 48 e−
184 MHR • Unit 2  Structure and Properties
For all seven atoms, 48 e− are available for bonding. Si forms 6
single bonds to each F atom, 12 electrons are used. There remains
36 e− (18 lone pairs) to be placed around the F atoms. Each F atom
uses 3 lone pairs (6 e− ) to complete an octet. Therefore, a possible
structure is:
• •
•
•
•
•F
• •
•
•
•
•F
2−
•
•
• •
F
• •
•
• F
• •
Si
•
•
• •
F
• •
•
•
•
•
•
• F
• •
Step 2 From the structure, there are 6 BPs and 0 LP, a total of six electron
groups around the central Si atom.
Step 3 The geometric arrangement of the electron group is octahedral.
Step 4 For 6 BPs, the molecular shape is also octahedral.
Check Your Solution
This molecular shape corresponds to the VSEPR notation for this ion, AX6.
Keep in mind that the need for an expanded valence level for the central
atom may not always be as obvious as in the previous Sample Problem.
For example, what if you were asked to predict the molecular shape of
−? Drawing the Lewis structure enables you to
the polyatomic ion, BrCl4
determine that the central atom has an expanded valence level.
Total number of valence electrons = 36 e-
Total number of electrons required for each atom
to have an octet = 40 e−
There are not enough electrons for bonding. Therefore, the central
atom requires an expanded valence level. A possible Lewis structure
for BrCl4
− is:
−
• •
•
•
Cl
•
•
• •
•
•
Cl
•
•
•
•
Br
•
•
•
•
•
•
Cl
• •
•
•
•
•
Cl
• •
Now you can see that the central atoms has 4 BPs and 2 LPs, a total of 6
electron groups around it. The geometric arrangement of the electron group
is octahedral. For 4 BPs and 2 LPs, the molecular shape is square planar.
Practice Problems
18. Use VSEPR theory to predict the molecular shape for each of the
following:
(a) HCN
(b) SO2
(c) SO3
(d) SO4
2−
19. Use VSEPR theory to predict the molecular shape for each of the
following:
(a) CH2F2
(b) AsCl5
+
(c) NH4
−
(d) BF4
20. Use VSEPR theory to predict the molecular shapes of NO2
+ and NO2
−.
Continued ...
Chapter 4  Structures and Properties of Substances • MHR 185
Continued ...
21. Draw Lewis structures for the following molecules and ions, and use
VSEPR theory to predict the molecular shape. Indicate the examples
in which the central atom has an expanded octet.
(a) XeI2
−
(b) PF6
(c) AsF3
−
(d) AlF4
22. Given the general formula and the shape of the molecule or ion,
suggest possible elements that could be the central atom, X, in each
of the following:
(a) XF3
(b) XF4
+ (trigonal pyramidal)
+ (tetrahedral)
(c) XF3 (T-shaped)
Tools
& Techniques
AIM Theory and Electron
Density Maps
The microscopic world of atoms is difﬁcult to
imagine, let alone visualize in detail. Chemists and
chemical engineers employ different molecular
modelling tools to study the structure, properties,
and reactivity of atoms, and the way they bond to
one another. Richard Bader, a chemistry professor at
McMaster University, has invented an interpretative
theory that is gaining acceptance as an accurate
method to describe molecular behaviour and predict
molecular properties. According to Dr. Bader, shown
below, small molecules are best represented using
topological maps, where contour lines (which are
commonly used to represent elevation on maps)
represent the electron density of molecules.
The diagrams above show two different ways to model the
electron density in a plane of a molecule of ethylene .
186 MHR • Unit 2  Structure and Properties
In the early 1970s, Dr. Bader invented the
theory of “Atoms in Molecules,” otherwise known
as AIM theory. This theory links the mathematics
of quantum mechanics to the atoms and bonds in
a molecule. AIM theory adopts electron density,
which is related to the Schrödinger description of
the atom, as a starting point to mapping molecules.
Chemists often focus on the energetic,
geometric, and spectroscopic properties of
molecules. However, since the electron density
exists in ordinary three-dimensional space, electron
density maps of molecules can be used as tools to
unearth a wealth of information about the molecule.
This information includes, but is not limited to, a
molecule’s magnetic properties, per-atom electron
population, and bond types.
Using diagrams and computer graphics, chemists
use AIM theory to construct three-dimensional
electron density maps of molecules. Chemists can
then use the maps as tools to perform experiments
on the computer as if they were performing the
same experiments in the laboratory, but with higher
efﬁciency. Many chemists are excited by the prospect
of using computer graphics, both inside and outside
of the classroom, as teaching tools for students and
the public at large.
In addition to being able to simulate very
simple isolated molecules and their reactions,
AIM theory provides a physical basis for the theory
of Lewis electron pairs and the VSEPR model of
molecular geometry. Equipped with computers and
computer-generated, three-dimensional electron
density maps, scientists are able to view molecules
and predict molecular phenomena without even
having to get off their chairs!
The Relationship Between Molecular Shape and Molecular Polarity
A molecule’s shape and polarity are directly related. As you know, the
electronegativity difference between two atoms is the principal factor
that determines the type of chemical bonding between them. As you saw
in section 4.1, when atoms of two different elements have ∆EN between
0.5 and 1.7, the bond between them is polar covalent. The electrons are
shared unequally between the two types of atoms. For example, in the
HCl molecule, the Cl atom is more electronegative than the H atom. Thus,
the Cl atom exerts a stronger force of attraction on the shared pair of
electrons. As a result, the Cl end of the bond develops a partial negative
charge (δ−) and the H end develops a partial positive charge (δ+). This
polarity in a bond is called a bond dipole. The vector used to represent a
bond dipole points toward the more electronegative element. For exam-
ple, you could represent the polarity of the bond in hydrogen chloride as:
δ+ δ−
• •
H
•
•
•
•
Cl
• •
or
HCI
For a diatomic molecule such as HCl, or the bond polarity is also the
molecule’s polarity. For polyatomic molecules, such as the examples that
follow, molecular polarity depends on the polarity of all of the bonds and
the angles at which the dipoles come together. Thus, molecular
dipole(cid:2)or just dipole(cid:2)is a term used to describe the charge separation
for the entire molecule.
Consider, for example, BeF2, which is a symmetrical, linear molecule.
Each Be(cid:2)F bond is polar (because ﬂuorine has a greater electronegativity
than beryllium). Due to the linear shape of this molecule, however,
the polarities of the two bonds are directly opposite each other. The
two bonding polarities exactly counteract each other, so that BeF2 is a
non-polar molecule. The shape of a molecule, combined with the polarity
of its individual bonds, therefore, determine polarity.
δ−
F
δ+
+
Be
δ−
F
Compare two molecules with the same molecular shape: CCl4 and
CCl3H. Since the polarity of the C(cid:2)Cl bond is different from that of
the C(cid:2)H bond, the polarities of these two molecules are different. The
CCl4 molecule is symmetrical about any axis joining the two atoms of
the C(cid:2)Cl bond. The polarities of the C(cid:2)Cl bonds counteract one
another. Thus, the carbon tetrachloride molecule is non-polar. In the
case of CCl3H, the polarity of the H(cid:2)Cl bond is different from that of
the three C(cid:2)Cl bonds. Thus, the molecule is polar.
Cl
H
+
Look back at Chapter 1, pages
8–10, to review how to predict
the molecular polarity of
organic compounds.
Cl
C
Cl
Cl
non-polar
Cl
C
Cl
Cl
polar
Table 4.3 summarizes the relationship between molecular polarity and
molecular shape. The letter “A” represents the central atom and the letter
“X” represent a more electronegative atom. An atom represented by the
letter “Y” is more electronegative than the atom represented by the letter
“X.” After you examine this table, do the Practice Problems that follow.
Chapter 4  Structures and Properties of Substances • MHR 187
Table 4.3 Effect of Molecular Shape on Molecular Polarity
Molecular shape
Bond polarity
Molecular polarity
linear
linear
bent
trigonal planar
trigonal planar
non-polar
polar
polar
non-polar
polar
XAX
YAX
X
X
X
X
A
X
A
X
A
X
Y
tetrahedral
X
X
non-polar
tetrahedral
AX
X
X
XX
A
X
X
Y
polar
Practice Problems
23. Use VSEPR theory to predict the shape of each of the following
molecules. From the molecular shape and the polarity of the bonds,
determine whether or not the molecule is polar.
(a) CH3F
(b) CH2O
(c) GaI3
24. Freon-12, CCl2F2, was used as a coolant in refrigerators until it was
suspected to be a cause of ozone depletion. Determine the molecular
shape of CCl2F2 and discuss the possibility that the molecule will be
a dipole.
25. Which of the following is more polar? Justify your answer in each case.
− or TeCl4
(a) NF3 or NCl3
(b) ICl4
26. A hypothetical molecule with the formula XY3 is discovered, through
experiment, to exist. It is polar. Which molecular shapes are possible
for this molecule? Which shapes are impossible? Explain why in
each case.
188 MHR • Unit 2  Structure and Properties
Section Summary
In this section, you have pieced together the main components that deter-
mine the structure and polarity of molecules. Why is the polarity of a
molecule important? Polar molecules attract one another more than non-
polar molecules do. Because of this attraction, many physical properties
of substances are affected by the polarity of their molecules. In the next
section, you will consider some of these physical properties for liquid and
solid substances, and learn about other forces that have a signiﬁcant effect
on the interactions within and among molecules.
Section Review
1
K/U
For each of the following molecules, draw a Lewis structure, and
determine if the molecule is polar or non-polar.
(a) AsH3
(b) CH3CN
(c) Cl2O
2
C
Discuss the validity of the statement: “All polar molecules must
have polar bonds and all non-polar molecules must have non-polar
bonds.”
3
K/U
What similarities and what differences would you expect in the
molecular shape and the polarity of CH4 and CH3OH? Explain your
answer.
4
I
The molecules BF3 and NH3 are known to undergo a combination
reaction in which the boron and nitrogen atoms of the respective
molecules join together. Sketch a Lewis structure of the molecule that
would be expected to be formed from this reaction. Would the product
molecule be expected to be more or less reactive than the starting
materials? Give a reason for your answer.
5
6
7
I
Use VSEPR theory to predict the molecular shape and the polarity
of SF2. Explain your answer.
I
Draw a Lewis structure for PCl4
+. Use VSEPR theory to predict the
molecular shape of this ion.
C
Identify and explain the factors that determine the structure and
polarity of molecules.
Chapter 4  Structures and Properties of Substances • MHR 189
4.3
Intermolecular Forces
in Liquids and Solids
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
(cid:2) distinguish between
intermolecular and
intramolecular forces
(cid:2) explain how the properties
of solids and liquids are con-
nected to their component
particles and the forces
between and among them
(cid:2) conduct experiments to
observe and analyze the
physical properties of
different substances and
determine the type of
bonding involved
(cid:2) communicate your under-
standing of the following
terms: intramolecular forces,
intermolecular forces,
dipole-dipole force,
ion-dipole force,
ion-induced dipole force,
dipole-induced dipole force,
dispersion force, hydrogen
bonding, crystalline solids,
amorphous solids, network
solids, allotrope
Water and hydrogen sulﬁde have the same molecular shape: bent. Both
are polar molecules. However, H2O, with a molar mass of 18 g, is a liquid
at room temperature, while H2S, with a molar mass of 34 g, is a gas.
Water’s boiling point is 100˚C, while hydrogen sulﬁde’s boiling point
is −61˚C. These property differences are difﬁcult to explain using the
bonding models you have learned so far. These models focused on the
forces of attraction between ions in ionic solids, between individual atoms
in covalent and polar covalent compounds, and between positive metal
ions and free electrons in metals. These are intramolecular forces—forces
exerted within a molecule or polyatomic ion. During a chemical change,
intramolecular forces are overcome and chemical bonds are broken.
Therefore, these forces inﬂuence the chemical properties of substances.
Forces that inﬂuence the physical properties of substances are called
intermolecular forces. These are forces of attraction and repulsion that act
between molecules or ions.
Intermolecular forces were extensively studied by the Dutch physicist
Johannes van der Waals (1837–1923). To mark his contributions to the
understanding of intermolecular attractions, these forces are often called
van der Waals forces. They are categorized into the following groups:
dipole-dipole forces, ion-dipole forces, induced dipole forces, dispersion
(London) forces, and hydrogen bonding. In the pages that follow, you will
see how each of these types of intermolecular forces affects the molecular
properties of liquids. Following that, you will apply your understanding
of intermolecular forces to help you explain some physical properties of
substances in the solid state.
Dipole-Dipole Forces
In the liquid state, polar molecules (dipoles) orient themselves so that
oppositely charged ends of the molecules are near to one another. The
attractions between these opposite charges are called dipole-dipole forces.
Figure 4.13 shows the orientation of polar molecules due to these forces
in a liquid.
Figure 4.13
Dipole-dipole forces among polar molecules in the liquid state
190 MHR • Unit 2  Structure and Properties
As a result of these dipole-dipole forces of attraction, polar molecules
will tend to attract one another more at room temperature than similarly
sized non-polar molecules would. The energy required to separate polar
molecules from one another is therefore greater than that needed to sepa-
rate non-polar molecules of similar molar mass. This is indicated by the
extreme difference in melting and boiling points of these two types of
molecular substances. (Recall that melting and boiling points are physical
properties of substances.)
Ion-Dipole Forces
Sodium chloride and other soluble ionic solids dissolve in polar solvents
such as water because of ion-dipole forces. An ion-dipole force is the
force of attraction between an ion and a polar molecule (a dipole). For
example, NaCl dissolves in water because the attractions between the Na+
and Cl− ions and the water molecules provide enough energy to overcome
the forces that bind the ions together. Figure 4.14 shows how ion-dipole
forces dissolve any type of soluble ionic compound.
Acetaldehyde (ethanal),
CH3CHO, is a polar molecule
that has a boiling point of 20˚C.
Propane, on the other hand, is
a non-polar molecule of similar
size, number of electrons, and
molar mass. The boiling point
of propane, CH3CH2CH3, is
−42˚C. Use the concept of
dipole-dipole forces to explain
these property differences.
−
+
−
+
+
−
+
+
−
−
−
+
−
+
−
+
−−
In aqueous solution, ionic solids dissolve as the negative ends and the positive
Figure 4.14
ends of the water molecules become oriented with the corresponding oppositely charged ions
that make up the ionic compound, pulling them away from the solid into solution.
Induced Intermolecular Forces
Induction of electric charge occurs when a charge on one object causes a
change in the distribution of charge on a nearby object. Rubbing a balloon
to make it "stick" to a wall is an example of charging by induction. There
are two types of charge-induced dipole forces.
An ion-induced dipole force results when an ion in close proximity
to a non-polar molecule distorts the electron density of the non-polar
molecule. The molecule then becomes momentarily polarized, and the
two species are attracted to each other. This force is active during every
moment of your life, in the bonding between non-polar O2 molecules
and the Fe2+ ion in hemoglobin. Ion-induced dipole forces, therefore, are
part of the process that transports vital oxygen throughout your body.
A dipole-induced dipole force is similar to that of an ion-induced
dipole force. In this case, however, the charge on a polar molecule is
responsible for inducing the charge on the non-polar molecule. Non-polar
gases such as oxygen and nitrogen dissolve, sparingly, in water because of
dipole-induced dipole forces.
Chapter 4  Structures and Properties of Substances • MHR 191
Dispersion (London) Forces
The shared pairs of electrons in covalent bonds are constantly vibrating.
While this applies to all molecules, it is of particular interest for mole-
cules that are non-polar. The bond vibrations, which are part of the
normal condition of a non-polar molecule, cause momentary, uneven
distributions of charge. In other words, a non-polar molecule becomes
slightly polar for an instant, and continues to do this on a random but
on-going basis. At the instant that one non-polar molecule is in a slightly
polar condition, it is capable of inducing a dipole in a nearby molecule.
An intermolecular force of attraction results. This force of attraction is
called a dispersion force. Chemists also commonly refer to it as a London
force, in honour of the German physicist, Fritz London, who studied
this force. Unlike other intermolecular forces, dispersion (London)
forces act between any particles, polar or otherwise. They are the main
intermolecular forces that act between non-polar molecules, as shown in
Figure 4.15.
Two factors affect the magnitude of dispersion forces. One is the
number of electrons in the molecule and the other is the shape of the
molecule. Vibrations within larger molecules that have more electrons
than smaller molecules can easily cause an uneven distribution of charge.
The dispersion forces between these larger molecules are thus stronger,
which has the effect of raising the boiling point for larger molecules. A
molecule with a spherical shape has a smaller surface area than a straight
chain molecule that has the same number of electrons. The smaller
surface area allows less opportunity for the molecule to induce a charge
on a nearby molecule. Therefore, for two substances with molecules that
have a similar number of electrons, the substance with molecules that
have a more spherical shape will have weaker dispersion forces and a
lower boiling point.
C
A
B
How dispersion forces develop between identical non-polar molecules. In A,
Figure 4.15
neither molecule interacts with the other. In B, one molecule becomes, instantaneously, a
dipole. At that moment, the dipolar molecule is able to induce a temporary charge separation
in the other molecule, resulting in a force of attraction between the two. All the molecules
within a sample undergo this same process, as shown in C.
Hydrogen Bonding
A dipole-dipole interaction that is very signiﬁcant in many biological
molecules and some inorganic molecules, such as H2O((cid:2)), is hydrogen
bonding. Hydrogen bonding is a particularly strong form of dipole-dipole
attraction that exists between a hydrogen atom in a polar-bonded
molecule that contains bonds such as H(cid:2)O, H(cid:2)N, or H(cid:2)F, and an
unshared pair of electrons on another small, electronegative atom such
as O, N, or F. The small, electronegative atom can be on its own, but is
usually bonded in a molecule.
192 MHR • Unit 2  Structure and Properties
When hydrogen is bonded to oxygen, ﬂuorine, or nitrogen, the strong
force of attraction exerted by any of these three very electronegative atoms
draws the electron density from the hydrogen atom in the polar-bonded
molecule, leaving the hydrogen atom with a partial positive charge. This
dipole is easily attracted to the partially negative lone pair on a nearby
electronegative atom: N, O, or F.
You can see the effect of hydrogen bonding clearly in the boiling
point data of the binary hydrides of Groups 14 to 17 (IVA to VIIA), shown
in Figure 4.16. In Group 14, the trend in boiling point is as expected.
The increase in boiling point from methane, CH4, to tin(IV) hydride,
SnH4, is due to an increase in the number of electrons. Therefore, there
are larger dispersion forces, since more electrons are able to temporarily
shift from one part of the molecule to another. In SnH4, this results in
greater intermolecular forces of attraction. There is no hydrogen bonding
in these substances, because there are no lone pairs on the molecules.
However, the hydrides of Groups 15, 16, and 17 (VA to VIIA) only
show the expected trend based on dispersion forces for the larger mass
hydrides. The smallest mass hydrides, NH3, H2O, and HF, have relatively
high boiling points, indicating strong intermolecular forces caused by
hydrogen bonding.
Why is there no hydrogen bonding in H2S and H2Se, which have
unshared electron pairs on their central atoms? Neither S nor Se is small
enough or electronegative enough to support hydrogen bonding. Thus,
H2O (with its small and very electronegative O atom) has a much higher
boiling point than H2S and H2Se, as you can see in Figure 4.16.
100
H2O
)
C
˚
(
i
t
n
o
p
g
n
i
l
i
o
B
0
−100
−200
HF
NH3
CH4
2
Group 14 (IV A)
Group 15 (V A)
Group 16 (VI A)
Group 17 (VII A)
H2Se
AsH3
HBr
GeH4
H2S
HCI
PH3
SiH4
H2Te
SbH3
HI
SnH4
3
4
5
Period
The boiling points of four groups of hydrides. The break in the trends
Figure 4.16
for NH3, H2O, and HF is due to hydrogen bonding. The dashed line shows the likely
boiling point of water, if no hydrogen bonding were present.
A hydrogen bond is only about 5% as strong as a single covalent
bond. However, in substances that contain numerous hydrogen bonds
the impact of hydrogen bonding can be signiﬁcant. For example, the
double-helix structure of DNA occurs because of hydrogen bonds, as
shown in Figure 4.17. Another substance that contains many hydrogen
bonds, water, is discussed on the following page.
P
P
S
P
S
S
P
P
S
S
P
S
P
S
P
S
S
P
S
P
S
S
P
S
P
S
P
P
S
P
S
S
P
S
P
S
S
P
P
S
P
S
P
S
P
S
O
−
O
CH2
O
P
O
S
P
S
O
−
O
O
P
O
CH2
S
H
H N
O
N
H
N
H
HN
N
O
O
H
N
H N
H
A DNA
Figure 4.17
(deoxyribonucleic acid) molecule
is comprised of two chains, each
formed from covalently bonded
atoms. Hydrogen bonds hold the
two chains together, producing
DNA’s familiar, spiral-like, double
helix structure.
Chapter 4  Structures and Properties of Substances • MHR 193
Hydrogen Bonding and Properties of Water
Hydrogen bonding also explains water’s unusual property of being less
dense in the solid state than in the liquid state. As you know from kinetic
molecular theory, lower temperatures cause liquid molecules to move
slower than in their gaseous states. When liquids solidify, the kinetic
energy of the particles is no longer enough to prevent the intermolecular
forces of attraction from causing particles to stick together. For most
substances, their solid states are denser than their liquid states. When
water freezes, however, the water molecules pack in such a way that the
solid state is less dense than the liquid state. Water molecules align in a
speciﬁc pattern so that hydrogen atoms of one molecule are oriented
toward the oxygen atom of another molecule. You can see this clearly in
Figure 4.18. If water molecules behaved as most molecules do, then lake
water would freeze from the bottom up, rather than from the top down.
The consequences for aquatic life, and on organisms (like us) that depend
on aquatic ecosystems, would be profound. A lake that freezes from the
bottom up would solidify completely, killing most of the life it contains.
Because ice ﬂoats on water, it insulates the water beneath it, preventing
it from freezing.
Hydrogen bonding also explains the solubility in water of polar
covalent compounds. As you learned in Unit 1, the O(cid:2)H functional
group in alcohols is polar. Because of this polar group, alcohols can form
hydrogen bonds with water molecules. Consequently, methanol and
ethanol are soluble in water in all proportions, and every alcohol is more
soluble than its corresponding alkane with the same number of carbon
atoms. (Recall that alkanes do not have the O(cid:2)H functional group.)
Ammonia, NH3, is a very soluble gas because it hydrogen-bonds with
water. The smaller mass amines, such as methylamine, CH3NH2, are also
soluble in water, for the same reason.
How is hydrogen bonding
different from a covalent bond
such as O—H?
Figure 4.18
result of these spaces, ice is less dense than liquid water.
In its solid state, water has an open, hexagonal, crystalline structure. As a
194 MHR • Unit 2  Structure and Properties
Summarizing Intramolecular and Intermolecular Forces
Table 4.4 compares key characteristics of intramolecular and
intermolecular forces. Once you have reviewed this information,
you will have an opportunity to expand the table by doing the
ThoughtLab that follows.
Table 4.4 Comparing Intramolecular and Internolecular Forces
r
a
l
u
c
e
l
o
m
a
r
t
n
I
r
a
l
u
c
e
l
o
m
r
e
t
n
I
Force
ionic
covalent
metallic
ion-dipole
hydrogen
bond
dipole-dipole
ion-induced
dipole
dipole-induced
dipole
dispersion
(London)
Model
+
−
+
−
+
−
+
−
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
δ–
A
δ+
H
δ–
B
•
•
+
Nature
of Attraction
Energy (kJ/mol)
Example
cation-anion
400–4000
nuclei-shared
electron pair
150–1100
cations-
delocalized
electrons
75–1000
NaCl
H H
Fe
ion charge-
dipole charge
40-600
10–40
polar bond to
hydrogen-
dipole charge
(lone pair, high
EN of N, O, F)
Na+
O
H
H
• •
•
• O
H
H
• •
•
•
O H
H
dipole charges
5–25
I
Cl
I
Cl
ion charge-
polarizable
electrons
dipole charge-
polarizable
electrons
polarizable
electrons
3–15
2–10
Fe2+
O2
H
Cl
CI
Cl
0.05–40
F
F
F
F
Chapter 4  Structures and Properties of Substances • MHR 195
ThoughtLab
Properties of Liquids
As you know, intermolecular forces act between
both like and unlike molecules. Adhesive forces are
intermolecular forces between two different kinds of
molecules. Cohesive forces are intermolecular forces
between two molecules of the same kind. Adhesive
and cohesive forces affect the physical properties of
many common phenomena in the world around you.
Procedure
1. Consider each of the following observations.
For each, infer the intermolecular (and, where
appropriate, intramolecular) forces that are
active, and explain how they account for the
observations.
• Why are bubbles in a soft drink spherical?
• How can water striders walk on water?
• Why does water form beaded droplets on
surfaces such as leaves, waxed car hoods,
and waxed paper?
• How does a ballpoint pen work?
• How does a towel work?
• Why does water form a concave meniscus in a
tube, while mercury forms a convex meniscus?
• Why does liquid honey ﬂow so slowly from a
spoon?
• Why do some motorists change to different
motor oils over the course of a year?
2. Based on your inferences and explanations,
develop deﬁnitions for the following terms:
surface tension, capillarity, and viscosity.
3. Verify your inferences and deﬁnitions by
consulting print and electronic resources. Then
identify the property or properties that best
explain each of the observation statements.
Analysis
1. Compare your inferences and explanations with
those that you found in reference sources.
Identify those cases in which your ideas matched
or closely matched what you found. Explain
where your reasoning may have led you astray,
for those cases in which your ideas did not
match closely with reference-source information.
2. Re-design the Concept Organizer on page xxx
so that it includes practical applications and
explanations such as those you have investigated
in this activity.
Bonding in Solids
In Investigation 4-A, you classiﬁed solid substances on the basis of the
types of bonds that hold their molecules or ions together. This is not,
however, the only way to classify solids. Chemists also divide solids
into two categories based on the macroscopic properties that arise
from the arrangements of their component particles. Crystalline solids
have organized particle arrangements, so they have distinct shapes.
Gemstones such as amethyst and garnet are examples of crystalline
solids. Amorphous solids have indistinct shapes, because their particle
arrangements lack order. Glass and rubber are common amorphous solids.
In the next few pages, you will learn about the structure and properties
of crystalline and amorphous solids.
Bonding and Properties of Crystalline Solids
Chemists further classify crystalline solids into ﬁve types, based on
their composition. These types are atomic, molecular, network, ionic,
and metallic. Since you have already learned about metallic solids, the
material that follows concentrates on the other four crystalline solids.
You will ﬁnd a summary of their properties in Table 4.5, following these
descriptions.
196 MHR • Unit 2  Structure and Properties
Atomic Solids
Atomic solids are made up of individual atoms that are held together
solely by dispersion forces. The number of naturally occurring atomic
solids is quite small. In fact, the noble gases in their solid state are the
only examples. Since the only forces holding atomic solids together are
dispersion forces, these solids have very low melting and boiling points.
Molecular Solids
Molecular solids are, as their name implies, made up of molecules. Like
atomic solids, the molecules that make up molecular solids, such as
frozen methane, are held together mainly by dispersion forces.
Consequently, they tend to have low melting and boiling points. In polar
molecular solids, however, stronger dipole-dipole forces, and sometimes
hydrogen bonding, give these compounds higher melting points and
boiling points than non-polar molecular solids. For example, the melting
point of non-polar propane, C3H8, is −190˚C. A molecule of polar formic
acid, HCOOH, which has a similar number of electrons and the same
molar mass as propane, melts at 8.4˚C. The large difference in boiling
point is due to the hydrogen bonding and dipole-dipole forces in formic
acid. You will often see molecular solids classiﬁed as covalent solids.
However, it is clearer to classify them as molecular solids, because
network solids, which you will see below, also contain covalent bonds.
Network Solids
Unlike the intramolecular covalent bonds that hold atoms together in
discrete molecules, it is possible for atoms to bond covalently into
continuous two- or three-dimensional arrays, called network solids.
A wide range of properties can be found among network solids.
Carbon-Based Network Solids
Figure 4.19 shows four allotropic forms of carbon. Allotropes are different
crystalline or molecular forms of the same element that differ in physical
and chemical properties.
B
C
A
D
Allotropic forms of
Figure 4.19
carbon: (A) graphite; (B) diamond;
(C) C60, buckminsterfullerene;
(D) fullerene nanotube
Chapter 4  Structures and Properties of Substances • MHR 197
C H E M
FA C T
At temperatures around 600˚C
and extremely low pressures,
methane will decompose and
deposit a thin ﬁlm of carbon,
in the form of diamond, on a
surface. The process, known
as chemical vapour deposition,
or CVD, can be used to coat
a wide variety of surfaces. The
hardness of this diamond ﬁlm
can be used for applications
that require non-scratch
surfaces such as cookware,
eyeglasses, and razor blades.
The graphite shown in Figure 4.19A is a soft, two-dimensional
network solid that is a good conductor of electricity. It has a high
melting point, which suggests strong bonds, but its softness indicates the
presence of weak bonds as well. Each carbon forms three strong covalent
bonds with three of its nearest neighbours in a trigonal planar pattern.
This structure gives stability to the layers. The fourth, non-bonding
pair of electrons is delocalized and free to move within the layers. This
gives graphite the ability to conduct an electric current. There are no
intramolecular forces between the layers. Dispersion forces attract one
layer to another, enabling layers to slide by one another. Graphite feels
slippery as a result of this characteristic. In fact, many industrial
processes use graphite as a lubricant.
In diamond, each carbon atom forms four strong covalent bonds with
four other carbon atoms. This three-dimensional array makes diamond the
hardest naturally occurring substance. The valence electrons are in highly
localized bonds between carbon atoms. Therefore, diamond does not
conduct electricity. The planes of atoms within the diamond reﬂect light,
which gives diamond its brilliance and sparkle. The regular arrangement
of the carbon atoms in a crystalline structure, coupled with the strength of
the covalent C(cid:2)C bonds, gives diamond its extreme hardness, and makes
it inert to corrosive chemicals.
Fullerenes make up a group of spherical allotropes of carbon.
Figure 4.19C shows C60, which is one type of fullerene discovered in
1985. It was given the name buckminsterfullerene because it resembles
the geodesic-domed structure designed by architect R. Buckminster Fuller.
Also known as “buckyballs,” C60 is just one of several fullerenes that have
been discovered. Others have been shown to have the formula C70, C74,
and C82. Because of their spherical shape, researchers have speculated
that fullerenes might make good lubricants.
Recently, microscopic-level research has developed very small carbon
networks called nanotubes. As you can see in Figure 4.19D, nanotubes
are like a fullerene network that has been stretched into a cylinder shape.
Nanotubes of C400 and higher may have applications in the manufacture
of high-strength ﬁbres. In the year 2000, researchers built a nanotube with
a diameter of 4 × 10−8 m. Up to that time, this nanotube was the smallest
structure assembled.
Other Network Solids
Many network solids are compounds, not elements.
Examples include silica, SiO2, and various metal silicates.
If you were asked to draw a Lewis structure representing
SiO2, you might draw a molecule that looks like CO2.
However, unlike the bonding that occurs in CO2, the silicon
atom in silica does not form a double bond with an oxygen
atom. The likely reason is that silicon’s 3p orbital is too
large to overlap effectively with a 2p orbital of the oxygen
atom. Instead, each silicon atom bonds to four oxygen
atoms to give a tetrahedral network with shared oxygen
atoms, as shown in Figure 4.20. The network is represented
by the formula (SiO2)n , indicating that SiO2 is the simplest
repeating unit. Quartz is a familiar example of a material
composed of silica.
O
O
Si
O
O
A representation of quartz, (SiO2)n,
Figure 4.20
a tetrahedral network with shared oxygen atoms
198 MHR • Unit 2  Structure and Properties
lattice point
unit cell
Simple cubic crystal
Figure 4.21
array indicating lattice points and
unit cell.
Technology
L I N K
Chemists commonly use a
process called X-ray
diffraction to determine the
structure of a compound. Two
pioneers of X-ray diffraction
were Rosalind Franklin and
Dorothy Crowfoot Hodgkin.
Franklin’s work on the DNA
molecule was instrumental in
the discovery of its helical
shape. Nobel Prize winner
Hodgkin discovered the
structure of complex mole-
cules, such as cholesterol,
penicillin, insulin, and vitamin
B-12. Find out about X-ray
diffraction: how it works and
the types of scientists who
employ this technology.
Ionic Crystals
You know that an ionic crystal is an array of ions, arranged at regular
positions in a crystal lattice. However, a closer look at the structure of
ionic crystals shows that they have different and distinct arrangements,
depending on the ions involved — speciﬁcally, their charge and the size.
You can compare the effect of size on crystal packing to fruits stacked
in a grocery store. For example, if you were trying to stack two kinds of
fruit to attain the most efﬁcient use of space, kiwi may ﬁt in among grape-
fruit more efﬁciently than oranges could ﬁll the same space. Similarly, in a
crystal, pairs of ions of the same or similar size are arranged differently
compared with ions of different sizes.
A crystal lattice is made up of identical repeating unit cells that give
the crystal its characteristic shape. Figure 4.21 shows a three-dimensional
representation of a simple cubic arrangement of unit cells.
In most ionic crystals, the anion is larger than the cation and,
therefore, the packing of the anions determines the arrangement of ions
in the crystal lattice. There are several possible arrangements for ionic
crystals in which the anions are larger than cations, and cations and
anions are present in equal molar amounts. For example, Figure 4.22
shows two different arrangements found in the structures of sodium
chloride, NaCl, and cesium chloride, CsCl.
A
B
Cl-
Na+
Cl−
Cs+
Cl-
Na+
Cs+
Cl−
Figure 4.22
of CsCl
(A) Face-centred cubic structure of NaCl; (B) Body-centred cubic structure
071B(04)1496
In the sodium chloride crystal, each chloride ion (Cl−) is surrounded
by six sodium ions (Na+). Similarly, each Na+ ion is surrounded by six Cl−
ions. In CsCl, each cesium ion (Cs+) ion is surrounded by eight Cl− ions.
Within a crystal lattice, deﬁnite lines of cleavage are present along
which a crystal may be split. This is an identifying property of ionic solids.
Chapter 4  Structures and Properties of Substances • MHR 199
Canadians
in Chemistry
Dr. R.J. Le Roy
You usually study science as discrete ﬁelds
of inquiry: chemistry, physics, and biology, for
example. Each of these ﬁelds has numerous
sub-ﬁelds, such as geophysics and biochemistry.
One of the scientists at the forefront of chemical
physics is Canada’s Dr. R.J. Leroy.
During a fourth-year undergraduate research
project at the University of Toronto, Dr. R.J. Leroy
pursued an answer to the following question: If you
use photodissociation to separate iodine molecules
into atoms, what fraction of the light is absorbed,
and how does that fraction depend on the colour
(frequency) of the light and on the temperature of
the molecules? (Photodissociation is a process that
involves the use of light to decompose molecules.)
The light causes a bonded molecule in its
ground state to undergo a transition into an excited
state. In this new state, the atoms repel one another,
causing the molecule to break apart. The fraction
of light absorbed, as measured spectroscopically,
depends on the population of molecules in the
initial state.
Chemists can use the fraction of light absorbed
by a sample to monitor the concentration of speciﬁc
molecules in a closed, controlled environment.
To do this, chemists also need to know the value
for a key proportionality constant that is unique to
each substance, known as the molar absorption
coefﬁcient. These coefﬁcients can be measured at
room temperature, but not at high temperatures.
“In principle, we have known the quantum
mechanics to describe these processes,” Dr. Le Roy
explains, “But to use that information, we have to
understand the forces atoms experience as the
atoms come together or fall apart.”
For his master’s thesis at the University
of Toronto, Dr. Le Roy developed computer
200 MHR • Unit 2  Structure and Properties
programs to perform the exact quantum mechanical
calculation of the absorption coefﬁcients governing
photodissociation processes. Later, when doing
his doctoral thesis at the University of Wisconsin,
he and his thesis supervisor, Dr. Richard Bernstein,
developed the Le Roy-Bernstein theory. This theory
describes the patterns of energies and other
properties for vibrational levels of molecules lying
very close to dissociation.
To determine when to trust the equations of the
Le Roy-Bernstein theory, Dr. Le Roy developed what
he calls “a little rule of thumb,” more generally
known as the Le Roy radius. A calculation for the
Le Roy radius, RLR, is:
R > RLR = 2[< rA
2 >1/2 + < rB
2 >1/2]
where R is the internuclear distance between two
atoms A and B.
The Le Roy radius is the minimum distance at
which the equation describing the vibrations of
molecules close to dissociation is thought to be
valid. The < rA
of the radii of the atoms of the two elements (or
of the two atoms of the same element) in their
ground states.
2 > and < rB
2 > values are the squares
Is there a practical outcome to mathematical
chemistry? Dr. Le Roy strongly encourages
“curiosity-oriented science,” as opposed to a
focus on short-term, practical results, partly because
practical results do come when processes are
fully understood.
For example, the study of global warming is
hindered, in his view, because the intermolecular
interactions are not well known. “To properly model
the processes, we have to understand the exchange
of energy during molecular collisions. If we know
them, we can predict an immense amount.”
Making Connections
1. In what ways are chemistry and physics related
to each other? Design a graphic organizer to
outline their similarities and differences.
2. Research and development funding often
encourages chemists and chemical engineers
to focus on practical applications. How does this
differ from Dr. Le Roy’s perspective? With which
perspective do you agree more? Write an
editorial outlining your opinions.
Determining the Type of Bonding in Substances
The type of bonding in a substance depends upon the kinds of atoms it
contains and the forces of attraction between those atoms. If you know
the physical properties of a substance, you can often predict the type of
bonding in the substance. Table 4.5 summarizes the types of forces of
attraction and the physical properties of solids with different types of
bonding discussed in this section. In Investigation 4-B, you will design
an experiment in which you predict the type of bonding in various
substances, then test your prediction.
Table 4.5 Summary of Properties of Different Types of Solids
Type of
Crystalline
Solid
Particles
Involved
Primary Forces
of Attraction
Between Particles
Boiling Point
Electrical
Conductivity in
Liquid State
Other Physical
Properties of
Crystals
Conditions
Necessary for
Formation
Atom
atoms
dispersion
low
very low
very soft
Molecular non-polar
molecules
or polar
molecules
dispersion,
dipole-dipole,
hydrogen bonds
generally
low
(non-polar);
intermediate
polar
very low
non-polar: very
soft; soluble in
non-polar solvents
Covalent
Network
atoms
covalent bonds
very high
low
Ionic
cations and
anions
electrostatic
attraction between
oppositely
charged ions
high
high
Metallic
atoms
metallic bonds
most high
very high
polar: somewhat
hard, but brittle;
many are soluble
in water
hard crystals that
are insoluble in
most liquids
hard and brittle;
many dissolve in
water
all have a lustre,
are malleable and
ductile, and are
good electrical
and thermal
conductors; they
dissolve in other
metals to form
alloys
formed between
atoms with no
electronegativity
difference
non-polar: formed
from symmetrical
molecules
containing covalent
bonds between
atoms with small
electronegativity
differences
polar: formed from
asymmetrical
molecules
containing polar
covalent bonds.
Electronegativity
difference between
atoms < 1.7
formed usually
from elements
belonging to
Group 14 (IV A)
formed between
atoms with
electronegativity
difference > 1.7
Examples
all Group 18
(VIIIA) atoms
non-polar:
Br2, CH4,
CO2, N2
polar: H2O,
NH3, CHCl3.,
CH3COOH,
CO, SO2,
many organic
compounds
graphite,
diamond,
SiO2
NaCl, CaF2,
Cs2S, MgO,
MgF2
formed by
metals with low
electronegativity
Hg, Cu, Fe,
Ca, Zn, Pb
Chapter 4  Structures and Properties of Substances • MHR 201
S K I L L   F O C U S
Initiating and planning
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
Determining the Type
of Bonding in Substances
Analysis
1. Based on your observations, classify the
solids. Identify the type of bonding in each
substance. Explain your decisions about
classiﬁcation in detail.
Conclusion
2. How did your results compare with your
predictions? If some results were inconclusive,
explain the source of this uncertainty and
suggest one way to rectify it.
Application
3. Suppose you want to challenge a classmate
to identify a set of substances.
(a) Suggest ﬁve solids (different from the ones
you used in this investigation) that you
could use.
(b) What tests could your classmate carry out
to classify the substances successfully?
Explain why these tests would work.
(c) Suggest several tests that might provide
inconclusive results. Explain why.
This investigation challenges you to design an
experiment to observe and analyze the physical
properties of different substances, and to deter-
mine the types of bonding present.
Question
How can you determine the type of bonding in
an unknown substance?
Safety Precautions
• Tie back long hair and any loose clothing.
• Before you light the candle or Bunsen burner,
check that there are no ﬂammable solvents
nearby.
• Ensure you have a bucket of sand nearby in
case of ﬁre.
Materials
a substance of each of the following types:
non-polar molecular, polar molecular, ionic,
network, and metallic
equipment or apparatus, depending on how you
design your experiment
Procedure
1. Your teacher will give you ﬁve samples stored
in bottles. Record the visible properties that
you can observe. Based on these properties,
predict the main type of bonding in each.
2. Design an experiment to test your predictions.
Ensure that you have adequately addressed all
possible safety considerations. Obtain
approval from your teacher before you begin
your investigation.
3. Carry out your investigation and record your
observations.
202 MHR • Unit 2  Structure and Properties
Chemistry Bulletin
Ionic Liquids: A Solution
to the Problem of Solutions
Although organic solvents are commonplace in
industry, they are highly volatile and dangerous
in the large quantities that manufacturing
processes require. Disposing of used solvents
is a major environmental concern.
Until recently, the idea of a recyclable,
non-volatile solvent seemed like the stuff of
science ﬁction. But in the 1980s, researchers
in the United States were trying to create a new
electrolyte for batteries. Instead, they created a
colourless, odorless liquid that was composed
of nothing but ions— an ionic liquid.
An ionic liquid is a salt in liquid form.
Ionic liquids do not usually ﬁnd practical
applications, since ionic compounds have
such high boiling points. For example, sodium
chloride does not begin to melt until it reaches
a temperature of about 800˚C.
In an ionic liquid, the cations are much
larger than in typical ionic substances. As a
result, the anions and cations cannot be packed
together in an orderly way that balances both
the sizes and distances of the ions with the
charges between them. As a result, they remain
in a loosely-packed, liquid form. Because the
charges on the cations have the capacity to
bind more anions, an ionic liquid has a net
positive charge. Notice the large cation of the
ionic liquid molecule shown below. This is
what makes ionic liquids suitable solvents.
The net charge can attract molecules of other
compounds, dissolving them.
CH2
CH2
+
CH2
CH3 PF6
−
N
N
CH3
Many properties of ionic liquids make them
more desirable solvents than organic solvents.
For example, ionic liquids require a lot of
energy to change their state — they remain
as liquids even at temperatures of 200˚C.
In addition, ionic liquids evaporate sparingly.
Organic solvents, on the other hand, easily
release fumes that are harmful, often toxic,
and that can eventually oxidize and create
carbon dioxide, a notorious greenhouse gas.
As solvents, ionic liquids can be uniquely
“tuned” to a particular purpose by adjusting
the anion/cation ratio. To decaffeinate coffee,
for example, you could create an ionic liquid
that would just dissolve caffeine and nothing
else. Current research suggests that ionic
liquids can be recovered from solution
and reused.
Yet, there are still many hurdles that must
be overcome before these substances can be
put to widespread use. Because ionic liquids
boil at high temperatures, conventional
methods of separating reaction products from
solution cannot be used. Pharmaceutical
manufacturing processes, for instance, often
involve the process of distillation. The higher
temperatures required to distill using ionic
liquids (as opposed to organic liquids) would
decompose many of the desired pharmaceutical
compounds.
The discovery of ionic liquids is proving a
fertile ﬁeld for researchers. Ionic solvents are
revealing new mechanisms of reaction and
enhancing our understanding of the molecular
world. As well, their potential applications in
both industry and the home have encouraged
several companies, world-wide, to further
explore and develop these unusual substances.
Making Connections
1. Investigate some of the industrial processes
where solvents are currently used. Could
ionic liquids be used in any of these
industries instead? Why or why not? Look
into some of the ideas that ionic liquid
researchers have proposed for dealing with
the unique challenges posed by different
industries.
Chapter 4  Structures and Properties of Substances • MHR 203
Amorphous Solids
Solids that are composed of molecules that are not arranged in an orderly,
crystalline structure are called amorphous. This term comes from the
Greek word amorphos, meaning “without form.” Glass is a typical
example of this type of solid. Heating silica sand to its melting point of
approximately 1700˚C, adding limestone (CaCO3 ) and soda ash (Na2CO3 ),
and then allowing the mixture to cool, was the ﬁrst method of making
soda-lime glass, dating back 4000 years ago.
Today, soda-lime glass makes up almost 90% of all glass manufac-
tured and ﬁnds its applications in window glass and bottle production.
It typically contains SiO2, Na2O, CaO, MgO, and Al2O3. Soda-lime glass
is referred to as an ionic glass, with an approximate composition given by
the formula Na2O • CaO •(SiO2)6 . Figure 4.23 shows that each silicon atom
is surrounded by four oxygen atoms in a tetrahedron. These tetrahedra are
randomly arranged among a network of Na+ and Ca2+ ions that ﬁll in the
spaces to balance the negative charge on the tetrahedron network.
Glass is an isotropic material, which means that its properties are the
same in all directions. This is a useful property, since it means that glass
expands uniformly as it is heated.
Na
Ca
Si
O
Structure of
Figure 4.23
soda-lime glass. Four oxygen
atoms surround each silicon atom
in randomly arranged tetrahedrons.
C H E M
FA C T
You may have heard that
glass actually ﬂows very
slowly over time. This is, in
fact, a misconception, possibly
caused by the fact that some
older windows are thicker at
the base. In the past, window
manufacturers were not able
to make windows of perfectly
uniform thickness. The
windows were probably set
on their broader side for
stability—their thickness did
not change over time due to
slowly ﬂowing glass.
By changing the proportion of the components or adding other
components, different properties can be given to the glass. For example,
adding B2O3 so that it makes up 13% by weight of the glass results in
borosilicate glass, sold as Pyrex™. Its low coefﬁcient of thermal expansion
indicates that it will expand very little when heated. Pyrex™ is, therefore,
an “ovenproof” product. Pyrex™ is often also used in laboratory glassware
as it can be heated numerous times over a ﬂame without cracking.
Flint glass contains lead(II) oxide, PbO and is used in lenses because
of its low refractive index, meaning that light passing through does not
bend very much.
Some elements also exist in amorphous forms. For example, charcoal
is an impure, amorphous form of carbon. When sulfur is heated to its
boiling point and cooled quickly, an amorphous form called plastic sulfur
forms. It has the formula S∞, and is often called “polymeric sulfur.”
204 MHR • Unit 2  Structure and Properties
Metal alloys can be amorphous, too. Liquidmetal™ alloy is an
amorphous alloy of zirconium mixed with nickel, titanium, copper, and
beryllium. It is used in the heads of some brands of golf clubs. Traditional
metal club heads may have microscopic gaps where planes of metallic
crystals meet. These tiny gaps are a potential source of weakness. The
amorphous alloy is non-crystalline, so the metal structure does not have
potential breakage sites.
A Material Made to Order: Intermolecular and Intramolecular
Forces in Action
The gloves in the photograph at the start of this chapter are anything but
ordinary. The thin, lightweight fabric can withstand startling impacts and
piercing forces, including small projectiles such as bullets. In fact, this
same fabric is used to make bulletproof vests. The long strands of ﬁbre
used to make such protective gear are interlaced to form a dense “net”
that is capable of absorbing large amounts of energy. You have probably
heard the trade name for this astounding ﬁbre: KEVLAR®. It was invented
by an American research chemist, Stephanie Kwolek, in 1965.
The secret to stopping a bullet with a fairly soft fabric is that it
behaves in much the same way as the netting on the goal frame used in
hockey. When a hockey puck strikes a net at 100 km/h, its kinetic energy
is transferred to the lengths of twine of the goal net. This twine is an
interlaced mesh that has strands which stretch horizontally and vertically
to disperse the energy of impact over a wide area.
The sample principle applies to KEVLAR®. It belongs to a class
of ﬁbres called aramids, which are polymers containing aromatic
and amide groups. The polymer forms in the condensation reaction
between terephthalic acid and 1,6-hexamethylenediamine, as shown in
Figure 4.24A. The strength of the polymer comes from the intramolecular
forces in the aromatic group that limit bond rotation in the straight chains,
and the amide linkage that leads to intermolecular hydrogen bonding
between the straight chains, as shown in Figure 4.24B.
A
H2N
NH2
+
HOC
COH
→
H2N
NH
O
O
O
C
O
COH
+
H2O
B
O
N
H
O
N
H
H
N
O
H
N
O
H
N
O
N
H
O
N
H
O
N
H
H
N
O
H
N
O
H
N
O
(A) A condensation
Figure 4.24
reaction between terephthalic acid
and 1,6-hexamethylenediamine to
form the monomer used to make
KEVLAR®; (B) Structure of KEVLAR®
showing hydrogen bonds between
straight chains
Chapter 4  Structures and Properties of Substances • MHR 205
In addition to stopping a bullet from penetrating the armour, a
bulletproof vest must also protect the body from the blunt force of impact.
A bulletproof vest cannot have as much “give” as a hockey net (that is, it
should not stretch back as much as hockey nets do upon impact).
Otherwise, its wearer would still be injured, even though the bullet might
not pierce the fabric. To accomplish this, the properties of KEVLAR® are
enhanced by twisting the strands to increase their density and thickness.
The strands are then woven very tightly. A resin coating is applied and
sandwiched between two layers of plastic ﬁlm. Each layer acts as a net
and slows down the bullet a little at a time until it has been stopped.
Deriving Theory from Application: Superconductors
When she ﬁrst synthesized KEVLAR®, Stephanie Kwolek did not know
that it would eventually be used in bulletproof vests or protective gloves.
She did, however, understand the theories behind the properties that
make it suitable for such applications—the theories of intermolecular
and intramolecular forces. This is not always the case. Often scientists
discover a material that has useful or interesting properties, but are unable
to explain them.
For example, in 1911, Dutch physicist Heike Kamerlingh Onnes
cooled some mercury to the boiling point of liquid helium: 4 K. He
found that at this low temperature, the mercury developed an astonishing
property. The super-cooled mercury had zero resistance when an electric
current passed through it. In other words, none of the energy of the
electrical current was given off as wasted heat. The mercury had become
a superconductor — a material with no resistance to electric current.
Most conducting materials, even good conductors such as copper, give
off wasted heat as electric current passes though them. In other words,
they have resistance. By contrast, superconductors are “perfect” electrical
conductors.
Scientists are interested in superconductors because they have a num-
ber of properties that arise from their lack of resistance. For example, once
a current is induced in a circuit made with a superconducting material,
the current continues to ﬂow through the circuit indeﬁnitely, without ever
diminishing. Also, superconductors have the ability to completely repel
magnetic ﬁeld lines. This means that a magnet placed over a supercon-
ductor hovers in mid-air, as shown in Figure 4.25.
Figure 4.25
A magnet hovers above a superconductor, cooled by liquid nitrogen.
206 MHR • Unit 2  Structure and Properties
Since Onnes’s discovery, chemists have discovered other metals that
superconduct at extremely low temperatures. A niobum metal alloy was
found to exhibit superconductivity at 23 K, for example. But scientists
wanted to ﬁnd materials that exhibit superconductivity at much higher
temperatures, because refrigerants like liquid helium are very expensive.
In 1986, materials containing copper oxide ions were discovered to
be superconductors at 30 K. This was an astounding discovery, because
these materials are insulators at room temperature and higher. Researchers
began experimenting with this new class of superconductors, tweaking
their composition, and soon developed a material (Tl2Ba2Ca2Cu3O10 ) that
superconducts at 125 K. This is close to the boiling point of nitrogen, a
cheaper refrigerant than liquid helium.
It would be ideal, of course, to eliminate the need for a refrigerant
altogether. Finding a material that exhibits superconductivity at room
temperature is one of the driving forces of superconductivity research,
and the search continues. As of 2001, the highest known temperature
for a superconductor is 138 K. Researchers continue to search for new
classes of materials that superconduct. In fact, in 2001, researchers found
evidence to suggest that carbon nanotubes may superconduct, even at
temperatures surpassing the boiling point of water.
Current and Future Applications
The properties of superconducting materials suggest a wealth of
applications. Despite the need to maintain low temperatures, they have
already found uses in magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), a medical diag-
nostic tool. They have also been used to create powerful electromagnets,
used in magnetically levitated (MAGLEV) trains.  Superconductors in
the future could be used to make 100% efﬁcient electrical wires,
allowing power plants to be built far from cities. A room-temperature
superconductor could also mean ultra-fast, low-power electronics.
Many of the ideas necessary to help describe and explain
superconductivity involve topics you will encounter in future chemistry
courses. Even armed with these ideas, however, researchers do not yet
have a complete, accepted theory to explain this intriguing property.
Nevertheless, the list of superconducting materials continues to expand,
and engineers continue to ﬁnd practical applications for them.
Section Summary
Describing and explaining the chemical and physical changes in the
world around you requires an understanding of matter at the atomic level.
You have seen, for example, that the concepts of intramolecular and
intermolecular forces are both needed to articulate the bonding, structure,
and properties of substances as familiar as water and as exotic as
KEVLAR®. Each year, chemical engineers invent thousands of new
materials and substances. Each has its own characteristic structure and
properties. Each demonstrates the amazing diversity of matter that arises
from atoms, molecules and ions, and the forces among and between them.
In the next Unit, you will continue to examine chemical bonds, but
with a different emphasis. You will learn about the energy changes that
are associated with breaking and forming bonds. In other words, you will
examine the energy changes of chemical reactions.
Chapter 4  Structures and Properties of Substances • MHR 207
Section Review
1
2
C
Compare the intermolecular and intramolecular forces in HBr((cid:2)).
K/U
The boiling point of pure, liquid hydrogen peroxide, H2O2, is
150˚C. Compare this boiling point to that of water, H2O. Account for
this difference.
3
K/U
Classify the following solids as ionic, network, molecular
(polar or non-polar), or metallic:
(a) P4
(b) Na3PO4
(c) Os
(d) SiO2
4
5
6
7
8
C
Discuss the bonding that is present in NH4Cl(s).
I
A solid substance is found to be soluble in water and has a melting
point of 140˚C. In order to classify this solid as ionic, molecular (polar
or non-polar), metallic, or network, what additional test(s) should be
carried out?
K/U
Determine the molecular shape of PF2Cl. Is it a polar molecule?
Why or why not?
K/U
For the compound, GeH4, use VSEPR theory to determine its
molecular shape and indicate whether or not this molecule is polar.
C
Predict the periodic trend you would expect in the melting points
of the following cesium halides: CsF, CsCl, CsBr, CsI. Explain your
reasoning.
9
MC
KEVLAR® is used to make canoes. Explain why it is a suitable
material for constructing a canoe.
10
MC
If diamond was not such an expensive substance, would it be
a good choice to use for the following applications? Explain your
answers.
(a) an electrical insulator
(b) a cable for ﬁbre optics
208 MHR • Unit 2  Structure and Properties
Review
Reﬂecting on Chapter 4
Summarize this chapter in the format of your
choice. Here are a few ideas to use as guidelines:
• Identify forces of attraction and repulsion that
occur in molecules and in ionic solids.
• Compare the bonding between a metal and a
non-metal with the bonding between non-metals.
• Illustrate how metallic bonding determines uses
of metals.
• Debate the statement: “every snowﬂake has a
different structure from all other snowﬂakes.”
• Describe the models that chemists use to
describe the structure and shape of molecules
and ions, and assess their value in terms of the
information they communicate.
• Give examples of products and technologies
whose development depends on an understand-
ing of intramolecular and intermolecular forces,
and explain this dependency.
Reviewing Key Terms
For each of the following terms, write a sentence
that shows your understanding of its meaning.
chemical bond
covalent bond
ionic bond
lattice energy
bond energy
polar covalent bond
free-electron model
metallic bond
co-ordinate covalent
dipole
intramolecular forces
intermolecular forces
dipole-dipole force
ion-dipole force
ion-induced dipole
dipole-induced dipole
force
force
bond
resonance structure
expanded valence
energy level
Valence-Shell
Electron-Pair
Repulsion theory
dispersion force
hydrogen bonding
crystalline solids
amorphous solids
network solids
allotrope
ionic crystals
Knowledge/Understanding
1. What experimental evidence supports the idea
that an “octet” in the valence level of atoms
within a molecule often corresponds to a
minimum total energy for the system?
2. Describe the intermolecular forces between the
molecules of hydrogen halides (HF, HCl, HBr,
HI), and explain the difference in their boiling
points.
3. Draw a Lewis structure for the following.
(a) CHBr3
(b) HS−
4. What is the difference between a permanent
molecular dipole and an induced dipole in a
non-polar molecule?
5. Cooking oil, a non-polar liquid, has a boiling
point in excess of 200˚C. Water boils at 100˚C.
How can you explain these facts, given the
strength of water’s hydrogen bonding?
6. What types of intermolecular forces must be
broken to melt solid samples of the following?
(a) NH3
(d) CH4
(b) NaI
(c) Fe
7. Predict, giving reasons, the order of decreasing
boiling points for the following elements:
oxygen, cesium, sulfur, krypton. Refer to the
periodic table to check your predictions.
8. In which compound, H2O or in NH3, will the
hydrogen bonding be stronger? Explain.
9. Draw a Lewis structure for O2
10. Distinguish between a crystal and a unit cell of
2−.
the same crystal.
11. Explain how pieces of shattered window glass
are different from the shattered pieces of an
ionic crystal.
12. Explain the following observations: motor oil
pours from a can more slowly than water; how-
ever, in a jar, the meniscus of motor oil is ﬂatter
than the meniscus of water.
13. List the following substances in order of
increasing boiling points: C2H5OH, SiO2, C3H8,
K. Give a reason for your answer.
14. What are the molecular shapes of CCl4,
CH3Cl, and CHCl3? In liquid samples of these
compounds, which would have dipole-dipole
forces between molecules?
15. Distinguish between dipole-dipole attraction
forces and an ionic bond.
Chapter 4  Structures and Properties of Substances • MHR 209
16. Draw Lewis structures and indicate the
molecular shape of the following.
(a) NOCl
(c) XeO3
(b) AlF6
3−
17. Draw Lewis diagrams to illustrate the following.
(a) a compound of chlorine that is diatomic
and has only dispersion forces between
molecules when in the liquid state
(b) a compound of chlorine that is diatomic
and has dipole-dipole attractions when in
the liquid state
18. In what cases is the name of the molecular
shape the same as the name of the electron
group arrangement?
25. In which liquid, HF((cid:2)) or H2O((cid:2)), would the
hydrogen bonding be stronger? Based upon
your prediction, which of these two liquids
would have a higher boiling point? Refer to
a reference book to ﬁnd the boiling points of
these two liquids to check your predictions.
Account for any difference between your
predictions and the actual boiling points.
Communication
26. Compare the molecules SF4 and SiF4 with
respect to molecular shape and molecular
polarity.
19. How can a molecule with polar covalent bonds
27. Compare the forces of attraction that must
not be a polar molecule?
be overcome to melt samples of NaI and HI.
Inquiry
20. Draw a Lewis structure for PF2Cl3 to show that
it may be polar or non-polar.
21. Water reaches its maximum density at 4˚C. At
temperatures above or below 4˚C, the density is
lower. Discuss what is happening to the water
molecules at temperatures around 4˚C.
22. The melting point of NaCl is 801˚C, of CaCl2 is
782˚C, and of AlCl3 is 190˚C. The electrostatic
forces of attraction between ions increase with
an increase in the charge. In these ionic solids,
the charge on the cations Na+, Ca2+, and Al3+
is increasing, but the melting point of the corre-
sponding compound is decreasing. Suggest an
explanation for this trend in the melting point.
23. Transition metal ions can be multivalent. For
example, gold(I), Au+, and gold(III), Au3+, are
the two ionic forms for gold. Decomposition
occurs at 240˚C for Au2S and at 197˚C for
Au2S3.
(a) Based upon the given information, which of
the two compounds has bonds with greater
ionic character?
(b) Predict which compound would have the
greater lattice energy. Outline the reasoning
for your answers.
24. Determine if the molecule XeF6 will have an
octahedral shape.
28. (a) Contrast the physical properties of diamond,
a covalent network solid with the molecular
compound 2,2-dimethylpropane.
(b) In diamond, covalent bonds join the
carbons atoms. In a molecule of
2,2-dimethylpropane, a central carbon
atom is covalently bonded to four (cid:2)CH3
groups. How are the covalent bonds in the
two substances different from one another?
(c) How are the physical properties of these two
substances related to the covalent bonds in
them?
29. At room temperature, carbon dioxide, CO2, is a
gas, while silica, SiO2, is a hard solid. Compare
the bonding in these two compounds to
account for this difference in physical states.
30. Compare the bonding and molecular polarity of
SeO3 and SeO2.
31. Discuss the intermolecular and intramolecular
forces in N2H4 and C2H4. Based upon the
bonding between molecules, which of these two
compounds would have a lower boiling point?
Making Connections
32. Many advanced materials, such as KEVLAR®,
have applications that depend on their chemi-
cal inertness. What hazards do such materials
pose for the environment? In your opinion, do
the beneﬁts of using these materials outweigh
the long-term risks associated with their use?
Give reasons to justify your answer.
210 MHR • Unit 2  Structure and Properties
33. Considering the changes of states that occur
with water in the environment, suggest how
intermolecular forces of attraction inﬂuence
the weather.
Answers to Practice Problems and Short Answers to
Section Review Questions
1.(a) 1s2 (b) 1s22s22p63s23p6 (c) 1s22s22p63s23p64s23d104p6
(d) 1s22s22p6 2.(a) [Li]+
(b) [Ca]2+
(c)
•
•
• •
−
• •
•
•Br
• •
(d)
•
•O•
•
• •
2−
3.(a)
•
Li
•
Li
+
• •
S
•
•
•
•
+
Li
2−
•
•
• •
S
• •
•
•
+
Li
(b)
Ca •
+
•
•
• •
Cl
• •
• •
Cl
• •
•
•
•
•
−
•
•
• •
Cl
• •
•
•
2+
Ca
−
•
•
• •
Cl
• •
•
•
(c)
•
K
+
•
• •
Cl
• •
•
•
−
K
+
Cl
(d)
•
Na
•
Na
•
Na
+
• •
•
N•
•
+
Na
• •
N•
•
• •
3−
•
•
+
Na
+
Na
4.(a) 6 (VIA) (b) 1 (IA) (c) 3 (IIIA) (d) 2 (IIA)  5. H(cid:2)Cl,
H(cid:2)Br, H(cid:2)I  6. AsBr3 ∆EN = 0.78, CaBr2 ∆EN = 1.96,
KBr ∆EN = 2.14: increasing ionic character  7.(a) C(cid:2)H
(b) Sn(cid:2)F (c) C(cid:2)O  8. covalent: S8, F2; polar covalent
SCl2 < SF2 < PF3; ionic: RbCl  9.(a)
NH
H
• •
H
(b)
H
C H
(c)
•
•
• •
F
• •
H
• •
(d)
H As
H
(e)
• •
F
•
•
•
•
C
•
•
•
•
F
• •
• •
F
• •
•
•
• •
• •
•
• Br
• •
•
•O
• •
−
• •
(f)
H S H
• •
O
• •
F •
•
• •
13.
Xe
O
(all co-ordinate covalent)
• •
N
N
• •
• •
•
F•
• •
(b)
•
•
• •
F
• •
• •
F•
•
•
•
• •
•
•
F •
•
14.(a)
S
• •
• •
(b)
•
•
• •
F
• •
O
• •
•
•
F •
•
• •
• •
F•
•
•
•
Br
•
•
•
•
• •
F
• •
15.(a)
•
F•
• •
F •
•
• •
•
•
F•
•
• •
F •
•
• •
•
•
F•
•
• •
•
F•
• •
• •
•
•
F •
•
• •
Xe
• •
•
•
•
•
F •
•
• •
• •
F•
•
•
•
• •
•
•
F •
•
P
• •
(b)
•
•
• •
F
• •
F •
•
• •
•
•
F•
•
• •
16. In PI3, one lone pair around P; in ClI3, two lone pairs
around the Cl.
•
•
• •
F
• •
17.
•
F•
• •
−
• •
F •
•
• •
• •
F
• •
•
•
• •
I
• •
•
•
18.(a) linear (b) bent (c) trigonal planar (d) tetrahedral
19.(a) tetrahedral (b) trigonal bipyramidal (c) tetrahedral
(d) tretrahedral  20. NO2
+ linear; NO2
− bent
I
21.(a) linear:
Xe
•
•
•
•
(b) octahedral:
−
• •
F
• •
•
•
•
•
• •
F
• •
• •
F•
•
•
•
P
• •
• •
I
•
F•
• •
F •
•
• •
•
•
F•
•
• •
H
(c) trigonal pyrimidal:
• •
As
• •
• •
•
F•
• •
F •
•
• •
•
•
F•
•
• •
• •
F•
•
•
•
Al
−
• •
F
• •
•
•
•
•
F•
•
• •
H
• •
• •
(g)
H O
• •
O H
• •
(h)
•
•
• •
Cl
• •
• •
N
•
•
O
• •
(d) tetrahedral:
•
•
• •
F
• •
2−
• •
O
•
•
•
•
C
10.(a)
2−
• •
O
•
•
•
•
C
2−
• •
O
•
•
C
•
•
O
• •
•
•
•
•
O
• •
•
•
•
•
O
• •
•
•
O
•
•
•
•
•
•
O
• •
•
•
•
•
O
• •
(b)
•
•
N O
+
•
•
(c)
•
•
• •
O
• •
• •
O•
•
•
•
Cl
• •
−
• •
O
• •
•
•
•
•
• •
O
• •
• •
•
•
O •
•
(d)
•
•
S
•
•
O•
•
• •
11.
H
• •
FH
•
•
•
•
C
H
C
•
•
•
•
Cl
• •
• •
Cl •
•
• •
12.(a)
H
H
•
•
N N
•
•
H
H
22.(a) O (b) P (c) Cl  23.(a) tetrahedral, polar (b) trigonal planar,
polar (c) trigonal planar, non-polar  24. tetrahedral, polar
25.(a) NF3 (b) TeCl4 26. trigonal pyramidal, T-shaped
Section 4.1: 1. (b) NaBr ionic, Br(cid:2)F polar covalent,
Br(cid:2)Cl covalent  2. O(cid:2)H > S(cid:2)O > H(cid:2)Br > Cl(cid:2)I > N(cid:2)Cl
3. property will tend to increase  4. cleavage; ionic
4.2: 1.(a) non-polar (b) polar (c) polar  3. both tetrahedral; CH4
is non-polar and CH3OH is polar  4. less reactive since B
and N now have octet in valence energy level  5. bent, polar
6. tetrahedral  4.3: 2. more opportunity for H-bonding and
greater dispersion forces in H2O2 3.(a) molecular non-polar,
ionic (c) metallic (d) network  6. trigonal pyramidal, polar
7. tetrahedral, non-polar  8. CsF > CsCl > CsBr > CsI
Chapter 4  Structures and Properties of Substances • MHR 211
U N I T   2   Project
Materials Convention
Background
The qualities and characteristics of a material are
determined by the bonding between the particles
that make up the material. For example, pure car-
bon exists in several different forms, or allotropes.
Each allotrope contains different bonding, and
therefore has different properties. The “lead” of
a pencil is really made of graphite, a silver-grey
allotrope of carbon. Graphite is a good writing tool
because the layered bonding arrangement creates a
soft material that is easily transferred to paper by
rubbing. The softness and slipperiness of graphite
also make it a valuable industrial lubricant.
Diamond, another allotrope of carbon, is one of the
hardest materials on Earth. Diamonds are useful in
cutting and drilling applications. Because they are
beautiful, sparkling stones, diamonds are also used
in jewellery.
Humans have used the materials in their
environment for thousands of years. In addition
to natural materials, new materials are continually
being invented. Some inventions take place by
accident, and others by design. These new materials
are often more effective, efﬁcient, or cheaper than
traditional materials.
Optical ﬁbres, each made of two different types of glass,
pass through the eye of a steel needle.
212 MHR • Unit 2  Structure and Properties
Whale oil was once a popular choice for lamp fuel.
Later, a new, “cutting-edge” fuel was developed from
petroleum to replace whale oil. What was this new
fuel? How did it compare to whale oil?
Copper has long been prized for its beauty,
malleability, and conductivity. However, in recent
ﬁbre-optic technology, intricate atom-layering
production processes are being used to produce a
material that has thousands of times the conductive
ability of copper. What is this new material?
Challenge
In this project, you will choose and investigate a
material. You may be interested in a common
material or substance that you encounter every
day. Alternatively, you may want to investigate
one of the many new, cutting-edge materials that
are currently being developed. You will research
the structure, properties, and applications of your
material, and then prepare a presentation to be set
up in the classroom.
Materials
Try to obtain a sample of your material, to examine
its physical properties. If this is not possible, ﬁnd
illustrations or photos of the material from books,
magazines, or the Internet. You will need materials
for your presentation, which may include charts, a
poster, models, pictures, or pamphlets.
Design Criteria
A
With your class, prepare a rubric that you will
use for self- and peer-assessments. Your teacher
will use the same rubric to assess your work.
B
Your presentation should be visually attractive,
interesting, and educational. It should examine
the relationship between the bonding and
physical properties of your material.
Action Plan
1
Examine or research the physical properties of
the material you have chosen to study. This
step may include a hands-on investigation of
a sample of the material, if available. Record a
detailed description of the properties of your
material. Include tests to determine any of the
following applicable properties.
Assessment
After you complete this project, answer the following
questions to assess your work.
(cid:2) Assess the success of your project based on the
response from your peers.
(cid:2) Assess the completeness of your research. Could
you have found out more?
(cid:2) Assess the visual presentation of your project. Was
your information laid out in a clear, interesting, and
easy-to-understand manner?
Evaluate
1
Prepare your presentation, and set it up in the
classroom. During one or two class periods,
proceed around the classroom, taking notes
on the materials presented by your classmates.
While studying all of the materials together,
note patterns, similarities, and differences in
structure and function.
2
3
Use the rubric that your class designed to
evaluate your presentation.
As directed by your teacher, use the rubric
your class designed to evaluate the presentation
of another student in the class.
Extension
What methods of analysis would provide scientists
with the most information on your material? What
scientiﬁc instruments would be helpful in studying
your material? Explain your answer in terms of the
structure of your material and the function of the
instrument.
thermal conductivity
electrical conductivity
hardness
boiling point
melting point
solubility in various solvents
surface tension
density
2
3
4
5
6
7
Research the chemical composition of the
material, and, if applicable, the processes used
to make it. Is your material natural or synthetic?
If it is synthetic, what substances are used to
produce it? Do these substances come from a
natural source?
If possible for your material, draw a Lewis
structure of the molecule or molecules on
which your material is based. Predict the
molecular shape using VSEPR theory.
Build a three-dimensional model showing the
composition of your material. Prepare a detailed
drawing to explain the bonding that occurs
between particles in your material.
Use your model and drawing to discuss the
following topics.
(a) the polarity of your material
(b) intermolecular forces affecting the properties
of your material
(c) the types of intramolecular bonding present
in your material
Describe and explain any relationship you
observe between the polarity and bonding
of your material (step 5) and its physical
properties (step 1).
(a) Decide on some possible functions of the
material you have chosen, based on its
properties.
(b) Research applications of your material in
industry, science, and medicine. How have
inventors used the speciﬁc characteristics of
your material to beneﬁt society?
(c) Compare historical, current, and possible
future applications of this material. Has this
material been replaced by a new material?
Are there economic or other reasons why
this material may no longer be used?
Unit 2  Project • MHR 213
Review
Knowledge/Understanding
Multiple Choice
In your notebook, write the letter for the best
answer to each question.
1. Which part of the atom did Rutherford discover
by bombarding gold foil with alpha particles?
(a) protons
(b) neutrons
(c) electrons
(d) nucleus
(e) a uniform, positively charged sphere
2. Which of the following did the Bohr model of
the atom help explain?
(a) nuclear structure
(b) atomic spectra
(c) structure of the electron
(d) structure of alpha particles
(e) wave property of the atom
3. Which of the following can help explain atomic
emission spectra?
(a) A photon of a speciﬁc wavelength of light is
absorbed when an atom’s electron jumps
from a lower energy level to a higher energy
level.
(b) A photon of a speciﬁc wavelength of light is
released when an atom’s electron falls from a
higher energy level to a lower energy level.
(c) Energy of electromagnetic radiation is
continuous.
(d) Electrons continuously release energy as
they orbit the nucleus of the atom.
(e) Energy is released when an electron jumps
from a lower energy level to a higher energy
level.
4. Which of the following is an example of a
network solid?
(a) sodium, Na(s)
(b) sucrose, C12H22O11(s)
(c) graphite, C(s)
(d) silica, SiO2(s)
(e) magnesium ﬂuoride, MgF2(s)
(d) 1s22s12p3
(e) 1s22s22p6
6. A crystalline substance that is hard,
unmalleable, has a high melting point, and
is a non-conductor of electricity could be
I an ionic crystal
II a polar covalent solid
III a metal
IV a network solid
(a) I or II
(b) I or III
(c) III or IV
(d) II or IV
(e) I or IV
7. Which of the following molecules does not
have a linear shape?
(a) Cl2O
(b) CO2
(c) XeF2
(d) OCS
(e) BeF2
8. Which of the following electron conﬁgurations
shows a transition metal atom?
(a) 1s22s22p5
(b) 1s22s22p63s23p1
(c) 1s22s22p63s23p63d104s1
(d) 1s22s22p63s23p63d104s24p1
(e) 1s22s22p63s23p63d104s24p3
9. A substance that has a melting point of 1850˚C
and a boiling point of 2700˚C is insoluble in
water and is a good insulator of electricity. The
substance is most likely
(a) an ionic solid
(b) a polar covalent solid
(c) a metal
(d) a network solid
(e) a molecular solid
10. The main factor that leads to the formation of a
chemical bond between atoms is
(a) the lowering of melting point and boiling
point when a compound is formed
(b) a tendency in nature to achieve a minimum
5. Which of the following electron conﬁgurations
energy for a system
is impossible for an atom, regardless of whether
it is in the ground state or an excited state?
(a) 1s22s22p3
(b) 1s2s12p1
(c) 1s32s12p4
214 MHR • Unit 2  Structures and Properties
(c) the formation of a shape consistent with
VSEPR theory
(d) a tendency to make the attractions equal to
the repulsions between atoms
(e) a tendency to reduce the number of existing
particles
Short Answers
In your notebook, write a sentence or a short
paragraph to answer each question.
11. The emission spectrum of an element has
spectral lines at wavelengths of 620 nm and
640 nm. Sketch the absorption spectrum for
this element.
12. Brieﬂy account for the two spectra referred
to in question 11.
13. Use the aufbau principle to write the
condensed ground state electron conﬁgurations
for nitrogen, phosphorus, and arsenic.
14. List these elements in order of increasing
atomic size: Na, Mg, K, and Ca.
15. What VSEPR notations correspond to a
molecule that have a bent shape?
16. How do the lone pairs of electrons around
the central atom of a molecule affect the bond
angle between two bond pairs of electrons.
17. List these elements in order of increasing ﬁrst
ionization energies:
(a) Li, Na, K, Rb
(b) Li, Be, B, C
18. Name the two elements in period 4 whose elec-
tron conﬁgurations are not accurately predicted
by the aufbau principle.
19. Which physical properties of an ionic solid are
related to the size of the lattice energy of the
crystal?
20. Explain why, at room temperature, CO2 is a gas
but CS2 is a liquid.
21. Sketch an outline of the periodic table and use
it to compare the trends in atomic size, ﬁrst
ionization energy, and electron afﬁnity.
22. Why do the properties of elements in the peri-
odic table recur periodically?
23. Use hydrogen and lithium to compare the con-
cepts of nuclear charge and effective nuclear
charge.
24. Explain how to determine the maximum num-
ber of electrons in any principal energy level.
25. What is the fourth quantum number, and why
does it have only two possible values?
26. What is the uncertainty principle, and what are
its implications for the atomic model?
27. Distinguish between dipole-dipole attraction
forces and dispersion (London) forces. Is one
type of these intermolecular forces stronger
than the other? Explain.
Inquiry
28. A metal, X, reacts with chlorine to form the
compound XCl2. The metal’s third ionization
energy is signiﬁcantly larger than its ﬁrst and
second ionization energies.
(a) To what group does the metal likely belong?
(b) What is the valence electron conﬁguration of
an atom of the metal in its ground state?
29. The last electron to enter an atom, following
the aufbau principle, has quantum numbers
n = 3, l = 2, ml = −1, and ms = + 1
2 . To which
block of elements and which period on the
periodic table does this element belong?
Identify the element, assuming that its orbitals
are ﬁlled in order of increasing ml.
30. If the ﬁrst ﬁve ionization energies of an
element are 1.09, 2.35, 4.62, 6.22, and 37.83
MJ/mol respectively, to which group in the
periodic table does this element belong?
Explain your reasoning.
31. Which ionic solid would you expect to have a
higher melting point: LiI or LiBr? Justify your
answer.
32. Which element in each of the following pairs
would you expect to be less metallic? Explain
your choices.
(a) Sb and As
(b) Si and P
(c) Be and Na
33. The ﬁrst ionization energy for boron is lower
than what you would predict, based on the
general trend for ionization energy across a
period. Explain this exception to the trend.
34. For any molecules that have the general
formula AXn, where n is greater than 2, how
can you decide whether a given molecule is
polar or not?
35. All three metals (Zn, Cd, Hg) in Group 12 (IIB)
have a ground state electron conﬁguration
ending with d10s2.
(a) What electrons will be available to partici-
pate in metallic bonding in these elements?
(b) What is the most likely charge to be carried
by stable ions of these metals?
Unit 2  Review • MHR 215
(c) Since Hg is a liquid at room temperature,
what does this indicate about the strength of
the metallic bonding in Hg compared to the
other two metals in this group?
36. Copy the following bond pairs into your note-
book. Use the electronegativity values in the
periodic table in Appendix E to indicate the
polarity of the bond in each case.
(a) N(cid:2)H
(b) F(cid:2)N
(c) I(cid:2)Cl
37. Arrange the following sets of bond pairs in
order of increasing polarity. Identify the
direction of bond polarity for the bond pairs
in each set.
(a) Cl(cid:2)F, Br(cid:2)Cl, Cl(cid:2)Cl
(b) Si(cid:2)Cl, P(cid:2)Cl, S(cid:2)Cl, Si(cid:2)Si
38. If a molecule with the formula AY3 is polar,
identify the molecular shapes that this mole-
cule could and could not have.
Communication
39. Draw a Lewis structure for the ionic compound
Ba(OH)2.
40. Draw a Lewis structure for the molecule POF3
and predict if it is a dipole.
41. Use VSEPR theory to predict the molecular
shape of CH2Cl2. Draw a sketch to indicate the
polarity of the bonds around the central atom
to verify that this is a polar molecule.
42. Draw and compare the Lewis structures of
− and OSCl2. In which of these cases, if
ClO4
any, does the central atom have an expanded
valence energy level?
46. The group trend for boiling point is the same as
the trend for atomic radius. For the compounds
formed between hydrogen and the ﬁrst three
elements of group 16 (VIA), H2S has a lower
boiling point than both H2O and H2Se.
Explain this diversion from the trend you
would expect.
47. Deﬁne the following terms, and identify the
term that best describes the H(cid:2)O bond in a
water molecule: non-polar covalent, polar
covalent, ionic.
48. For a solid metallic element:
(a) Identify four physical properties.
(b) Identify two chemical properties that
would enable you to classify the element
as metallic.
49. (a) Explain why the successive ionization
energies for an element always increase.
(b) Identify an element for which you would
predict the difference between two
successive ionization energies to be very
large. Explain what you can infer about
the electron conﬁguration of the atoms
of this element.
50. In your own words, state Hund’s rule. Explain
how it applies in drawing the orbital diagram
for a carbon atom.
51. You can use electronegativity differences to
think of chemical bonds as having a percent
ionic or a percent covalent character. The
graph below plots percent ionic character
versus ∆EN for a number of gaseous binary
molecules. Use this graph to answer the
questions on the next page.
43. Write the electron conﬁguration and
draw an orbital diagram to show the ﬁrst
excited state of a sodium atom. Assume
that the outermost electron is excited.
44. Write a full set of quantum numbers
for the following:
(a) the outermost electron in a Li atom
(b) the electron that causes a chlorine
atom to become a chloride ion with
a charge of 1−.
45. Summarize the trend in metallic
character, and compare it to the trends
for atomic size and ionization energy.
216 MHR • Unit 2  Structures and Properties
100
75
50
25
r
e
t
c
a
r
a
h
c
c
i
n
o
i
t
n
e
c
r
e
P
Ionic
KiF
KF
Arbitrary
cutoff
KCl
NaCl
KBr
Kl
LiCl
LiBr
Lil
CsCl
HF
Covalent
IBr
Cl2
HI
ICl
0
HCl
HBr
1.0
2.0
∆EN
3.0
(a) Describe the ionic character of the molecules
as a function of ∆EN .
Making Connections
57. Researchers estimate that known reserves of
(b) Which molecule has a 0 percent ionic
character? What can you infer about the
interactions among the electrons of this
molecule?
(c) Do any molecules have a 100 percent ionic
character? What can you infer about the
interactions among the electrons of ionic
compounds? (Hint: Can atoms give up or
gain electrons in the way the ionic bonding
model suggests they do?)
(d) Chemists often assign the value of 50 percent
as an arbitrary cutoff for separating ionic
compounds from covalent compounds.
Based on your answer in part (c), what does
the use of the term “arbitrary” suggest about
the nature of chemical bonds?
52. The periodic trend for electronegativity is the
inverse of the trend for atomic radius.
(a) Make a sketch of the periodic table to
show the group and period trends for
electronegativity.
(b) Explain, using an example, why you would
expect this inverse relationship between
electronegativity and atomic radius.
53. Name the two scientists whose ideas showed
that the location of an electron in an atom is
uncertain. Explain how their ideas did, in
fact, suggest this fact about electrons.
54. In 1906, the Nobel Prize in chemistry was
awarded to a French chemist, Ferdinand
Moissan, for isolating ﬂuorine in its pure
elemental form. Why would this achievement
be deserving of such a prestigious honour? Use
your understanding of atomic properties as
well as chemical bonds to explain your answer.
55. Use a graphic organizer such as a Venn diagram
to compare ionic bonding with metallic
bonding.
56. Lead and carbon belong to the same group of
the periodic table. One is a metal, while the
other is a non-metal. How can two elements
whose atoms have the same number of valence
electrons be so different in their properties?
industrially important transition metals, such
as manganese and iron, will be depleted in less
than a human lifetime. Scattered about the
ocean ﬂoor are billions of tonnes of small
chunks of rock ranging in diameter from sever-
al millimetres to several metres. These nodules,
as they are called, consist mainly of manganese
and iron oxides, but contain smaller amounts
of other transition-metal compounds as well.
The ocean ﬂoor is designated as international
property. Therefore, no single country may
claim ownership of this vast potential resource.
Write an editorial that outlines your recommen-
dations for how this resource may be shared.
58. Many useful products, such as superglue and
ﬁre-retardant materials, are domestic “spin-offs”
from research that is related to military applica-
tions. Military expense budgets are large, in
part, because of the money required to support
this research. In your opinion, should military
budgets be exempt from cost-conservation
measures that governments typically must
consider? Debate this question with your class-
mates, and issue a statement that summarizes
your decisions.
C O U R S E
C H A L L E N G E
The Chemistry of Human Health
Think about these questions as you plan for your
Chemistry Course Challenge.
• What are the properties characteristic of
metals such as aluminum and calcium based
on their electronic conﬁgurations?
• How would you test for these properties
in the laboratory?
• How would you determine the type of
bonding or intermolecular forces within
a substance?
Unit 2  Review • MHR 217
Energy Changes and
Rates of Reaction
U N I T   3   C O N T E N T S
CHAPTER  5
Energy and Change
CHAPTER  6
Rates of Chemical Reactions
UNIT  3  PROJECT
Developing a Bulletin About
Catalysts and Enzymes
UNIT 3 OVERALL  EXPECTATIONS
What energy transformations
and mechanisms are involved
in chemical change?
What skills are involved in
determining energy changes
for physical and chemical
processes and rates of
reaction?
How do chemical technologies
and processes depend on
the energetics of chemical
reactions?
Unit Project Prep
Look ahead to the project at the
end of Unit 3. Start preparing for
the project now by listing what you
already know about catalysts and
enzymes. Think about how catalysts
and enzymes affect chemical
reactions. As you work through the
unit, plan how you will investigate
and present a bulletin about the
uses of catalysts and enzymes in
Canadian industries.
218
In the nineteenth century, railway
tunnels were blasted through the
Rocky Mountains to connect British
Columbia with the rest of Canada.
Workers used nitroglycerin to blast
through the rock. This compound is
so unstable, however, that accidents
were frequent and many workers
died. Alfred B. Nobel found a way
to stabilize nitroglycerin, and make
it safer to use, when he invented
dynamite.
What makes nitroglycerin such
a dangerous substance? First, nitro-
glycerin, C3H5(NO3)3((cid:2)) , gives off a
large amount of energy when it
decomposes. In fact, about 1500 kJ
of energy is released for every mole
of nitroglycerin that reacts. Second,
the decomposition of nitroglycerin
occurs very quickly—in a fraction
of a second. This fast, exothermic
reaction is accompanied by a
tremendous shock wave, which is
caused by the expansion of the
gaseous products. Finally,
nitroglycerin is highly shock-
sensitive. Simply shaking or jarring
it can cause it to react.
Thus, nitroglycerin’s explosive
properties are caused by three fac-
tors: the energy that is given off by
its decomposition, the rate at which
the reaction occurs, and the small
amount of energy that is needed to
initiate the reaction. In this unit,
you will learn about the energy and
rates of various chemical reactions.
Energy and Change
Think about a prehistoric family group building a ﬁre. It may seem as
though this ﬁre does not have much in common with a nuclear power
plant. Both the ﬁre and the nuclear power plant, however, are technolo-
gies that harness energy-producing processes.
As you learned in Unit 2, humans continually devise new techno-
logies that use chemical reactions to produce materials with useful
properties. Since the invention of ﬁre, humans have also worked to devise
technologies that harness energy. These technologies depend on the fact
that every chemical, physical, and nuclear process is accompanied by a
characteristic energy change. Consider the melting of an ice cube to cool a
drink, the combustion of natural gas to cook a meal, and the large-scale
production of electricity via a nuclear power plant. All societies depend
on the energy changes that are associated with these physical, chemical,
and nuclear processes.
In this chapter, you will study the causes and magnitude of the
energy changes that accompany physical changes, chemical reactions,
and nuclear reactions. You will see that different processes involve vastly
different amounts of energy. You will learn how to calculate the amount
of energy that is absorbed or released by many simple physical changes
and chemical reactions. This will allow you to predict energy changes
without having to carry out the reaction—an important skill to have when
dealing with dangerous reactions. Finally, you will examine the efﬁciency
and environmental impact of traditional and alternative energy sources.
C h a p t e r   P r e v i e w
5.1 The Energy of Physical,
Chemical, and Nuclear
Changes
5.2 Determining Enthalpy
of Reaction by
Experiment
5.3 Hess’s Law of Heat
Summation
5.4 Energy Sources
P r e r e q u i s i t e
C o n c e p t s   a n d   S k i l l s
Before you begin this chapter,
review the following concepts
and skills:
(cid:2) writing balanced chemical
equations (Concepts and
Skills Review)
(cid:2) performing stoichiometric
calculations (Concepts
and Skills Review)
Enough radiant energy reaches Earth every day to meet
the world’s energy needs many times over. Since this is
the case, why do fossil fuels provide most of Canada’s
energy, while solar power supplies only a tiny fraction?
220 MHR • Unit 3  Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
The Energy of Physical, Chemical,
and Nuclear Processes
5.1
Most physical changes, chemical reactions, and nuclear reactions are
accompanied by changes in energy. These energy changes are crucial to
life on Earth. For example, chemical reactions in your body generate the
heat that helps to regulate your body temperature. Physical changes, such
as evaporation, help to keep your body cool. On a much larger scale, there
would be no life on Earth without the energy from the nuclear reactions
that take place in the Sun.
The study of energy and energy transfer is known as thermodynamics.
Chemists are interested in the branch of thermodynamics known as
thermochemistry: the study of energy involved in chemical reactions.
In order to discuss energy and its interconversions, thermochemists have
agreed on a number of terms and deﬁnitions. You will learn about these
terms and deﬁnitions over the next few pages. Then you will examine the
energy changes that accompany chemical reactions, physical changes, and
nuclear reactions.
Studying Energy Changes
The law of conservation of energy states that the total energy of the
universe is constant. In other words, energy can be neither destroyed
nor created. This idea can be expressed by the following equation:
∆Euniverse = 0
Energy can, however, be transferred from one substance to another. It can
also be converted into various forms. In order to interpret energy changes,
scientists must clearly deﬁne what part of the universe they are dealing
with. The system is deﬁned as the part of the universe that is being studied
and observed. In a chemical reaction, the system is usually made up of the
reactants and products. By contrast, the surroundings are everything else
in the universe. The two equations below show the relationship between
the universe, a system, and the system’s surroundings.
Universe = System + Surroundings
∆Euniverse = ∆Esystem + ∆Esurroundings = 0
From the relationship, we know that any change in the system is
accompanied by an equal and opposite change in the surroundings.
∆Esystem = −∆Esurroundings
Look at the chemical reaction that is taking place in the ﬂask in
Figure 5.1. A chemist would probably deﬁne the system as the contents
of the ﬂask—the reactants and products. Technically, the rest of the
universe is the surroundings. In reality, however, the entire universe
changes very little when the system changes. Therefore, the surroundings
are considered to be only the part of the universe that is likely to be
affected by the energy changes of the system. In Figure 5.1, the ﬂask, the
lab bench, the air in the room, and the student who is carrying out the
reaction all make up the surroundings. The system is more likely to
signiﬁcantly inﬂuence its immediate surroundings than, say, a
mountaintop in Japan (also, technically, part of the surroundings).
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
(cid:2) write thermochemical equa-
tions, expressing the energy
change as a heat term in the
equation or as ∆H
(cid:2) represent energy changes
using diagrams
(cid:2) compare energy changes
that result from physical
changes, chemical reac-
tions, and nuclear reactions
(cid:2) communicate your under-
standing of the following
terms: thermodynamics,
thermochemistry, law of
conservation of energy,
system, surroundings,
heat (Q), temperature (T),
enthalpy (H), enthalpy
change (∆H), endothermic
reaction, exothermic reac-
tion, enthalpy of reaction
(∆Hrxn), standard enthalpy
of reaction (∆H˚rxn), thermo-
chemical equation, mass
defect, nuclear binding
energy, nuclear ﬁssion,
nuclear fusion
The solution in the
Figure 5.1
ﬂask is the system. The ﬂask, the
laboratory, and the student are the
surroundings.
Chapter 5  Energy and Change • MHR 221
Heat and Temperature
Heat, Q, refers to the transfer of kinetic energy. Heat is expressed in the
same units as energy— joules (J). Heat is transferred spontaneously from a
warmer object to a cooler object. When you close the door of your home on
a cold day to “prevent the cold from getting in,” you are actually preventing
the heat from escaping. You are preventing the kinetic energy in your warm
home from transferring to colder objects, including the cold air, outside.
Temperature, T, is a measure of the average kinetic energy of the particles
that make up a substance or system. You can think of temperature as a way
of quantifying how hot or cold a substance is, relative to another substance.
K
380
370
360
350
340
330
320
310
300
290
280
270
260
20
10
0
373.15
˚C 110
100
100.00
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
–10
–250
–260
–270
0.00
−273.15
273.15
0.00
Celsius degrees and Kelvin degrees are the same size. The Kelvin scale begins
Figure 5.2
at absolute zero. This is the temperature at which the particles in a substance have no kinetic
energy. Therefore, Kelvin temperatures are never negative. By contrast, 0˚C is set at the
melting point of water. Celsius temperatures can be positive or negative.
Temperature is measured in either Celsius degrees (˚C) or kelvins (K).
The Celsius scale is a relative scale. It was designed so that water’s
boiling point is at 100˚C and water’s melting point is at 0˚C. The Kelvin
scale, on the other hand, is an absolute scale. It was designed so that 0 K
is the temperature at which a substance possesses no kinetic energy. The
relationship between the Kelvin and Celsius scales is shown in Figure 5.2,
and by the following equation.
Temperature in Kelvin degrees = Temperature in Celsius degrees + 273.15
Enthalpy and Enthalpy Change
Chemists deﬁne the total internal energy of a substance at a constant
pressure as its enthalpy, H. Chemists do not work with the absolute
enthalpy of the reactants and products in a physical or chemical process.
Instead, they study the enthalpy change, ∆H, that accompanies a process.
That is, they study the relative enthalpy of the reactants and products in a
system. This is like saying that the distance between your home and your
school is 2 km. You do not usually talk about the absolute position of
your home and school in terms of their latitude, longitude, and elevation.
You talk about their relative position, in relation to each other.
The enthalpy change of a process is equivalent to its heat change at
constant pressure.
222 MHR • Unit 3  Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
Enthalpy Changes in Chemical Reactions
In chemical reactions, enthalpy changes result from chemical bonds being
broken and formed. Chemical bonds are sources of stored energy. Breaking
a bond is a process that requires energy. Creating a bond is a process that
releases energy. For example, consider the combustion reaction that takes
place when nitrogen reacts with oxygen.
N2(g) + O2(g) → 2NO(g)
In this reaction, one mole of nitrogen-nitrogen triple bonds and one mole
of oxygen-oxygen double bonds are broken. Two moles of nitrogen-oxygen
bonds are formed. This reaction absorbs energy. In other words, more
energy is released to form two nitrogen-oxygen bonds than is used to break
one nitrogen-nitrogen bond and one oxygen-oxygen bond. When a reaction
results in a net absorption of energy, it is called an endothermic reaction.
On the other hand, when a reaction results in a net release of energy,
it is called an exothermic reaction. In an exothermic reaction, more energy
is released to form bonds than is used to break bonds. Therefore, energy is
released. Figure 5.3 shows the relationship between bond breaking, bond
formation, and endothermic and exothermic reactions.
Reactants
Products
bonds broken
bonds made
energy absorbed
energy released
endothermic reaction:
system absorbs E
The energy changes
Figure 5.3
that result from bonds breaking and
forming determine whether a reac-
tion is exothermic or endothermic.
bonds broken
bonds made
energy absorbed
energy released
exothermic reaction:
system releases E
Representing Enthalpy Changes
The enthalpy change of a chemical reaction is known as the enthalpy
of reaction, ∆Hrxn. The enthalpy of reaction is dependent on conditions
such as temperature and pressure. Therefore, chemists often talk about the
standard enthalpy of reaction, ∆H˚rxn: the enthalpy change of a chemical
reaction that occurs at SATP (25˚C and 100 kPa). Often, ∆H˚rxn is written
simply as ∆H˚. The ˚ symbol is called “nought.” It refers to a property of
a substance at a standard state or under standard conditions. You may
see the enthalpy of reaction referred to as the heat of reaction in other
chemistry books.
Representing Exothermic Reactions
There are three different ways to represent the enthalpy change of an
exothermic reaction. The simplest way is to use a thermochemical
equation: a balanced chemical equation that indicates the amount of heat
that is absorbed or released by the reaction it represents. For example,
consider the exothermic reaction of one mole of hydrogen gas with half
a mole of oxygen gas to produce liquid water. For each mole of hydrogen
gas that reacts, 285.8 kJ of heat is produced. Notice that the heat term is
included with the products because heat is produced.
O2(g) → H2O((cid:2)) + 285.8 kJ
H2(g) + 1
2
C H E M
FA C T
Chemists use different sub-
scripts to represent enthalpy
changes for speciﬁc kinds
of reactions. For example,
∆Hcomb represents the enthalpy
change of a combustion
reaction.
Chapter 5  Energy and Change • MHR 223
H2(g) + 1–
2O2(g)
(reactants)
You can also indicate the enthalpy of reaction as a separate expression
beside the chemical equation. For exothermic reactions, ∆H˚ is always
negative.
∆H˚ = −285.8 kJ
A third way to represent the enthalpy of reaction is to use an enthalpy
diagram. Examine Figure 5.4 to see how this is done.
H2(g) + 1
2
O2(g) → H2O((cid:2))
∆H˚rxn = −285.8 kJ
l
,
H
y
p
a
h
t
n
e
H2O((cid:2))
(products)
In an exothermic
Figure 5.4
reaction, the enthalpy of the system
decreases as energy is released to
the surroundings.
MgO(s) + CO2(g)
(products)
∆H˚ = 117.3 kJ
H
,
y
p
l
a
h
t
n
e
MgCO3(s)
(reactants)
In an endothermic
Figure 5.5
reaction, the enthalpy of the system
increases as heat energy is
absorbed from the surroundings.
Representing Endothermic Reactions
The endothermic decomposition of solid magnesium carbonate produces
solid magnesium oxide and carbon dioxide gas. For each mole of magne-
sium carbonate that decomposes, 117.3 kJ of energy is absorbed. As for an
exothermic reaction, there are three different ways to represent the
enthalpy change of an endothermic reaction.
You can include the enthalpy of reaction as a heat term in the
chemical equation. Because heat is absorbed in an endothermic reaction,
the heat term is included on the reactant side of the equation.
117.3 kJ + MgCO3(s) → MgO(s) + CO2(g)
You can also indicate the enthalpy of reaction as a separate expression
beside the chemical reaction. For endothermic reactions, the enthalpy of
reaction is always positive.
MgCO3(s) → MgO(s) + CO2(g) ∆H˚rxn = 117.3 kJ
Finally, you can use a diagram to show the enthalpy of reaction.
Figure 5.5 shows how the decomposition of solid magnesium carbonate
can be represented graphically.
Stoichiometry and Thermochemical Equations
The thermochemical equation for the decomposition of magnesium
carbonate, shown above, indicates that 117.3 kJ of energy is absorbed
when one mole, or 84.32 g, of magnesium carbonate decomposes. The
decomposition of two moles of magnesium carbonate absorbs twice as
much energy, or 234.6 kJ.
∆H˚rxn = 117.3 kJ
MgCO3(s) → MgO(s) + CO2(g)
2MgCO3(s) → 2MgO(s) + 2CO2(g) ∆H˚rxn = 234.6 kJ
Enthalpy of reaction is linearly dependent on the quantity of products.
That is, if the amount of products formed doubles, the enthalpy change
also doubles. Figure 5.6 shows the relationship between the stoichiometry
of a reaction and its enthalpy change. Because of this relationship, an
exothermic reaction that is relatively safe on a small scale may be
extremely dangerous on a large scale. One of the jobs of a chemical
engineer is to design systems that allow exothermic reactions to be carried
out safely on a large scale. For example, the blast furnaces used in steel
making must withstand temperatures of up to 2000˚C, produced by the
exothermic combustion reaction of coal with oxygen.
amount of
compound A
(mol)
varies directly with
(factor: molar ratio)
amount of
compound B
(mol)
varies directly with
(factor: ∆H     )
rxn
heat absorbed
or released
(kJ)
Figure 5.6
of a reaction and ∆H.
This diagram summarizes the relationship between the stoichiometry
224 MHR • Unit 3  Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
Sample Problem
Stoichiometry and Thermochemical Reactions
Problem
Aluminum reacts readily with chlorine gas to produce aluminum
chloride. The reaction is highly exothermic.
2Al(s) + 3Cl2(g) → 2AlCl3(s) ∆H˚rxn = −1408 kJ
What is the enthalpy change when 1.0 kg of Al reacts completely with
excess Cl2?
What Is Required?
You need to calculate the enthalpy change, ∆H, when the given amount
of Al reacts.
What Is Given?
You know the enthalpy change for the reaction of two moles of Al
with one mole of Cl2. From the periodic table, you know the molar
mass of Al.
2Al(s) + 3Cl2(g) → 2AlCl3(s) ∆H˚rxn = −1408 kJ
MAl = 26.98 g/mol
Plan Your Strategy
Convert the given mass of Al to moles. The enthalpy change is linearly
dependent on the quantity of reactants. Therefore, you can use a ratio to
determine the enthalpy change for 1.0 kg of Al reacting with Cl2.
Act on Your Strategy
Determine the number of moles of Al in 1 kg. Remember to convert to
grams.
n mol Al = mAl
MAl
= 1.0 × 103 g
26.98 g/mol
= 37 mol
Use ratios to compare the reference reaction with the known enthalpy
change (∆H1) to the reaction with the unknown enthalpy change (∆H2).
∆H2
∆H1
∆H2
−1408 kJ
= n2 mol Al
n1 mol Al
= 37 mol Al
2 mol Al
∆H2 = −2.6 × 104 kJ
Check Your Solution
The sign of the answer is negative, which corresponds to an exothermic
reaction. The 1 kg sample contained about 20 times more moles of Al.
Therefore, the enthalpy change for the reaction should be about 20 times
greater, and it is.
Chapter 5  Energy and Change • MHR 225
Practice Problems
1. Consider the following reaction.
N2(g) + O2(g) → 2NO(g) ∆H˚rxn = +180.6 kJ
(a) Rewrite the thermochemical equation, including the standard
enthalpy of reaction as either a reactant or a product.
(b) Draw an enthalpy diagram for the reaction.
(c) What is the enthalpy change for the formation of one mole of
nitrogen monoxide?
(d) What is the enthalpy change for the reaction of 1.000 × 102 g of
nitrogen with sufﬁcient oxygen?
2. The reaction of iron with oxygen is very familiar. You can see the
resulting rust on buildings, vehicles, and bridges. You may be sur-
prised, however, at the large amount of heat that is produced by this
reaction.
4Fe(s) + 3O2(g) → 2Fe2O3(s) + 1.65 × 103 kJ
(a) What is the enthalpy change for this reaction?
(b) Draw an enthalpy diagram that corresponds to the thermochemical
equation.
(c) What is the enthalpy change for the formation of 23.6 g of iron(III)
oxide?
3. Consider the following thermochemical equation.
25.9 kJ + 1
2
H2(g) + 1
2
I2(g) → HI(g)
(a) What is the enthalpy change for this reaction?
(b) How much energy is needed for the reaction of 4.57 × 1024
molecules of iodine, I2, with excess hydrogen, H2?
(c) Draw and label an enthalpy diagram that corresponds to the given
thermochemical equation.
4. Tetraphosphorus decoxide, P4O10, is an acidic oxide. It reacts with
water to produce phosphoric acid, H3PO4, in an exothermic reaction.
P4O10(s) + 6H2O((cid:2)) → 4H3PO4(aq) ∆H˚rxn = −257.2 kJ
(a) Rewrite the thermochemical equation, including the enthalpy
change as a heat term in the equation.
(b) How much energy is released when 5.00 mol of P4O10 reacts with
excess water?
(c) How much energy is released when 235 g of H3PO4(aq) is formed?
Heat Changes and Physical Changes
Enthalpy changes are associated with physical changes as well as with
chemical reactions. You have observed examples of these enthalpy
changes in your daily life. Suppose that you want to prepare some pasta.
You put an uncovered pot of water on a stove element. The heat from the
element causes the water to become steadily hotter, until it reaches 100˚C
(the boiling point of water at 100 kPa). At this temperature, heat is still
being added to the water. The average kinetic energy of the liquid water
molecules does not increase, however. Instead, the energy is used to break
the intermolecular bonds between the water molecules as they change
from liquid to vapour. The temperature of the liquid water remains at
226 MHR • Unit 3  Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
100˚C until all the water has been vaporized. If you add heat to the
vapour, the temperature of the vapour will increase steadily.
When you heat ice that is colder than 0˚C, a similar process occurs.
The temperature of the ice increases until it is 0˚C (the melting point of
water). If you continue to add heat, the ice remains at 0˚C but begins to
melt, as the bonds between the water molecules in the solid state begin
to break.
Figure 5.7 shows the relationship between temperature and heat for
a solid substance that melts and then vaporizes as heat is added to it.
gas
liquid
∆H˚vap
e
r
u
t
a
r
e
p
m
e
T
boiling
point
melting
point
solid
∆H˚melt
Heat added
You can represent the enthalpy change that accompanies a phase
change—from liquid to solid, for example— just like you represented the
enthalpy change of a chemical reaction. You can include a heat term in
the equation, or you can use a separate expression of enthalpy change.
For example, when one mole of water melts, it absorbs 6.02 kJ of energy.
H2O(s) + 6.02 kJ → H2O((cid:2))
H2O(s) → H2O((cid:2)) ∆H = 6.02 kJ
Normally, however, chemists represent enthalpy changes associated with
phase changes using modiﬁed ∆H symbols. These symbols are described
below.
• enthalpy of vaporization, ∆Hvap : the enthalpy change for the phase
change from liquid to gas
• enthalpy of condensation, ∆Hcond: the enthalpy change for the phase
change of a substance from gas to liquid
• enthalpy of melting, ∆Hmelt : the enthalpy change for the phase change of
a substance from solid to liquid
• enthalpy of freezing, ∆Hfre: the enthalpy change for the phase change of
a substance from liquid to solid
Vaporization and condensation are opposite processes. Thus, the
enthalpy changes for these processes have the same value but opposite
signs. For example, 6.02 kJ is needed to vaporize one mole of water.
Therefore, 6.02 kJ of energy is released when one mole of water freezes.
∆Hvap = −∆Hcond
Similarly, melting and freezing are opposite processes.
∆Hmelt = −∆Hfre
Several enthalpies of melting and vaporization are shown in Table 5.1.
Notice that the same units (kJ/mol) are used for the enthalpies of melting,
vaporization, condensation, and freezing. Also notice that energy changes
associated with phase changes can vary widely.
As heat is added to a
Figure 5.7
substance, the temperature of the
substance steadily increases until it
reaches its melting point or boiling
point. The temperature then remains
steady as the substance undergoes
a phase change.
C H E M
FA C T
The process of melting is also
known as fusion. Therefore,
you will sometimes see the
enthalpy of melting referred to
as the enthalpy of fusion.
Chapter 5  Energy and Change • MHR 227
Table 5.1 Enthalpies of Melting and Vaporization for Several Substances
Substance
argon
diethyl ether
ethanol
mercury
methane
sodium chloride
water
Enthalpy of melting,
∆Hmelt (kJ/mol)
Enthalpy of vaporization,
∆Hvap (kJ/mol)
1.3
7.3
5.0
23.4
8.9
27.2
6.02
6.3
29
40.5
59
0.94
207
40.7
Hot Packs and Cold Packs:
Using the Energy of Physical Changes
You just learned about the enthalpy changes that are associated with
phase changes. Another type of physical change that involves a heat
transfer is dissolution. When a solute dissolves in a solvent, the enthalpy
change that occurs is called the enthalpy of solution, ∆Hsoln. Dissolution
can be either endothermic or exothermic.
Manufacturers take advantage of endothermic dissolution to
produce cold packs that athletes can use to treat injuries. One type of cold
pack contains water and a salt, such as ammonium nitrate, in separate
compartments. When you crush the pack, the membrane that divides the
compartments breaks, and the salt dissolves. This dissolution process is
endothermic. It absorbs heat for a short period of time, so the cold pack
feels cold. Figure 5.8 shows how a cold pack works.
outer casing
water
soluble salt
membrane of
water pack
A typical cold pack has two separate chambers. One chamber
contains a salt. The other chamber contains water. Crushing
the pack allows the salt to dissolve in the water—an
endothermic process.
Figure 5.8
inﬂammation of the joint.
This person’s shoulder was injured. Using a cold pack helps to reduce the
Some types of hot packs are constructed in much the same way as the cold
packs described above. They have two compartments. One compartment
contains a salt, such as calcium chloride. The other compartment contains
water. In hot packs, however, the dissolution process is exothermic. It
releases heat to the surroundings.
228 MHR • Unit 3  Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
Web
L I N K
www.mcgrawhill.ca/links/
chemistry12
Not all hot packs use dissolu-
tion processes. For example,
one kind of hot pack exploits
the crystallization of sodium
thiosulfate or sodium acetate.
Another kind uses the oxida-
tion of iron (rusting). On the
Internet, investigate different
kinds of hot packs. Are they
all used for the same purpose?
What are the pros and cons
of their designs? To start your
search, go to the web site
above and click on Web Links.
Energy and Nuclear Reactions
The energy that is released by a physical change, such as the dissolution
of calcium chloride, can warm your hands. The energy that is released by
a chemical reaction, such as the formation of water, can power a rocket.
The energy that is released by a nuclear reaction, such as the nuclear
reactions in the Sun, however, can provide enough heat to fry an egg on
a sidewalk that is 150 000 000 km away from the surface of the Sun.
From previous science courses, you will recall that nuclear reactions
involve changes in the nuclei of atoms. Often nuclear reactions result in the
transformation of one or more elements into one or more different elements.
Like physical changes and chemical reactions, nuclear reactions are
accompanied by energy changes. Nuclear reactions, however, produce sig-
niﬁcantly more energy than physical and chemical processes. In nuclear
reactions, a signiﬁcant amount of the mass of the reactants is actually
converted into energy.
Ever since Albert Einstein devised his famous equation, E = mc2,
we have known that mass and energy are interconvertible. In Einstein’s
equation, E is energy in kg • m2/s2 (J), m is the mass in kg, and c2 is the
square of the speed of light.
c2 = (3.0 × 108 m/s)2
= 9.0 × 1016 m2/s2
As you can see, c2 is an enormous number. Therefore, even a very tiny
amount of matter is equivalent to a signiﬁcant amount of energy.
For example, compare the mass of 1 mol of carbon-12 atoms with the
mass of the individual nucleons in 1 mol of carbon-12 atoms. The mass of
6 mol of hydrogen-1 atoms (one proton and one electron each) and 6 mol
of neutrons is 12.098 940 g. The mass of 1 mol of carbon-12 atoms is
exactly 12 g. Note that the mass of the electrons does not change in a
nuclear reaction.
12.098 940 g/mol
− 12.000 000 g/mol
0.098 940 g/mol
The difference in mass is signiﬁcant. It would show up on any reasonably
precise balance. Thus, the mass of the nucleus of carbon-12 is signiﬁcant-
ly less than the mass of its component nucleons. The difference in mass
between a nucleus and its nucleons is known as the mass defect. What
causes this mass defect? It is caused by the nuclear binding energy: the
energy associated with the strong force that holds a nucleus together.
Nucleus + Nuclear binding energy → Nucleons
You can use Einstein’s equation to calculate the nuclear binding
energy for carbon-12.
∆E = ∆mc2
−5 kg/mol)(9.0 × 1016 m2/s2)
= (9.89 × 10
= 8.9 × 1012 J/mol
= 8.9 × 109 kJ/mol
Clearly, the energy associated with the bonds that hold a nucleus together
is much greater than the energy associated with chemical bonds, which
are usually only a few hundred kJ/mol.
The higher the binding energy of a nucleus, the more stable the nucleus
is. Nuclei with mass numbers (A) that are close to 60 are the most stable.
Nuclear reactions, in which nuclei break apart or fuse, tend to form nuclei
that are more stable than the reactant nuclei. Figure 5.9 illustrates the
relative stability of various nuclei.
Chapter 5  Energy and Change • MHR 229
This graph shows the
Figure 5.9
relative stability of nuclei.
It indicates whether nuclei are
more likely to split or fuse in a
nuclear reaction. Notice that
the helium-4 nucleus is unusually
stable.
Electronic Learning Partner
To learn more about nuclear
ﬁssion, go to the Chemistry 12
Electronic Learning Partner.
)
V
e
M
(
n
o
e
l
c
u
n
r
e
p
y
g
r
e
n
e
g
n
d
n
B
i
i
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
34S
56Fe
84Kr
119Sn
16O
12C
14N
4He
region of very
stable nuclei
205 Tl
235U
238U
fusion
fission
7Li
6Li
3H
3He
2H
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
220
240
260
Mass number, A
The difference between the nuclear binding energy of the reactant
nuclei and the product nuclei represents the energy change of the
nuclear reaction.
Nuclear Fission
A heavy nucleus can split into lighter nuclei by undergoing nuclear
ﬁssion. Nuclear power plants use controlled nuclear ﬁssion to provide
energy. Uncontrolled nuclear ﬁssion is responsible for the massive
destructiveness of an atomic bomb.
The most familiar ﬁssion reactions involve the splitting of uranium
atoms. In these reactions, a uranium-235 atom is bombarded with
neutrons. The uranium nucleus then splits apart into various product
nuclei. Two examples of ﬁssion reactions that involve uranium-235 are
shown in Figure 5.10.
1
0
n
+
235
92
U
92
36
Kr +
141
56
Ba
+
1
3
0
n
+
energy
+
energy
1
0
n
+
235
92
U
90
37
Rb +
144
55
Cs
+
1
2
0
n
Figure 5.10
product nuclei. Two examples are shown here.
Uranium can undergo ﬁssion in numerous different ways, producing various
230 MHR • Unit 3  Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
Fission reactions produce vast quantities of energy. For example, when
one mole of uranium-235 splits, it releases 2.1 × 1013 J. By contrast, when
one mole of coal burns, it releases about 3.9 × 106 J. Thus, the combustion
of coal releases about ﬁve million times fewer joules of energy per mole
than the ﬁssion of uranium-235.
Nuclear Fusion
Two smaller nuclei can fuse to form a larger nucleus, in what is called a
nuclear fusion reaction. You and all other life on Earth would not exist
without nuclear fusion reactions. These reactions are the source of the
energy produced in the Sun.
One example of a fusion reaction is the fusion of deuterium
and tritium.
2
1H + 3
2He + 1
0n
1H → 4
The seemingly simple reaction between deuterium and tritium produces
1.7 × 1012 J of energy for each mole of deuterium. This is about 10 times
fewer joules of energy than are produced by the ﬁssion of one mole of
uranium. It is still, however, 500 000 times more energy than is produced
by burning one mole of coal.
Scientists are searching for a way to harness the energy from fusion
Math
L I N K
The ﬁssion of one mole of
uranium-235 produces more
energy than the fusion of one
mole of deuterium with one
mole of tritium. What if you
compare the energy that is
produced in terms of mass of
reactants? Calculate a ratio
to compare the energy that
is produced from fusion and
ﬁssion, per gram of fuel. What
practical consequences arise
from your result?
reactions. Fusion is a more desirable way to produce energy than ﬁssion.
The main product of fusion, helium, is relatively harmless compared with
the radioactive products of ﬁssion. Unfortunately,
fusion is proving more difﬁcult than ﬁssion to harness.
Fusion will not proceed at a reasonable rate without an
enormous initial input of energy. This is not a problem
in the core of the Sun, where the temperature ranges
from 7 500 000˚C to 15 000 000˚C. It is a problem in
industry. Scientists are working on safe and economical
ways to provide the high-temperature conditions that
are needed to make fusion a workable energy source.
1021 J
1015 J
1018 J
1024 J
daily solar energy
falling on Earth
energy of strong earthquake
daily electrical output of
Canadian dams at Niagara Falls
1000 t of coal burned
Comparing the Energy of Physical, Chemical,
and Nuclear Processes
In this section, you learned that physical changes,
chemical reactions, and nuclear reactions all involve
energy changes. You also learned that the energy
changes have some striking differences in magnitude.
Figure 5.11 shows energy changes for some physical,
chemical, and nuclear processes. Some other interesting
energy statistics are included for reference.
The energy changes of physical, nuclear, and chemical
Figure 5.11
processes vary widely. In general, however, chemical reactions are
associated with greater energy changes than physical changes.
Nuclear reactions are associated with far greater energy changes than
chemical reactions.
1012 J
109 J
106 J
103 J
100 J
10−3 J
10−6 J
10−9 J
10−12 J
10−15 J
10−18 J
10−21 J
1 t of TNT exploded
1 kW • h of electrical energy
heat released from combustion
of 1 mol glucose
heat required to boil 1 mol of water
heat absorbed during division of one
bacterial cell
energy from fission of one 235U atom
average kinetic energy of a molecule
in air at 300 K
Chapter 5  Energy and Change • MHR 231
The following Concept Organizer summarizes what you learned about the
energy changes associated with physical changes, chemical reactions, and
nuclear reactions.
Concept Organizer
Energy Changes
Physical
Changes
The phase of a
substance changes.
Chemical
Reactions
Bonds between
atoms break and form.
Heat is released —
exothermic change.
Heat is absorbed —
endothermic change.
Heat is released —
exothermic reaction.
Heat is absorbed —
endothermic reaction.
In  general, physical changes
involve smaller energy changes
than chemical reactions. Nuclear
reactions produce far more energy
than chemical reactions.
y
g
r
e
n
e
g
n
i
s
a
e
r
c
n
i
Fission and
Fusion Reactions
Mass is converted
into energy.
An enormous quantity
of energy is released.
Section Summary
In section 5.1, you learned about the energy changes that accompany
physical changes, chemical reactions, and nuclear reactions. You learned
how to represent energy changes using thermochemical equations and
diagrams. In the next section, you will determine the enthalpy of a
reaction by experiment.
Section Review
1
2
3
4
In your own words, explain why exothermic reactions have
K/U
∆H < 0.
Label each thermochemical equation with the most speciﬁc
K/U
form(s) of ∆H. Remember to pay attention to the sign of ∆H.
(a) Ag(s) + 1
Cl2(g) → AgCl(s) + 127.0 kJ (at 25˚C and 100 kPa)
2
(b) 44.0 kJ + H2O((cid:2)) → H2O(g) (at 25˚C and 100 kPa)
(c) C2H4(g) + 3O2(g) → 2CO2(g) + 2H2O(g) + energy
Suppose that one of your friends was absent on the day that you
C
learned about labelling ∆H. To help your friend, create a table that
summarizes the different ways to label ∆H, and their meanings.
I
Calcium oxide, CaO, reacts with carbon in the form of graphite.
Calcium carbide, CaC2, and carbon monoxide, CO, are produced in
an endothermic reaction.
CaO(s) + 3C(s) + 462.3 kJ → CaC2(s) + CO(g)
(a) 246.7 kJ of energy is available to react. What mass of calcium
carbide is produced, assuming sufﬁcient reactants?
232 MHR • Unit 3  Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
5
6
7
(b) What is the enthalpy change for the reaction of 46.7 g of graphite
with excess calcium oxide?
(c) 1.38 × 1024 formula units of calcium oxide react with excess
graphite. How much energy is needed?
I
Acetylene, C2H2, undergoes complete combustion in oxygen.
Carbon dioxide and water are formed. When one mole of acetylene
undergoes complete combustion, 1.3 × 103 kJ of energy is released.
(a) Write a thermochemical equation for this reaction.
(b) Draw a diagram to represent the thermochemical equation.
(c) How much energy is released when the complete combustion of
acetylene produces 1.50 g of water?
C
Write an equation to represent each phase change in Table 5.1 on
page 228. Include the enthalpy change as a heat term in the equation.
MC
When one mole of gaseous water forms from its elements, 241.8 kJ
of energy is released. In other words, when hydrogen burns in oxygen
or air, it produces a great deal of energy. Since the nineteenth century,
scientists have been researching the potential of hydrogen as a fuel.
One way in which the energy of the combustion of hydrogen has been
successfully harnessed is as rocket fuel for aircraft.
(a) Write a thermodynamic equation for the combustion of hydrogen.
(b) Describe three reasons why hydrogen gas is a desirable rocket fuel.
(c) Suggest challenges that engineers might have had to overcome in
order to make hydrogen a workable rocket fuel for aircraft.
(d) Use print and electronic resources to ﬁnd out about research into
hydrogen as a fuel. Create a time line that shows signiﬁcant events
and discoveries in this research.
8
MC
A healthy human body maintains a temperature of about 37.0˚C.
Explain how physical, chemical, and nuclear processes all contribute,
directly or indirectly, to keeping the human body at a constant
temperature.
Chapter 5  Energy and Change • MHR 233
5.2
Determining Enthalpy
of Reaction by Experiment
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
(cid:2) determine the heat that is
produced by a reaction
using a calorimeter, and use
the data obtained to calcu-
late the enthalpy change for
the reaction
(cid:2) communicate your under-
standing of the following
terms: speciﬁc heat
capacity (c), heat capacity
(C), calorimeter, coffee-cup
calorimeter, constant-
pressure calorimeter
Chemical and physical processes, such as the ones you studied in
section 5.1, are associated with characteristic enthalpy changes. How do
chemists measure these enthalpy changes?
To measure the enthalpy of a chemical or physical process, chemists
insulate the system from the surroundings. They can then determine
the heat change by measuring the temperature change of the system. What
is the relationship between the heat change and the temperature change?
As you learned in previous science courses, each substance has a charac-
teristic property that dictates how its temperature will change when heat
is lost or gained.
Speciﬁc Heat Capacity
The amount of energy that is needed to raise the temperature of one
gram of a substance 1˚C (or 1 K) is the speciﬁc heat capacity, c, of the
substance. Speciﬁc heat capacity is usually expressed in units of J/g • ˚C.
The speciﬁc heat capacities of several substances are given in Table 5.2.
Figure 5.12 shows that you can often predict the relative speciﬁc heat
capacities of familiar substances.
Table 5.2 Speciﬁc Heat Capacities of Selected Substances
Substance
Specific heat capacity (J/g •  ˚C at 25˚C)
aluminum
carbon (graphite)
hydrogen
iron
ammonia (liquid)
ethanol
ethylene glycol
water (liquid)
On a sunny day, you
Figure 5.12
would probably prefer to sit on a
bench made of wood rather than
a bench made of aluminum. Wood
has a higher heat capacity than
aluminum. Therefore, more heat is
needed to increase its temperature.
air
concrete
glass
wood
Element
Compound
Other material
0.900
0.711
14.267
0.444
4.70
2.46
2.42
4.184
1.02
0.88
0.84
1.76
You can use the speciﬁc heat capacity of a substance to calculate the
amount of energy that is needed to heat a given mass a certain number
of degrees. You can also use the speciﬁc heat capacity to determine the
amount of heat that is released when the temperature of a given mass
decreases. The speciﬁc heat capacity of liquid water, as shown in
Table 5.2, is 4.184 J/g • ˚C. This relatively large value indicates that a
considerable amount of energy is needed to raise or lower the temperature
of water.
Explain why water is some-
times used as a coolant for
automobile engines.
234 MHR • Unit 3  Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
All samples of the same substance have the same speciﬁc heat
capacity. In contrast, heat capacity, C, relates the heat of a sample, object,
or system to its change in temperature. Heat capacity is usually expressed
in units of kJ/˚C.
Consider a bathtub full of water and a teacup full of water at room
temperature. All the water has the same speciﬁc heat capacity, but the
two samples have different heat capacities. It would take a great deal more
heat to raise the temperature of the water in the bathtub by 10˚C than it
would take to raise the temperature of the water in the teacup by 10˚C.
Therefore, the water in the bathtub has a higher heat capacity.
Speciﬁc Heat Capacity and Heat Transfer
You can use the following equation to calculate the heat change of a sub-
stance, based on the mass of the substance. You can also use this equation
to calculate the speciﬁc heat capacity of the substance and the change in
its temperature.
Q = m • c • ∆T
where Q = heat (J)
m = mass (g)
c = speciﬁc heat capacity (J/g • ˚C)
∆T = Tf (ﬁnal temperature) − Ti (initial temperature)(˚C or K)
Water is often used in controlled surroundings to measure the heat of a
reaction. For example, you can use the equation above to determine the
amount of energy that is needed to heat 1.00 × 102 g of water from 20.0˚C
to 45.0˚C.
Q = m • c • ∆T
The mass of the water is 1.00 × 102 g. The speciﬁc heat capacity of water
is 4.184 J/g • ˚C. The temperature of the water increases by 25.0˚C.
∴Q = (1.00 × 102 g)(4.184 J/g • ˚C)(25.0˚C)
= 1.05 × 104 J
To raise the temperature of 1.00 × 102 g of water by 25˚C, 1.05 × 104 J of
heat is needed.
Try the following problems to practise working with speciﬁc heat
capacity and temperature change.
Practice Problems
5. A sample of ethylene glycol, used in car radiators, has a mass of
34.8 g. The sample liberates 783 J of heat. The initial temperature
of the sample is 22.1˚C. What is the ﬁnal temperature?
6. A sample of ethanol, C2H5OH, absorbs 23.4 kJ of energy. The
temperature of the sample increases from 5.6˚C to 19.8˚C. What is
the mass of the ethanol sample? The speciﬁc heat capacity of ethanol
is 2.46 J/g • ˚C.
7. A child’s swimming pool contains 1000 L of water. When the water
is warmed by solar energy, its temperature increases from 15.3˚C to
21.8˚C. How much heat does the water absorb?
8. What temperature change results from the loss of 255 kJ from a
10.0 kg sample of water?
Chapter 5  Energy and Change • MHR 235
Web
L I N K
www.mcgrawhill.ca/links/
chemistry12
The famous French scientist
Antoine Laviosier (1743-1794)
is considered by many to
be the ﬁrst modern chemist.
Lavoisier created a calori-
meter to study the energy that
is released by the metabolism
of a guinea pig. To learn about
Lavoisier’s experiment, go to
the web site above and click
on Web Links. What do you
think about using animals in
experiments? Write an essay
to explain why you agree or
disagree with this practice.
Measuring Heat Transfer in a Laboratory
From previous science courses, you will probably remember that a
calorimeter is used to measure enthalpy changes for chemical and
physical reactions. A calorimeter works by insulating a system from its
surroundings. By measuring the temperature change of the system, you
can determine the amount of heat that is released or absorbed by the
reaction. For example, the heat that is released by an exothermic
reaction raises the temperature of the system.
Qreaction = −Qinsulated system
In your previous chemistry course, you learned about various types
of calorimeters. For instance, you learned about a bomb calorimeter,
which allows chemists to determine energy changes under conditions
of constant volume.
In section 5.1, however, you learned that an enthalpy change repre-
sents the heat change between products and reactants at a constant
pressure. Therefore, the calorimeter you use to determine an enthalpy
change should allow the reaction to be carried out at a constant pressure.
In other words, it should be open to the atmosphere.
To determine enthalpy changes in high school laboratories, a
coffee-cup calorimeter provides fairly accurate results. A coffee-cup
calorimeter is composed of two nested polystyrene cups (“coffee cups”).
They can be placed in a 250 mL beaker for added stability. Since a
coffee-cup calorimeter is open to the atmosphere, it is also called a
constant-pressure calorimeter.
As with any calorimeter, each part of the coffee-cup calori-meter has
an associated heat capacity. Because these heat capacities are very small,
however, and because a coffee-cup calorimeter is not as accurate as other
calorimeters, the heat capacity of a coffee-cup calorimeter is usually
assumed to be negligible. It is assumed to have a value of 0 J/˚C.
Using a Calorimeter to Determine the Enthalpy of a Reaction
A coffee-cup calorimeter is well-suited to determining the enthalpy
changes of reactions in dilute aqueous solutions. The water in the
calorimeter absorbs (or provides) the energy that is released (or absorbed)
by a chemical reaction. When carrying out an experiment in a dilute
solution, the solution itself absorbs or releases the energy. You can
calculate the amount of energy that is absorbed or released by the
solution using the equation mentioned earlier.
Q = m • c • ∆T
The mass, m, is the mass of the solution, because the solution absorbs the
heat. When a dilute aqueous solution is used in a calorimeter, you can
assume that the solution has the same density and speciﬁc heat capacity
as pure water. As you saw above, you can also assume that the heat
capacity of the calorimeter is negligible. In other words, you can assume
that all the heat that is released or absorbed by the reaction is absorbed
or released by the solution.
The following Sample Problem illustrates how calorimetry can be
used to determine ∆H of a chemical reaction.
236 MHR • Unit 3  Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
Sample Problem
Determining the Enthalpy of a Chemical Reaction
Problem
Copper(II) sulfate, CuSO4, reacts with sodium hydroxide, NaOH, in a
double displacement reaction. A precipitate of copper(II) hydroxide,
Cu(OH)2, and aqueous sodium sulfate, Na2SO4, is produced.
CuSO4(aq) + 2NaOH(aq) → Cu(OH)2(s) + Na2SO4(aq)
50.0 mL of 0.300 mol/L CuSO4 solution is mixed with an equal
volume of 0.600 mol/L NaOH. The initial temperature of both solutions
is 21.4˚C. After mixing the solutions in the coffee-cup calorimeter, the
highest temperature that is reached is 24.6˚C. Determine the enthalpy
change of the reaction. Then write the thermochemical equation.
What Is Required?
You need to calculate ∆H of the given reaction.
What Is Given?
You know the volume of each solution. You also know the initial
temperature of each solution and the ﬁnal temperature of the reaction
mixture.
Volume of CuSO4 solution, VCuSO4
Volume of NaOH solution, VNaOH = 50.0 mL
Initial temperature, Ti = 21.4˚C
Final temperature, Tf = 24.6˚C
= 50.0 mL
Plan Your Strategy
Step 1 Determine the total volume by adding the volumes of the two
solutions. Determine the total mass of the reaction mixture,
assuming a density of 1.00 g/mL (the density of water).
Step 2 Use the equation Q = m • c • ∆T to calculate the amount of
heat that is absorbed by the solution (in J). Assume that the
reaction mixture has the same speciﬁc heat capacity as water
(c = 4.184 J/g • ˚C ).
Step 3 Use the equation Qreaction = −Qsolution to determine the amount of
heat that is released by the reaction.
Step 4 Determine the number of moles of CuSO4 and NaOH that reacted.
If necessary, determine the limiting reactant. Use the amount of
limiting reactant to get ∆H of the reaction (in kJ/mol).
Step 5 Use your ∆H to write the thermochemical equation for the
reaction.
Act on Your Strategy
Step 1 The total volume of the reaction mixture is
50.0 mL + 50.0 mL = 100.0 mL
The mass of the reaction mixture, assuming a density of
1.00 g/mL, is
m = DV
= (1.00 g/mL)(100.0 mL)
= 1.00 × 102 g
Continued ...
Chapter 5  Energy and Change • MHR 237
Continued ...
Step 2 The amount of heat, Q, that is absorbed by the solution is
Qsolution = msolution • csolution • ∆Tsolution
= (100 g)(4.184 J/g • ˚C)(24.6˚C − 21.4˚C)
= 1.3 × 103 J
Step 3 Based on the value of Q in step 2, the heat change for the
reaction is −1.3 × 103 J.
Step 4 Calculate the number of moles of CuSO4 as follows.
n = c • V
= (0.300 mol/L)(50.0 × 10
= 0.0150 mol
−3 L)
Calculate the number of moles of NaOH.
n mol NaOH = (0.600 mol/L)(50.0 × 10
= 0.300 mol
−3 L)
The reactants are present in stoichiometric amounts. (There is no
limiting reactant.)
∆H of the reaction, in kJ/mol CuSO4, is
∆H =
−1.3 × 103 J
0.0150 mol CuSO4
= −8.9 × 103 J/mol CuSO4
= −89 kJ/mol CuSO4
The enthalpy change of the reaction is −89 kJ/mol CuSO4.
Step 5 The thermochemical equation is
CuSO4(aq) + 2NaOH(aq) → Cu(OH)2(s) + Na2SO4(aq) ∆H = −89 kJ
Check Your Solution
The solution has the correct number of signiﬁcant digits. The units are
correct. You know that the reaction was exothermic, because the temper-
ature of the solution increased. The calculated ∆H is negative, which is
correct for an exothermic reaction.
Practice Problems
9. A chemist wants to determine the enthalpy of neutralization for the
following reaction.
HCl(aq) + NaOH(aq) → NaCl(aq) + H2O((cid:2))
The chemist uses a coffee-cup calorimeter to neutralize completely
61.1 mL of 0.543 mol/L HCl(aq) with 42.6 mL of NaOH(aq). The
initial temperature of both solutions is 17.8˚C. After neutralization,
the highest recorded temperature is 21.6˚C. Calculate the enthalpy of
neutralization, in units of kJ/mol of HCl. Assume that the density
of both solutions is 1.00 g/mL. Also assume that the speciﬁc heat
capacity of both solutions is the same as the speciﬁc heat capacity
of water.
238 MHR • Unit 3  Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
10. A chemist wants to determine empirically the enthalpy change for
the following reaction.
Mg(s) + 2HCl(aq) → MgCl2(aq) + H2(g)
The chemist uses a coffee-cup calorimeter to react 0.50 g of Mg
ribbon with 100 mL of 1.00 mol/L HCl(aq). The initial temperature
of the HCl(aq) is 20.4˚C. After neutralization, the highest recorded
temperature is 40.7˚C.
(a) Calculate the enthalpy change, in kJ/mol of Mg, for the reaction.
(b) State any assumptions that you made in order to determine the
enthalpy change.
11. Nitric acid is neutralized with potassium hydroxide in the following
∆H = −53.4 kJ/mol
reaction.
HNO3(aq) + KOH(aq) → KNO3(aq) + H2O((cid:2))
55.0 mL of 1.30 mol/L solutions of both reactants, at 21.4˚C, are
mixed in a calorimeter. What is the ﬁnal temperature of the mixture?
Assume that the density of both solutions is 1.00 g/mL. Also assume
that the speciﬁc heat capacity of both solutions is the same as the
speciﬁc heat capacity of water. No heat is lost to the calorimeter
itself.
12. A student uses a coffee-cup calorimeter to determine the enthalpy of
reaction for hydrobromic acid and potassium hydroxide. The student
mixes 100.0 mL of 0.50 mol/L HBr(aq) at 21.0˚C with 100.0 mL of
0.50 mol/L KOH(aq), also at 21.0˚C. The highest temperature that is
reached is 24.4˚C. Write a thermochemical equation for the reaction.
In Practice Problems 9, 11, and 12, you used experimental data to deter-
mine the enthalpy of reaction for neutralization reactions. Neutralization
reactions are particularly well suited to analysis involving the use of a
coffee-cup calorimeter for a number of reasons:
• When using dilute solutions of acids and bases, you can assume
their density is close to the density of water. Therefore, you can easily
measure the volume of the solutions and calculate their mass.
• Neutralization reactions between dilute strong acids and dilute strong
bases tend to cause temperature changes in the reaction mixture that are
large enough to be measurable using a standard thermometer, but small
enough for safety.
• Neutralization reactions take place very quickly. Therefore, the peak
temperature change also occurs very quickly. There is little time for
heat transfer between the insulated system and the surroundings to
take place.
In the following investigation, you will construct a coffee-cup calorimeter
and use it to determine the enthalpy of a neutralization reaction.
Chapter 5  Energy and Change • MHR 239
S K I L L   F O C U S
Predicting
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
Determining the Enthalpy
of a Neutralization Reaction
The neutralization of hydrochloric acid with
sodium hydroxide solution is represented by
the following equation.
HCl(aq) + NaOH(aq) → NaCl(aq) + H2O((cid:2))
Using a coffee-cup calorimeter, you will deter-
mine the enthalpy change for this reaction.
Question
What is the heat of neutralization for hydro-
chloric acid and sodium hydroxide solution?
Prediction
Will the neutralization reaction be endothermic
or exothermic? Record your prediction, and give
reasons.
Safety Precautions
If you get any hydrochloric acid or sodium
hydroxide solution on your skin, ﬂush your skin
with plenty of cold water.
Materials
100 mL graduated cylinder
400 mL beaker
2 polystyrene cups that are the same size
polystyrene lid
thermometer
stirring rod
1.00 mol/L HCl(aq)
1.00 mol/L NaOH(aq)
thermometer
lid
reaction
mixture
stirrer
polystyrene
cups
beaker
(optional,
for support)
Procedure
1. Your teacher will allow the hydrochloric acid
and sodium hydroxide solution to come to
room temperature overnight.
2. Read the rest of this Procedure carefully
before you continue. Set up a graph to record
your temperature observations.
3. Build a coffee-cup calorimeter, using the
diagram above as a guide. You will need to
make two holes in the polystyrene lid—one
for the thermometer and one for the stirring
rod. The holes should be as small as possible
to minimize heat loss to the surroundings.
4. Rinse the graduated cylinder with a small
quantity of 1.00 mol/L NaOH(aq). Use the
cylinder to add 50.0 mL of 1.00 mol/L
NaOH(aq) to the calorimeter. Record the
initial temperature of the NaOH(aq). (This
will also represent the initial temperature
of the HCl(aq).)
The NaOH(aq) can
burn your skin.
CAUTION
240 MHR • Unit 3  Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
5. Rinse the graduated cylinder with tap
(a) Do you think you would have obtained a
water. Then rinse it with a small quantity of
1.00 mol/L HCl(aq). Quickly and carefully, add
50.0 mL of 1.00 mol/L HCl(aq) to the NaOH(aq)
in the calorimeter.
CAUTION
burn your skin.
The HCl(aq) can
6. Cover the calorimeter. Record the temperature
every 30 s, stirring gently and continuously.
7. When the temperature levels off, record the
ﬁnal temperature, Tf .
8. If time permits, repeat steps 4 to 7.
Analysis
1. Determine the amount of heat that is absorbed
by the solution in the calorimeter.
2. Use the following equation to determine
the amount of heat that is released by the
reaction:
−Qreaction = Qsolution
3. Determine the number of moles of HCl(aq) and
NaOH(aq) that were involved in the reaction.
4. Use your knowledge of solutions to explain
what happens during a neutralization reac-
tion. Use equations in your answer. Was heat
released or absorbed during the neutralization
reaction? Explain your answer.
Conclusion
5. Use your results to determine the enthalpy
change of the neutralization reaction, in
kJ/mol of NaOH. Write the thermochemical
equation for the neutralization reaction.
Applications
6. When an acid gets on your skin, why must
you ﬂush the area with plenty of water rather
than neutralizing the acid with a base?
7. Suppose that you had added solid sodium
hydroxide pellets to hydrochloric acid,
instead of adding hydrochloric acid to sodium
hydroxide solution?
different enthalpy change?
(b) Would the enthalpy change have been
higher or lower?
(c) How can you test your answer? Design
an investigation, and carry it out with the
permission of your teacher.
(d) What change do you need to make to the
thermochemical equation if you perform
the investigation using solid sodium
hydroxide?
8. In Investigation 5-A, you assumed that the
heat capacity of your calorimeter was 0 J/˚C.
(a) Design an investigation to determine the
actual heat capacity of your coffee-cup
calorimeter, Ccalorimeter. Include equations
for any calculations you will need to do.
If time permits, have your teacher approve
your procedure and carry out the investiga-
tion. Hint: If you mix hot and cold water
together and no heat is absorbed by the
calorimeter itself, then the amount of heat
absorbed by the cold water should equal
the amount of heat released by the hot
water. If more heat is released by the hot
water than is absorbed by the cold water,
the difference must be absorbed by the
calorimeter.
(b) Include the heat capacity of your
calorimeter in your calculations for
∆Hneutralization . Use the following
equation:
−Qreaction = (msolution • csolution • ∆T) + (Ccalorimeter • ∆T)
P R O B E W A R E
If you have access to probeware, do Probeware
Investigation 5-A, or a similar investigation from a
probeware company.
Chapter 5  Energy and Change • MHR 241
Section Summary
In this section, you measured the enthalpy change of a reaction by
calorimetry. You may have noticed that the reactions you studied in this
section involved relatively small energy changes. How do chemists work
quantitatively with some of the large energy changes you examined in
section 5.1? In the next section, you will learn how to calculate the heat
of reaction for virtually any chemical reaction or physical change. This
powerful skill will allow you to ﬁnd heats of reaction without carrying
out experiments.
Section Review
1
2
K/U
Distinguish between heat capacity and speciﬁc heat capacity.
K/U
What properties of polystyrene make it a suitable material for
a constant-pressure calorimeter? Why are polystyrene coffee cups not
suitable for a constant-volume calorimeter?
3
K/U
Suppose that you use concentrated reactant solutions in an
experiment with a coffee-cup calorimeter. Will you make the same
assumptions that you did when you used dilute solutions? Explain.
4
I
Concentrated sulfuric acid can be diluted by adding it to water. The
reaction is extremely exothermic. In this question, you will design an
experiment to measure the enthalpy change (in kJ/mol) for the dilution
of concentrated sulfuric acid. Assume that you have access to any
equipment in your school’s chemistry laboratory. Do not carry out
this experiment.
(a) State the equipment and chemicals that you need.
(b) Write a step-by-step procedure.
(c) Set up an appropriate data table.
(d) State any information that you need.
(e) State any simplifying assumptions that you will make.
5
I
A chemist mixes 100.0 mL of 0.050 mol/L potassium hydroxide
with 100.0 mL of 0.050 mol/L nitric acid in a constant-pressure
calorimeter. The temperature of the reactants is 21.01˚C. The
temperature of the products is 21.34˚C.
(a) Write a thermochemical equation for the reaction.
(b) If you performed this investigation, would you change the
procedure? If so, how?
6
7
C
Explain why a bomb calorimeter may not provide accurate results
for determining the enthalpy of a reaction.
MC
From experience, you know that you produce signiﬁcantly more
heat when you are exercising than when you are resting. Scientists can
study the heat that is produced by human metabolism reactions using
a “human calorimeter.” Based on what you know about calorimetry,
how would you design a human calorimeter? What variables would
you control and study in an investigation using your calorimeter?
Write a brief proposal outlining the design of your human calorimeter
and the experimental approach you would take.
242 MHR • Unit 3  Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
Hess’s Law of Heat Summation
In section 5.2, you used a coffee-cup calorimeter to determine the quantity
of heat that was released or absorbed in a chemical reaction. Coffee-cup
calorimeters are generally used only for dilute aqueous solutions. There
are many non-aqueous chemical reactions, however. There are also many
reactions that release so much energy they are not safe to perform using
a coffee-cup calorimeter. Imagine trying to determine the enthalpy of
reaction for the detonation of nitroglycerin, an unstable and powerfully
explosive compound. Furthermore, there are reactions that occur too
slowly for the calorimetric method to be practical. (You will learn more
about rates of reactions in the next chapter.)
Chemists can determine the enthalpy change of any reaction using an
important law, known as Hess’s law of heat summation. This law states
that the enthalpy change of a physical or chemical process depends only
on the beginning conditions (reactants) and the end conditions (products).
The enthalpy change is independent of the pathway of the process and
the number of intermediate steps in the process. It is the sum of the
enthalpy changes of all the individual steps that make up the process.
For example, carbon and oxygen can form carbon dioxide via two
pathways.
1. Carbon can react with oxygen to form carbon monoxide. The carbon
monoxide then reacts with oxygen to produce carbon dioxide. The two
equations below represent this pathway.
5.3
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
(cid:2) explain Hess’s law of heat
summation, using examples
(cid:2) apply Hess’s law to
solve problems, including
problems that involve
data obtained through
experimentation
(cid:2) calculate heat of reaction
using given enthalpies of
formation
(cid:2) communicate your under-
standing of the following
terms: Hess’s law of heat
summation, formation
reactions, standard molar
enthalpy of formation (∆H˚f)
C(s) + 1
2
CO(g) + 1
2
O2(g) → CO(g)
O2(g) → CO2(g)
∆H˚ = −110.5 kJ
∆H˚ = −283.0 kJ
2. Carbon can also react with oxygen to produce carbon dioxide directly.
C(s) + O2(g) → CO2(g) ∆H˚ = −393.5 kJ
In both cases, the net result is that one mole of carbon reacts with one
mole of oxygen to produce one mole of carbon dioxide. (In the ﬁrst
pathway, all the carbon monoxide that is produced reacts with oxygen to
form carbon dioxide.) Notice that the sum of the enthalpy changes for the
ﬁrst pathway is the same as the enthalpy change for the second pathway.
Examine Figure 5.13 to see how to represent the two pathways using
one enthalpy diagram.
C(s)  + O2(g)
CO(g) + 1–
2O2(g)
H
,
y
p
l
a
h
t
n
e
∆H˚ = −110.5 kJ
∆H˚ = −283.0 kJ
CO2(g)
∆H˚ = −393.5 kJ
Carbon dioxide
Figure 5.13
can be formed by the reaction of
oxygen with carbon to form carbon
monoxide, followed by the reaction
of carbon monoxide with oxygen.
Carbon dioxide can also be formed
directly from carbon and oxygen.
No matter which pathway is used,
the enthalpy change of the reaction
is the same.
Chapter 5  Energy and Change • MHR 243
The routes that
Figure 5.14
cyclists take to get from the
starting point to the ﬁnishing point
has no effect on the net change in
the cyclists’ gravitational potential
energy.
One way to think about Hess’s law is to compare the energy changes
that occur in a chemical reaction with the changes in the potential energy
of a cyclist on hilly terrain. This comparison is shown in Figure 5.14.
starting point
cyclist A
∆ height
cyclist B
finishing point
Hess’s law allows you to determine the energy of a chemical reaction
without directly measuring it. In this section, you will examine two ways
in which you can use Hess’s law to calculate the enthalpy change of a
chemical reaction:
1. by combining chemical equations algebraically
2. by using the enthalpy of a special class of reactions called
formation reactions
Combining Chemical Equations Algebraically
According to Hess’s law, the pathway that is taken in a chemical reaction
has no effect on the enthalpy change of the reaction. How can you use
Hess’s law to calculate the enthalpy change of a reaction? One way is to
add equations for reactions with known enthalpy changes, so that their
net result is the reaction you are interested in.
For example, you can combine thermochemical equations (1) and (2)
below to ﬁnd the enthalpy change for the decomposition of hydrogen
peroxide, equation (3).
H2O2((cid:2)) → H2(g) + O2(g)
(1)
(2) H2(g) + 1
O2(g) → H2O((cid:2))
2
H2O2((cid:2)) → H2O((cid:2)) + 1
(3)
2
∆H˚ = +188 kJ
∆H˚ = −286 kJ
O2(g) ∆H˚ = ?
Carefully examine equation (3), the target equation. Notice that
O2 are on the right
H2O2 is on the left (reactant) side, while H2O and  1
2
(product) side. Now examine equations (1) and (2). Notice which sides of
the equations H2O2 and H2O are on. They are on the correct sides, based
on equation (3). Also notice that hydrogen does not appear in equation (3).
Therefore, it must cancel out when equations (1) and (2) are added. Since
there is one mole of H2(g) on the product side of equation (1) and one mole
of H2(g) on the reactant side of equation (2), these two terms cancel. Set up
equations (1) and (2) as shown on the next page. Add the products and
the reactants. Then cancel any substances that appear on opposite sides.
244 MHR • Unit 3  Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
(1)
(2)
(3)
H2O2((cid:2)) → H2(g) + O2(g)
∆H˚ = +188 kJ
H2(g) + 1
2
O2(g) → H2O((cid:2))
∆H˚ = −286 kJ
H2O2((cid:2)) + H2(g) + 1
2
O2(g) → H2O((cid:2)) + O2(g) + H2(g)
∆H˚ = ?
or
H2O2((cid:2)) → H2O((cid:2)) + 1
2
O2(g)
∆H˚ = ?
Equations (1) and (2) add to give equation (3). Therefore, you know that
the enthalpy change for the decomposition of hydrogen peroxide is the
sum of the enthalpy changes of equations (1) and (2).
H2O2((cid:2)) → H2O((cid:2)) + 1
2
O2(g) ∆H˚ = 188 kJ − 286 kJ = −98 kJ
Figure 5.15 illustrates this combination of chemical equations in an
enthalpy diagram.
H
,
y
p
l
a
h
t
n
e
equation (1)
∆H˚ = 188 kJ
equation (3)
∆H˚ = −98 kJ
H2O2((cid:2))
H2(g)  + O2(g)
H2O((cid:2)) +
1–
2O2(g)
equation (2)
∆H˚ = −286 kJ
The algebraic
Figure 5.15
combination of chemical reactions
can be represented in an enthalpy
diagram.
In the previous example, you did not need to manipulate the two equa-
tions with known enthalpy changes. They added to the target equation as
they were written. In many cases, however, you will need to manipulate
the equations before adding them. There are two key ways in which you
can manipulate an equation:
1. Reverse an equation so that the products become reactants and the
reactants become products. When you reverse an equation, you need
to change the sign of ∆H ˚(multiply by −1).
2. Multiply each coefﬁcient in an equation by the same integer or
fraction. When you multiply an equation, you need to multiply ∆H ˚
by the same number.
Examine the following Sample Problem to see how to manipulate
equations so that they add to the target equation. Try the problems that
follow to practise ﬁnding the enthalpy change by adding equations.
Sample Problem
Using Hess’s Law to Determine Enthalpy Change
Problem
One of the methods that the steel industry uses to obtain metallic iron
is to react iron(III) oxide, Fe2O3, with carbon monoxide, CO.
Fe2O3(s) + 3CO(g) → 3CO2(g) + 2Fe(s)
Continued ...
Chapter 5  Energy and Change • MHR 245
PROBLEM TIP
Before adding chemical
equations, be sure to line up
the equation arrows.
Electronic Learning Partner
Go to the Chemistry 12
Electronic Learning Partner
for more information about
aspects of material covered
in this section of the chapter.
Continued ...
Determine the enthalpy change of this reaction, given the following
equations and their enthalpy changes.
(1) CO(g) + 1
O2(g) → CO2(g)
2
(2) 2Fe(s) + 3
O2(g) → Fe2O3
2
∆H˚ = −822.3 kJ
∆H˚ = −283.0 kJ
What Is Required?
You need to ﬁnd ∆H ˚ of the target reaction.
Fe2O3(s) + 3CO(g) → 3CO2(g) + 2Fe(s)
What Is Given?
You know the chemical equations for reactions (1) and (2), and their
corresponding enthalpy changes.
Plan Your Strategy
Step 1 Examine equations (1) and (2) to see how they compare with
the target equation. Decide how you need to manipulate
equations (1) and (2) so that they add to the target equation.
(Reverse the equation, multiply the equation, do both, or do
neither). Remember to adjust ∆H ˚ accordingly for each equation.
Step 2 Write the manipulated equations so that their equation arrows
line up. Add the reactants and products on each side, and cancel
substances that appear on both sides.
Step 3 Ensure that you have obtained the target equation. Add ∆H ˚ for
the combined equations.
Act on Your Strategy
Step 1 Equation (1) has CO as a reactant and CO2 as a product, as does
the target reaction. The stoichiometric coefﬁcients do not match
the coefﬁcients in the target equation, however. To achieve the
same coefﬁcients, you must multiply equation (1) by 3.
Equation (2) has the required stoichiometric coefﬁcients, but Fe
and Fe2O3 are on the wrong sides of the equation. You need to
reverse equation (2) and change the sign of ∆H ˚.
Step 2 Multiply each equation as required, and add them.
3 × (1)
−1 × (2)
3CO(g) + 3
2
O2(g) → 3CO2(g)
Fe2O3(s) → 2Fe(s) + 3
2
∆H˚ = 3(−283.0 kJ)
O2(g) ∆H˚ = −1(−824.2 kJ)
Fe2O3(s) + 3
2
O2(g) + 3CO(g) → 3CO2(g) + 2Fe(s) + 3
2
O2(g)
or
Fe2O3(s) + 3CO(g) → 3CO2(g) + 2Fe(s)
Step 3 The desired equation is achieved. Therefore, you can calculate
the enthalpy change of the target reaction by adding the heats
of reaction for the manipulated equations.
∆H˚ = 3(−283.0 kJ) + 824.2 kJ = −24.8 kJ
∴Fe2O3(s) + 3CO(g) → 3CO2(g) + 2Fe(s) ∆H˚ = −24.8 kJ
Check Your Solution
Because the equations added correctly to the target equation, you know
you manipulated the equations with known enthalpy changes correctly.
Check to ensure that you adjusted ∆H ˚ accordingly for each equation.
246 MHR • Unit 3  Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
Practice Problems
13. Ethene, C2H4, reacts with water to form ethanol, CH3CH2OH((cid:2)).
C2H4(g) + H2O((cid:2)) → CH3CH2OH((cid:2))
Determine the enthalpy change of this reaction, given the following
thermochemical equations.
(1) CH3CH2OH((cid:2)) + 3O2(g) → 3H2O((cid:2)) + 2CO2(g) ∆H˚ = −1367 kJ
∆H˚ = −1411 kJ
(2)
C2H4(g) + 3O2(g) → 2H2O((cid:2)) + 2CO2(g)
14. A typical automobile engine uses a lead-acid battery. During
discharge, the following chemical reaction takes place.
Pb(s) + PbO2(s) + 2H2SO4((cid:2)) → 2PbSO4(aq) + 2H2O((cid:2))
Determine the enthalpy change of this reaction, given the following
equations.
(1) Pb(s) + PbO2(s) + 2SO3(g) → 2PbSO4(s) ∆H˚ = −775 kJ
∆H˚ = −133 kJ
(2)
SO3(g) + H2O((cid:2)) → H2SO4((cid:2))
15. Mixing household cleansers can result in the production of hydrogen
chloride gas, HCl(g). Not only is this gas dangerous in its own right,
but it also reacts with oxygen to form chlorine gas and water vapour.
4HCl(g) + O2(g) → 2Cl2(g) + 2H2O(g)
Determine the enthalpy change of this reaction, given the following
equations.
(1) H2(g) + Cl2(g) → 2HCl(g) ∆H˚ = −185 kJ
(2) H2(g) + 1
O2(g) → H2O((cid:2))
2
H2O(g) → H2O((cid:2))
(3)
∆H˚ = −285.8 kJ
∆H˚ = −40.7 kJ
16. Calculate the enthalpy change of the following reaction between
nitrogen gas and oxygen gas, given thermochemical equations
(1), (2), and (3).
2N2(g) + 5O2(g) → 2N2O5(g)
(1)
2H2(g) + O2(g) → 2H2O((cid:2))
∆H˚ = −572 kJ
N2O5(g) + H2O((cid:2)) → 2HNO3((cid:2)) ∆H˚ = −77 kJ
∆H˚ = −174 kJ
H2(g) → HNO3((cid:2))
O2(g) + 1
2
(2)
(3) 1
2
N2(g) + 3
2
Sometimes it is impractical to use a coffee-cup calorimeter to ﬁnd the
enthalpy change of a reaction. You can, however, use the calorimeter to
ﬁnd the enthalpy changes of other reactions, which you can combine to
arrive at the desired reaction. In the following investigation, you will
determine the enthalpy changes of two reactions. Then you will apply
Hess’s law to determine the enthalpy change of a third reaction.
Chapter 5  Energy and Change • MHR 247
S K I L L   F O C U S
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
Communicating results
Hess’s Law and the Enthalpy
of Combustion of Magnesium
Magnesium ribbon burns in air in a highly
exothermic combustion reaction. (See equation
(1).) A very bright ﬂame accompanies the
production of magnesium oxide, as shown in
the photograph below. It is impractical and
dangerous to use a coffee-cup calorimeter to
determine the enthalpy change for this reaction.
(1) Mg(s) + 1
2
O2(g) → MgO(s)
Instead, you will determine the enthalpy changes
for two other reactions (equations (2) and (3)
below). You will use these enthalpy changes,
along with the known enthalpy change for
another reaction (equation (4) below), to deter-
mine the enthalpy change for the combustion
of magnesium.
(2) MgO(s) + 2HCl(aq) → MgCl2(aq) + H2O((cid:2))
(3) Mg(s) + 2HCl(aq) → MgCl2(aq) + H2(g)
(4) H2(g) + 1
2
O2(g) → H2O((cid:2)) ∆H˚ = −285.8 kJ/mol
Notice that equations (2) and (3) occur in
aqueous solution. You can use a coffee-cup
calorimeter to determine the enthalpy changes
for these reactions. Equation (4) represents the
formation of water directly from its elements in
their standard state.
248 MHR • Unit 3  Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
Question
How can you use equations (2), (3), and (4) to
determine the enthalpy change of equation (1)?
Prediction
Predict whether reactions (2) and (3) will be
exothermic or endothermic.
Materials
coffee cup calorimeter (2 nested coffee cups
sitting in a 250 mL beaker)
thermometer
100 mL graduated cylinder
scoopula
electronic balance
MgO powder
Mg ribbon (or Mg turnings)
sandpaper or emery paper
1.00 mol/L HCl(aq)
Safety Precautions
• Hydrochloric acid is corrosive. Use care when
handling it.
• Be careful not to inhale the magnesium oxide
powder.
Procedure
Part 1 Determining ∆H of Equation (2)
1. Read the Procedure for Part 1. Prepare a fully-
labelled set of axes to graph your temperature
observations.
2. Set up the coffee-cup calorimeter. (Refer
to Investigation 5-A) Using a graduated
cylinder, add 100 mL of 1.00 mol/L HCl(aq)
to the calorimeter.
your skin.
CAUTION
HCI(aq) can burn
3. Record the initial temperature, Ti , of the
HCl(aq), to the nearest tenth of a degree.
4. Find the mass of no more than 0.80 g of MgO.
Record the exact mass.
5. Add the MgO powder to the calorimeter con-
taining the HCl(aq) . Swirl the solution gently,
recording the temperature every 30 s until
the highest temperature, Tf , is reached.
6. Dispose of the reaction solution as directed
by your teacher.
Part 2 Determining ∆H of Equation (3)
1. Read the Procedure for Part 2. Prepare a fully-
labelled set of axes to graph your temperature
observations.
2. Using a graduated cylinder, add 100 mL of
1.00 mol/L HCl(aq) to the calorimeter.
3. Record the initial temperature, Ti , of the
HCl(aq), to the nearest tenth of a degree.
4. If you are using magnesium ribbon (as
opposed to turnings), sand the ribbon.
Accurately determine the mass of no more
than 0.50 g of magnesium. Record the exact
mass.
5. Add the Mg to the calorimeter containing the
HCl(aq). Swirl the solution gently, recording
the temperature every 30 s until the highest
temperature, Tf , is reached.
6. Dispose of the solution as directed by your
teacher.
Analysis
1. Use the equation Q = m • c • ∆T to determine
the amount of heat that is released or
absorbed by reactions (2) and (3). List any
assumptions you make.
2. Convert the mass of MgO and Mg to moles.
Calculate ∆H of each reaction in units of
kJ/mol of MgO or Mg. Remember to put the
proper sign (+ or −) in front of each ∆H value.
3. Algebraically combine equations (2), (3), and
(4), and their corresponding ∆H values, to get
equation (1) and ∆H of the combustion of
magnesium.
4. (a) Your teacher will tell you the accepted
value of ∆H of the combustion of
magnesium. Based on the accepted value,
calculate your percent error.
(b) Suggest some sources of error in the
investigation. In what ways could you
improve the procedure?
5. What assumption did you make about
the amount of heat that was lost to the
calorimeter? Do you think that this is a
fair assumption? Explain.
6. Why was it fair to assume that the hydrochlo-
ric acid solution has the same density and
speciﬁc heat capacity as water?
Conclusion
7. Explain how you used Hess’s law of heat sum-
mation to determine ∆H of the combustion of
magnesium. State the result you obtained for
the thermochemical equation that corresponds
to chemical equation (1).
Extension
8. Design an investigation to verify Hess’s law,
using the following equations.
(1) NaOH(s) → Na+
(2) NaOH(s) + H+
(aq) + OH−
(aq) + Cl−
(aq)
(aq) →
Na+
(aq) + Cl−
Na+
(aq) + Cl−
(aq) + H2O((cid:2))
(3) Na+
(aq) + OH−
(aq) + H+
(aq) →
(aq) + H2O((cid:2))
(aq) + Cl−
Assume that you have a coffee-cup
calorimeter, solid NaOH, 1.00 mol/L HCl(aq),
1.00 mol/L NaOH(aq), and standard laboratory
equipment. Write a step-by-step procedure
for the investigation. Then outline a plan
for analyzing your data. Be sure to include
appropriate safety precautions. If time
permits, obtain your teacher’s approval and
carry out the investigation.
Chapter 5  Energy and Change • MHR 249
Using Standard Molar Enthalpies of Formation
You have learned how to add equations with known enthalpy changes
to obtain the enthalpy change for another equation. This method can be
time-consuming and difﬁcult, however, because you need to ﬁnd reactions
with known enthalpy changes that will add to give your target equation.
There is another way to use Hess’s law to ﬁnd the enthalpy of an equation.
Formation Reactions
In Investigation 5-B, you used the reaction of oxygen with hydrogen to
form water. Reactions like this one are known as formation reactions. In a
formation reaction, a substance is formed from elements in their standard
states. The enthalpy change of a formation reaction is called the standard
molar enthalpy of formation, ∆H˚f. The standard molar enthalpy of forma-
tion is the quantity of energy that is absorbed or released when one mole of
a compound is formed directly from its elements in their standard states.
Some standard molar enthalpies of formation are listed in Table 5.3.
Notice that the standard enthalpies of formation of most compounds are
negative. Thus, most compounds are more stable than the elements they
are made from.
Table 5.3 Selected Standard Molar Enthalpies of Formation
Compound
CO(g)
CO2(g)
CH4(g)
CH3OH((cid:2))
C2H5OH((cid:2))
C6H6((cid:2))
C6H12O6(s)
H2O((cid:2))
H2O(g)
CaCl2(s)
CaCO3(s)
NaCl(s)
HCl(g)
HCl(aq)
∆H˚f
−110.5
−393.5
−74.6
−238.6
−277.6
+49.0
−1274.5
−285.8
−241.8
−795.4
−1206.9
−411.1
−92.3
−167.5
Formation equations
2O2(g) → CH3OH((cid:2))
2O2(g) → C2H5OH((cid:2))
2O2(g) → CO(g)
C(s) + 1–
C(s) + O2(g) → CO2(g)
C(s) + 2H2(g) → CH4(g)
C(s) + 2H2(g) +  1–
2C(s) + 3H2(g) +  1–
6C(s) + 3H2(g)  → C6H6((cid:2))
6C(s) + 6H2(g) + 3O2(g)  → C6H12O6(s)
2O2(g) → H2O((cid:2))
H2(s) +  1–
2O2(g) → H2O(g)
H2(s) +  1–
Ca(s) + Cl2(g) → CaCl2(s)
Ca(s) + C(s) +  3–
Na(s) +  1–
2H2(s) +  1–
1–
2H2(s) +  1–
1–
2Cl2(g) → NaCl(g)
2Cl2(g) → HCl(g)
2Cl2(g) → HCl(ag)
2O2(g) → CaCO3(s)
By deﬁnition, the enthalpy of formation of an element in its standard
state is zero. The standard state of an element is usually its most
stable form under standard conditions. Recall, from section 5.1, that
standard conditions are 25˚C and 100 kPa (close to room temperature
and pressure). Therefore, the standard state of nitrogen is N2(g). The
standard state of magnesium is Mg(s).
Some elements exist in more than one form under standard condi-
tions. For example, carbon can exist as either graphite or diamond, as
shown in Figure 5.16. Graphite is deﬁned as the standard state of carbon.
Therefore, the standard enthalpy of formation of graphite carbon is 0
kJ/mol. The standard enthalpy of formation of diamond is 1.9 kJ/mol.
Another example is oxygen, O2(g). Oxygen also exists in the form of ozone,
250 MHR • Unit 3  Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
Carbon can exist as
Figure 5.16
graphite or diamond under standard
conditions. It can, however, have
only one standard state. Carbon’s
standard state is graphite.
O3(g), under standard conditions. The diatomic molecule is deﬁned as the
standard state of oxygen, however, because it is far more stable than
ozone. Therefore, the standard enthalpy of formation of oxygen gas, O2(g),
is 0 kJ/mol. The standard enthalpy of formation of ozone is 143 kJ/mol.
C(graphite)
C(diamond)
∆Hf  = 1.9 kJ/mol
When writing a formation equation, always write the elements in their
standard states. For example, examine the equation for the formation of
water directly from its elements under standard conditions.
H2(g) + 1
2
O2(g) → H2O((cid:2))
∆H˚f = −285.8 kJ
A formation equation should show the formation of exactly one mole of
the compound of interest. The following equation shows the formation of
benzene, C6H6 under standard conditions.
6C(graphite) + 3H2(g) → C6H6((cid:2)) ∆H˚f = 49.1 kJ
Practice Problems
17. Write a thermochemical equation for the formation of each
substance. Be sure to include the physical state of all the elements
and compounds in the equation. You can ﬁnd the standard enthalpy
of formation of each substance in Appendix E.
(a) CH4
(b) NaCl
(c) MgO
(d) CaCO3
18. Liquid sulfuric acid has a very large negative standard enthalpy of
formation (− 814.0 kJ/mol). Write an equation to show the formation
of liquid sulfuric acid. The standard state of sulfur is rhombic
sulfur (S(s)).
19. Write a thermochemical equation for the formation of gaseous
cesium. The standard enthalpy of formation of Cs(g) is 76.7 kJ/mol.
20. Solid phosphorus is found in two forms: white phosphorus (P4)
and red phosphorus (P). White phosphorus is the standard state.
(a) The enthalpy of formation of red phosphorus is –17.6 kJ/mol. Write
a thermochemical equation for the formation of red phosphorus.
(b) 32.6 g of white phosphorus reacts to form red phosphorus. What is
the enthalpy change?
Chapter 5  Energy and Change • MHR 251
Calculating Enthalpy Changes
You can calculate the enthalpy change of a chemical reaction by adding
the heats of formation of the products and subtracting the heats of forma-
tion of the reactants. The following equation can be used to determine the
enthalpy change of a chemical reaction.
∆H˚ = Σ(n∆H˚f products) − Σ(n∆H˚f reactants)
In this equation, n represents the molar coefﬁcient of each compound in
the balanced chemical equation and Σ means “the sum of.”
As usual, you need to begin with a balanced chemical equation. If a
given reactant or product has a molar coefﬁcient that is not 1, you need to
multiply its ∆H˚f by the same molar coefﬁcient. This makes sense because
the units of ∆H˚f are kJ/mol. Consider, for example, the complete
combustion of methane, CH4(g).
CH4(g) + 2O2(g) → CO2(g) + 2H2O(g)
Using the equation for the enthalpy change, and the standard enthalpies
of formation in Appendix E, you can calculate the enthalpy change of this
reaction.
∆H˚ = [(∆H˚f of CO2(g)) + 2(∆H˚f of H2O(g))] − [1(∆H˚f of CH4(g)) + 2(∆H˚f of O2(g))]
Substitute the standard enthalpies of formation from Appendix E to get
the following calculation.
∆H˚ = [(−393.5 kJ/mol) + 2(−241.8 kJ/mol)] − [(−74.8 kJ/mol) + 2(0 kJ/mol)]
= −802.3 kJ/mol of CH4
How does this method of adding heats of formation relate to Hess’s law?
Consider the equations for the formation of each compound that is
involved in the reaction of methane with oxygen.
(1) H2(g) + 1
2
(2)
O2(g) → H2O(g) ∆H˚f = −241.8 kJ
∆H˚f = −393.5 kJ
∆H˚f = −74.6 kJ
C(s) + O2(g) → CO2(g)
C(s) + 2H2(g) → CH4(g)
(3)
“Using enthalpies of formation
is like a shortcut for adding
equations to obtain ∆H ˚.” Do
you agree with this statement?
Explain your answer.
There is no equation for the formation of oxygen, because oxygen is an
element in its standard state.
By adding the formation equations, you can obtain the target equation.
Notice that you need to reverse equation (3) and multiply equation (1) by 2.
2 × (1)
(2)
−1 × (3)
2H2(g) + O2(g) → 2H2O(g)
C(s) + O2(g) → CO2(g)
∆H˚f = 2(−241.8) kJ
∆H˚f = −393.5 kJ
CH4(g) → C(s) + 2H2(g) ∆H˚f = −1(−74.6) kJ
CH4(g) + 2O2(g) + C(s) + 2H2(g) → 2H2O(g) + CO2(g) + C(s) + 2H2(g)
or
CH4(g) + 2O2(g) → 2H2O(g) + CO2(g)
Add the manipulated ∆H˚f values: ∆H˚ = 2(−241.8) kJ − 393.5 kJ + 74.6 kJ
= −802.3 kJ
.
This value of ∆H˚ is the same as the value you obtained using ∆H˚f
data. When you used the addition method, you performed the same
operations on the enthalpies of formation before adding them. Therefore,
using enthalpies of formation to determine the enthalpy of a reaction is
consistent with Hess’s law. Figure 5.17 shows the general process for
determining the enthalpy of a reaction from enthalpies of formation.
252 MHR • Unit 3  Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
,
l
H
y
p
a
h
t
n
e
elements
(decomposition)
−∆H˚f
reactants
∆H˚f
(formation)
∆H˚rxn
products
∆H˚rxn = ∑(n∆H˚f products) − ∑(n∆H˚f reactants)
The overall enthalpy change of any reaction is the sum of the enthalpy change
Figure 5.17
of the decomposition of the reactants to their elements and the enthalpy change of the forma-
tion of the products from their elements.
It is important to realize that, in most reactions, the reactants do not
actually break down into their elements and then react to form products.
Since there is extensive data about enthalpies of formation, however,
it is useful to calculate the overall enthalpy change this way. Moreover,
according to Hess’s law, the enthalpy change is the same, regardless of
the pathway. (In Chapter 6, you will learn more about the mechanisms
by which compounds and elements react to form different elements and
compounds.) Examine the following Sample Problem to see how to use
enthalpies of formation to determine the enthalpy change of a reaction.
Then try the Practice Problems that follow.
Sample Problem
Using Enthalpies of Formation
Problem
Iron(III) oxide reacts with carbon monoxide to produce elemental iron
and carbon dioxide. Determine the enthalpy change of this reaction,
using known enthalpies of formation.
Fe2O3(s) + 3CO(g) → 3CO2(g) + 2Fe(s)
What Is Required?
You need to ﬁnd ∆H ˚ of the given chemical equation, using ∆H˚f data.
What Is Given?
From Appendix E, you can obtain the enthalpies of formation.
∆H˚f of Fe2O3(s) = −824.2 kJ/mol
∆H˚f of CO(g) = −110.5 kJ/mol
∆H˚f of CO2(g) = −393.5 kJ/mol
∆H˚f of Fe(s) = 0 kJ/mol (by deﬁnition)
Plan Your Strategy
Multiply each ∆H˚f value by its molar coefﬁcient from the balanced
chemical equation. Substitute into the following equation, and then solve.
∆H˚ = Σ(n∆H˚f products) − Σ(n∆H˚f reactants)
Continued ...
You saw the reaction between
iron(III) oxide and carbon
monoxide in the Sample
Problem on page 245. Which
method for determining the
enthalpy of reaction do you
prefer? Explain your answer.
Chapter 5  Energy and Change • MHR 253
Continued ...
Act on Your Strategy
∆H˚ = Σ(n∆H˚f products) − Σ(n∆H˚f reactants)
= [3(∆H˚f CO2(g)) + 2(∆H˚f Fe(s))] − [(∆H˚f Fe2O3(s)) + 3(∆H˚f CO(g))]
= [(−393.5 kJ/mol) + 2(0 kJ/mol)] − [(−824.2 kJ/mol) + 3(−110.5 kJ/mol)]
= −24.8 kJ/mol
∴Fe2O3(s) + 3CO(g) → 3CO2(g) + 2Fe(s) ∆H˚ = −24.8 kJ/mol
Check Your Solution
A balanced chemical equation was used in the calculation. The number
of signiﬁcant digits is correct. The units are also correct.
Practice Problems
21. Hydrogen can be added to ethene, C2H4, to obtain ethane, C2H6.
C2H4(g) + H2(g) → C2H6(g)
Show that the equations for the formation of ethene and ethane from
their elements can be algebraically combined to obtain the equation
for the addition of hydrogen to ethene.
22. Zinc sulﬁde reacts with oxygen gas to produce zinc oxide and sulfur
dioxide.
2ZnS(s) + 3O2(g) → 2ZnO(s) + 2SO2(g)
Write the chemical equation for the formation of the indicated
number of moles of each compound from its elements. Algebraically
combine these equations to obtain the given equation.
23. Small amounts of oxygen gas can be produced in a laboratory by
heating potassium chlorate, KClO3.
2KClO3(s) → 2KCl(s) + 3O2(g)
Calculate the enthalpy change of this reaction, using enthalpies of
formation from Appendix E.
24. Use the following equation to answer the questions below.
CH3OH((cid:2)) + 1.5O2(g) → CO2(g) + 2H2O(g)
(a) Calculate the enthalpy change of the complete combustion of one
mole of methanol, using enthalpies of formation.
(b) How much energy is released when 125 g of methanol undergoes
complete combustion?
Section Summary
In this section, you learned how to calculate the enthalpy change of
a chemical reaction using Hess’s law of heat summation. Enthalpies of
reaction can be calculated by combining chemical equations algebraically
or by using enthalpies of formation. Hess’s law allows chemists to
determine enthalpies of reaction without having to take calorimetric
measurements. In the next section, you will see how the use of energy
affects your lifestyle and your environment.
254 MHR • Unit 3  Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
Section Review
1
2
K/U
Explain why you need to reverse the sign of ∆H˚ when you
reverse an equation. Use an example in your answer.
C
In section 5.3, you learned two methods for calculating enthalpy
changes using Hess’s law. If you had only this textbook as a reference,
which method would allow you to calculate enthalpy changes for the
largest number of reactions? Explain your answer.
3
I
In the early 1960s, Neil Bartlett, at the University of British
Columbia, was the ﬁrst person to synthesize compounds of
the noble gas xenon. A number of noble gas compounds (such as XeF2,
XeF4, XeF6, and XeO3) have since been synthesized. Consider the
reaction of xenon diﬂuoride with ﬂuorine gas to produce xenon
tetraﬂuoride.
XeF2(g) + F2(g) → XeF4(s)
Use the following standard molar enthalpies of formation to calculate
the enthalpy change for this reaction.
Compound ∆H˚f (kJ/mol)
XeF2(g)
XeF4(s)
−108
−251
4
I
Calculate the enthalpy change of the following reaction, given
equations (1), (2), and (3).
2H3BO3(aq) → B2O3(s) + 3H2O((cid:2))
(1)
(2) H2B4O7(s) + H2O((cid:2)) → 4HBO2(aq)
(3)
H3BO3(aq) → HBO2(aq) + H2O((cid:2)) ∆H˚ = −0.02 kJ
∆H˚ = −11.3 kJ
H2B4O7(s) → 2B2O3(s) + H2O((cid:2)) ∆H˚ = 17.5 kJ
5
I
The standard molar enthalpy of formation of calcium carbonate is
–1207.6 kJ/mol. Calculate the enthalpy of formation of calcium oxide,
given the following equation.
CaO(g) + CO2(g) → CaCO3(s) ∆H˚ = −178.1 kJ
6
C
A classmate is having difﬁculty understanding Hess’s law. Write
a few paragraphs to explain the law. Include examples, diagrams, and
an original analogy.
7
C
In your own words, explain why using enthalpies of formation
to determine enthalpy of reaction depends on Hess’s law. Include
an example.
Chapter 5  Energy and Change • MHR 255
5.4
Energy Sources
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
(cid:2) compare the efﬁciency and
environmental impact of
conventional and alternative
sources of energy
(cid:2) communicate your under-
standing of the following
terms: non-renewable,
renewable
The energy that
Figure 5.18
Canadians use comes from a
variety of sources. What factors
account for the changes you can
see in this graph? How do you
think energy use has changed
since 1996?
Canadians depend on energy sources, such as those listed in Figure 5.18,
to power vehicles, light and heat buildings, and manufacture products
that support our lives and lifestyles. As society’s needs for energy and
energy-using products grow, scientists and technologists search for more
economical and environmentally responsible ways to meet these needs.
In this section, you will compare energy sources based on their efﬁciency
and environmental impact.
Primary Energy by Source, Canada, 1871 to 1996
(Percent of Energy Consumption)
90
+
t
n
e
c
r
e
P
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
×
0
∗
1871
×
×
×
×
×
+
+
++
× ×
×
+
×
+
× × ×
×
×
×
×
++
++++
×
×
∗ ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗
× × ×
+
+
+
× × ×
+++
++
+
+
+
+
1895
1915
1935
1955
1975
1996
Wood
Coal
Petroleum
Hydro
Gas
Nuclear
Energy and Efﬁciency
When you think about energy efﬁciency, what comes to mind? You may
think about taking the stairs instead of the elevator, choosing to drive a
small car instead of a sport utility vehicle, or turning off lights when you
are not using them. What, however, does efﬁciency really mean? How do
you quantify it?
There are several ways to deﬁne efﬁciency. One general deﬁnition
says that energy efﬁciency is the ability to produce a desired effect with
minimum energy expenditure. For example, suppose that you want to
bake a potato. You can use a microwave oven or a conventional oven.
Both options achieve the same effect (baking the potato), but the ﬁrst
option uses less energy. According to the general deﬁnition above, using
the microwave oven is more energy-efﬁcient than using the conventional
oven. The general deﬁnition is useful, but it is not quantitative.
Another deﬁnition of efﬁciency suggests that it is the ratio of useful
energy produced to energy used in its production, expressed as a percent.
This deﬁnition quantitatively compares input and output of energy. When
you use it, however, you need to be clear about what you mean by “energy
used.” Figure 5.19 shows factors to consider when calculating efﬁciency
or analyzing efﬁciency data.
256 MHR • Unit 3  Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
”Useful energy“ is
energy delivered to consumer in usable form
actual work done
”Energy used“ could include
ideal energy content of fuel
energy used to extract and transport fuel
solar energy used to create fuel (e.g. biomass)
energy used to build and maintain power plant
Efficiency  =
Useful energy produced
Energy used
×  100%
It is often difﬁcult to determine how much energy is used to produce
useful energy. Often an efﬁciency percent only takes into account the
“ideal” energy output of a system, based on the energy content of the fuel.
Efﬁciency and Natural Gas
When discussing the efﬁciency of a fuel such as natural gas, you need to
specify how that fuel is being used. Consider, for example, natural gas.
Natural gas is primarily methane. Therefore, you can estimate an ideal
value for energy production using the enthalpy of combustion of methane.
CH4(g) + 2O2(g) → CO2(g) + 2H2O(g) ∆H˚ = −802 kJ
In other words, 16 g of methane produces 802 kJ of heat (under constant
pressure conditions).
When natural gas is used directly in cooking devices, its efﬁciency can
be as high as 90%. Thus, for every 16 g of gas burned, you get about 720 kJ
(0.90 × 802 kJ) of usable energy as heat for cooking. This is a much higher
fuel efﬁciency than you can get with appliances that use electrical energy
produced in a power plant that runs on a fuel such as coal.
If natural gas is used to produce electricity in a power plant, however,
the efﬁciency is much lower —around 37%. Why? The heat from the
burning natural gas is used to boil water. The kinetic energy of the result-
ing steam is transformed to mechanical energy for turning a turbine.
The turbine generates the electrical energy. Each of these steps has an
associated efﬁciency that is less than 100%. Thus, at each step, the overall
efﬁciency of the fuel decreases.
Thinking About the Environment
Efﬁciency is not the only criterion for selecting an energy source. Since
the 1970s, society has become increasingly conscious of the impact of
energy technologies on the environment.
Suppose that you want to analyze the environmental impact of an
energy source. You can ask the following questions:
• Are any waste products or by-products of the energy production
process harmful to the environment? For example, any process in which
a hydrocarbon is burned produces carbon dioxide. Carbon dioxide is a
known greenhouse gas, which contributes to global warming. Any com-
bustion process provides the heat required to form oxides of nitrogen
from nitrogen gas. Nitrogen oxides contribute to acid precipitation.
• Is obtaining or harnessing the fuel harmful to the environment? For
example, oil wells and strip coal mines destroy habitat. Natural gas
pipelines, shown in Figure 5.20, are visually unappealing. They also
split up habitat, which harms the ecosystem.
Efﬁciency is
Figure 5.19
expressed as a percent. Always
specify what is included in the
“energy used” part of the ratio.
This gas pipeline
Figure 5.20
harms the ecosystem by splitting
up habitat.
Chapter 5  Energy and Change • MHR 257
• Will using the energy source permanently remove the fuel from the
environment? A non-renewable energy source (such as coal, oil, or
natural gas) is effectively gone once we have used it up. Non-renewable
energy sources take millions of years to form. We use them up at a
much faster rate than they can be replenished. An energy source that
is clearly renewable is solar energy. The Sun will continue to radiate
energy toward Earth over its lifetime —many millions of years. A some-
what renewable energy source is wood. Trees can be grown to replace
those cut down. It takes trees a long time to grow, however, and habitat
is often destroyed in the meantime.
Comparing Energy Sources
Both efﬁciency and environmental impact are important factors to con-
sider when comparing energy sources. In the following ThoughtLab, you
will research and compare alternative and conventional energy sources.
ThoughtLab
Comparing Energy Sources
In this ThoughtLab, you will work as a class to
compare two different energy sources.
Procedure
fuels back to solar energy that powered the
photosynthesis in the plants that eventually
became the fossil fuel. Write a brief outline of
your ﬁndings.
1. On your own, or with a group, choose an energy
6. Your teacher will pair you (or your group) with
source from the following list. Other energy
sources may be discussed and added in class.
solar (radiant) energy
petroleum
hydrogen fuel cell
natural gas fuel cell
wind energy
hydroelectric power
geothermal energy
wood
biomass
nuclear ﬁssion
natural gas
coal
tar sands
2. Before beginning your research, record your cur-
rent ideas about the efﬁciency and environmental
impact of your chosen energy source.
3. Research the efﬁciency and environmental
impact of your energy source. If possible,
determine what the efﬁciency data means.
For example, suppose that a source tells you
that natural gas is 90% efﬁcient. Is the source
referring to natural gas burned directly for heat
or for cooking? Is the energy being converted
from heat to electricity in a power plant? Be as
speciﬁc as possible.
4. Ensure that you use a variety of sources to ﬁnd
your data. Be aware of any bias that might be
present in your sources.
5. Trace the energy source as far back as you can.
For example, you can trace the energy in fossil
another student (or group) that has researched a
different energy source. Work together to analyze
the comparative merits and drawbacks of the two
energy sources, based on your research.
7. Write a conclusion that summarizes the beneﬁts
and risks of both energy sources, in terms of
their efﬁciency and environmental impact.
8. Present your ﬁndings to the class.
Analysis
1. Discuss the presentations as a class.
(a) Decide which energy sources are most
efﬁcient. Also decide which energy sources
are least damaging to the environment.
(b) Decide which energy source is best overall in
terms of both efﬁciency and environmental
impact.
2. Could the “best overall” energy source be used
to provide a signiﬁcant portion of Canada’s
energy needs? What obstacles would need to
be overcome for this to happen?
3. Besides efﬁciency and environmental impact,
what other factors are involved in developing
and delivering an energy source to consumers?
258 MHR • Unit 3  Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
Careers
in Chemistry
Nuclear Safety Supervisor
Jennifer Noronha
In some ways, nuclear power is an appealing power
source. Nuclear reactions create large amounts of
energy from minimal material, and they generate
none of the carbon dioxide and other emissions that
cause acid rain and global warming. The products
and reactants of nuclear reactions, however, are
dangerously radioactive. Therefore, special meas-
ures are needed to protect nuclear power station
employees from daily exposure to radiation. That
is where Jennifer Noronha comes in. Noronha is
the supervisor of Radiological Services at
Darlington. Employee safety—especially from high
radiation doses —is her ﬁrst priority.
The Darlington Nuclear Generating Station
is located 70 km east of Toronto. It uses a fuel of
natural uranium to produce enough electricity to
provide power for a city the size of Toronto.
Noronha and her radiation protection team plan and
implement safety programs that minimize dose
rates, or the amount of radiation that station
employees are exposed to.
Station employees must undergo four weeks
of radiation protection training. This training was
designed by Noronha’s department, based on an
extensive investigation of radiation ﬁelds within
the station, as well as a thorough evaluation of
past safety programs and approaches. Through this
training, employees learn how to measure existing
dose rates with survey equipment, assess what
kinds of tools and protective clothing are needed,
and take appropriate action to lower radiation doses.
For example:
• Airborne hazards, such as tritium (present in
radiated water vapour), can be reduced by running
the station’s dryer system. The dryer system
catches the radiated vapour and dries it out of
the air.
• Non-airborne radiation can be countered by
shielding the affected area with lead blankets or
sheeting material.
Noronha’s strong mathematics skills were evident
from an early age. When she moved to Canada from
Kenya at age 11, she was immediately put ahead a
grade. Her mathematics skills and her father’s engi-
neering profession were what propelled her toward
engineering. Noronha earned her engineering
physics degree from McMaster University. Her
courses included general chemistry, biomedical
theory, and nuclear theory. She worked as a
commissioning engineer at Darlington during its
start-up. She tested the station’s safety shut-down
systems and helped to bring the station’s ﬁrst
reactor on-line. “It was pretty amazing,” Noronha
says. “At the time, it was still relatively new
technology, and it was Canadian technology.”
Noronha got her MBA from the University of
Toronto in 1998. Soon after, she moved to her
current position, which allows her to combine her
people skills and technical expertise.
Making Career Connections
1. Are you interested in the different safety con-
cerns related to Canadian nuclear reactors, and
the steps that are being taken to counter these
concerns? Contact the Canadian Nuclear Safety
Commission (CNSC) or explore their web site.
(The CNSC is the Ottawa-based government
watchdog for the use of nuclear energy in
Canada.)
2. To learn more about the wide variety of careers
in nuclear power generation, Ontario Power
Generation is a good place to start. Their web
site has a helpful career page that lists opportuni-
ties for students and recent graduates, as well as
experienced professionals.
Chapter 5  Energy and Change • MHR 259
Chemistry Bulletin
Hot Ice
When engineers ﬁrst began extending natural
gas pipelines through regions of bitter cold,
they noticed that their lines plugged with a
dangerous slush of ice and gas. The intense
pressure of the lines, combined with the cold,
led to the formation of methane hydrates,
a kind of gas-permeated ice. More than a
mere nuisance, methane hydrate plugs were a
potential threat to pipelines. The build-up of
gas pressure behind a methane hydrate plug
could lead to an explosion. Now, however,
this same substance may hold the key to a vast
fuel supply.
Methane hydrates form when methane
molecules become trapped within an ice lattice
as water freezes. They can form in very cold
conditions or under high-pressure conditions.
Both of these conditions are met in deep
oceans and in permafrost. In Canada, hydrates
have already been found in large quantities in
the Canadian Arctic. Methane hydrate has a
number of remarkable properties. For example,
when brought into an oxygen atmosphere, the
methane fumes can be ignited, making it
appear that the ice is burning!
Methane releases 25% less carbon dioxide per
gram than coal, and it emits none of the oxides
of nitrogen and sulfur that contribute to acid
precipitation. Therefore, using methane in
place of other fossil fuels is very desirable.
Methane hydrates seem to be an ideal and
plentiful “pre-packaged” source of natural gas.
Estimates of the exact amount of methane
stored in hydrates suggest there could be
260 MHR • Unit 3  Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
enough to serve our energy needs anywhere
from 350 years to 3500 years, based on current
levels of energy consumption. This would con-
stitute a signiﬁcant source of fossil fuels, if we
can ﬁnd a way to extract the gas safely and
economically.
Unfortunately, hydrates become unstable
when the pressure or temperature changes.
Even small changes in these conditions can
cause hydrates to degrade rapidly. Methane
hydrates are stable at ocean depths greater than
300 m, but offshore drilling at these depths has
been known to disturb the hydrate formations,
causing large, uncontrolled releases of ﬂamma-
ble methane gas. Also, methane hydrates often
hold sediment layers together. Therefore, in
addition to the danger of a gas explosion, there
is the danger of the sea ﬂoor collapsing where
drilling occurs.
Methane is a signiﬁcant greenhouse gas.
A massive release of methane could cause
catastrophic global climate change. Some
researchers believe that the drastic climate
change that occurred during the Pleistocene
era was due to methane hydrate destabilization
and widespread methane release.
Nonetheless, Canada, Japan, the United
States, and Russia all have active research and
exploration programs in this area. As global
oil supplies dwindle, using methane hydrates
might increasingly be seen as worth the risk
and cost.
Making Connections
1. Compare using methane from natural gas
with using methane from methane hydrates
in terms of environmental impact and efﬁ-
ciency. You will need to do some research
to ﬁnd out extraction methods for each
source of methane.
2. On the Internet, research one possible struc-
ture of methane hydrate. Create a physical
model or a three-dimensional computer
model to represent it. Use your model to
explain why methane hydrates are unstable
at temperatures that are warmer than 0˚C.
Emerging Energy Sources
In the ThoughtLab on page 258, you probably noticed that all energy
sources have drawbacks as well as beneﬁts. Scientists and engineers are
striving to ﬁnd and develop new and better energy sources. One energy
source that engineers are trying to harness is nuclear fusion. As you
learned in section 5.1, nuclear fusion provides a great deal of energy from
readily available fuel (isotopes of hydrogen). In addition, nuclear fusion
produces a more benign waste product than nuclear ﬁssion (helium).
Unfortunately, fusion is not yet practical and controllable on a large scale
because of the enormous temperatures involved.
Chemists are also striving to ﬁnd new sources for existing fuels that
work well. The Chemistry Bulletin on the facing page discusses a new
potential source of methane.
Section Summary
In this section, you learned about efﬁciency. You learned how it can
be deﬁned in different ways for different purposes. You used your
understanding of processes that produce energy to investigate the
efﬁciency and environmental impact of different energy sources.
In Chapter 5, you learned about the energy that is associated with
chemical reactions. You used a calorimeter to measure heat changes, and
you used these heat changes to write thermochemical equations. You
probably already realize that adding heat to reactants often speeds up a
reaction. In other words, raising the temperature of a system consisting of
a chemical reaction often increases the speed of the reaction. A familiar
example is cooking. You increase the temperature of a heating element
to speed up the reactions that are taking place in the food as it cooks.
How does increasing temperature speed up a reaction? Is the enthalpy
of a reaction related to its speed? Chapter 6 addresses these questions.
Section Review
1
C
Your friend tells you about an energy source that is supposed to be
46% efﬁcient. What questions do you need to ask your friend in order
to clarify this claim?
2
C
Efﬁciency and environmental concerns are not always separate. In
fact, they are often closely linked. Give three examples of energy
sources in which changes in efﬁciency affect environmental impact, or
vice versa.
3
I
Design an experiment to determine the efﬁciency of a laboratory
burner. You will ﬁrst need to decide how to deﬁne the efﬁciency, and
you will also need to ﬁnd out what fuel your burner uses. Include a
complete procedure and safety precautions.
4
MC
Some high-efﬁciency gas furnaces can heat with an efﬁciency of
up to 97%. These gas furnaces work by allowing the water vapour pro-
duced during combustion to condense. Condensation is an exothermic
reaction that releases further energy for heating. Use the information in
this section to demonstrate the increased heat output, using Hess’s law.
The enthalpy of condensation of water is 44 kJ/mol.
Chapter 5  Energy and Change • MHR 261
5
MC
“Nuclear energy is an energy source that is less hazardous to the
environment than energy derived from burning coal.” Write a brief
essay, explaining why you agree or disagree with this statement.
6
MC
The label on an electric kettle claims that the kettle is 95%
efﬁcient.
(a) What deﬁnition of efﬁciency is the manufacturer using?
(b) Write an expression that shows how the manufacturer might have
arrived at an efﬁciency of 95% for the kettle.
(c) Design a detailed experiment to test the manufacturers’ claim.
Include safety precautions.
7
K/U
Read the Chemistry Bulletin on page 260. How does the
efﬁciency of using methane as a fuel source compare to using methane
hydrates? Justify your answer.
8
I
Hydrogen is a very appealing fuel, in part because burning it
produces only non-polluting water. One of the challenges that
researchers face in making hydrogen fuel a reality is how to produce
hydrogen economically. Researchers are investigating methods of
producing hydrogen indirectly. The following series of equations
represent one such method.
3FeCl2(s) + 4H2O(g) → Fe3O4(s) + 6HCl(g) + H2(g)
Fe3O4(s) + 3
2
3FeCl3(s) → 3FeCl2(s) + 3
2
Cl2(g) + 6HCl(g) → 3FeCl3(s) + 3H2O(g) + 1
2
∆H˚ = 318 kJ
O2(g) ∆H˚ = −249 kJ
∆H˚ = 173 kJ
Cl2(g)
(a) Show that the net result of the three reactions is the decomposition
of water to produce hydrogen and oxygen.
(b) Use Hess’s law and the enthalpy changes for the reactions to
determine the enthalpy change for the decomposition of one
mole of water. Check your answer, using the enthalpy of formation
of water.
262 MHR • Unit 3  Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
Review
Reﬂecting on Chapter 5
Summarize this chapter in the format of your
choice. Here are a few ideas to use as guidelines:
• Compare the magnitude of energy changes
resulting from physical changes, chemical
reactions, and nuclear reactions.
• Compare the processes that are responsible
for the energy changes resulting from physical
changes, chemical reactions, and nuclear
reactions.
• Explain the different ways to represent the ener-
gy changes of physical and chemical processes.
• Give examples of important exothermic and
endothermic processes.
• Explain how a calorimeter is used to determine
enthalpy of reaction.
• Use examples and analogies to explain Hess’s
law.
• Show how to use Hess’s law and experimentally
determined enthalpies of reaction to calculate
unknown enthalpies of reaction.
• Show how to calculate enthalpy of reaction using
known enthalpies of formation, and explain how
this calculation relates to Hess’s law.
• Explain the concept of efﬁciency, and discuss
the efﬁciency and environmental impact of
conventional and alternative energy sources.
Reviewing Key Terms
For each of the following terms, write a sentence
that shows your understanding of its meaning.
thermodynamics
law of conservation
of energy
surroundings
temperature (T )
enthalpy change (∆H )
exothermic reaction
standard enthalpy of
reaction (∆H ˚)
thermochemistry
system
heat (Q )
enthalpy (H )
endothermic reaction
enthalpy of reaction
thermochemical
equation
nuclear binding energy
nuclear fusion
mass defect
nuclear ﬁssion
speciﬁc heat capacity (c) heat capacity (C )
calorimeter
constant-pressure
calorimeter
coffee-cup calorimeter
Hess’s law of heat
summation
formation reactions
standard molar enthalpy
of formation (∆H˚f)
non-renewable
renewable
Knowledge/Understanding
1. In your own words, describe the relationship
between a system and its surroundings. Use
an example to illustrate your description.
2. The vaporization of liquid carbon disulﬁde,
CS2, requires an energy input of 29 kJ/mol.
(a) Is this reaction exothermic or endothermic?
What is the enthalpy change of this reaction?
(b) Write a thermochemical equation of this
reaction. Include 29 kJ as either a reactant
or a product.
(c) Draw and label an enthalpy diagram for the
vaporization of liquid carbon disulﬁde.
3. A given chemical equation is tripled and then
reversed. What effect, if any, will there be on
the enthalpy change of the reaction?
4. Explain why two nested polystyrene coffee
cups, with a lid, make a good constant-pressure
calorimeter.
5. Write the balanced equation for the formation
of each substance.
(a) LiCl(s)
(c) NH4NO3(s)
6. If the enthalpy of formation of an element
(b) C2H5OH((cid:2))
in its standard state is equal to zero, explain
why the heat of formation of iodine gas, I2(g),
is 21 kJ/mol.
Inquiry
7. In an oxygen-rich atmosphere, carbon
burns to produce carbon dioxide, CO2. Both
carbon monoxide, CO, and carbon dioxide
are produced when carbon is burned in an
oxygen-deﬁcient atmosphere. This makes the
direct measurement of the enthalpy of forma-
tion of CO difﬁcult. CO, however, also burns
in oxygen, O2, to produce pure carbon dioxide.
Explain how you would experimentally deter-
mine the enthalpy of formation of carbon
monoxide.
8. Two 30.0 g pieces of aluminium, Al, are placed
in an insulated container.
(a) One piece of Al has an initial temperature
of 100.0˚C. The other piece has an initial
temperature of 20.0˚C. What is the tempera-
ture inside the container after the system
has equilibrated? Assume that no heat is
lost to the container or the surroundings.
Chapter 5  Energy and Change • MHR 263
(b) Repeat the calculation in part (a) with the
(b) Using the following equations, determine the
following change: The piece of Al at 20.0˚C
has a mass of 50.0 g.
9. The complete combustion of 1.00 mol of
sucrose, C12H22O11, releases −5641 kJ of energy
(at 25˚C and 100 kPa).
C12H22O11(s) + 12O2(g) → 12CO2(g) + 11H2O((cid:2))
(a) Use the enthalpy change of this reaction, and
enthalpies of formation from Appendix E, to
determine the enthalpy of formation of
sucrose.
(b) Draw and label an enthalpy diagram for
this reaction.
10. A 10.0 g sample of pure acetic acid, CH3CO2H,
is completely burned. The heat released warms
2.00 L of water from 22.3˚C to 39.6˚C. Assuming
that no heat was lost to the calorimeter, what is
the enthalpy change of the complete combus-
tion of acetic acid? Express your answer in
units of kJ/g and kJ/mol.
11. Use equations (1), (2), and (3) to ﬁnd the
enthalpy change of the formation of methane,
CH4, from chloroform, CHCl3.
CHCl3((cid:2)) + 3HCl(g) → CH4(g) + 3Cl2(g)
(1) 1
H2(g) + 1
2
2
(2) C(s) + 2H2(g) → CH4(g)
(3) C(s) + 1
2
Cl2(g) → HCl(g) ∆H˚ = −92.3 kJ
Cl2(g) → CHCl3((cid:2))
∆H˚ = −74.8 kJ
H2(g) + 3
2
∆H˚ = −134.5 kJ
12. The following equation represents the
combustion of ethylene glycol, (CH2OH)2 .
(CH2OH)2((cid:2)) + 5
O2(g) → 2CO2(g) + 3H2O((cid:2))
2
∆H˚ = −1178 kJ
Use known enthalpies of formation and the
given enthalpy change to determine the
enthalpy of formation of ethylene glycol.
13. Most of us associate the foul smell of hydrogen
sulﬁde gas, H2S(g), with the smell of rotten eggs.
H2S(g) + 3
O2(g) → SO2(g) + H2O(g) ∆H = −519 kJ
2
How much energy is released when 15.0 g of
H2S(g) burns?
14. Hydrogen peroxide, H2O2, is a strong oxidizing
agent. It is used as an antiseptic in a 3.0%
aqueous solution. Some chlorine-free bleaches
contain 6.0% hydrogen peroxide.
(a) Write the balanced chemical equation for the
formation of one mole of H2O2((cid:2)).
264 MHR • Unit 3  Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
enthalpy of formation of H2O2.
(1) 2H2O2((cid:2)) → 2H2O((cid:2)) + O2(g) ∆H˚ = −196 kJ
(2) H2(g) + 1
2
O2(g) → H2O((cid:2))
15. Hydrogen cyanide is a highly poisonous gas. It
∆H˚ = −286 kJ
is produced from methane and ammonia.
CH4(g) + NH3(g) → HCN(g) + 3H2(g)
Find the enthalpy change of this reaction, using
the following thermochemical equations.
(1) H2(g) + 2C(graphite) + N2(g) → 2HCN(g)
∆H˚ = 270 kJ
(2) N2(g) + 3H2(g) → 2NH3(g)
(3) C(graphite) + 2H2(g) → CH4(g) ∆H˚ = −75 kJ
16. The following equation represents the complete
∆H˚ = −92 kJ
combustion of butane, C4H10.
C4H10(g) + 6.5O2(g) → 4CO2(g) + 5H2O(g)
(a) Using known enthalpies of formation,
calculate the enthalpy change of the complete
combustion of C4H10. (The enthalpy of
formation of C4H10 is −126 kJ/mol.)
(b) Using known enthalpies of formation, calcu-
late the enthalpy change of the complete
combustion of ethane, C2H6, to produce
carbon dioxide and water vapour. Express
your answer in units of kJ/mol and kJ/g.
(c) A 10.0 g sample that is 30% C2H6 and 70%
C4H10, by mass, is burned in excess oxygen.
How much energy is released?
17. The caloric content (energy content) of foods is
measured using a bomb calorimeter. A sample
of food is burned in oxygen, O2, inside the
calorimeter. You can make a simple food
calorimeter using an empty food can or pop
can. Design an investigation in which you
make your own calorimeter and then use your
calorimeter to measure the energy content of a
piece of cheese or a cracker. Include a diagram
of your proposed calorimeter. List the data, and
other observations, that you plan to record. Get
your teacher’s approval before carrying out
your investigation. Note: Some students have a
severe nut allergy. Do not use peanuts, or any
other nuts, in your investigation.
18. Design an investigation to determine the
enthalpy change of the combustion of ethanol
using a wick-type burner, similar to that in a
kerosene lamp.
(a) Draw and label a diagram of the apparatus.
(b) Write a step-by-step procedure.
(c) Prepare a table to record your data and other
observations.
(d) State any assumptions that you will make
when carrying out the calculations.
Communication
19. Suppose that you need to ﬁnd the enthalpy
change of a chemical reaction. Unfortunately,
you are unable to carry out the reaction in
your school laboratory. Does this mean that
you cannot ﬁnd the enthalpy change of the
reaction? Explain.
20. Acetylene, C2H2, and ethylene, C2H4, are both
used as fuels. They combine with oxygen gas to
produce carbon dioxide and water in an
exothermic reaction. Acetylene also reacts with
hydrogen to produce ethylene, as shown.
C2H2(g) + H2(g) → C2H4(g) ∆H˚ = −175.1 kJ
(a) Without referring to any tables or doing any
calculations, explain why C2H2 has a more
positive enthalpy of formation than C2H4.
(b) Do you think C2H2 or C2H4 is a more
energetic fuel? Explain.
Making Connections
21. When a vehicle is parked in the sunlight on a
hot summer day, the temperature inside can
approach 55˚C. One company has patented a
non-CFC propelled aerosol that can be sprayed
inside a vehicle to reduce the temperature to
25˚C within seconds. The spray contains a
mixture of two liquids: 10% ethanol, C2H5OH,
and 90% water by mass.
(a) Use thermochemical equations, and the
corresponding enthalpy changes, to explain
how the spray works.
(b) 1.0 g of the aerosol is sprayed into a hot
vehicle. How much heat (in kJ) can be
absorbed due to vaporization of the aerosol?
Note: ∆Hvap of water = 44.0 kJ/mol and
∆Hvap of ethanol = 38.56 kJ/mol
(c) Do you think there are any risks associated
with using a spray like the one described
above? Explain your answer.
22. Consider methane, CH4, and hydrogen, H2, as
possible fuel sources.
(a) Write the chemical equation for the complete
combustion of each fuel. Then ﬁnd the
enthalpy of combustion, ∆Hcomb, of each
fuel. Express your answers in kJ/mol and
kJ/g. Assume that water vapour, rather than
liquid water, is formed in both reactions.
(b) Which is the more energetic fuel, per unit
mass?
(c) Consider a ﬁxed mass of each fuel. Which
fuel would allow you to drive a greater
distance? Explain brieﬂy.
(d) Describe how methane and hydrogen could
be obtained.  Which of these methods do you
think is less expensive? Explain.
(e) Which fuel do you think is more
environmentally friendly? Explain.
Answers to Practice Problems and Short Answers to
5. 12.8˚C 6. 6.70 × 102 g
Section Review Questions
Practice Problems: 1.(a) N2(g) + O2(g) + 180.6 kJ → 2NO(g)
(b) Reactants have lower energy than products. (c) +90.3 kJ
(d) +644.5 kJ 2.(a) −1.65 × 103 kJ (b) Reactants have higher
energy than products. (c) −1.22 × 102 kJ 3.(a) +25.9 kJ
(b) +393 kJ (c) Reactants have lower energy than products.
4.(a) P4O10(s) + 6H2O((cid:2)) → 4H3PO4(aq) + 257.2 kJ
(b) −1.29 × 103 kJ (c) −1.54 × 102 kJ
7. 2.7 × 104 kJ 8. 6.09˚C 9. −50 kJ/mol
10.(a) −4.1 × 102 kJ/mol Mg (b) The density and heat capacity
of the solutions are the same as the density and heat
capacity of water. No heat is lost to the calorimeter.
11. 29.7˚C 12. HBr(aq) + KOH(aq) → H2O((cid:2)) + KBr(aq) + 57 kJ
13. −44 kJ 14. −509 kJ 15. −120 kJ 16. +30 kJ
17.(a) C(s) + 2H2(g) → CH4(g) + 74.6 kJ
(b) Na(s) + 1
2
(c) Mg(s) + 1
2
(d) Ca(s) + C(s) + 3
2
18. H2(g) + S(s) + 2O2(g) → H2SO4((cid:2)) + 814.0 kJ
19. Cs(s) + 76.7 kJ → Cs(g) 20.(a) 1
P4(s) → P(s) + 17.6 kJ
4
(b) −18.5 kJ 21. Get the target equation from the two
formation equations.  22. Get the target equation from the
formation equations.  23. −77.6 kJ/mol 24.(a) −637.9 kJ
(b) 2.49 × 103 kJ
Section Review: 5.1: 2.(a) ∆H˚rxn = −127.0 kJ
(b) ∆H˚vap = +44.0 kJ (c) ∆H˚rxn = ∆H˚comb < 0 4.(a) 34.21 g
(b) 599 kJ (c) 1.06 × 103 kJ
5.(a) C2H2(g) + 5
2
(c) 108 kJ  7.(a) H2(g) + 1
2
5.2: 5.(a) KOH(aq) + HNO3(aq) → H2O((cid:2)) + KNO3(aq) + 55 kJ
5.3: 3. −143 kJ 4. 14.3 kJ 5. −636.0 kJ
Cl2(g) → NaCl(s) + 411.2 kJ
O2(g) → MgO(s) + 601.2 kJ
O2(g) → H2O((cid:2)) + 2CO2(g) + 1.3 × 103 kJ
O2(g) → CaCO3(s) + 1207.6 kJ
O2(g) → H2O(g) + 241.8 kJ
Chapter 5  Energy and Change • MHR 265
Rates of Chemical
Reactions
Racing cars, such as the one shown below, can reach speeds that are well
above 200 km/h. In contrast, the maximum speed of many farm tractors is
only about 25 km/h. Just as some vehicles travel more quickly than others,
some chemical reactions occur more quickly than others. For example,
compare the two reactions that occur in vehicles: the decomposition of
sodium azide in an air bag and the rusting of iron in steel.
When an automobile collision activates an air bag, sodium azide,
NaN3(g), decomposes to form sodium, Na(s), and nitrogen gas, N2(g). (The
gas inﬂates the bag.) This chemical reaction occurs almost instantan-
eously. It inﬂates the air bag quickly enough to cushion a driver’s impact
in a collision.
On the other hand, the reaction of iron with oxygen to form rust pro-
ceeds quite slowly. Most Canadians know that the combination of road salt
and wet snow somewhat increases the rate of the reaction. Even so, it takes
several years for a signiﬁcant amount of rust to form on the body of a car.
This is a good thing for car owners—if rusting occurred as fast as the
reaction in an inﬂating air bag, cars would ﬂake to pieces in seconds.
Why do some reactions occur slowly while others seem to take place
instantaneously? How do chemists measure, compare, and express the rates
at which chemical reactions occur? Can chemists predict and control the
rate of a chemical reaction? These questions will be answered in Chapter 6.
The combustion of gasoline is a fast and highly exothermic
reaction. Gasoline is stored in a car’s fuel tank, where it is
exposed to oxygen in the air. Why does gasoline in a fuel
tank not burst into ﬂames spontaneously?
C h a p t e r   P r e v i e w
6.1 Expressing and
Measuring Reaction
Rates
6.2 The Rate Law: Reactant
Concentration and Rate
6.3 Theories of Reaction
Rates
6.4 Reaction Mechanisms
and Catalysts
P r e r e q u i s i t e
C o n c e p t s   a n d   S k i l l s
Before you begin this chapter,
review the following concepts
and skills:
(cid:2) balancing chemical
equations (Concepts and
Skills Review)
(cid:2) expressing concentration
in units of mol/L (Concepts
and Skills Review)
266 MHR • Unit 3  Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
Expressing and Measuring
Reaction Rates
As you learned in the Unit 3 opener, nitroglycerin is an explosive
that was used to clear the way for railroads across North America. It
decomposes instantly. The reactions that cause fruit to ripen, then rot,
take place over a period of days. The reactions that lead to human ageing
take place over a lifetime.
How quickly a chemical reaction occurs is a crucial factor in how
the reaction affects its surroundings. Therefore, knowing the rate of a
chemical reaction is integral to understanding the reaction.
Expressing Reaction Rates
The change in the amount of reactants or products over time is called the
reaction rate. How do chemists express reaction rates? Consider how the
rates of other processes are expressed. For example, the Olympic sprinter
in Figure 6.1 can run 100 m in about 10 s, resulting in an average running
rate of 100 m/10 s or about 10 m/s.
The running rate of a sprinter is calculated by dividing the distance
travelled by the interval of time the sprinter takes to travel this distance.
In other words, running rate (speed) is expressed as a change in distance
divided by a change in time. In general, a change in a quantity with
respect to time can be expressed as follows.
Rate = Change in quantity
Change in time
= Quantityﬁnal − Quantityinitial
tﬁnal − tinitial
=
∆ Quantity
∆t
Chemists express reaction rates in several ways. For example, a reaction
rate can be expressed as a change in the amount of reactant consumed or
product made per unit of time, as shown below. (The letter A represents
a compound.)
Rate of reaction = Amount of Aﬁnal − Amount of Ainitial (in mol)
tﬁnal − tinitial (in s)
=
∆ Amount of A
∆t
(in mol/s)
When a reaction occurs between gaseous species or in solution, chemists
usually express the reaction rate as a change in the concentration of the
reactant or product per unit time. Recall, from your previous chemistry
course, that the concentration of a compound (in mol/L) is symbolized by
placing square brackets, [ ], around the chemical formula. The equation
below is the equation you will work with most often in this section.
6.1
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
(cid:2) describe, with the help of
a graph, reaction rate as a
function of the change of
concentration of a reactant
or product with respect
to time
(cid:2) examine various methods
that are used to monitor the
rate of a chemical reaction
(cid:2) determine and distinguish
between the average rate
and the instantaneous rate
of a chemical reaction
(cid:2) review the factors that
affect reaction rate
(cid:2) communicate your under-
standing of the following
terms: reaction rate,
average rate, instantaneous
rate, catalyst
The running rate
Figure 6.1
(speed) of a sprinter is expressed
as a change in distance over time.
Rate of reaction = Concentration of Aﬁnal − Concentration of Ainitial (in mol/L)
tﬁnal − tinitial (in s)
=
∆[A]
∆t
(in mol/(L • s))
Chapter 6  Rates of Chemical Reactions • MHR 267
Reaction rates are always positive, by convention. A rate that is expressed
as the change in concentration of a product is the rate at which the
concentration of the product is increasing. The rate that is expressed
in terms of the change in concentration of a reactant is the rate at which
the concentration of the reactant is decreasing.
Average and Instantaneous Rates of Reactions
If reactions always proceeded at a constant rate, it would be straight-
forward to ﬁnd reaction rates. You would just need the initial and ﬁnal
concentrations and the time interval. Reaction rates, however, are not
usually constant. They change with time. How does this affect the way
that chemists determine reaction rates?
Consider the following reaction.
A(g) → C(g) + D(g)
Now examine the graph in Figure 6.2. The blue line on the graph shows
the concentration of product C as the reaction progresses, based on the
data in Table 6.1.
Table 6.1 Concentration of C During a Reaction at Constant Temperature
Time (s)
0.0
5.0
10.0
15.0
20.0
[C] (mol/L)
0.00
3.12 × 10−3
4.41 × 10−3
5.40 × 10−3
6.24 × 10−3
The average rate of a reaction is the average change in the concentration
of a reactant or product per unit time over a given time interval. For
example, using the data in Table 6.1, you can determine the average rate
of the reaction from t = 0.0 s to t = 5.0 s.
Average rate =
∆[C]
∆t
= (3.12 × 10−3 mol/L) − 0.00 mol/L
5.0 s − 0.0 s
= 6.2 × 10
−4 mol/(L • s)
You can see this calculation in Figure 6.2. On a concentration-time graph,
the average rate of a reaction is represented by the slope of a line that is
drawn between two points on the curve. This line is called a secant.
The average rate of a reaction gives an overall idea of how quickly the
reaction is progressing. It does not, however, tell you how fast the reaction
is progressing at a speciﬁc time. For example, suppose that someone
asked you how fast the reaction in Figure 6.2 was progressing over 20.0 s.
You would probably calculate the average rate from t = 0.0 s to t = 20.0 s.
You would come up with the answer 3.12 × 10−3 mol/(L • s). (Try this
calculation yourself.) What would you do, however, if you were asked
how fast the reaction was progressing at exactly t = 10.0 s?
The instantaneous rate of a reaction is the rate of the reaction at a
particular time. To ﬁnd the instantaneous rate of a reaction using a
concentration-time graph, draw a tangent line to the curve and ﬁnd the
slope of the tangent. A tangent line is like a secant line, but it touches the
curve at only one point. It does not intersect the curve.
268 MHR • Unit 3  Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
The slope of the tangent is the instantaneous rate of the reaction.
Figure 6.2 shows the tangent line at t = 10.0 s. As shown on the graph,
the slope of the tangent (therefore the instantaneous rate) at t = 10.0 s
is 2.3 × 10−4 mol/(L • s).
Notice that near the beginning of the reaction, when the concentration
of the reactants is relatively high, the slope of the tangent is greater
(steeper). This indicates a faster reaction rate. As the reaction proceeds,
the reactants are used up and the slope of the tangent decreases.
9.00
8.00
7.00
6.00
)
3
0
1
×
5.00
The Concentration of C Versus Time
∆[C] = 5.4 × 10−3 mol/L − 3.1 × 10−3 mol/L
= 2.3 × 10−3 mol/L
Instantaneous =
rate
∆[C]
∆t
2.3 × 10−3 mol/L
10.0 s
= 2.3 × 10−4 mol/(L • s)
=
Physics
L I N K
In your previous courses
in science or physics,
you probably learned the
difference between instant-
aneous velocity and average
velocity. How did you use a
displacement-time graph to
determine instantaneous
velocity and average velocity?
Write a memo that explains
instantaneous rate and
average rate to a physicist,
by comparing reaction rate
with velocity.
L
/
l
o
m
(
]
C
[
4.00
3.00
2.00
1.00
∆t = 5.0 s − 0.0 s
= 5.0 s
5.0
0.00
0
∆t = 15.0 s − 5.0 s
= 10.0 s
∆[C] = 3.1 × 10−3 mol/L − 0.0 mol/L
= 3.1 × 10−3 mol/L
Average rate =
∆[C]
∆t
3.1 × 10−3 mol/L
5.0 s
= 6.2 × 10−4 mol/(L • s)
=
10.0
Time (s)
15.0
20.0
The slope of a tangent drawn to a concentration-time curve represents the
Figure 6.2
instantaneous rate of the reaction. The slope of a secant is used to determine the average
rate of a reaction.
In the following ThoughtLab, you will use experimental data to draw a
graph that shows the change in concentration of the product of a reaction.
Then you will use the graph to help you determine the instantaneous rate
and average rate of the reaction.
Chapter 6  Rates of Chemical Reactions • MHR 269
ThoughtLab
Average and Instantaneous Reaction Rates
A chemist carried out a reaction to trace the rate
of decomposition of dinitrogen pentoxide.
2. Draw a secant to the curve in the interval from
t = 0 s to t = 4800 s.
2N2O5(g) → 4NO2(g) + O2(g)
3. Draw a tangent to the curve at t = 1200 s and at
The chemist collected the following data at a
constant temperature.
Time (s)
0.00
6.00 × 102
1.20 × 103
1.80 × 103
2.40 × 103
3.00 × 103
3.60 × 103
4.20 × 103
4.80 × 103
5.40 × 103
6.00 × 103
[O2] (mol/L)
0.0
2.1 × 10−3
3.6 × 10−3
4.8 × 10−3
5.6 × 10−3
6.4 × 10−3
6.7 × 10−3
7.1 × 10−3
7.5 × 10−3
7.7 × 10−3
7.8 × 10−3
Procedure
1. Using graph paper or spreadsheet software,
plot and label a graph that shows the rate of
formation of oxygen gas. The concentration of
O2 (in mol/L) is the dependent variable and time
(in s) is the independent variable.
t = 4800 s.
4. Determine the slope of the secant. What is the
average rate of the reaction over the given time
interval? Include proper units, and pay attention
to signiﬁcant digits.
5. Determine the slope of each tangent. What is
the instantaneous reaction rate at t = 1200 s and
at t = 4800 s? Include proper units, and pay
attention to signiﬁcant digits.
Analysis
1. Why are the units for the average rate and the
instantaneous rate the same?
2. For a given set of data, two students determined
different average reaction rates. If neither student
made an error in the calculations, account for the
difference in their reaction rates.
3. Propose a reason for the difference in the
instantaneous rates at 1200 s and 4800 s.
4. When chemists compare the rates of reactions
carried out under different conditions, they
often compare the rates near the beginning of
the reactions. What advantage(s) do you see
in this practice? Hint: Think of slow reactions.
Reaction Rates in Terms of Products and Reactants
In the ThoughtLab, you analyzed the rate of the following reaction in
terms of the production of oxygen.
2N2O5(g) → 4NO2(g) + O2(g)
There are two other ways to represent the rate of this reaction:
• in terms of the rate of the disappearance of dinitrogen pentoxide
• in terms of the production of nitrogen dioxide
For every 1 mol of O2 that is produced, 4 mol of NO2 are also produced.
This means that the rate of production of NO2 is four times greater than
the rate of production of O2. Therefore, the rate of production of O2 is one
quarter the rate of production of NO2. You can express the relationship
between O2 production and NO2 production as follows.
∆[O2]
∆t
= 1
4
∆[NO2]
∆t
When 1 mol of O2 is produced, 2 mol of N2O5 are consumed. Therefore,
the rate of production of O2 is half the rate of disappearance of N2O5. You
can represent this relationship as follows:
∆[O2]
∆t
= − 1
2
∆[N2O5]
∆t
270 MHR • Unit 3  Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
Notice that the expression involving N2O5 (the reactant) has a negative
sign. A change in concentration is calculated using the expression below.
Change in concentration = Concentrationﬁnal − Concentrationinitial
Since the concentration of a reactant always decreases as a reaction
progresses, the change in concentration is always negative. By convention,
however, a rate is always expressed as a positive number. Therefore,
expressions that involve reactants must be multiplied by −1 to become
positive.
Examine the Sample Problem below to see how to express reaction
rates in terms of products and reactants. Then try the Practice Problems
that follow.
Electronic Learning Partner
To learn more about reaction
rates expressed as changes in
concentration over time, go to
the Chemistry 12 Electronic
Learning Partner.
Sample Problem
Expressing Reaction Rates
Problem
Dinitrogen pentoxide, N2O5, decomposes to form nitrogen dioxide and
oxygen.
2N2O5(g) → 4NO2(g) + O2(g)
NO2 is produced at a rate of 5.0 × 10−6 mol/(L • s). What is the
corresponding rate of disappearance of N2O5 and rate of formation of O2?
What Is Required?
Since N2O5 is a reactant, you need to calculate its rate of disappearance.
O2 is a product, so you need to ﬁnd its rate of formation.
What Is Given?
You know the rate of formation of NO2 and the balanced chemical
equation.
Plan Your Strategy
First check that the chemical equation is balanced. Then use the molar
coefﬁcients in the balanced equation to determine the relative rates of
disappearance and formation.
Since 4 mol of NO2 are produced for every 2 mol of N2O5 that
decompose, the rate of disappearance of N2O5 is  2
4
formation of NO2. Similarly, 1 mol of O2 is formed for every 4 mol
of NO2. Therefore, the rate of production of O2 is  1
the rate of NO2
4
production.
, or  1
2
, the rate of
Act on Your Strategy
Rate of disappearance of N2O5 = 1
2
Rate of production of O2
Check Your Solution
× 5.0 × 10−6 mol/(L • s)
−6 mol/(L • s)
= 2.5 × 10
× 5.0 × 10−6 mol/(L • s)
−6 mol/(L • s)
= 1
4
= 1.2 × 10
From the coefﬁcients in the balanced chemical equation, you can see that
the rate of decomposition of N2O5 is  2
4
NO2. The rate of production of O2 is  1
2
the rate of decomposition of N2O5.
, the rate of formation of
, or  1
2
Chapter 6  Rates of Chemical Reactions • MHR 271
Practice Problems
1. Cyclopropane, C3H6, is used in the synthesis of organic compounds
and as a fast-acting anesthetic. It undergoes rearrangement to form
propene. If cyclopropane disappears at a rate of 0.25 mol/s, at what
rate is propene being produced?
2. Ammonia, NH3, reacts with oxygen to produce nitric oxide, NO,
and water vapour.
4NH3(g) + 5O2(g) → 4NO(g) + 6H2O(g)
At a speciﬁc time in the reaction, ammonia is disappearing at rate
of 0.068 mol/(L • s).
What is the corresponding rate of production of water?
3. Hydrogen bromide reacts with oxygen to produce bromine and
water vapour.
4HBr(g) + O2(g) → 2Br2(g) + 2H2O(g)
How does the rate of decomposition of HBr (in mol/(L • s) ) compare
with the rate of formation of Br2 (also in mol/(L • s) )? Express your
answer as an equation.
4. Magnesium metal reacts with hydrochloric acid to produce
magnesium chloride and hydrogen gas.
Mg(s) + 2HCl(aq) → MgCl2(aq) + H2(g)
Over an interval of 1.00 s, the mass of Mg(s) changes by −0.011 g.
(a) What is the corresponding rate of consumption of HCl(aq)
(in mol/s)?
(b) Calculate the corresponding rate of production of H2(g) (in L/s)
at 20˚C and 101 kPa.
Methods for Measuring Reaction Rates
How do chemists collect the data they need to determine a reaction rate?
To determine empirically the rate of a chemical reaction, chemists must
monitor the concentration or amount of at least one reactant or product.
There are a variety of techniques available. The choice of technique
depends on the reaction under study and the equipment available.
Monitoring Mass, pH, and Conductivity
Consider the reaction of magnesium with hydrochloric acid.
Mg(s) + 2HCl(aq) → MgCl2(aq) + H2(g)
Hydrogen gas is released in the reaction. You can track the decrease in
mass, due to the escaping hydrogen, by carrying out the reaction in an
open vessel on an electric balance. The decrease in mass can be plotted
against time. Some electronic balances can be connected to a computer,
with the appropriate software, to record mass and time data automatically
as the reaction proceeds.
Another technique for monitoring the reaction above involves pH.
Since HCl is consumed in the reaction, you can record changes in pH
with respect to time. Figure 6.3 shows a probe being used to monitor the
changing pH of a solution.
PROBLEM TIP
Recall, from your previous
chemistry course, that 1.00 mol
of any gas occupies a volume
of 24.0 L at 20˚C and 101 kPa.
If the concentration
Figure 6.3
of H3O+ or OH− ions changes over
the course of a reaction, a chemist
can use a pH meter to monitor the
reaction.
272 MHR • Unit 3  Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
P R O B E W A R E
If you have access to
probeware, do Probeware
Investigation 6-A, or a similar
investigation from a probeware
company.
A third technique involves electrical conductivity. Dissolved ions in
aqueous solution conduct electricity. The electrical conductivity of the
solution is proportional to the concentration of ions. Therefore, reactions
that occur in aqueous solution, and involve a change in the quantity of
dissolved ions, undergo a change in electrical conductivity. In the reaction
above, hydrochloric acid is a mix of equal molar amounts of two ions:
hydronium, H3O+, and chloride, Cl−. The MgCl2 that is produced exists as
three separate ions in solution: one Mg2+ ion and two Cl− ions. Since there
is an increase in the concentration of ions as the reaction proceeds, the
conductivity of the solution also increases with time.
Monitoring Pressure
When a reaction involves gases, the pressure of the system often changes
as the reaction progresses. Chemists can monitor this pressure change. For
example, consider the decomposition of dinitrogen pentoxide, shown in
the following chemical reaction.
2N2O5(g) → 4NO2(g) + O2(g)
When 2 mol of N2O5 gas decompose, they form 5 mol of gaseous products.
Therefore, the pressure of the system increases as the reaction proceeds,
provided that the reaction is carried out in a closed container. Chemists
use a pressure sensor to monitor pressure changes.
Monitoring Colour
Colour change can also be used to monitor the progress of a reaction.
The absorption of light by a chemical compound is directly related to the
concentration of the compound. For example, suppose you add several
drops of blue food colouring to a litre of water. If you add a few millilitres
of bleach to the solution, the intensity of the colour of the food dye
diminishes as it reacts. You can then monitor the colour change. (Do not
try this experiment without your teacher’s supervision.)
For accurate measurements of the colour intensity of a solution,
chemists use a device called a spectrophotometer. (See Figure 6.4.)
This photograph
Figure 6.4
shows a simple spectrophotometer,
which measures the amount of
visible light that is absorbed by
a coloured solution. More sophisti-
cated devices can measure the
absorption of ultraviolet and
infrared radiation.
Monitoring Volume
When a reaction generates gas, chemists can monitor the volume of gas
produced. In Investigation 6-A, you will determine average reaction rates
by recording the time taken to produce a ﬁxed volume of gas. You will
perform several trials of the same reaction to investigate the effects that
temperature, concentration of reactants, and surface area of reactants
have on the reaction rate. You will also perform one trial using a
different reactant.
Chapter 6  Rates of Chemical Reactions • MHR 273
S K I L L   F O C U S
Predicting
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
Studying Reaction Rates
You have probably already encountered the
reaction of vinegar with baking soda. The carbon
dioxide that is produced can be used to simulate
a volcano, for example, or to propel a toy car or
rocket.
CH3COOH(aq) + NaHCO3(s) →
NaCH3COO(aq) + CO2(g) + H2O((cid:2))
Other carbonate-containing compounds, such as
calcium carbonate, can also react with vinegar to
produce CO2.
In this investigation, you will determine
reaction rates by recording the time taken to
produce a ﬁxed volume of CO2. You will collect
the CO2 by downward displacement of water.
Question
How do factors such as concentration, tempera-
ture, a different reactant, and surface area affect
the rate of this reaction?
Prediction
Read the Procedure. Quantitatively predict
the effects of changes to the concentration and
temperature. Qualitatively predict the effects
of changes to the reactant and surface area.
Materials
electronic balance
pneumatic trough
stopwatch
250 mL Erlenmeyer ﬂask
retort stand and clamp
one-holed rubber stopper, ﬁtted with a piece
of glass tubing (must be airtight)
1 m rubber hose to ﬁt glass tubing
(must be airtight)
25 or 100 mL graduated cylinder
large test tube
weighing paper, weighing boat, or small beaker
100 mL vinegar (at room temperature)
10 g baking soda, NaHCO3
2.0 g powdered CaCO3
2.0 g solid CaCO3 (marble chips)
scoopula
thermometer
wash bottle with distilled water
(at room temperature)
warm-water bath (prepared using a large beaker
and a hot plate or electric kettle)
ice bath (ice cubes and water)
paper towel
Safety Precautions
• Beware of shock hazard if an electric kettle or
hot plate is used.
• Wear safety glasses at all times.
Procedure
Part 1  The Effect of Concentration
1. The distilled water and vinegar that you are
going to use should be at room temperature.
Measure and record the temperature of either
the vinegar or the distilled water.
2. Assemble the apparatus for the collection of
CO2, by downward displacement of water, as
shown below.
one-holed
stopper
clamp
rubber
tube
test tube
pneumatic
trough
sink
250 ml
Erlenmeyer
flask
reaction
mixture
water
274 MHR • Unit 3  Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
Note: To invert a test tube ﬁlled with water,
place a piece of paper over the mouth of the
ﬁlled test tube before inverting it.
3. Copy the table below into your notebook, to
record your data.
Mass of
NaHCO3 (g)
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
Trial
1
2
3
4
Volume of
vinegar (mL)
Volume of
distilled
water (mL)
Time to fill
test tube
with CO2 (s)
Average
reaction
rate (mL/s)
20.0
15.0
10.0
5.0
0.0
5.0
10.0
15.0
4. For trial 1, add 20.0 mL of vinegar to the
ﬂask. Have the stopwatch ready. The end of
the rubber tubing should be in place under
the water-ﬁlled test tube in the pneumatic
trough. Quickly add 1.00 g of NaHCO3 to the
ﬂask, and put in the stopper. Record the time
taken to ﬁll the tube completely with CO2.
5. Complete trials 2 to 4 with the indicated
quantities.
6. Determine the volume of CO2 you collected
by ﬁlling the gas collection test tube to the
top with water and then pouring the water
into a graduated cylinder.
Part 2  The Effect of Temperature
1. Repeat trial 3 in Part 1 using a mixture of
10 mL of water and 10 mL of vinegar that
has been cooled to about 10˚C below room
temperature in an ice bath. Measure and record
the temperature of the mixture immediately
before the reaction. Record the time taken
to ﬁll the test tube with CO2. Determine the
average rate of production of CO2 (in mL/s).
2. Use a hot-water bath to warm a mixture of
10 mL of distilled water and 10 mL of vinegar
to about 10˚C above room temperature. Repeat
trial 3 in Part 1 using this heated mixture.
Measure and record the temperature of the
vinegar-water mixture immediately before the
reaction. Record the time taken to ﬁll the test
tube with CO2. Determine the average rate of
production of CO2 (in mL/s).
Part 3  The Effect of Reactants and Surface Area
1. Repeat trial 3 in Part 1, using 1.00 g of
powdered calcium carbonate, CaCO3 ,
instead of NaHCO3. All the reactants should
be at room temperature. Record the time
taken to ﬁll the tube with CO2. Determine the
average rate of production of CO2 (in mL/s).
2. Repeat step 1, using 1.00 g of solid CaCO3
(marble chips) instead of powdered CaCO3 .
Analysis
1. Draw a graph to show your results for Part 1.
Plot average reaction rate (in mL CO2/s) on
the y-axis. Plot [CH3COOH] (in mol/L) on the
x-axis. Vinegar is 5.0% (m/v) CH3COOH.
2. As quantitatively as possible, state a
relationship between [CH3COOH] and the
average rate of the reaction.
3. Compare the average reaction rate for
corresponding concentrations of vinegar at
the three different temperatures tested.
4. What effect did a 10˚C temperature change
have on the reaction rate? Be as quantitative
as possible.
5. What effect did using CaCO3 instead of
NaHCO3 have on the reaction rate?
6. What effect did the surface area of the CaCO3
have on the reaction rate?
Conclusion
7. State the effect of each factor on the
reaction rate. Compare your results with
your prediction.
Application
8. The rate of this reaction can be expressed by
the following equation:
Rate = k[CH3COOH]m , where k is a constant
and m is usually equal to 0, 1, or 2.
What value of m do your results suggest?
Chapter 6  Rates of Chemical Reactions • MHR 275
Factors That Affect Reaction Rate
Chemists have made the following observations about factors that affect
reaction rate.  You may already be familiar with some of these observa-
tions, from your previous studies of chemical reactions and from
Investigation 6-A.
Summary of Some Factors That Affect Reaction Rate
1. The rate of a reaction can be increased by increasing the
temperature.
2. Increasing the concentrations of the reactants usually increases
the rate of the reaction.
3. A catalyst is a substance that increases the rate of a reaction.
The catalyst is regenerated at the end of the reaction and can be
re-used. You will learn more about catalysts in section 6.4.
4. Increasing the available surface area of a reactant increases the rate
of a reaction.
5. The rate of a chemical reaction depends on what the reactants are.
Chemists and engineers use these and other factors to manipulate the
rate of a particular reaction to suit their needs. For example, consider the
synthesis of ammonia, NH3, from nitrogen and hydrogen.
N2(g) + 3H2(g) → 2NH3(g)
This reaction must be carried out with high concentrations of reactants, at
a temperature of 400˚C to 500˚C, in the presence of a catalyst. Otherwise,
the rate of production of ammonia is too slow to be economically feasible.
Section Summary
In this section, you learned how to express reaction rates and how to ana-
lyze reaction rate graphs. You also learned how to determine the average
rate and instantaneous rate of a reaction, given appropriate data. Then
you examined different techniques for monitoring the rate of a reaction.
Finally, you carried out an investigation to review some of the factors that
affect reaction rate. In the next section, you will learn how to use a rate
law equation to show the quantitative relationships between reaction rate
and concentration.
Section Review
1
2
C
In your own words, explain why the rate of a chemical reaction
is fastest at the beginning of the reaction.
K/U
Show why the expression for the rate of disappearance of a
reactant is always negative, even though rates are always positive,
by convention.
3
K/U
Under what circumstances is the rate at which the concentration
of a reactant decreases numerically equal to the rate at which the
concentration of a product increases?
276 MHR • Unit 3  Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
4
In the following reaction, the rate of production of sulfate ions
I
is 1.25 × 10−3 mol/(L • s).
− + 3HSO3
2HCrO4
(a) What is the corresponding rate at which [HSO3
− + 5H+ → 2Cr3+ + 3SO4
2− + 5H2O
−] decreases over
the same time interval?
(b) What is the corresponding rate at which [HCrO4
−] decreases over the
same time interval?
5
K/U
In this section, you examined the following techniques for
monitoring the progress of a reaction. State the conditions that must
change as a reaction proceeds, to allow each technique to be used.
(a) using a pH meter
(b) using a spectrophotometer
(c) using a conductivity meter
(d) monitoring pressure
6
I
Refer to the table in the ThoughtLab on page 270. Redraw the table,
adding one column for [N2O5] and one column for [NO2].
(a) Calculate [NO2] at each time interval, based on [O2]. Assume initial
[NO2] = 0.0 mol/L.
(b) On the same set of axes, draw and label a concentration-time graph
with two curves: one for [NO2] and one for [O2].
(c) What do you notice about the shapes of the two curves?
(d) Determine the instantaneous rate at t = 1200 and t = 4800 for each
compound. How do the instantaneous rates compare?
(e) Is it possible to use the information in the table to calculate [N2O5]
at each time interval? Explain your answer.
(f) On a concentration-time graph, sketch the shape of a curve that
represents [N2O5] versus time.
7
C
For each reaction, suggest one or more techniques for monitoring
the progress of the reaction. Explain your answers.
(a) CH3CH2CH2CH2CH(cid:2)CH2((cid:2)) + Br2(aq) → CH3CH2CH2CH2CHBrCH2Br((cid:2))
Hint: Br2 is brownish-orange. The other compounds are colourless.
(b) H2O2(aq) → H2O((cid:2)) + 1
O2(g)
2
(c) CaCO3(s) + H2SO4(aq) → CaSO4(aq) + CO2(g) + H2O((cid:2))
(aq) + 5Fe3+
(d) 5Fe2+
−
(aq) + 8H+
(aq) + MnO4
(aq) → Mn2+
Hint: The permanganate ion, MnO4
species in the reaction are colourless.
(aq) + 4H2O((cid:2))
− , is purple. All the other
(e) N2(g) + 3H2(g) → 2NH3(g)
Chapter 6  Rates of Chemical Reactions • MHR 277
6.2
The Rate Law: Reactant
Concentration and Rate
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
(cid:2) express the rate of a
reaction as a rate law
equation
(cid:2) explain the concept of
half-life for a reaction
(cid:2) determine the rate
law equation and rate
constant for a reaction
from experimental data
(cid:2) communicate your under-
standing of the following
terms: rate law equation,
rate constant, overall
reaction order, ﬁrst-order
reaction, second-order
reaction, initial rates
method, half-life (t1/2)
The rate of a chemical reaction depends on several factors, as you learned
in section 6.1. One of the factors that affect reaction rate is the concentra-
tions of the reactants. You know that the rates of most chemical reactions
increase when the concentrations of the reactants increase. Is there a more
speciﬁc relationship? In this section, you will explore the quantitative
relationships between the rate of a reaction and the concentrations of the
reactants.
Relating Reactant Concentrations and Rate
Consider the general reaction below.
aA + bB → products
This reaction occurs at a constant temperature. The reactant formulas are
represented by A and B. The stoichiometric coefﬁcients are represented by
a and b. In this section, you will study reaction rates that are not affected
by the concentrations of the products. Therefore, you do not need to use
symbols for the products.
In general, the rate of a reaction increases when the concentrations of
the reactants increase. The dependence of the rate of a reaction on the
concentrations of the reactants is given by the following relationship.
Rate ∝ [A]m[B]n
This relationship can be expressed in a general equation called the
rate law equation. The rate law equation is shown in Figure 6.5. For any
reaction, the rate law equation expresses the relationship between the
concentrations of the reactants and the rate of the reaction. The letter k
represents a proportionality constant called the rate constant. There is
a different rate constant for each reaction at any given temperature.
The exponents m and n must be determined by experiment. They
do not necessarily correspond to the stoichiometric coefﬁcients of their
reactants. They are usually 1 or 2, but values of 0, 3, and even fractions
can occur.
Rate constant
Rate law exponents
(cid:2) depends on temperature
(cid:2) do not change with temperature
(cid:2) is constant under constant conditions
(cid:2) must be determined experimentally
Rate  =  k
A m B n
Concentrations of reactants
Figure 6.5
This diagram explains the components of the rate law.
278 MHR • Unit 3  Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
The values of the exponents in the rate law equation establish the
order of the reaction. If a given reactant is found to have an exponent of 1,
the reaction is said to be ﬁrst order in this reactant. Similarly, if the
exponent of a reactant is 2, the reaction is second order in this reactant.
The sum of the exponents (m + n) is known as the overall reaction order.
For example, the rate law equation below represents a reaction that is ﬁrst
order in A, second order in B, and third order (1 + 2) overall.
Rate = k[A]1[B]2
Chemists carry out experiments to determine the rate law equation for a
given reaction at a given temperature. Later in the section, you will work
with data and do this yourself. First, however, it is necessary to examine
further the rate constant and reaction order.
The Rate Constant
The magnitude of the rate constant, k, indicates the speed of a reaction.
A small rate constant indicates a slow reaction. A large rate constant
indicates a fast reaction. For example, a ﬁrst-order reaction with a rate
constant of 102 s−1 will be essentially complete in less than 0.10 s. By
contrast, a ﬁrst-order reaction with a rate constant of 10−3 s−1 will take
about 2 h.
As a reaction proceeds, the reaction rate decreases because the
concentrations of the reactants decrease. The value of the rate constant,
however, remains the same throughout the reaction. In other words, for a
given reaction under constant conditions, the value of k remains constant.
What happens if the temperature changes? Since the rate of a
chemical reaction depends on temperature, so does k. Because a chemical
reaction depends on temperature, chemists who study reaction rates
must work at constant temperature. Furthermore, the value of k must
be accompanied by the temperature at which the reaction occurred.
For example, for the second order decomposition of hydrogen iodide,
k = 2.7 × 10−3 L/(mol • s) at 440˚C. When the temperature is increased
to 500˚C, k = 3.9 × 10−3 L/(mol • s).
Deﬁning First-Order Reactions
A ﬁrst-order reaction has an overall order of 1. The decomposition of
dinitrogen pentoxide, N2O5, is an example of a ﬁrst-order reaction.
2N2O5(g) → 4NO2(g) + 5O2(g)
Experiments have shown that this reaction is ﬁrst order in N2O5. In other
words, the rate law equation is written as follows:
Rate = k[N2O5]1
Because the overall order of the reaction is one, it is a ﬁrst-order reaction.
Reactions with more than one reactant can also be ﬁrst-order
reactions. For example, consider the following reaction.
Chemists can trace the
progress of the chemical
reaction shown on the left
by monitoring its conductivity.
Explain why.
(CH3)3CBr(aq) + H2O((cid:2)) → (CH3)3OH(aq) + H+
(aq) + Br−
(aq)
Experiments have shown that the reaction is ﬁrst order in (CH3)3CBr, and
zero order in water. In other words, the rate of the reaction does not
depend, at all, on the concentration of water. The rate law equation is
written as follows:
The overall reaction order is 1 (1 + 0). The reaction is ﬁrst order.
Rate = k[(CH3)3CBr((cid:2))]1[H2O((cid:2))]0
Chapter 6  Rates of Chemical Reactions • MHR 279
You frequently encounter ﬁrst-order relationships in everyday
life. For example, if one soft drink costs $1.50, two soft drinks cost
$3.00, three cost $4.50, and so on. This ﬁrst-order relationship can be
represented by the following equation.
Cost = $1.50 (Number of soft drinks)1
Deﬁning Second-Order Reactions
A second-order reaction has an overall reaction order of 2. An example
of a second-order reaction is the decomposition of hydrogen iodide.
2HI(g) → H2(g) + I2(g)
Chemists have determined, by experiment, that this reaction is second
order in hydrogen iodide. Therefore, the rate law equation is written
as follows:
Rate = k[HI]2
Another example of a second-order reaction is the reaction between nitric
oxide and ozone.
NO(g) + O3(g) → NO2(g) + O2(g)
By experiment, chemists have determined that the reaction is ﬁrst order in
nitric oxide and ﬁrst order in ozone, as shown below:
Rate = k[NO]1[O3]1
The overall order of the reaction is 2 (1 + 1). Therefore, the reaction is a
second order reaction.
For a non-chemistry example of a second-order relationship, consider
the equation for the simple parabola, y = x2. When x = 3, y = 9.
When x = 12, the value of y increases to 122 = 144. In other words,
when the value of x increases by 4, the value of y increases by a factor
of 42 (16 × 9 = 144).
C H E M
FA C T
For the decomposition reaction
of hydrogen iodide, the value
of the exponent of [HI] in the
rate law equation is the same
as its molar coefﬁcient in the
balanced chemical equation.
This is not always the case.
The values of the exponents
in a rate law equation must
be determined by experiment.
Electronic Learning Partner
Go to the Chemistry 12
Electronic Learning Partner
for more information about
aspects of material covered
in this section of the chapter.
Other Reactions
There are also other types of reactions, besides ﬁrst-order and second-
order reactions. For example, consider the decomposition of ammonia on
a tungsten, W, catalyst.
2NH3(g)
W(s)
N2(g) + 3H2(g)
The rate law equation for this reaction has been found experimentally.
Rate = k[NH3]0 = k
The rate of decomposition of ammonia on a tungsten catalyst is
independent of the concentration of ammonia, since [NH3]0 = 1.
In other words, the rate of the reaction is a constant.
Many reactions have overall orders that are higher than 2. Some
reactions have overall orders that are fractions. In this text, however,
you will concentrate on ﬁrst-order and second-order reactions.
The Initial Rates Method
As you have learned, the values of the exponents in a rate law equation
must be determined experimentally. Chemists determine the values of
m and n by carrying out a series of experiments. Each experiment has a
different, known set of initial concentrations. All other factors, such as
temperature, remain constant. Chemists measure and compare the initial
rate of each reaction. Thus, this method is called the initial rates method.
280 MHR • Unit 3  Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
There are several reasons for using initial rates. One reason is that
chemists do not need to follow each reaction to its end. This saves time,
especially when studying slow reactions.
Rate Experiments
To see how the initial rates method works, consider the following reaction:
2N2O5(g) → 2NO2(g) + O2(g)
The general rate law equation for this reaction is given below.
Rate = k[N2O5]m
To determine the value of m, a chemist performs three experiments. A
different initial concentration of dinitrogen pentoxide, [N2O5]0, is used for
each experiment. The subscript 0 represents t = 0. Table 6.2 shows the
results of these experiments.
Table 6.2 Data for Rate Experiments
Experiment
Initial [N2O5]0 (mol/L)
1
2
3
0.010
0.020
0.030
Initial rate (mol/(L • s))
4.8 × 10−6
9.6 × 10−6
1.5 × 10−5
The value of m can be determined using at least two different methods. By
inspection, you can see that when the concentration of N2O5 is doubled
(experiments 1 and 2), the rate also doubles. When the concentration of
N2O5 is tripled (experiments 1 and 3), the rate also triples. This indicates
a ﬁrst-order relationship, as follows:
Rate = k[N2O5]1
Alternatively, you can compare the rate law equation for each experiment
using ratios. This method is useful when the relationship between
concentration and rate is not immediately obvious from the data.
Write the rate expressions for experiments 1 and 2 as follows:
Rate1 = k(0.010)m
= 4.8 × 10
−6 mol/(L • s)
Rate2 = k(0.020)m
= 9.6 × 10
−6 mol/(L • s)
Create a ratio to compare the two rates.
Rate1
Rate2
= k(0.010 mol/L)m
k(0.020 mol/L)m
= 4.8 × 10−6 mol/(L • s)
9.6 × 10−6 mol/(L • s)
Since k is a constant for reactions that occur at a constant temperature,
you can cancel out k.
k(0.010 mol/L)m
k(0.020 mol/L)m
= 4.8 × 10−6 mol/(L • s)
9.6 × 10−6 mol/(L • s)
(0.5)m = 0.5
m = 1 (by inspection)
Check your value of m by
setting up a ratio for experi-
ments 1 and 3 (or experiments
2 and 3). Solve for m, and
compare.
Chapter 6  Rates of Chemical Reactions • MHR 281
Notice that the units of the
rate constant are determined
by your calculation. For a
ﬁrst-order reaction, the units
are always s−1. Show why this
is the case. What are the units
for a second-order reaction?
Determining the Rate Constant
Once you know the rate law equation for a reaction, you can calculate the
rate constant using the results from any of the experiments. The rate law
equation for the previous rate experiments is written as follows:
Rate = k[N2O5]1
You can use data from any of the three experiments to calculate k.
Substituting data from experiment 1, you can solve for k.
4.8 × 10
−6 mol/(L • s) = k(0.010 mol/L)
k = 4.8 × 10−6 mol/(L • s)
0.010 mol/L
−1
−6s
= 4.8 × 10
Therefore, for the temperature at which the experiments were carried out,
4.8 × 10−4 s−1 is the rate constant. Using data from experiment 2 would
give the same value of k.
Sample Problem
Finding a Rate Law Equation
Problem
Chlorine dioxide, ClO2, reacts with hydroxide ions to produce a mixture
of chlorate and chlorite ions.
2ClO2(aq) + 2OH−
−
−
(aq) + H2O((cid:2))
(aq) + ClO2
(aq) → ClO3
The rate data in the table below were determined at a constant
temperature. Find the rate law equation and the value of k.
Experiment
1
2
3
Initial [ClO2] (mol/L)
0.0150
0.0150
0.0450
Initial [OH−] (mol/L)
0.0250
0.0500
0.0250
Initial rate of formation of
products (mol/(L •s))
−3
−3
−2
1.30 × 10
2.60 × 10
1.16 × 10
What Is Required?
You need to ﬁnd the value of m, n, and k in the general rate law equa-
tion for the reaction.
−
Rate = k[ClO2]m[OH
]n
What Is Given?
You know the initial concentrations of the reactants and the initial rates
for three experiments.
Plan Your Strategy
Step 1 Find two experiments in which [ClO2] remains constant and [OH−]
changes. Compare the rates and concentrations to solve for n.
Then ﬁnd two experiments in which [OH−] remains constant and
[ClO2] changes. Compare rates and concentrations to ﬁnd m.
Step 2 Use the data and your calculated values for m and n to solve
for k, using the following equation.
−
Rate = k[ClO2]m [OH
]n
282 MHR • Unit 3  Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
PROBLEM TIP
When you set up your ratio to
compare rates, it does not
matter which rate is the
numerator, and which is the
denominator. It is often easier
to see the solution, however,
if the larger rate is the
numerator.
Act on Your Strategy
Step 1 Begin with experiments 1 and 2, where [ClO2] is constant, to
determine the order of the reaction with respect to OH−.
Set up a ratio for the two rates as shown. Notice that you can
cancel out [ClO2] because you chose experiments in which [ClO2]
did not change.
Rate2
Rate1
= k(0.0150 mol/L)m (0.0150 mol/L)n
k(0.0500 mol/L)m (0.0250 mol/L)n
= 2.60 × 10−3 mol/(L • s)
1.30 × 10−3 mol/(L • s)
Because k is a constant, you can cancel it out.
k(0.0500 mol/L)n
k(0.0250 mol/L)n
= 2.60 × 10−3 mol/(L • s)
1.30 × 10−3 mol/(L • s)
(2)n = 2
n = 1 (by inspection)
Therefore, the reaction is ﬁrst order with respect to OH−.
Set up a ratio for experiments 1 and 3, in which [OH−] is
constant and [ClO2] changes. You can cancel out the [OH−]
terms right away.
Rate2
Rate1
= k(0.0450 mol/L)m (0.0250 mol/L)n
k(0.0150 mol/L)m (0.0250 mol/L)n
= 1.16 × 10−2 mol/(L • s)
1.30 × 10−3 mol/(L • s)
Since k is a constant, you can cancel it out.
= 1.16 × 10−2 mol/(L • s)
1.30 × 10−3 mol/(L • s)
k[0.0450 mol/L]m
k[0.0150 mol/L]m
(3)m = 8.92 ≈ 9
m = 2 (by inspection)
The reaction is second order with respect to ClO2.
Therefore, the rate law equation is written as follows:
−
Rate = k[ClO2]2 [OH
]
The reaction is second order in ClO2, ﬁrst order in OH−, and third
order overall.
Step 2 To ﬁnd the value of the rate constant, substitute data from any of
the three experiments into the rate law equation. Using the data
from experiment 1 gives the following equation.
1.30 × 10−3mol/(L • s) = k(0.0150 mol/L)2(0.0250 mol/L)
Solve for k.
k =
1.30 × 10−3 mol/(L • s)
(0.0150 mol/L)2 (0.0250 mol/L)
• s)
= 231 L2/(mol2
Therefore, the rate constant at the temperature of the
experiment is 231 L2/(mol2
Rate = 231 L2/(mol2
• s). The rate law equation is
• s)[CIO2]2[OH−].
Check Your Solution
To check your values of m and n, solve by inspection. When [ClO2] is
constant and [OH−] doubles, the rate also doubles and the reaction is ﬁrst
order in OH−. When [OH−] is constant and [ClO2] triples, the rate
increases by a factor of 9. Recall that 32 = 9, indicating a second-order
relationship. To check your value of k, substitute data from experiment
2 or 3. You should get the same answer. Also check the units and the
number of signiﬁcant digits for k.
Chapter 6  Rates of Chemical Reactions • MHR 283
Practice Problems
5. When heated, ethylene oxide decomposes to produce methane and
carbon monoxide.
C2H4O(g) → CH4(g) + CO(g)
At 415˚C, the following initial rate data were recorded.
Experiment
[C2H4O]0 (mol/L)
1
2
3
0.002 85
0.004 28
0.005 70
Initial rate (mol/(L • s))
5.84 × 10−7
8.76 × 10−7
1.17 × 10−6
Determine the rate law equation and the rate constant at 415˚C.
6. Iodine chloride reacts with hydrogen to produce iodine and hydrogen
chloride.
2ICl + H2 → I2 + 2HCl
At temperature T, the following initial rate data were recorded.
Experiment
[ICI]0 (mol/L)
[H2]0 (mol/L)
Initial rate (mol/(L • s))
1
2
3
0.20
0.40
0.20
0.050
0.050
0.200
0.0015
0.0030
0.0060
Determine the rate law equation and the rate constant at temperature T.
7. Sulfuryl chloride (also known as chlorosulfuric acid and thionyl
chloride), SO2Cl2, is used in a variety of applications, including the
synthesis of pharmaceuticals, rubber-based plastics, dyestuff, and
rayon. At a certain temperature, the rate of decomposition of sulfuryl
chloride was studied.
SO2Cl2(g) → SO2(g) + Cl2(g)
[SO2Cl2] (mol/L)
0.150
0.300
0.450
Initial rate (mol/(L • s))
3.3 × 10−6
6.6 × 10−6
9.9 × 10−6
(a) Write the rate law equation for the decomposition of sulfuryl
chloride.
(b) Determine the rate constant, k, for the reaction, with the
appropriate units.
8. Consider the following reaction.
2A + 3B + C → products
This reaction was found to obey the following rate law equation.
Rate = k[A]2 [B][C]
Copy the following table into your notebook. Then use the given
information to predict the blank values. Do not write in this textbook.
Experiment
Initial [A]
(mol/L)
Initial [B]
(mol/L)
Initial [C]
(mol/L)
Initial rate
(mol/(L • s))
1
2
3
4
5
0.10
0.10
0.20
(c)
0.10
0.20
(a)
0.050
0.025
0.010
0.050
0.10
(b)
0.040
0.15
0.40
0.40
0.20
0.45
(d)
284 MHR • Unit 3  Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
The Half-Life of a Reaction
You have seen that a large rate constant indicates a fast reaction, while
a small rate constant indicates a slow reaction. It is not always easy,
however, to determine how long a reaction will take to be completed
just by looking at the value of k. How can you relate the speed of a
reaction to the units of s−1 for a ﬁrst-order reaction?
The half-life, t1/2, of a reaction is the time that is needed for the
reactant mass or concentration to decrease by one half of its initial
value. The SI units for half-life are seconds. Usually, however, half-life
is expressed in whatever units of time are appropriate to the reaction.
For example, the half-life of a very fast reaction may be measured in
microseconds. The half-life of a slow reaction may be measured in days.
Knowing the half-life of a reaction is an easy way to tell how fast or how
slow a reaction is.
Examine Figure 6.6 to see how half-life and reactant concentration are
related for the ﬁrst-order decomposition of dinitrogen pentoxide.
t0
After t 1/2
After 2t 1/2
After 3t 1/2
t 1/2
t 1/2
t 1/2
24
48
Time (min)
72
Math
L I N K
]
5
O
2
N
[
0.0600
0.0500
0.0400
0.0300
0.0200
0.0100
0.0000
0
This graph shows [N2O5] versus time for the ﬁrst three half-lives of the
Figure 6.6
decomposition reaction of N2O5 at 44˚C . The spheres in the cubes represent [ N2O5].
The half-life of any ﬁrst-order reaction is always a constant, and it
depends on k. In other words, any ﬁrst-order reaction (that is, any reaction
with a rate law equation in the form Rate = k[A]) has a half-life that is
independent of the initial concentration of the reactant, A. The half-life
of any ﬁrst-order reaction can be calculated using the following equation.
t1/2 = 0.693
k
In this equation, k is the ﬁrst-order rate constant. It has units of s−1.
Examine the Sample Problem on the next page to learn how to calcu-
late the half-life of a ﬁrst-order reaction. Then try the Practice Problems
that follow.
Where does the equation
for half-life come from? Each
rate law has an associated
integrated rate law. (A calculus
teacher may be able to show
you how to arrive at the
integrated rate law.) For
ﬁrst-order reactions, the
integrated rate law is
(cid:2)
ln
(cid:3)
[A]0
[A]t
= kt, where A is
= 1
2
[A]0 for all ﬁrst-order
a reactant. Show that
[A]t1/2
reactions. Then use the
integrated rate law to arrive
at the equation for half-life.
Chapter 6  Rates of Chemical Reactions • MHR 285
Sample Problem
Calculating the Half-Life of a First-Order Reaction
Problem
The decomposition of sulfuryl chloride, SO2Cl2, is a ﬁrst-order reaction.
SO2Cl2(g) → SO2(g) + Cl2(g)
Rate = k[SO2Cl2]
At 320˚C, the rate constant is 2.2 × 10−5 s−1 .
(a) Calculate the half-life of the reaction, in hours.
(b) How long does the sulfuryl chloride take to decrease to  1
8
of its
original concentration?
What Is Required?
(a) You need to ﬁnd the half-life, t1/2, of the reaction.
(b) You need to ﬁnd the time required for [SO2Cl2] to decrease to  1
8
initial value, [SO2Cl2]0.
of its
What Is Given?
You know the rate equation and the rate constant.
Rate = k[SO2Cl2]
−1
k = 2.2 × 10
−5 s
Plan Your Strategy
(a) To ﬁnd t1/2, use the following equation.
t1/2 = 0.693
k
(b) Each half-life reduces the initial concentration of the reactant,
[A]0, by one half.
After 1 t1/2, [A] = 1
2
After 2 t1/2, [A] = 1
2
= 1
4
After 3 t1/2, [A] = 1
2
= 1
8
[A]0
× (
1
2
[A]0
× (
1
4
[A]0
[A]0)
[A]0)
The concentration of reactant remaining after 3 half-lives is  1
8
( 1
2
)3, of the original amount.
, or
Act on Your Strategy
(a) Solve for t1/2.
t1/2 =
0.693
2.2 × 10−5 s−1
= 3.2 × 104 s
Convert the units of your answer to hours.
t1/2 =
3.2 × 104 s
(60 s/min)(60 min/h)
= 8.8 h
The half-life of the reaction, in hours, is 8.8 h.
PROBLEM TIP
In general, the concentration
of reactant that is left after n
half-lives have passed, [A]t ,
can be expressed as follows.
)n × [A]0
[A]t = x[A]0 = ( 1
2
286 MHR • Unit 3  Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
(b) Determine how many half-lives correspond to  1
8
× [SO2Cl2]0.
1
8
× [SO2Cl2]0 = (
)n × [SO2Cl2]0
1
2
1
2
)n
= (
1
8
n = 3 (by inspection)
Determine the time span that corresponds to 3 half-lives.
3 × 8.8 h = 26 h
It would take 26 h for the concentration of SO2Cl2 to decrease
to
[SO2Cl2]0.
1
8
Check Your Solution
The units and signiﬁcant digits for half-life are correct. The small
rate constant of 2.2 × 10−5 corresponds to a slow reaction with a long
of the initial
half-life. Three half-lives corresponds to
concentration.
= 1
8
× 1
2
× 1
2
1
2
Practice Problems
9. Cyclopropane, C3H6, has a three-membered hydrocarbon ring
structure. It undergoes rearrangement to propene. At 1000˚C, the
ﬁrst-order rate constant for the decomposition of cyclopropane is
9.2 s−1.
(a) Determine the half-life of the reaction.
(b) What percent of the original concentration of cyclopropane
will remain after 4 half-lives?
10. Peroxyacetyl nitrate (PAN), H3CCO2ONO2, is a constituent of
photochemical smog. It undergoes a ﬁrst-order decomposition
reaction with t1/2 = 32 min.
(a) Calculate the rate constant in s−1 for the ﬁrst-order decomposition
of PAN.
(b) 128 min after a sample of PAN began to decompose, the
concentration of PAN in the air is 3.1 × 1013 molecules/L. What
was the concentration of PAN when the decomposition began?
11. In general, a reaction is essentially over after 10 half-lives. Prove that
this generalization is reasonable.
12. The half-life of a certain ﬁrst-order reaction is 120 s. How long do you
estimate that it will take for 90% of the original sample to react?
Section Summary
In this section, you learned how to relate the rate of a chemical reaction
to the concentrations of the reactants using the rate law. You classiﬁed reac-
tions based on their reaction order. You determined the rate law equation
from empirical data. Then you learned about the half-life of a ﬁrst-order
reaction. As you worked through sections 6.1 and 6.2, you may have won-
dered why factors such as concentration and temperature affect the rates
of chemical reactions. In the following section, you will learn about some
theories that have been developed to explain the effects of these factors.
Chapter 6  Rates of Chemical Reactions • MHR 287
Section Review
1
2
3
4
5
The following reaction is second order in A and ﬁrst order in B.
K/U
2A + 1B → 3C
What is the rate law equation for the reaction below?
(Assume that A, B, and C are the same compounds for each reaction.)
4A + 2B → 6C
Consider the general reaction below.
K/U
aA + bB → cC + dD
Based on this equation, is it correct to write the following rate law
equation by inspection? Explain your answer.
Rate = k[A]a[B]b
Consider the following rate law equation.
K/U
Rate = k[A]2[B]
(a) How does the reaction rate change if [A] decreases by a factor
of 2 and [B] increases by a factor of 4?
(b) How does the reaction rate change if [A] and [B] are doubled?
Consider the following rate law equation.
K/U
−]2[H+]
Rate = k[HCrO4
(a) What is the order with respect to each reactant?
−][HSO3
(b) What is the overall reaction order?
(c) What are the units for the rate constant?
The data in the table below were collected for the following reaction.
I
A + B → C + D
Experiment
[A]0  (mol/L)
[B]0 (mol/L)
1
2
3
0.020
0.040
0.040
0.020
0.020
0.060
Initial rate (mol/(L • s))
5.0 × 10−3
1.0 × 10−2
9.0 × 10−2
(a) What is the rate law equation for the reaction?
(b) Calculate the value of the rate constant, with proper units.
6
I
The data in the table below were collected, at 25˚C, for the
following reaction.
2A + B + 2C → 3D
Determine the rate law equation and the value of k at 25˚C, with
proper units.
Experiment
[A]0 (mol/L)
[B]0 (mol/L)
[C]0 (mol/L)
1
2
3
4
0.20
0.20
0.20
0.60
0.10
0.30
0.10
0.30
0.10
0.20
0.30
0.40
Initial rate (mol/(L • s))
4.0 × 10−4
1.2 × 10−3
4.0 × 10−4
3.6 × 10−3
7
A ﬁrst-order decomposition reaction has a rate constant of
I
2.34 × 10−2 year−1. What is the half-life of the reaction? Express
your answer in years and in seconds.
288 MHR • Unit 3  Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
Theories of Reaction Rates
In section 6.2, you explored the rate law, which deﬁnes the relationship
between the concentrations of reactants and reaction rate. Why, however,
does the rate of a reaction increase with increased concentrations of
reactants? Why do increased temperature and surface area increase
reaction rates? To try to explain these and other macroscopic observations,
chemists develop theories that describe what happens as reactions proceed
on the molecular scale. In this section, you will explore these theories.
Collision Theory
Why do factors such as temperature and concentration increase or
decrease the rate of a reaction? To answer this question, chemists must
ﬁrst answer another question: What causes a reaction to occur? One
obvious answer is that a reaction occurs when two reactant particles
collide with one another. This answer is the basis for collision theory: In
order for a reaction to occur, reacting particles (atoms, molecules, or ions)
must collide with one another.
The Effect of Concentration on Reactant Rates
You can use simple collision theory to begin to understand why factors
such as concentration affect reaction rate. If a collision is necessary for a
reaction to occur, then it makes sense that the rate of the reaction will
increase if there are more collisions per unit time. More reactant particles
in a given volume (that is, greater concentration) will increase the number
of collisions between the particles per second. Figure 6.7 illustrates
this idea.
6.3
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
(cid:2) explain, using the collision
theory and potential energy
diagrams, how different
factors, such as temperature
and concentration, control
the rate of a chemical
reaction
(cid:2) analyze simple potential
energy diagrams of chemical
reactions
(cid:2) communicate your under-
standing of the following
terms: collision theory,
activation energy (Ea),
transition state theory,
potential energy diagram,
transition state, activated
complex
Electronic Learning Partner
Go to the Chemistry 12
Electronic Learning Partner
for more information about
aspects of material covered
in this section of the chapter.
Figure 6.7
collisions per second.
At increased reactant concentrations, there is an increased number of
Collision Theory and Surface Area
You can also use simple collision theory to explain why increasing the
surface area of a solid-phase reactant speeds up a reaction. With greater
surface area, more collisions can occur. This explains why campﬁres are
started with paper and small twigs, rather than logs. Figure 6.8 shows an
example of the effect of surface area on collision rate.
Mixtures of grain or
Figure 6.8
coal dust and air are potentially
explosive, as shown in this grain
elevator explosion.
Chapter 6  Rates of Chemical Reactions • MHR 289
Beyond Collision Theory
Simple collision theory recognizes that a collision between reactants
is necessary for a reaction to proceed. Does every collision result in a
reaction? Consider a 1 mL sample of gas at room temperature and
atmospheric pressure. In the sample, about 1028 collisions per second take
place between gas molecules. If each collision resulted in a reaction, all
gas phase reactions would be complete in about a nanosecond (10−9 s)— a
truly explosive rate! As you know from section 6.2, however, gas phase
reactions can occur quite slowly. This suggests that not every collision
between reactants results in a reaction.
In order for a collision between reactants to result in a reaction, the
collision must be effective. An effective collision— one that results in the
formation of products—must satisfy the following two criteria. You will
investigate these criteria over the next few pages.
For a collision to be effective, it must satisfy both of these criteria:
1. correct orientation of reactants
2. sufﬁcient collision energy
Orientation of Reactants
Reacting particles must collide with the proper orientation relative to
one another. This is also known as having the correct collision geometry.
The importance of proper collision geometry can be illustrated by the
following reaction.
NO(g) + NO3(g) → NO2(g) + NO2(g)
Figure 6.9 shows ﬁve of the many possible ways in which NO and NO3
can collide. Only one of these ﬁve possibilities has the correct collision
geometry for a reaction to occur. As shown in the ﬁgure, only a certain
orientation of reactants prior to collision leads to the formation of two
molecules of nitrogen dioxide.
Activation Energy
In addition to collision geometry, there is a second factor that determines
whether a collision will result in a reaction: the energy of the collision.
The reactants must collide with energy that is sufﬁcient to begin to break
the bonds in the reactants and to begin to form the bonds in the products.
In most reactions, only a small fraction of collisions have sufﬁcient
energy for a reaction to occur. The activation energy, Ea, of a reaction is
the minimum collision energy that is required for a successful reaction.
The collision energy depends on the kinetic energy of the colliding
particles. As you know, temperature is a measure of the average kinetic
energy of the particles in a substance. If you plot the number of collisions
in a substance at a given temperature against the kinetic energy of
each collision, you get a curve like the one in Figure 6.10. The type of
distribution that is shown by this curve is known as a Maxwell-Boltzmann
distribution. The dotted line indicates the activation energy. The shaded
part of the graph indicates the collisions with energy that is equal to or
greater than the activation energy.
How does the distribution of kinetic energy change as the temperature
of a substance increases? Figure 6.11 shows the distribution of kinetic
ineffective
ineffective
ineffective
ineffective
effective
Only one of these ﬁve
Figure 6.9
possible orientations of NO and
NO3 will lead to the formation of a
product.
s
n
o
i
s
i
l
l
o
c
f
o
n
o
i
t
c
a
r
F
Ea
Energy
The area under a
Figure 6.10
Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution
graph represents the distribution of
the kinetic energy of collisions at a
constant temperature. At a given
temperature, only a certain fraction
of the molecules in a sample have
enough kinetic energy to react.
290 MHR • Unit 3  Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
energy in a sample of reacting gases at two different temperatures,
T1 and T2, where T2 > T1. The activation energy is indicated by the
dashed vertical line. Two observations are apparent from the graph:
1. At both temperatures, a relatively small fraction of collisions have
sufﬁcient kinetic energy—the activation energy—to result in a reaction.
2. As the temperature of a sample increases, the fraction of collisions
with sufﬁcient energy to cause a reaction increases signiﬁcantly.
Electronic Learning Partner
Go to the Chemistry 12
Electronic Learning Partner
to learn more about collision
geometry.
At increased
Figure 6.11
temperatures, more particles
collide with enough energy
to react.
Ea
greater fraction
at T2 with enough
energy to react
s
n
o
i
s
i
l
l
o
c
f
o
n
o
i
t
c
a
r
F
T1
T2  > T1
Energy
For many reactions, the rate roughly doubles for every 10˚C rise in
temperature.
Transition State Theory
Transition state theory is used to explain what happens when molecules
collide in a reaction. It examines the transition, or change, from reactants
to products. The kinetic energy of the reactants is transferred to potential
energy as the reactants collide, due to the law of conservation of energy.
This is analogous to a bouncing basketball. The kinetic energy of the ball
is converted to potential energy, which is stored in the deformed ball as it
hits the ﬂoor. The potential energy is converted to kinetic energy as the
ball bounces away.
You can represent the increase in potential energy during a chemical
reaction using a potential energy diagram: a diagram that charts the
potential energy of a reaction against the progress of the reaction.
Examples of potential energy diagrams are shown in Figures 6.12 and 6.13
on the next page. The y-axis represents potential energy. The x-axis,
labelled “Reaction progress,” represents the progress of the reaction
through time.
The “hill” in each diagram illustrates the activation energy barrier
of the reaction. A slow reaction has a high activation energy barrier. This
indicates that relatively few reactants have sufﬁcient kinetic energy for
a successful reaction. A fast reaction, by contrast, has a low activation
energy barrier.
A potential energy diagram for an exothermic reaction is shown in
Figure 6.12. The reactants at the beginning of the reaction are at a higher
energy level than the products. The overall difference in potential energy
is the enthalpy change, ∆H. There is no way to predict the activation
energy of a reaction from its enthalpy change. A highly exothermic reac-
tion may be very slow because it has a high activation energy. Conversely,
a reaction that is very fast may release very little heat. The enthalpy
change of a reaction is determined by ﬁnding the overall energy that is
Chapter 6  Rates of Chemical Reactions • MHR 291
transferred. The activation energy of a reaction is determined by analyzing
the reaction rate.
A potential energy diagram for an endothermic reaction is shown in
Figure 6.13. The reactants at the beginning of the reaction are at a lower
energy level than the products. The overall difference in potential energy
between reactants and products is the enthalpy change.
transition state
transition state
reactants
Ea(fwd)
∆H
y
g
r
e
n
e
l
a
i
t
n
e
t
o
P
y
g
r
e
n
e
l
a
i
t
n
e
t
o
P
reactants
Ea(rev)
products
Ea(rev)
Ea(fwd)
products
∆H
Reaction progress
Reaction progress
Figure 6.12
for an exothermic reaction
A potential energy diagram
Figure 6.13
diagram for an endothermic reaction
A potential energy
You may already know that many reactions can proceed in two directions.
For example, hydrogen and oxygen react to form water. Water, however,
can also undergo electrolysis, forming hydrogen and oxygen. This is the
reverse of the ﬁrst reaction.
H2(g) + 1
2
H2O((cid:2)) → H2(g) + 1
2
O2(g) → H2O((cid:2)) ∆H˚ = −285.8 kJ
O2((cid:2))
∆H˚ = 285.8 kJ
The enthalpy change of the ﬁrst reaction is the same as the enthalpy
change of the second reaction, with the opposite sign. (You can show
this using Hess’s law.) How are the activation energies of forward and
reverse reactions related? For an exothermic reaction, the activation
energy of the reverse reaction, Ea(rev) equals Ea(fwd) + ∆H. For an endo-
thermic reaction, Ea(rev) equals Ea(fwd) − ∆H. Figures 6.12 and 6.13 show
the activation energies of forward and reverse reactions.
The top of the activation energy barrier on a potential energy diagram
represents the transition state, or change-over point, of the reaction. The
chemical species that exists at the transition state is referred to as the
activated complex. The activated complex is a transitional species that is
neither product nor reactant. It has partial bonds and is highly unstable.
There is a subtle difference between the transition state and the activated
complex. The transition state refers to the top of the “hill” on a potential
energy diagram. The chemical species that exists at this transition point is
called the activated complex.
Tracing a Reaction With a Potential Energy Diagram
Consider the substitution reaction between a hydroxide, OH−, ion and
methyl bromide, BrCH3. Methanol, CH3OH, and a bromide, Br−, ion
are formed.
BrCH3 + OH− → CH3OH + Br−
Figure 6.14 is a potential energy diagram for this reaction. It includes
several “snapshots” as the reaction proceeds.
292 MHR • Unit 3  Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
H
Br
C
−
1
OH
H
H
C
Br
OH
Br
H
C
H
OH
Br
C OH
H
C
OH
−
+
Br
H
H
reactants
H H
before transition state
HH
activated complex
H
H
after transition state
H
products
y
g
r
e
n
E
Ea(fwd)
Ea(rev)
BrCH3 + OH
−
∆Hrxn
Reaction progress
Br− + CH3OH
Figure 6.14
As the reactants collide, chemical bonds break and form.
For a successful reaction to take place, BrCH3 and OH− must collide in a
favourable orientation. The OH− ion must approach BrCH3 from the side
that is opposite to the Br atom. When this occurs, a partial bond is formed
between the O of the OH− ion and the C atom. Simultaneously, the C(cid:3)Br
bond is weakened.
Because the activated complex contains partial bonds, it is highly
unstable. It can either break down to form products or it can decompose
to re-form the reactants. The activated complex is like a rock teetering on
top of a mountain. It could fall either way.
Sample Problem
Drawing a Potential Energy Diagram
Problem
Carbon monoxide, CO, reacts with nitrogen dioxide, NO2. Carbon
dioxide, CO2, and nitric oxide, NO, are formed. Draw a potential energy
diagram to illustrate the progress of the reaction. (You do not need to
draw your diagram to scale). Label the axes, the transition state, and the
activated complex. Indicate the activation energy of the forward reaction,
Ea(fwd) = 134 kJ, as well as ∆H = −226 kJ . Calculate the activation energy
of the reverse reaction, Ea(rev), and show it on the graph.
Continued ...
Chapter 6  Rates of Chemical Reactions • MHR 293
Continued ...
Solution
Since Ea(rev) = ∆H + Ea(fwd)
Ea(rev) = 226 kJ + 134 kJ
= 360 kJ
The activation energy of the reverse reaction is 360 kJ.
OC…O…NO
transition state
∆H = −226 kJ
Ea(fwd) = 134 kJ
reactants
CO(g) + NO2(g)
J
k
,
y
g
r
e
n
e
l
a
i
t
n
e
t
o
P
Ea(rev) = 360 kJ
products
CO2(g) + NO(g)
reaction progress
Check Your Solution
Look carefully at the potential energy diagram. Check that you have
labelled it completely. Since the forward reaction is exothermic, the
reactants should be at a higher energy level than the products, and they
are. The value of Ea(rev) is reasonable.
Practice Problems
13. The following reaction is exothermic.
2ClO(g) → Cl2(g) + O2(g)
Draw and label a potential energy diagram for the reaction. Propose a
reasonable activated complex.
14. Consider the following reaction.
AB + C → AC + B ∆H = +65 kJ, Ea(rev) = 34 kJ
Draw and label a potential energy diagram for this reaction.
Calculate and label Ea(fwd). Include a possible structure for the
activated complex.
15. Consider the reaction below.
C + D → CD ∆H = −132 kJ , Ea(fwd) = 61 kJ
Draw and label a potential energy diagram for this reaction. Calculate
and label Ea(rev). Include a possible structure for the activated complex.
16. In the upper atmosphere, oxygen exists in forms other than O2(g).
For example, it exists as ozone, O3(g), and as single oxygen atoms, O(g).
Ozone and atomic oxygen react to form two molecules of oxygen.
For this reaction, the enthalpy change is −392 kJ and the activation
energy is 19 kJ. Draw and label a potential energy diagram. Include
a value for Ea(rev). Propose a structure for the activated complex.
294 MHR • Unit 3  Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
Temperature Dependence of Reaction Rates: Applications
As you saw in Figure 6.11, when reactions occur at higher temperatures,
the percent of particles that have sufﬁcient kinetic energy to react (Ea)
increases. Since a greater percent of reactant particles have enough energy
to react, the rate of the reaction increases.
Chemists exploit the temperature dependence of reaction rates by
carrying out chemical reactions at elevated temperatures to speed them
up. In organic chemistry, especially, reactions are commonly performed
under reﬂux: that is, while boiling the reactants. To prevent reactants and
products from escaping as gases, a water-cooled condenser tube is ﬁtted to
the reaction vessel. The tube condenses the vapours to liquids and returns
them to the reaction vessel. Figure 6.15 shows an experiment performed
under reﬂux.
At home, you take advantage of the temperature dependence of
chemical reactions all the time. For example, to keep your food fresh,
you store it in a refrigerator. If you have ever left milk or vegetables in
the refrigerator for several weeks, however, you have probably observed
that refrigeration does not stop food from spoiling. Instead, it decreases
the rate of the reactions that cause spoilage. When you want to cook your
food quickly, you increase the temperature of the stove. This increases
the rate of the reactions that take place as the food cooks.
Web
L I N K
www.mcgrawhill.ca/links/
chemistry12
The chirping rate of a cricket
is dependent on temperature,
much like chemical reaction
rates are. Why does this
suggest that a cricket is a
cold-blooded creature?
Search the Internet to
determine the mathematical
relationship between ambient
temperature and the chirping
rate of a cricket. Start your
search by going to the web
site above and clicking on
Web Links.
clamp
substances
condense
on inside of tube
clamp
clamp
condenser tube
water out
cold water in
vapours rise
reaction vessel
boiling chips
heater
As the reactants are boiled under reﬂux, the vapours
Figure 6.15
condense and are returned to the reaction vessel. In this way, a chemical
reaction can be carried out at the boiling point of the reactants at
atmospheric pressure, with no loss of reactants, products, or solvent.
Chapter 6  Rates of Chemical Reactions • MHR 295
Section Summary
In this section, you used collision theory and transition state theory to
explain how reaction rates are affected by various factors. You considered
simple reactions, consisting of a single-step collision between reactants.
Not all reactions are simple, however. In fact, most chemical reactions
take place via several steps, occurring in sequence. In the next section,
you will learn about the steps that make up reactions and discover how
these steps relate to reaction rates.
Section Review
1
2
3
K/U
In your own words, describe how collision theory explains
that increased concentrations result in increased reaction rates.
I
Suppose that you have a solid sample of an organic substance.
You are going to burn the substance in an analytical furnace and
determine whether or not any unburned matter remains. The substance
is somewhat hard, and you receive it in a solid chunk.
(a) Suggest two ways to increase the rate of burning so that your
analysis will take less time.
(b) Explain why your suggestions would work, using the theories you
learned in this section.
Consider the following reaction.
K/U
A2 + B2 → 2AB Ea(fwd) = 143 kJ, Ea(rev) = 75 kJ
(a) Is the reaction endothermic or exothermic in the forward direction?
(b) Draw and label a potential energy diagram. Include a value for ∆H.
(c) Suggest a possible activated complex.
4
C
Consider two exothermic reactions. Reaction (1) has a much
smaller activation energy than reaction (2).
(a) Sketch a potential energy diagram for each reaction, showing how
the difference in activation energy affects the shape of the graph.
(b) How do you think the rates of reactions (1) and (2) compare?
Explain your answer.
5
C
Your friend is confused about the difference between the enthalpy
change and the activation energy of a chemical reaction. Write a few
paragraphs, in which you deﬁne each term and distinguish between
them. Use potential energy diagrams to illustrate your answer.
6
MC
In a coal-ﬁred electric generating plant, the coal is pulverized
before being mixed with air in the incinerator. Use collision theory
to explain why the coal is pulverized.
7
C
People who have been submerged in very cold water, and
presumed drowned, have sometimes been revived. By contrast, people
who have been submerged for a similar period of time in warmer water
have not survived. Suggest reasons for this difference.
8
C
Create a graphic organizer to summarize how the theories
you have studied in section 6.3 explain the effects of concentration,
temperature, and surface area on reaction rates.
296 MHR • Unit 3  Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
Reaction Mechanisms
and Catalysts
Chemical reactions are like factories, where goods (products) are created
from raw materials (reactants). An assembly line, like the one shown in
Figure 6.16, involves many steps. An automobile is not formed from its
components in just one step. Similarly, most chemical reactions do not
proceed immediately from products to reactants. They take place via a
number of steps. While you can go inside a factory to see all the steps that
are involved in making an automobile or a piece of clothing, you cannot
observe a chemical equation on a molecular scale as it proceeds. Chemists
can experimentally determine the reactants and products of a reaction, but
they must use indirect evidence to suggest the steps in-between.
Elementary Reactions
A reaction mechanism is a series of steps that make up an overall reaction.
Each step, called an elementary reaction, involves a single molecular
event, such as a simple collision between atoms, molecules, or ions.
An elementary step can involve the formation of different molecules or
ions, or it may involve a change in the energy or geometry of the starting
molecules. It cannot be broken down into further, simpler steps.
For example, consider the following reaction.
2NO(g) + O2(g) → 2NO2(g)
Chemists have proposed the following two-step mechanism for this
reaction. Each step is an elementary reaction.
Step 1 NO(g) + O2(g) → NO3(g)
Step 2 NO3(g) + NO(g) → 2NO2(g)
When you add the two elementary reactions, you get the overall reaction.
Notice that NO3 is present in both elementary reactions, but it is not pres-
ent in the overall reaction. It is produced in the ﬁrst step and consumed
in the second step.
Molecules (or atoms or ions) that are formed in an elementary reaction
and consumed in a subsequent elementary reaction are called reaction
intermediates. Even though they are not products or reactants in the over-
all reaction, reaction intermediates are essential for the reaction to take
place. They are also useful for chemists
who are trying to ﬁnd evidence to support a proposed reaction mecha-
nism. You will explore this idea in Investigation 6-B.
The Molecularity of Elementary Reactions
The term molecularity refers to the number of reactant particles (mole-
cules, atoms, or ions) that are involved in an elementary
reaction.
In the reaction mechanism you just saw, each elementary
reaction consisted of two molecules colliding and reacting. When two par-
ticles collide and react, the elementary reaction is said to
be bimolecular.
6.4
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
(cid:2) demonstrate an under-
standing that most reactions
occur as a series of
elementary reactions in
a reaction mechanism
(cid:2) evaluate a proposed
mechanism for a
chemical reaction
(cid:2) determine, through
experiment, the reaction
rate and rate law equation
for a chemical reaction
(cid:2) communicate your
understanding of the follow-
ing terms: reaction mecha-
nism, elementary reaction,
reaction intermediates,
molecularity, bimolecular,
unimolecular, termolecular,
rate-determining step,
homogeneous catalyst,
heterogeneous catalyst,
enzymes, active site,
substrate
Like most chemical
Figure 6.16
reactions, building a car on an
assembly line takes more than
one step.
Chapter 6  Rates of Chemical Reactions • MHR 297
unimolecular
bimolecular
termolecular
This ﬁgure shows
Figure 6.17
the molecularity of elementary
reactions. Termolecular reactions
are rare.
A unimolecular elementary reaction occurs when one molecule or
ion reacts. For example, when one molecule of chlorine absorbs ultraviolet
light, the Cl(cid:3)Cl bond breaks. The product is two chlorine atoms.
UV light
Cl2(g)
2Cl(g)
An elementary reaction may also involve three particles colliding in a
termolecular reaction. Termolecular elementary steps are rare, because
it is unlikely that three particles will collide all at once. Think of it this
way. You have probably bumped into someone accidentally, many times,
on the street or in a crowded hallway. How many times, however, have
you and two other people collided at exactly the same time? Figure 6.17
models unimolecular, bimolecular, and termolecular reactions.
Rate Law Equations for Elementary Reactions
In section 6.2, you learned that the rate law equation for a chemical
reaction cannot be determined just by looking at the chemical equation.
It must be found by experiment. Elementary reactions are the exception
to this rule. For an elementary reaction, the exponents in the rate law
equation are the same as the stoichiometric coefﬁcients for each reactant
in the chemical equation. Table 6.3 shows how rate laws correspond to
elementary reactions.
Table 6.3 Elementary Reactions and Their Rate Laws
Elementary reaction
A → products
A + B → products
2A → products
2A + B → products
Rate law
Rate = k[A]
Rate = k[A][B]
Rate = k[A]2
Rate = k[A]2[B]
Proposing and Evaluating Mechanisms
You can take apart a grandfather clock to take a look at its mechanism.
You can physically examine and take apart its gears and springs to deter-
mine how it works.
When chemists investigate the mechanism of a reaction, they are
not so lucky. Determining the mechanism of a chemical reaction is a bit
like ﬁguring out how a clock works just by looking at its face and hands.
For this reason, reaction mechanisms are proposed rather than deﬁnitively
stated. Much of the experimental evidence that is obtained to support
a mechanism is indirect. Researchers need a lot of creativity as they
propose and test mechanisms.
One of the ways that researchers provide evidence for proposed
mechanisms is by proving the existence of a reaction intermediate.
Although a reaction intermediate usually appears for a very short time
and cannot be isolated, there are other ways to show its presence. For
example, if a reaction intermediate is coloured while other reactants are
colourless, a spectrophotometer will show when the reaction intermediate
is formed. You may even be able to see a ﬂeeting colour change without
a spectrophotometer.
298 MHR • Unit 3  Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
When chemists propose a mechanism, they must satisfy the
following criteria:
• The equations for the elementary steps must combine to give the
equation for the overall reaction.
• The proposed elementary steps must be reasonable.
• The mechanism must support the experimentally determined rate law.
The Rate-Determining Step
How do chemists determine whether a proposed mechanism supports the
experimentally determined rate law? They must consider how the rates of
the elementary reactions relate to the rate of the overall reaction.
Elementary reactions in mechanisms all have different rates. Usually one
elementary reaction, called the rate-determining step, is much slower.
Hence, it determines the overall rate.
To understand the rate-determining step, consider a two-step process.
Suppose that you and a friend are making buttered toast for a large group
of people. The ﬁrst step is toasting the bread. The second step is buttering
the toast. Suppose that toasting two slices of bread takes about two
minutes, but buttering the toast takes only a few seconds.
The rate at which the toast is buttered does not have any effect on
the overall rate of making buttered toast, because it is much faster than
the rate at which the bread is toasted. The overall rate of making buttered
toast, therefore, depends only on the rate of toasting the bread. In other
words, two pieces of buttered toast will be ready every two minutes. This
is the same as the rate for the ﬁrst step in the “buttered toast mechanism.”
Thus, toasting the bread is the rate-determining step in the mechanism.
Step 1 Bread → Toast
Step 2 Toast + Butter → Buttered toast
Now suppose that the butter is frozen nearly solid. It takes you about ﬁve
minutes to scrape off enough butter for one piece of toast. Pieces of toast
pile up, waiting to be buttered. In this case, the rate of making buttered
toast depends on the rate of spreading the butter. The rate of toasting is
fast relative to the rate of buttering.
Step 1 Bread → Toast
Step 2 Toast + Frozen butter → Buttered toast
(slow, rate-determining)
(slow, rate-determining)
(fast)
(fast)
The Rate-Determining Step and the Rate Law
How does the rate-determining step relate to the rate law for the overall
equation? Consider the reaction of nitrogen dioxide with chlorine.
2NO2(g) + Cl2(g) → 2NO2Cl(g)
Experiments show that this reaction has the following rate equation.
Rate = k[NO2][Cl2]
The proposed mechanism for the reaction is shown below.
Step 1 NO2(g) + Cl2(g) → NO2Cl(g) + Cl(g)
Step 2 NO2(g) + Cl(g) → NO2Cl(g)
The mechanism seems reasonable, because the steps add up to give the
overall reaction. Both steps are plausible, because they are bimolecular
elementary reactions. Does the reaction mechanism support, however, the
experimentally determined rate law?
(slow)
(fast)
Chapter 6  Rates of Chemical Reactions • MHR 299
C H E M
FA C T
Rate-determining steps can
occur anywhere in a reaction
mechanism. If a slow step is
not the ﬁrst step of the mecha-
nism, however, the overall rate
law is more complicated to
determine. One reason is that
fast reactions occurring early
in a mechanism are often
reversible—both the forward
and reverse reactions take
place. (You will learn more
about these reactions in Unit 4.)
The ﬁrst step in the mechanism is slow when compared with the
second step. Therefore, the rate-determining step is step 1. Since the rate
of the overall reaction depends on the rate of the slow step, the rate law
equation for the rate-determining step should match the rate law for the
overall reaction.
By deﬁnition, the rate law equation for step 1 is written as follows:
Rate1 = k1[NO2][Cl2]
The rate law of the rate-determining step in the proposed mechanism
matches the experimentally determined rate law. Since the proposed
mechanism is consistent with the overall rate law equation, it is a
reasonable mechanism.
Sample Problem
Evaluating a Proposed Mechanism
Problem
Consider the reaction below.
2NO(g) + 2H2(g) → N2(g) + 2H2O(g)
The experimentally determined rate law is written as follows:
Rate = k[NO]2[H2]
A chemist proposes the mechanism below for the reaction.
Step 1 2NO(g) + H2(g) → N2O(g) + H2O(g)
Step 2 N2O(g) + H2(g) → N2(g) + H2O(g)
Determine whether the proposed mechanism is reasonable.
(slow)
(fast)
What Is Required?
You need to determine whether the proposed mechanism is reasonable.
To do this, you need to answer the following questions:
• Do the steps add up to the overall reaction?
• Are the steps reasonable in terms of their molecularity?
• Is the proposed mechanism consistent with the experimentally
determined rate law?
What Is Given?
You know the proposed mechanism, the overall reaction, and the rate
law for the overall reaction.
Plan Your Strategy
Add the two reactions, and cancel out reaction intermediates. Check
the molecularity of the steps. Determine the rate law equation for the
rate-determining step, and compare it to the overall rate law equation.
Act on Your Strategy
Add the two steps.
Step 1
Step 2
2NO(g) + H2(g) → N2O(g) + H2O(g)
N2O(g) + H2(g) → N2 + H2O(g)
N2O(g) + 2H2(g) + 2NO(g) → N2O(g) + N2(g) + 2H2O(g)
or
2NO(g) + 2H2(g) → N2(g) + 2H2O(g)
300 MHR • Unit 3  Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
The two steps add up to give the overall reaction. The second step is
bimolecular, so it is chemically reasonable. The ﬁrst step is termolecular,
which is possible but rare. In the proposed mechanism, step 1 is the
rate-determining reaction. The rate law equation for the ﬁrst step is
written as follows:
Rate1 = k1[NO2]2[H2]
The rate law equation for the slow step matches the rate law equation
for the overall reaction.
Based on the equations for the elementary reactions, the molecularity
of these reactions, and the rate law for the rate-determining step, the
reaction mechanism seems reasonable.
Check Your Solution
The reaction intermediate in the proposed mechanism is N2O. When
adding the two steps, you were able to cancel out N2O.
Practice Problems
17. NO2(g) and F2(g) react to form NO2F(g). The experimentally
determined rate law for the reaction is written as follows:
Rate = k[NO2][F2]
A chemist proposes the following mechanism. Determine whether
the mechanism is reasonable.
Step 1 NO2(g) + F2(g) → NO2F(g) + F(g)
Step 2 NO2(g) + F(g) → NO2F(g)
(slow)
(fast)
18. A researcher is investigating the following overall reaction.
2C + D → E
The researcher claims that the rate law equation for the reaction
is written as follows:
Rate = k[C][D]
(a) Is the rate law equation possible for the given reaction?
(b) If so, suggest a mechanism that would match the rate law. If not,
explain why not.
19. A chemist proposes the following reaction mechanism for a certain
reaction.
Step 1 A + B → C
Step 2 C + A → E + F
(a) Write the equation for the chemical reaction that is described by
(slow)
(fast)
this mechanism.
(b) Write a rate law equation that is consistent with the proposed
mechanism.
20.Consider the reaction between 2-bromo-2-methylpropane and water.
(aq)
(aq) + Br−
(CH3)3CBr(aq) + H2O((cid:2)) → (CH3)3COH(aq) + H+
Rate experiments show that the reaction is ﬁrst order in (CH3)3CBr,
but zero order in water. Demonstrate that the accepted mechanism,
shown below, is reasonable.
Step 1 (CH3)3CBr(aq) → (CH3)3C+
Step 2 (CH3)3C+
+
(aq) → H+
Step 3 (CH3)3COH2
(aq)
+
(aq) + H2O((cid:2)) → (CH3)3COH2
(aq) + (CH3)3COH(aq)
(aq) + Br−
(slow)
(fast)
(fast)
(aq)
Chapter 6  Rates of Chemical Reactions • MHR 301
Catalysts
A catalyst is a substance that increases the rate of a chemical reaction
without being consumed by the reaction. Catalysts are of tremendous
importance in all facets of chemistry, from the laboratory to industry.
Many industrial reactions, for example, would not be economically viable
without catalysts. Well over three million tonnes of catalysts are produced
annually in North America.
How a Catalyst Works
A catalyst works by lowering the activation energy of a reaction so that a
larger fraction of the reactants have sufﬁcient energy to react. It lowers the
activation energy by providing an alternative mechanism for the reaction.
The potential energy diagram in Figure 6.18 shows the activation energy
for an uncatalyzed reaction and the activation energy for the same
reaction with the addition of a catalyst.
*
TRANSITION
STATES
uncatalyzed
Ea(fwd)
no catalyst
*
*
y
g
r
e
n
E
Ea(fwd)
with catalyst
catalyzed
REACTANTS
∆H
Ea(rev)
no catalyst
PRODUCTS
Reaction progress
In Figure 6.18, the catalyzed reaction consists of a two-step mechanism.
The uncatalyzed reaction consists of a one-step mechanism. To see how
a catalyst works, in general, consider a simple, one-step, bimolecular
reaction:
A catalyst lowers
Figure 6.18
the activation energy of a reaction
by providing an alternative mecha-
nism. A catalyst also increases the
rate of the reverse reaction. What
effect does a catalyst have on ∆H of
a reaction?
A + B → AB
A catalyst can increase the rate of this reaction by providing an alternative
mechanism with lower activation energy. A possible mechanism for the
catalyzed reaction is shown below.
Step 1
Step 2
Overall reaction
A + catalyst → A(cid:3)catalyst
A(cid:3)catalyst + B → AB + catalyst
A + B → AB
Both steps are faster than the original, uncatalyzed reaction. Therefore,
although the overall reaction of the catalyzed mechanism has the same
reactants and products as the uncatalyzed reaction, the catalyzed mecha-
nism is faster. The chemical species A(cid:3)catalyst is a reaction intermediate.
It is produced in step 1 but consumed in step 2. By contrast, the catalyst
is regenerated in the reaction. It appears as a reactant in step 1 and as
302 MHR • Unit 3  Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
a product in step 2. Although the catalyst changes during the overall
reaction, it is regenerated unchanged at the end of the overall reaction.
Figure 6.19 shows the reaction of sodium potassium tartrate with
H2O2, catalyzed by cobaltous chloride, CoCl2. The CoCl2 is pink in solu-
tion. Notice that the contents of the beaker brieﬂy change colour to dark
green, suggesting the formation of a reaction intermediate. Also notice that
you can see the regeneration of the catalyst when the reaction is over.
Catalysts are divided into two categories, depending on whether or not
they are in the same phase as the reactants.
Homogeneous Catalysts
A homogeneous catalyst exists in the same phase as the reactants.
Homogeneous catalysts most often catalyze gaseous and aqueous
reactions. For example, aqueous zinc chloride, ZnCl2, is used to catalyze
the following reaction.
(CH3)2CHOH(aq) + HCl(aq)
ZnCl2(aq)
(CH3)2CHCl(aq) + H2O((cid:2))
The reaction takes place in aqueous solution, and the catalyst is soluble in
water. Therefore, ZnCl2 is a homogeneous catalyst when it is used with
this reaction.
Heterogeneous Catalysts
A heterogeneous catalyst exists in a phase that is different from the phase
of the reaction it catalyzes. An important industrial use of heterogeneous
catalysts is the addition of hydrogen to an organic compound that
contains C(cid:2)C double bonds. This process is called hydrogenation.
Consider the hydrogenation of ethylene, shown below.
H2C(cid:2)CH2(g) + H2(g)
Pd(s)
H3C(cid:3)CH3(g)
Without a catalyst, the reaction is very slow. When the reaction is catalyzed
by a metal such as palladium or platinum, however, the rate increases
dramatically. The ethylene and hydrogen molecules form bonds with the
metal surface. This weakens the bonds of the hydrogen and ethylene. The
H(cid:3)H bonds of the hydrogen molecules break, and the hydrogen atoms are
somewhat stabilized because of their attraction to the metal. The hydrogen
atoms react with the ethylene, forming ethane. Figure 6.20 shows the
hydrogenation of ethylene to ethane.
ethylene,
C2H4
H2
metal
surface
separated
H atoms
1
H2 and C2H4 approach and bond to
metal surface.
Rate-limiting step is H(cid:3)H bond breakage.
2
ethane,
C2H6
3
One H atom bonds to C2H4.
4
Another C(cid:3)H bond forms, and C2H6
leaves the surface.
A
B
C
D
The reaction of
Figure 6.19
Rochelle’s salt, sodium potassium
tartrate, with hydrogen peroxide
is catalyzed with CoCl2 at 70˚C.
Photograph A shows the reactants
before mixing.
Photograph B was taken
immediately after CoCl2 was
added. Notice the pink colour.
Photograph C was taken after
about 20 s.
Photograph D was taken after
about 2 min.
Platinum metal is
Figure 6.20
used as a heterogeneous catalyst
for the hydrogenation of gaseous
ethylene to ethane.
Chapter 6  Rates of Chemical Reactions • MHR 303
Web
L I N K
www.mcgrawhill.ca/links/
chemistry12
You probably know
that compounds called
chloroﬂuorocarbons (CFCs)
are responsible for depleting
the ozone layer in Earth’s
stratosphere. Did you know,
however, that CFCs do their
destructive work by acting
as homogeneous catalysts?
Use the Internet to ﬁnd out
how CFCs catalyze the
decomposition of ozone in
the stratosphere. To start your
research, go to the web site
above and click on Web Links.
Communicate your ﬁndings
as a two-page press release.
You may ﬁnd the term “hydrogenation” familiar. Some food products,
such as margarine and peanut butter, contain hydrogenated vegetable oils.
Hydrogenation is used in the food industry to convert liquid vegetable
oils, which contain carbon-carbon double bonds, to solid fats, such as
shortening, which are fully saturated.
Biological Catalysts
Your body depends on reactions that are catalyzed by amazingly efﬁcient
and speciﬁc biological catalysts. Biological catalysts are enormous protein
molecules called enzymes. Their molecular masses range from 15 000 to
1 000 000 g/mol.
Only a small portion of the enzyme, called the active site, is actually
involved in the catalysis reaction. In terms of the enzyme’s overall shape,
the active site is like a nook or a fold in its surface. The reactant molecule,
called the substrate in an enzyme reaction, binds to the active site. The
enzyme works by stabilizing the reaction’s transition state.
Two models currently exist to explain how an enzyme and its substrate
interact. One model, called the lock and key model, suggests that an
enzyme is like a lock, and its substrate is like a key. The shape of the active
site on the enzyme exactly ﬁts the shape of the substrate. A second model,
called the induced ﬁt model, suggests that the active site of an enzyme
changes its shape to ﬁt its substrate. Figure 6.21 shows both models.
SUBSTRATES
PRODUCT
+
active site
fast
slow
enzyme
enzyme-substrate
complex
enzyme
A
Lock-and-key model
SUBSTRATES
PRODUCT
+
active site
fast
slow
enzyme
enzyme-substrate
complex
enzyme
B
Induced-fit model
Figure 6.21
shows the induced-ﬁt model of enzyme function.
Diagram A shows the lock and key model of enzyme function. Diagram B
Enzymes are involved in many functions of the human body, including
digestion and metabolism. For example, the enzyme lactase is responsible
for catalyzing the breakdown of lactose, a sugar found in milk. People
who are lactose-intolerant are usually missing lactase, or they have insuf-
ﬁcient amounts. If you are lactose-intolerant, you can take commercially
produced supplements that contain lactase.
In the following ThoughtLab, you will investigate other ways in
which industries use and produce catalysts.
304 MHR • Unit 3  Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
ThoughtLab
Researching Catalysts
Many reactions that produce useful compounds
proceed too slowly to be used in industries.
Some reactions need to be carried out at high
temperatures or pressures to proceed quickly.
These conditions, however, are often expensive to
maintain. Therefore, chemists and engineers use
catalysts to speed up the reactions in order to obtain
products at a reasonable rate and under reasonable
conditions. Similarly, many necessary biological
reactions would proceed too slowly to sustain life
without the presence of enzymes.
Procedure
1. As a class, hold a brainstorming session to create
a list of catalysts that are used in industries and
a list of enzymes. Come to class prepared with
several suggestions. (You may need to do some
initial research.) Two examples in each category
are given below.
• industrial catalysts : catalytic converter,
V2O5 catalyst in synthesis of H2SO4(aq)
(contact process)
• enzymes: papain, pepsin
2. Choose one catalyst and one enzyme from each
brainstormed list.
3. Using electronic and print resources, research
your substances.
4. Prepare a brief report about each substance.
Your report should include answers to the
Analysis questions below. If you prefer, present
your research as a web page.
5. Include a list of the sources you used. You should
include at least three electronic sources and one
print source for each substance.
Analysis
1. Your report about industrial catalysts should
answer the following questions.
(a) What is the chemical formula of the catalyst?
Is the catalyst heterogeneous or
homogeneous?
(b) What process does the catalyst speed up?
Include products, reactants, the reaction
mechanism (if possible), and information
about the uncatalyzed reaction.
(c) What technology is required to support the
catalyzed reaction (for example, the design
of a catalytic converter)?
(d) What is the importance and relevance, to
Canadians, of the industry associated with
the catalyst?
2. Your report about enzymes should answer the
questions below.
(a) What chemical process is the enzyme
involved in?
(b) How does the enzyme ﬁt into an overall
biological process?
(c) Are there any ways in which the enzyme can
be prevented from doing its job? Explain.
(d) Is the enzyme mass-produced by industry?
If so, how? For what purpose is it
mass-produced?
In the Thought Lab above, you may have included the enzyme catalase
in your brainstormed list. Catalase in your blood is responsible for the
“ﬁzzing” you see when you use a dilute hydrogen peroxide solution to
disinfect a cut. When dilute hydrogen peroxide is poured on a cut, it
decomposes to oxygen gas and water. The decomposition reaction is
catalyzed by catalase.
Have you ever opened an old bottle of hydrogen peroxide and noticed
that it has lost its potency? The hydrogen peroxide has decomposed, leav-
ing you with a bottle of water. At room temperature, in the absence of a
catalyst, the decomposition of H2O2 occurs very slowly, over a period of
months or years. With the help of a catalyst, however, the rate of the reac-
tion can be increased to the point where it can be easily studied in a high
school laboratory.
In Investigation 6-B, you will write a detailed procedure to determine
the rate law for the catalyzed decomposition of hydrogen peroxide. Instead
of using catalase to catalyze the reaction, you will use an inorganic catalyst.
Chapter 6  Rates of Chemical Reactions • MHR 305
S K I L L   F O C U S
Predicting
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
Determining the Rate Law
for a Catalyzed Reaction
Hydrogen peroxide, H2O2, can be purchased as a
dilute solution in a pharmacy or supermarket.
It is used, among other things, as a topical
antiseptic for minor cuts. In this investigation,
you will use the I− ion, in the form of aqueous
NaI, to catalyze the decomposition of H2O2.
Questions
What are the exponents m and n, and the rate
constant, in the following general rate law
equation?
−
Rate = k[H2O2]m[I
]n
Safety Precautions
• The reaction mixture will get hot. Handle the
Erlenmeyer ﬂask near the top.
• 6% hydrogen peroxide solution is an
irritant. Wear safety glasses, latex gloves,
and a laboratory apron.
Procedure
1. Copy the following table into your notebook,
to record your observations. Give your table
a title.
Prediction
Will the catalyzed decomposition
be ﬁrst order or second order with
respect to H2O2 and with respect to I−?
Materials
100 mL beaker
250 mL Erlenmeyer ﬂask
60 mL 6% (m/v) H2O2(aq)
60 mL 1.0 mol/L NaI(aq)
3 graduated cylinders (10 mL)
2 medicine droppers or plastic pipettes
masking tape or grease pencil
electronic top-loading balance,
accurate to two decimal places
Option 1
pneumatic trough
one-holed rubber stopper, ﬁtted with a piece
of glass tubing (must be airtight)
1 m rubber hose to ﬁt glass tubing
(must be airtight)
graduated cylinder to collect gas
Option 2
balance, preferably accurate to three decimal
places
306 MHR • Unit 3  Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
H2O2
NaI
Experiment
Volume of 6%
H2O2 (mL)
Volume of
distilled
water (mL)
Volume of
1.0 mol/L
NaI (mL)
Volume of
distilled
water (mL)
O2 produced
in 60 s
(mL or g)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
10.0
8.0
6.0
4.0
10.0
10.0
10.0
0
2.0
4.0
6.0
0
0
0
10.0
10.0
10.0
10.0
8.0
6.0
4.0
0
0
0
0
2.0
4.0
6.0
2. The rate of production of oxygen gas can be
monitored in different ways. Depending on
the equipment you have available, choose
option 1 or option 2.
• Option 1: You can collect the oxygen gas by
downward displacement of water. Collect
the oxygen produced in the ﬁrst 60 s of the
reaction in an upside-down graduated
cylinder. Refer to Investigation 6-A to see
how to set up an apparatus for collecting
the gas.
• Option 2 : If you have an electronic balance
that is accurate to 0.001 g, you can monitor
the change in mass as oxygen is released in
the ﬁrst 60 s of the reaction.
Note: Gently swirl the reaction mixture for the
ﬁrst 5 s. To help the bubbles of oxygen leave
the solution, gently swirl the reaction ﬂask
every 15 s. Stop swirling at 45 s.
3. For your chosen option, write out a complete
procedure based on the table on the previous
page. Include a diagram showing the experi-
mental set-up, and detailed safety precautions.
Have your teacher approve your procedure,
and then carry it out.
Analysis
1. For each experiment, determine the initial
rate of reaction. That is, convert the volume
or mass of O2 within the time interval to
get an initial rate of mol O2/(L • s). Using the
stoichiometry of the reaction, convert this
initial rate to a rate of decomposition of H2O2
in mol/(L • s).
2. (a) For the experiments in which [H2O2] was
kept constant, plot a graph of reaction rate
(y-axis) versus [NaI]. From the shape of the
graph, determine if the reaction is ﬁrst
order or second order with respect to NaI.
(b) For the experiments in which [NaI] was
kept constant, plot a graph of reaction rate
(y-axis) versus [H2O2]. From the shape of
the graph, determine if the reaction is ﬁrst
order or second order with respect to H2O2.
3. Determine the value of k for the reaction, with
proper units. Pay close attention to signiﬁcant
digits.
Conclusion
4. Write the rate law equation for the reaction.
Applications
5. The iodide ion-catalyzed decomposition of
hydrogen peroxide to oxygen gas and water is
believed to occur via the following mechanism.
Step 1 H2O2 + I− → H2O + OI−
(slow)
Step 2 H2O2 + OI− → H2O + O2 + I− (fast)
(a) Show that these two steps are consistent
with the overall stoichiometry of the
reaction.
(b) Is this mechanism consistent with your
experimentally obtained rate law? Explain.
(c) How does this mechanism account for the
fact that the I− ion is a catalyst?
(d) What is the role of the hypoiodite, IO−, ion
in the mechanism? How do you know?
(e) Draw and label a potential energy-reaction
coordinate diagram that is consistent with
this mechanism. Be sure to illustrate any
reaction intermediates.
(f) Postulate a possible activated complex
for step 1 of the proposed mechanism.
6. The rate of decomposition of H2O2 can be
increased using other catalysts, such as Mn2+
and Fe2+.
(a) How do you expect ∆H for the decomposi-
tion reaction to change if different catalysts
are used?
(b) Do you expect the rate law to change?
Explain.
Chapter 6  Rates of Chemical Reactions • MHR 307
Canadians
in Chemistry
Dr. Maud L. Menten
Dr. Maud L. Menten, a leading researcher in the ﬁeld
of biochemistry, was born in Port Lambton, Ontario,
in 1879. She grew up in rural British Columbia, where
she had to take a canoe across the Fraser River every
day to get to school. Later, Menten returned to
Ontario to attend the University of Toronto. Upon
receiving her medical degree in 1911, she became
one of the ﬁrst female doctors in Canada.
Menten soon received international recognition
for her study of enzymes. From 1912 to 1913, she
worked at Leonor Michaelis’ lab at the University of
Berlin. While conducting experiments on the break-
down of sucrose by the enzyme called invertase,
Menten and Michaelis were able to reﬁne the work
of Victor Henri to explain how enzymes function. A
few years earlier, Henri had proposed that enzymes
bind directly to their substrates. Michaelis and
Menten obtained the precise measurements that
were needed to support Henri’s hypothesis. Using
the recently developed concept of pH, they were
able to buffer their chemical reactions and thereby
control the conditions of their experiments more
successfully than Henri. Their ﬁndings, published in
1913, provided the ﬁrst useful model of enzyme
function.
In the ground-breaking scientiﬁc paper that
presented their work, Menten and Michaelis also
derived an important mathematical formula. This
formula describes the rate at which enzymes break
down their substrates. It correlates the speed of
the enzyme reaction with the concentrations of
the enzyme and the substrate. Called the Michaelis-
Menten equation, it remains fundamental to our
understanding of how enzymes catalyze reactions.
Menten remained an avid researcher all her life.
She worked long days, dividing her time between
teaching at the University of Pittsburgh’s School
of Medicine and working as a pathologist at the
Children’s Hospital of Pittsburgh. She also worked
with her peers and students on more than 70 papers
that dealt with a wide range of medical topics. In
addition to her work with Michaelis, Menten’s contri-
butions to science include pioneering techniques for
studying the chemical composition of tissues and
for investigating the nature of hemoglobin in human
red blood cells.
It was not until 1949, only a year before retiring
from the University of Pittsburgh, that Menten
obtained a full professorship. Shortly after retiring,
Menten joined the Medical Research Institute of
British Columbia to do cancer research. Sadly, ill
health forced her to cease her scientiﬁc work only
a few years later. She spent her remaining days in
Leamington, Ontario.
Although she was a brilliant medical researcher,
Menten’s enthusiasm overﬂowed beyond the
boundaries of science. She was a world traveller,
a mountain climber, a musician, and a student of
languages. She was even a painter, whose work
made its way into art exhibitions.
In honour of her lifetime of achievements,
Maud L. Menten was inducted into the Canadian
Medical Hall of Fame in 1998.
Section Summary
In this section, you learned that chemical reactions usually proceed as a
series of steps called elementary reactions. You related the equations for
elementary reactions to rate laws. You learned how the relative speed of
the steps in a reaction mechanism help to predict the rate law of an over-
all reaction. Finally, you learned how a catalyst controls the rate of a
chemical reaction by providing a lower-energy reaction mechanism. In
this chapter, you compared activation energies of forward and reverse
reactions. In the next unit, you will study, in detail, reactions that proceed
in both directions.
308 MHR • Unit 3  Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
Section Review
1
2
3
4
5
6
K/U
In your own words, describe an elementary reaction.
K/U
Distinguish between an overall reaction and an elementary
reaction. Include a discussion of rate law.
K/U
Why do chemists say that a reaction mechanism is proposed ?
K/U
What three criteria must a proposed reaction mechanism satisfy,
for it to be accepted?
C
Explain the difference between a reaction intermediate and an
activated complex in a reaction mechanism.
K/U
Consider the reaction below.
C
D + E
2A + B2
A chemist proposes the following reaction mechanism.
Step 1 A + B2 → AB2
Step 2 AB2 + C → AB2C
Step 3 AB2C + A → A2B2 + C
Step 4 A2B2 → D + E
(a) Show that the proposed mechanism can account for the
overall reaction.
(b) What is the role of AB2C and AB2?
(c) What is the role of C?
(d) Given a proposed reaction mechanism, how can you differentiate,
in general, between a reaction intermediate and a catalyst?
7
I
Chlorine gas reacts with aqueous hydrogen sulﬁde (also known as
hydrosulfuric acid) to form elemental sulfur and hydrochloric acid.
Cl2(g) + H2S(aq) → S(s) + 2HCl(aq)
The experimentally obtained rate law equation is written as follows:
Rate = k[Cl2][H2S]
Which of the following mechanisms is consistent with this
information? Explain your answer.
Mechanism A
Step 1 Cl2 + H2S → Cl+ + HCl + HS−
Step 2 Cl+ + HS− → HCl + S
Mechanism B
Step 1 Cl2 → Cl+ + Cl−
Step 2 Cl− + H2S → HCl + HS−
Step 3 Cl+ + HS− → HCl + S
(slow)
(fast)
(slow)
(fast)
(fast)
8
Consider the following general endothermic reaction.
C
A + B → C + D
(a) Explain why a catalyst has no effect on the enthalpy change.
Illustrate your answer with a potential energy diagram.
(b) Explain the effect of a catalyst on a reaction that has similar
products and reactants, but is an exothermic reaction. Illustrate
your answer with a potential energy diagram.
Chapter 6  Rates of Chemical Reactions • MHR 309
9
10
Consider the general reaction shown below.
K/U
2A + B → 2E + F
The experimentally determined rate law equation is written as follows:
Rate = k[A][B]
A proposed mechanism for the reaction has the ﬁrst step below.
Step 1 A + B → C + F (rate-determining step)
Assuming a two-step mechanism, write a possible second elementary
reaction for this mechanism.
MC
Historians suspect that many ancient Romans suffered from lead
poisoning. The ancient Romans used lead for their plumbing system
(hence, the Latin name for the element). Lead is a poison because it
can form strong bonds with proteins, including enzymes. Lead and
other heavy metals react with enzymes by binding to functional groups
on their active sites. When lead binds to a protein, such as an enzyme,
the protein often precipitates out of solution.
(a) Based on your understanding of enzymes and the information above,
explain why lead’s ability to form strong bonds with the active sites
of enzymes makes lead toxic to humans.
(b) Egg whites and milk are used as antidotes for heavy metal
poisoning. The victim must ingest the egg white or milk soon after
the lead has been ingested. Then the victim’s stomach must be
pumped. Explain why this antidote works. Why must the stomach
be pumped?
(c) Would the antidote described in part (b) work for someone who
suffers from long-term exposure to lead by ingestion? Explain why
or why not.
310 MHR • Unit 3  Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
Review
Reﬂecting on Chapter 6
Summarize this chapter in the format of your
choice. Here are a few ideas to use as guidelines:
• Use a graph to describe the rate of reaction as
a function of the change of concentration of a
reactant or product with respect to time.
• Distinguish between an average rate and an
instantaneous rate of a reaction.
• Express the rate of a reaction as a rate law
equation.
• Explain what the term “half-life” means.
Calculate the half-life of a ﬁrst-order reaction.
• Use collision theory and transition state theory
to explain how concentration, temperature,
surface area, and the nature of reactants control
the rate of a chemical reaction.
• Use a potential energy diagram to demonstrate
your understanding of the relationships between
activation energy, reactants, products, enthalpy
change, and the activated complex.
• Explain why most reactions occur as a series
of elementary reactions. Show how the rate law
for a rate-determining step relates to the rate
law for an overall reaction.
• Explain how a catalyst increases the rate of a
chemical reaction.
Reviewing Key Terms
For each of the following terms, write a sentence
that shows your understanding of its meaning.
reaction rate
instantaneous rate
rate law equation
overall reaction order
second-order reaction
half-life (t1/2 )
activation energy (Ea)
potential energy
diagram
average rate
catalyst
rate constant
ﬁrst-order reaction
initial rates method
collision theory
transition state theory
transition state
activated complex
elementary reaction
molecularity
unimolecular
rate-determining step
heterogeneous catalyst
active site
reaction mechanism
reaction intermediates
bimolecular
termolecular
homogeneous catalyst
enzymes
substrate
Knowledge/Understanding
1. The way that chemists monitor the rate of a
chemical reaction depends on the reaction.
What conditions of a reacting system must
change for the each instrument or method
below to be useful?
(a) balance
(b) downward displacement of water
(c) spectrophotometer
2. In your own words, describe how collision
theory explains why increased surface area
increases the rate of a reaction.
3. Agitation (stirring) often increases the rate of a
reaction. Use collision theory to explain why.
4. At elevated temperatures, ammonia reacts with
oxygen as follows:
4NH3(g) + 5O2(g) → 4NO(g) + 6H2O(g)
(a) Write an equation that shows the relation-
ship between the rate of reaction expressed
in terms of each reactant and product.
(b) The average rate of production of nitrogen
monoxide is 6.2 × 10−2 mol/(L • s). What is
the average rate of change in the concentra-
tion of ammonia?
5. State two requirements for an effective
collision between reactants.
6. State the difference between a homogeneous
catalyst and a heterogeneous catalyst.
Inquiry
7. The rate of decomposition of hydrogen perox-
ide was studied at a particular temperature.
H2O2(aq) → H2O((cid:2)) + 1
2
(a) The initial concentration of hydrogen
O2(g)
peroxide was 0.200 mol/L. 10.0 s later,
it was measured to be 0.196 mol/L. What
was the initial rate of the reaction, expressed
in mol/(L • s)?
(b) 0.500 L of hydrogen peroxide solution was
used for the experiment. What mass was lost
as O2 bubbled out of solution in this initial
10.0 s interval?
8. The following ﬁrst-order reaction has a rate
of 3.8 × 10−3 mol/(L • s) when [A] = 0.38 mol/L.
A → products
(a) Calculate the value of k and the half-life
of the reaction.
Chapter 6  Rates of Chemical Reactions • MHR 311
(b) What did you assume when answering
part (a)?
9. The units of k, the rate constant, depend on
the overall order of a reaction. For what overall
reaction order does the rate constant have the
same units as the reaction rate?
10. The rate constant of a ﬁrst-order reaction is
4.87 × 10−2 s−1 at a particular temperature.
Calculate the half-life of this reaction.
11. Phosgene, COCl2, is a highly toxic gas that is
heavier than air. It can be produced by reacting
carbon monoxide with chlorine in a very
slow reaction.
CO(g) + Cl2(g) → COCl2(g)
The following initial rate data were collected
at a particular temperature.
Experiment
1
2
3
4
Initial [CO]
(mol/L)
0.500
0.0500
0.0500
Initial [Cl2]
(mol/L)
0.0500
0.0500
0.500
0.05 00
0.00500
Initial rate
(mol/(L • s))
6.45 × 10−30
6.65 × 10−31
6.50 × 10−30
6.60 × 10−32
(a) Write the rate law equation for this reaction.
(b) Calculate the value of the rate constant.
Make sure that you use the proper units.
13. Mercury(II) chloride, HgCl2, reacts with oxalate
2−, as follows:
ions, C2O4
2−
(aq) →
2HgCl2(aq)+C2O4
−
(aq) + 2CO2(g) + Hg2Cl2(s)
2Cl
The reaction rate was monitored by measuring
the mass of Hg2Cl2 formed as a function of time.
Experiment
Initial [Hg2Cl2]
(mol/L)
Initial [C2O4
(mol/L)
2−]
1
2
3
0.0788
0.0788
0.039
0.113
0.225
0.225
Initial rate
(mol/(L • s))
1.35 × 10−6
5.33 × 10−6
2.63 × 10−6
(a) Write the rate law equation for the reaction.
(b) Calculate the value of the rate constant, with
the appropriate units.
(c) Calculate the initial rate of the reaction
when [HgCl2] = 0.0400 mol/L and
[C2O4
2−] = 0.150 mol/L.
14. A chemical reaction between compounds A and
B is ﬁrst order in A and ﬁrst order in B. Find
the unknown information in the table below.
Experiment Rate (mol/(L • s))
[A] (mol/L)
[B] (mol/L)
1
2
3
0.10
0.40
0.80
0.20
(a)
0.40
0.050
0.050
(b)
12. The following reaction was studied using the
15. A chemical reaction between compounds C
method of initial rates.
3A(aq) + 4B(aq) → products
The following data were collected.
Experiment
Initial [A]
(mol/L)
Initial [B]
(mol/L)
Initial rate
(mol/(L • s))
1
2
3
4
0.200
0.600
0.200
0.600
0.200
0.200
0.400
0.400
5.00
45.0
10.0
90.0
(a) Write the rate law equation.
(b) What is the overall reaction order?
(c) Calculate the value of the rate constant, with
the proper units.
and D is ﬁrst order in C and second order in D.
Find the unknown information in the table
below.
Experiment Rate (mol/(L • s))
[A] (mol/L)
[B] (mol/L)
1
2
3
0.10
(a)
(b)
1.0
2.0
2.0
0.20
0.20
0.40
16. Consider the reaction below.
2A + B → C + D
At 20˚C, the activation energy of the forward
reaction is 59.9 kJ/mol and the activation
energy of the reverse reaction is 72.0 kJ/mol.
(a) What is the enthalpy change for the reaction?
(b) Sketch a potential energy diagram for the
reaction.
312 MHR • Unit 3  Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
17. Consider the reaction below.
C
2A + B2
A chemist proposes the following reaction
D + E
mechanism.
Step 1 A + B2 → AB2
Step 2 AB2 + C → AB2C
Step 3 AB2C + A → A2B2 + C
Step 4 A2B2 → D + E
Suggest a rate law equation corresponding to
each of the following situations. Remember that
a rate law equation may include only the con-
centration of reactants and catalyst, if any. If
you think that it is impossible to predict a rate
law for any of the situations, explain why. State
any assumptions you make for each situation.
(a) Step 1 is the rate determining step.
(b) Step 2 is the rate determining step.
(c) Step 3 is the rate determining step.
Communication
18. Explain why chemical reactions are fastest at
the beginning.
19. Explain why a rate constant must always be
accompanied by the temperature at which it
was determined.
20. Your friend is having trouble understanding
how a rate-determining step in a reaction
mechanism determines the rate of the overall
reaction. Invent a new analogy to explain
the idea to your friend, using a process from
everyday life that involves slow and fast steps.
21. Write a few paragraphs to distinguish
between an activated complex and a reaction
intermediate. Include equations and diagrams
in your explanation.
22. “For an endothermic reaction, the activation
energy will always be greater than the enthalpy
change for the reaction.”
(a) Do you agree or disagree with this
statement? Explain your answer.
(b) Replace the word “endothermic” with
“exothermic.” Do you agree or disagree with
this statement now? Explain your answer.
23. (a) Explain, in your own words, what is meant
by the term “activation energy.”
(b) How can the idea of activation energy be
used to explain the temperature dependence
of rate?
(c) How can activation energy be used to
explain why a catalyst increases the rate of
a chemical reaction?
Making Connections
24. Suppose that you are using a Polaroid™ camera
outdoors during the winter. You want your
photographs to develop faster. Suggest a way
to accomplish this.
25. Why are catalytic converters not very effective
immediately after starting a vehicle in the
winter? Suggest a way to correct this problem.
Answers to Practice Problems and Short Answers to
Section Review Questions
Practice Problems: 1. 0.25 mol/s  2. 0.10 mol/(L • s)
3. ∆[Br2]/∆t = −0.5∆[HBr]/∆t 4.(a) 9.0 × 10−4mol/s
(b) 0.011 L/s  5. Rate = (2.05 × 10−4 s−1)[C2H4O]
6. Rate = (0.15 L/(mol • s))[ICl][H2] 7.(a) Rate = k[SO2Cl2]
(b) k = 2.2 × 10−5 s−1 8.(a) 0.10 (b) 0.025 (c) 0.34 (d) 0.060
9.(a) 0.075 s (b) 6.2% 10.(a) 3.6 × 10−4 s−1
(b) 5.0 × 1014 molecules/L 11. Only 0.1% of the reactants
are left.  12. about 400 s  13. Products are at lower energy
than reactants.  14. Ea(fwd) = 99 kJ 15. Ea(rev) = 193 kJ
16. Ea(rev) = 411 kJ 17. Yes: Steps add to give overall reaction.
Both steps are bimolecular. Rate law for slow step matches
experimental rate law.  18.(a) yes (b) C + D → B (slow);
B + C → E (fast) 19.(a) A + 2B → E + F (b) Rate = k[A][B]
20. Steps add to give overall reaction. Steps are bimolecular
or unimolecular. Rate law for slow step matches experi-
mental rate law.
Section Review:  6.1:  4.(a) 1.25 × 10−3 mol/(L • s)
(b) 8.33 × 10−4 mol/(L • s) 6.2  1. Rate = k[A]2[B] 2. no  3.(a) no
change (b) increase by a factor of 8  4.(a) 1, 2, 1 (b) 4
(c) L3/(mol3
(b) 6.2 × 102 L2/(mol2
7. 29.6 years; 9.33 × 108 s 6.3:  3.(a) endothermic
(b) ∆H = 68 kJ 6.4: 6.(b) reaction intermediates (c) catalyst
7. mechanism A  9. A + C → 2E (fast)
• s) 6. Rate = (0.020 L2/(mol2
• s) 5.(a) Rate = k[A][B]2
• s))[A][B]
Chapter 6  Rates of Chemical Reactions • MHR 313
U N I T   3   Project
Developing a Bulletin
About Catalysts and
Enzymes
Scientists argued that it was impossible to produce
alcohol, an organic compound, without the action
of yeast, or some other living organism.
Although no one realized it at the time,
Fulhame’s ideas on catalysts were directly relevant
to the debate on vital force. There is no mysterious
vital force in living organisms. Instead, organic
reactions in living organisms depend on organic
catalysts called enzymes.
In 1828, the German chemist Friedrich Wohler
discovered that urea, an organic compound, could
be produced in a laboratory without any help from
a living organism. Wohler’s discovery inspired
other scientists to hypothesize that the fermentation
of sugar into alcohol could also occur without the
presence of living organisms, such as yeast. Some
scientists went further, and insisted that yeast was
not even a living organism.
Background
Scientists have studied the amazing properties of
enzymes and catalysts for more than 200 years.
In 1794, the English chemist Elizabeth Fulhame
published a book called An Essay on Combustion.
Her book included many of the ﬁrst recorded ideas
about the role of catalysis in chemical processes.
In particular, Fulhame was interested in the
catalytic properties of the hydrogen and oxygen
atoms in water.
Fulhame’s ideas about inorganic catalysts were
swept under by the fast and furious debate of her
scientiﬁc era. Many of the most prominent scientists
of her day were arguing over whether organic
reactions needed living organisms to occur. Many
scientists believed that a vital force was present
in living organisms and was essential for the
formation of all organic compounds. For example,
the fermentation of sugar into alcohol takes place
through the action of yeast, a living organism.
Urea
Eventually, scientists proved that fermentation
did not require whole cells of yeast. Fermentation
could still occur if non-living extracts of yeast were
present. Through further study and experimentation,
the important component in the yeast extract was
identiﬁed as an enzyme. If earlier scientists had
considered Fulhame’s ideas on catalysts, they might
have arrived at the truth about enzymes sooner!
Over time, scientists have built up a large body
of knowledge about many different catalysts and
enzymes. This knowledge has been put to good
use in industry. Difﬁcult and expensive industrial
processes have been made faster, cheaper, and
easier through the use of catalysts and enzymes. For
example, enzymes are used in the pharmaceutical
industry, in paper-making and recycling processes,
and in the petroleum industry. Many more industrial
uses of catalysts and enzymes are possible, and
research into catalysts continues.
314 MHR • Unit 3  Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
Assessment
After you complete this project, answer the following
questions to assess your work.
(cid:2) Assess the interest level of the information you
gathered. Did you obtain information of interest to
Grade 12 chemistry students? Did you obtain
information of interest to non-science students?
(cid:2) Assess the scientiﬁc accuracy and complexity of
the information you gathered. Did you use at least
three major sources? If you used web sites, were
they run by reputable organizations? Did you
include information above and beyond the content
of this course?
(cid:2) Assess your communication skills. Did you explain
detailed chemical information in a clear and
understandable way?
In this project, you will research some of
the many catalysts and enzymes that are used
in Canadian industries. Then you will create an
information bulletin to present your ﬁndings.
Challenge
Design, produce, and distribute an information
bulletin to inform your community about the use
of catalysts or enzymes in Canadian industries.
Choose one or more of the following options:
• If there is a local industry you can study, focus
on different aspects of this industry’s use of
catalysts.
• Study a catalyst that is used by several
• Will you study a local industry, or cover a
different industries.
• Compile a variety of uses of catalysts and
enzymes across Canada.
• Analyze a cutting-edge technology that involves
catalysts or enzymes.
variety of Canadian industries?
• Will you examine one enzyme or catalyst in
detail, or will you give an overview of many
different catalysts and/or enzymes?
• How can you ensure that your bulletin is
• Analyze the historical development and use of a
visually attractive and interesting?
particular enzyme or catalyst.
Materials
Set up your information bulletin in the format of a
brochure or leaﬂet, suitable to be distributed to
classmates and other students in your school.
Alternatively, present your information bulletin as a
web page, so that you can share your research with
a wider audience.
Design Criteria
A
As a class, develop a product rubric to assess
the bulletins. For example, you may wish
to evaluate how interesting the bulletins are,
or whether they are easy for non-chemistry
students to understand.
B
Your bulletin should be interesting, visually
attractive, factual, and aimed at a wide audience.
Action Plan
1
Decide whether you will work on your own,
with a partner, or as part of a small group.
2
Decide what you want your bulletin to look
like. The following questions will help you
decide on a format.
• How many topics will you cover in your
bulletin?
• How long will each article in your bulletin be?
• How can you motivate readers? For example,
you may want to include activities (such as
puzzles and quizzes) or a brief list of
interesting facts.
3
If you are working as part of a group, assign a
task to each member of the group.
Evaluate
Print out your bulletin. Display it on a poster board
in a hallway of your school, or in a local public
building. If your bulletin is in the form of a web
page, present it to the class and then post it on the
Internet or on your school’s Intranet.
Web
L I N K
www.mcgrawhill.ca/links/chemistry12
Go to the web site above, and click on Web Links to ﬁnd
appropriate sites to start your research.
Unit 3 Project • MHR 315
Review
Knowledge/Understanding
Multiple Choice
In your notebook, write the letter for the best
answer to each question.
1. The ∆H˚f of an element in its standard state is
deﬁned to be
(a) 0 kJ/mol
(b) 10 kJ/mol
(c) −10 kJ/mol
(d) greater than 0 kJ/mol
(e) a unique value for each element
2. 10.9 kJ of energy is needed to vaporize 60.0 g of
liquid Br2 vapour at 60˚C. What is the molar
heat of vaporization of Br2 at 60˚C?
(a) 3.64 kJ/mol
(b) 7.27 kJ/mol
(c) 14.6 kJ/mol
(d) 29.1 kJ/mol
(e) 10.9 kJ/mol
3. What is the molar heat of vaporization of water,
given the following thermochemical equations?
H2(g) + 1
2
H2(g) + 1
2
O2(g) → H2O(g) + 241.8 kJ
O2(g) → H2O((cid:2)) + 285.8 kJ
(a) 44.0 kJ/mol
(b) −527.6 kJ/mol
(c) −44.0 kJ/mol
(d) −527.6 kJ/mol
(e) 241.8 kJ/mol
4. Which substance has a standard enthalpy of
formation, ∆H˚f, equal to zero?
(a) gold, Au(s)
(b) water, H2O((cid:2))
(c) carbon monoxide, CO(s)
(d) zinc, Zn(g)
(e) water, H2O(g)
5. Which of the following statements are true?
I. The reaction vessel cools when an
endothermic reaction occurs.
II. An endothermic reaction has a negative
value of ∆H.
III. Heat is liberated when an exothermic
reaction occurs.
(a) I and II
(b) I, II, and III
(c) I and III only
(d) II and III only
(e) none of them
(a) I and II only
(b) II and III only
(c) I and IV only
(d) II, III, and IV only
(e) II and IV only
7. Which factor does not affect the rate of a
chemical reaction in aqueous solution?
(a) the enthalpy change of the reaction
(b) the activation energy of the reaction
(c) the collision frequency of the reacting
particles
(d) the relative orientation of the colliding
particles
(e) the temperature of the solution
8. Which statement about an activated complex
is true?
(a) It is a stable substance.
(b) It has lower chemical potential energy, or
enthalpy, than reactants or products.
(c) It occurs only in endothermic reactions.
(d) It occurs at the transition state of the
reaction.
(e) It always breaks down to form product
molecules.
9. A catalyst changes the
I. mechanism of a reaction
II. enthalpy change of a reaction
III. activation energy of a reaction
(a) I only
(b) III only
(c) I and III only
(d) II and III only
(e) I, II, and III
10. The overall rate of any chemical reaction is
most closely related to
(a) the number of steps in the reaction
mechanism
(b) the overall reaction
(c) the fastest step in the reaction mechanism
(d) the slowest step in the reaction mechanism
(e) the average rate of all the steps in the
reaction mechanism
Short Answer
In your notebook, write a sentence or a short
paragraph to answer each question.
11. Distinguish between an open system and an
6. Which of the following processes are
insulated system.
exothermic?
I. boiling water
II. freezing water
III. condensing steam
IV. melting ice
316 MHR • Unit 3  Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
12. In your own words, deﬁne the terms “system”
and “surroundings.” Use an example.
13. In a chemical reaction, bonds are formed and
24. List the factors that affect the rate of a chemical
broken.
(a) How would you characterize the enthalpy
change of bond breaking?
(b) How would you characterize the enthalpy
change of bond formation?
(c) State the relationship between the enthalpy
change of the overall reaction (exothermic
or endothermic) and bond breakage and
formation.
14. “The reactants have more potential energy than
the products.” What kind of reaction does this
statement describe? Justify your answer.
15. What is the relationship between the initial
quantity of reactants for a reaction and the
enthalpy change for a reaction? Use a thermo-
chemical equation in your answer.
16. Compare and contrast enthalpy of vaporization
and enthalpy of condensation.
17. What are the characteristics of a good constant-
pressure calorimeter?
18. A wooden or plastic spoon, rather than a metal
spoon, should be used to stir hot soup. Explain
why, in terms of speciﬁc heat capacity.
19. Butane, C4H10, is the fuel that is used in
disposable lighters. Consider the following
equation for the complete combustion of butane.
C4H10(g) + 6.5O2(g) → 4CO2(g) + 5H2O((cid:2))
(a) Write a separate balanced chemical equation
for the formation of C4H10, the formation of
CO2, and the formation of H2O, directly from
the elements in their standard states.
(b) Algebraically combine these equations to
get the balanced chemical equation for the
complete combustion of C4H10.
20. The enthalpy of formation of an element in
its standard state is zero. Explain why the
enthalpy of formation of I2(g) is 21 kJ/mol,
not 0 kJ/mol.
21. Brieﬂy state why it is useful to know the
half-life of a reaction.
22. The rate of a chemical reaction is dependent
on its ∆H. Do you agree or disagree with this
statement? Brieﬂy justify your answer.
23. What is the relationship between the units
of the rate constant, k, and the overall
reaction order?
reaction.
25. Draw and label a potential energy diagram for
the following exothermic reaction. Include Ea,
the activated complex, and ∆H.
A + B → AB
26. Distinguish between the instantaneous rate and
the initial rate of a chemical reaction. Under
what circumstances would these two rates be
the same?
Inquiry
27. A student wants to determine the enthalpy
change associated with dissolving solid sodium
hydroxide, NaOH, in water. The student dis-
solves 1.96 g of NaOH in 100.0 mL of water in a
coffee-cup calorimeter. The initial temperature
of the water is 23.4˚C. After the NaOH dissolves,
the temperature of the water rises to 28.7˚C.
(a) Use these data to determine the enthalpy of
dissolution of sodium hydroxide, in kJ/mol
NaOH. Assume that the heat capacity of the
calorimeter is negligible.
(b) Suppose that the heat capacity of the
calorimeter was not negligible. Explain
how the value of ∆H that you calculated in
part (a) would compare with the actual ∆H.
(c) Draw and label an enthalpy diagram for this
reaction.
28. Some solid ammonium nitrate, NH4NO3, is
added to a coffee-cup calorimeter that contains
water at room temperature. After the NH4NO3
has dissolved, the temperature of the solution
drops to near 0˚C. Explain this observation.
29. Consider the following chemical equations and
their enthalpy changes.
CH4(g) + 2O2(g) →
CO2(g) + 2H2O(g) ∆H = −8.0 × 102 kJ
CaO(s) + H2O((cid:2)) → Ca(OH)2(aq) ∆H = −65 kJ
What volume of methane, at 20˚C and 100 kPa,
would have to be combusted in order to release
the same amount of energy as the reaction of
1.0 × 102 g of CaO with sufﬁcient water? (The
volume of 1.00 mol of any gas at 20˚C and
100 kPa is 24 L.)
Unit 3 Review • MHR 317
30. The complete combustion of 1.00 mol of
sucrose (table sugar), C12H22O11, yields
5.65 × 103 kJ.
(a) Write a balanced thermochemical equation
for the combustion of sucrose.
(b) Calculate the amount of energy that is
released when 5.00 g of sucrose (about one
teaspoon) is combusted.
31. Carbon monoxide reacts with hydrogen gas to
produce a mixture of methane, carbon dioxide,
and water. (This mixture is known as substitute
natural gas.)
4CO(g) + 8H2(g) → 3CH4(g) + CO2(g) + 2H2O((cid:2))
Use the following thermochemical equations to
determine the enthalpy change of the reaction.
C(graphite) + 2H2(g) → CH4(g) + 74.8 kJ
CO(g) + 1
O2(g) → CO2(g) + 283.1 kJ
2
H2(g) + 1
O2(g) → H2O(g) + 241.8 kJ
2
C(graphite) + 1
2
H2O((cid:2)) + 44.0 kJ → H2O(g)
O2(g) → CO(g) + 110.5 kJ
32. The decomposition of aqueous hydrogen
peroxide, H2O2, can be catalyzed by different
catalysts, such as aqueous sodium iodide, NaI,
or aqueous iron(II) nitrate, Fe(NO3)2 .
(a) The enthalpy change, in kJ/mol of H2O2,
would be the same for this reaction, regard-
less of the catalyst. Explain why, with the
help of a potential energy diagram.
(b) Design an investigation to verify your
explanation in part (a). Do not attempt to
carry out the investigation without the
supervision of your teacher.
33. Acetone, CH3COCH3 , reacts with iodine in
acidic solution.
CH3COCH3(aq) + I2(aq)
H+
CH3COCH2I(aq) + HI(aq)
The experimentally observed rate law equation
is written as follows:
Rate = k[CH3COCH3][H+]
(a) What is the effect on the reaction rate if the
concentration of CH3COCH3 is doubled?
(b) What is the effect on the reaction rate if the
concentration of I2 is doubled?
34. Consider the heterogeneous reaction of solid
magnesium with hydrochloric acid.
Mg(s) + 2HCl(aq) → MgCl2(aq) + H2(g)
The general rate law of this reaction is
given below.
Rate = k[Mg]m[HCl]n
Several trials of the reaction are carried out,
each using a piece of magnesium ribbon of a
ﬁxed length. This is analogous to constant
concentration. The general rate law equation
can now be written as follows:
Rate = k′[HCl]n, where k′ = k[Mg]m
Design an investigation to determine the value
of n in the rate law equation. Assume that you
have a stock solution of 6.0 mol/L HCl, magne-
sium ribbon, a stopwatch, and any standard
laboratory glassware available. If you want to
carry out your investigation, have your teacher
approve the procedure ﬁrst.
35. Thioacetamide, CH3CSNH2, reacts with
water as shown in the balanced chemical
equation below.
CH3C(S)NH2(aq) + H2O((cid:2)) →
H2S(aq) + CH3CONH2(aq)
The experimentally observed rate law equation
is written as follows:
+
Rate = k[H3O
][CH3C(S)NH2]
(a) Do you expect the reaction rate to change if
some solid NaOH is added to the reaction
vessel? Explain.
(b) Do you expect the reaction rate to change if
250 mL of water is added to 250 mL of the
reacting solution? Explain.
(c) How will the reaction rate change if the reac-
tion is carried out at 40˚C instead of at 20˚C?
Communication
36. If a solution of acid accidentally comes in
contact with your skin, you are told to run
the affected area under cold water for several
minutes. Explain why it is not advisable to
simply neutralize the acid with a basic solution.
37. A classmate is having difﬁculty understanding
how the concepts of system, insulated system,
and surroundings are related to exothermic and
endothemic reactions. Write a note to explain
to your classmate how the concepts are related.
Use diagrams to help clarify your explanation.
38. Consider the following data for the complete
combustion of the C1 to C8 alkanes.
318 MHR • Unit 3  Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
Name
Formula
methane
CH4
ethane
propane
butane
pentane
hexane
heptane
octane
C2H6
C3H8
C4H10
C5H12
C6H14
C7H16
C8H18
∆Hcomb (kJ/mol of alkane)
−8.90 × 102
−1.56 × 103
−2.22 × 103
−2.88 × 103
−3.54 × 103
−4.16 × 103
−4.81 × 103
−5.45 × 103
(a) Using either graph paper or spreadsheet soft-
ware, plot a graph of ∆Hcomb (y-axis) versus
the number of C atoms in the fuel (x-axis).
(b) Extrapolate your graph to predict ∆Hcomb
of decane, C10H22 .
(c) From your graph, develop an equation to
determine ∆Hcomb of a straight-chain alkane,
given the number of carbons. Your equation
should be of the form ∆H = ….
(d) Use the equation you developed in part (c)
to determine ∆Hcomb of C10H22 . How does
this value compare with the value of ∆H you
determined by extrapolation from the graph?
Explain why.
(e) Methane, ethane, propane, and butane are all
gases at room temperature. You know that
equal volumes of different gases contain the
same number of moles under identical con-
ditions of temperature and pressure. Which
of these gases do you think would make the
best fuel? Explain your answer.
39. A chemistry student wrote the following
sentences to remind herself of important
concepts. Write a paragraph to expand on each
concept. Use examples and diagrams where
appropriate.
(a) Hess’s law can be used to determine the
enthalpy change of a reaction, instead of
measuring the enthalpy change in a laboratory.
(b) A pH meter can be used to monitor the
progress of a reaction.
(c) The rate law equation for a reaction is
dictated by the rate-determining step in the
reaction’s mechanism.
(d) A catalyst speeds up a reaction, but it does
not affect the enthalpy change of the reaction.
Making Connections
40. Suppose that you are having a new home built
in a rural area, where natural gas is not avail-
able. You have two choices for fuelling your
furnace:
• propane, C3H8, delivered as a liquid under
pressure and stored in a tank
• home heating oil, delivered as a liquid (not
under pressure) and stored in a tank
What factors do you need to consider in order
to decide on the best fuel? What assumptions
do you need to make?
41. Suppose that you read the following statement
in a magazine: 0.95 thousand cubic feet of
natural gas is equal to a gigajoule, GJ, of energy.
Being a media-literate student, you are sceptical
of this claim and wish to verify it. The following
assumptions/information may be useful.
• Natural gas is pure methane.
• Methane undergoes complete combustion.
• H2O((cid:2)) is formed, rather than H2O(g).
• 1.00 mol of any gas occupies 24 L at 20˚C
and 100 kPa.
• 1 foot = 12 inches; 1 inch = 2.54 cm;
1 L = 1 dm3
42. Many taxis and delivery vehicles, especially
in large cities, have been converted to burn
propane, C3H8, rather than gasoline. This is
done to save money. For most vehicles, the
conversion to propane must be done at the
owner’s expense. Suppose that a taxi owner
wants to calculate how far a taxi needs to be
driven in order to recoup the conversion cost.
List the information that the owner needs in
order to do the calculation. Also list any
simplifying assumptions.
C O U R S E
C H A L L E N G E
The Chemistry of Human Health
Consider the following points as you plan your Chemistry
Course Challenge:
• How can you determine and compare rates of
chemical reactions?
• What are some key differences between inorganic
catalysts and enzymes?
• How are enzymes important for maintaining human
health?
Unit 3 Review • MHR 319
Chemical Systems
and Equilibrium
U N I T   4   C O N T E N T S
CHAPTER  7
Reversible Reactions and Chemical
Equilibrium
CHAPTER  8
Acids, Bases, and pH
CHAPTER  9
Aqueous Solutions and Solubility
Equilibria
UNIT  4  ISSUE
Earth in Equilibrium
UNIT 4 OVERALL  EXPECTATIONS
What are the properties of a
system at equilibrium? What
factors affect the extent of a
chemical reaction?
How can you measure the
position of equilibrium experi-
mentally and predict the
concentrations of chemicals
in a system at equilibrium?
How can understanding
chemical equilibrium help
you explain systems in biology,
ecology, and chemical
industries?
Unit Issue Prep
Why is an understanding of Earth’s
geochemical cycles important?
Look at the issue for Unit 4, on
page 456. Start preparing now by
listing questions that you would
like answered. Record additional
questions as you progress through
this unit.
320
Photochromic lenses darken in
sunlight and then gradually clear
in shade and dim light. The change
is permanent in constant light
conditions, yet reversible if the
light intensity changes. How?
The molten glass contains
dissolved silver chloride. As the
solution cools, silver chloride
precipitates, forming tiny silver
chloride crystals. Light striking
these crystals produces silver and
chlorine atoms. The silver atoms
tend to clump together to form
particles that are big enough to
block light and darken the glass.
Adding copper(I) chloride to
the molten glass makes the process
reversible. When light intensity
diminishes, copper ions remove
electrons from silver atoms, convert-
ing the silver atoms into silver ions.
The silver ions then migrate back
to the silver chloride crystals. The
glass becomes transparent again.
Most of the reactions that you
have studied have essentially gone
to completion. You can use stoi-
chiometry to calculate the amounts
of products formed, assuming that
the chemical reaction proceeds only
from left to right. In many chemical
reactions, however, a mixture of
reactants and products form because
the reaction can also proceed from
right to left. In this unit, you will
study the concepts that describe
reversible reactions.
Reversible Reactions and
Chemical Equilibrium
Your body contains over 1 kg of nitrogen, mainly in the proteins and
nucleic acids that make up your cells. Your body, however, cannot absorb
nitrogen directly from the atmosphere. You get the nitrogen-containing
compounds you need by eating plants and other foods.
Plants cannot absorb nitrogen directly from the atmosphere, either.
Their roots absorb nitrogen compounds—mainly nitrates —from the soil.
Some of these nitrates result from atmospheric chemical reactions that
involve nitrogen and oxygen. First, lightning supplies the energy that is
needed to form nitric oxide from nitrogen and oxygen. The resulting nitric
oxide combines with oxygen to form nitrogen dioxide, which reacts with
rainwater to form nitric acid. Then, in the seas and the soil at Earth’s
surface, nitric acid ionizes to produce nitrate, NO3
organisms can readily absorb nitrate.
−. Plants and plant-like
Scientists call this chemical “circle of life” the nitrogen cycle. There
are, as you know, similar, equally important cyclic processes in nature.
Each process involves reversible changes: changes that may proceed in
either direction, from reactants to products or from products to reactants.
In this chapter, you will study factors that affect reversible changes,
notably those in chemical reactions. You will learn how to determine the
amounts of reactants and products that are present when their proportions
no longer change. You will also learn how to make qualitative predictions
about the ways that chemists can change these proportions. Finally, you
will see how industrial chemists apply their knowledge of reversible
changes to increase the yield of chemicals that are important to society.
How is this dynamic situation simi-
lar to the activity of reactants and
products in a chemical reaction?
C h a p t e r   P r e v i e w
7.1 Recognizing Equilibrium
7.2 Thermodynamics and
Equilibrium
7.3 The Equilibrium
Constant
7.4 Predicting the Direction
of a Reaction
P r e r e q u i s i t e
C o n c e p t s   a n d   S k i l l s
Before you begin this chapter,
review the following concepts
and skills:
(cid:2) using the relationship
between rate of reaction
and concentration
(Chapter 6, section 6.2)
(cid:2) using stoichiometry with
chemical equations
(previous studies)
(cid:2) calculating molar
concentrations
(previous studies)
322 MHR • Unit 4  Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
7.1
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
(cid:2) identify and illustrate
equilibrium in various
systems and the conditions
that lead to equilibrium
(cid:2) describe, in terms of
equilibrium, the behaviour
of ionic solutes in unsatu-
rated, saturated, and
supersaturated solutions
(cid:2) communicate your
understanding of the
following terms: equilibrium,
homogeneous equilibrium,
heterogeneous equilibrium
Recognizing Equilibrium
In Unit 3, you learned that the rate of any reaction depends on the
concentration of the reacting chemicals. As a reaction proceeds, the
concentrations of the “product” chemicals increases, and the reverse
reaction may re-form “reactants.” Under certain conditions, the rate of
the reverse reaction increases as the rate of the forward reaction decreases.
Eventually, the rate of the forward reaction equals the rate of the reverse
reaction. Equilibrium occurs when opposing changes, such as those just
described, are occurring simultaneously at the same rate.
How can you recognize equilibrium? In the following paragraphs, you
will read about physical changes that may or may not involve a system
at equilibrium. As you consider these changes, note which systems are at
equilibrium and what changes are taking place. Also note the conditions
that would be needed for the changes to occur in the opposite direction at
the same rate. The ExpressLab that follows these descriptions will add to
your understanding of equilibrium. It will help you recognize systems that
are at equilibrium and systems that are not.
• A puddle of water remains after a summer shower. The puddle evapo-
rates because some of the water molecules near the surface have enough
kinetic energy to escape from the liquid. At the same time, some water
molecules in the air may condense back into the liquid. The chance
of this happening is small, however. The puddle soon evaporates
completely, as shown in Figure 7.1(A).
• Even if you put a lid on a jar of water, some of the water in the jar
evaporates. Careful measurements show that the level of liquid water
in the jar initially decreases because more water evaporates than
condenses. As the number of water vapour molecules increases,
however, some condense back into the liquid. Eventually, the number
of evaporating molecules and the number of condensing molecules
are equal. The level of water inside the jar remains constant. At this
point, shown in Figure 7.1(B), equilibrium has been reached.
A
B
Figure 7.1
Why is (B) an example of equilibrium, while (A) is not?
Chapter 7  Reversible Reactions and Chemical Equilibrium • MHR 323
• Crystals of copper(II) sulfate pentahydrate, CuSO4 • 5H2O , are blue. If
you place a few small crystals in a beaker of water, water molecules
break apart the ions and they enter into the solution. A few ions in
the solution may re-attach to the crystals. Because more ions enter the
solution than re-attach to the crystals, however, all the solid eventually
dissolves. If you keep adding crystals of copper(II) sulfate pentahydrate,
the solution eventually becomes saturated. Crystals remain at the
bottom of the beaker, as shown in Figure 7.2.
A
B
Figure 7.2
temperature affect the concentration of the solution in the equilibrium system?
Which of these systems, (A) or (B), is at equilibrium? Will changing the
• Figure 7.3(A) shows a supersaturated solution of sodium acetate. It was
prepared by adding sodium acetate to a saturated aqueous solution. The
mixture was heated to dissolve the added crystals. Finally, the solution
was left to return slowly to room temperature. In Figure 7.3(B), a single
crystal of sodium acetate has been added to the supersaturated solution.
As you can see, solute ions rapidly leave the solution, and solid forms.
A
B
Figure 7.3
effect of adding a crystal to it. Is either of these systems at equilibrium?
These photographs show a supersaturated solution of sodium acetate and the
324 MHR • Unit 4  Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
ExpressLab
Modelling Equilibrium
In this ExpressLab, you will model what happens
when forward and reverse reactions occur. You will
take measurements to gain quantitative insight into
an equilibrium system. Then you will observe the
effect of introducing a change to the equilibrium.
Materials
2 graduated cylinders (25 mL)
2 glass tubes with different diameters (for example,
10 mm and 6 mm)
2 labels or a grease pencil
supply of water, coloured with food dye
Procedure
1. Copy the following table into your notebook, to
record your observations.
Transfer
number
Volume of water in
reactant cylinder (mL)
Volume of water in
product cylinder (mL)
25.0
0.0
0
1
2
7. Add approximately 5 mL of water to the reactant
cylinder. Record the volume in each cylinder.
Then repeat steps 4 and 5 until there is no further
change in volume.
Analysis
1. Plot a graph of the data you collected. Put trans-
fer number on the x-axis and volume of water on
the y-axis. Use different symbols or colours to
distinguish between the reactant volume and the
product volume. Draw the best smooth curve
through the data.
2. In this activity, the volume of water is a model for
concentration. How can you use your graph to
compare the rate of the forward reaction with the
rate of the reverse reaction? What happens to
these rates as the reaction proceeds?
3. At the point where the two curves cross, is the
rate of the forward reaction equal to the rate of
the reverse reaction? Explain.
4. How can you recognize when the system is at
equilibrium?
2. Label one graduated cylinder “reactant.” Label
5. Were the volumes of water (that is, concentra-
the other “product.”
3. Fill the reactant cylinder with coloured water, up
to the 25.0 mL mark. Leave the product cylinder
empty.
4. With your partner, transfer water simultaneously
from one cylinder to the other as follows: Lower
the larger-diameter glass tube into the reactant
cylinder. Keep the top of the tube open. When
the tube touches the bottom of the cylinder,
cover the open end with a ﬁnger. Then transfer
the liquid to the product cylinder. At the same
time as you are transferring liquid into the
product cylinder, your partner must use the
smaller-diameter tube to transfer liquid from
the product cylinder into the reactant cylinder.
5. Remove the glass tubes. Record the volume of
water in each graduated cylinder, to the nearest
0.1 mL.
6. Repeat steps 4 and 5 until there is no further
change in the volumes of water in the graduated
cylinders.
tions of reactants and products) in the two tubes
equal at equilibrium? How do you know?
6. In a chemical reaction, what corresponds to the
addition of more water to the reactant cylinder?
How did the ﬁnal volume of water in the product
cylinder change as a result of adding more water
to the reactant cylinder?
7. Determine the ratio
Volume of product
Volume of reactant
at the
end of the ﬁrst equilibrium and at the end of the
second equilibrium. Within experimental error,
were these two ratios the same or different?
8. In this activity, what do you think determined
the relative volumes of water in the graduated
cylinders? In a real chemical reaction, what
factors might affect the relative concentrations
of reactants and products at equilibrium?
9. Explain why the system in this activity is a
closed system.
Chapter 7  Reversible Reactions and Chemical Equilibrium • MHR 325
Conditions That Apply to All Equilibrium Systems
The fundamental requirement for equilibrium is that opposing changes
must occur at the same rate. There are many processes that reach
equilibrium. Three physical processes that reach equilibrium are
• a solid in contact with a solution that contains this solid: for example,
sugar crystals in a saturated aqueous sugar solution
• the vapour above a pure liquid: for example, a closed jar that contains
liquid water
• the vapour above a pure solid: for example, mothballs in a closed drawer
Two chemical processes that reach equilibrium are
• a reaction with reactants and products in the same phase: for example,
a reaction between two gases to produce a gaseous product. In this
chapter, you will focus on reactions in which the reactants and
products are in the same phase. The equilibrium they reach is called
homogeneous equilibrium.
• a reaction in which reactants and products are in different phases:
for example, an aqueous solution of ions, in which the ions combine to
produce a slightly soluble solid that forms a precipitate. In Chapters 8
and 9, you will work extensively with reactions in which the reactants
and products are in different phases. The equilibrium they reach is
called heterogeneous equilibrium.
What is it that equilibrium systems like these have in common? What con-
ditions are necessary for equilibrium to become established? As outlined
in the box below, there are four conditions that apply to all equilibrium
systems.
The Four Conditions That Apply to All Equilibrium Systems
1. Equilibrium is achieved in a reversible process when the rates of
opposing changes are equal. A double arrow, (cid:2)(cid:3), indicates reversible
changes. For example:
A decomposition reaction is
taking place in a closed con-
tainer, R → P. At equilibrium,
does the concentration of
reactant have to equal the
concentration of product?
Explain your answer.
(cid:2)(cid:3) H2O(g)
H2O((cid:4))
H2(g) + Cl2(g)
(cid:2)(cid:3) 2HCl(g)
2. The observable (macroscopic) properties of a system at equilibrium
are constant. At equilibrium, there is no overall change in the
properties that depend on the total quantity of matter in the
system. Examples of these properties include colour, pressure,
concentration, and pH.
You can summarize the ﬁrst two equilibrium conditions by stating that
equilibrium involves dynamic change at the molecular level but no change
at the macroscopic level.
3. Equilibrium can only be reached in a closed system. A closed system
is a system that does not allow the input or escape of any component
of the equilibrium system, including energy. For this reason, a
system can be at equilibrium only if it is at constant temperature.
A common example of a closed system is carbon dioxide gas that
is in equilibrium with dissolved carbon dioxide in a soda drink.
326 MHR • Unit 4  Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
The system remains at equilibrium as long as the container is not
opened. Note that small changes to the components of a system are
sometimes negligible. Thus, equilibrium principles can be applied
if a system is not physically closed. For example, consider the
equilibrium of a solid in a saturated aqueous solution, such as
CaO(s) + H2O((cid:4))
(aq) . You can neglect the small
amount of water that vaporizes from the open beaker during an
experiment.
(aq) + 2OH−
(cid:2)(cid:3) Ca2+
4. Equilibrium can be approached from either direction. For example,
the proportions of H2(g), Cl2(g), and HCl(g) (in a closed container at
constant temperature) are the same at equilibrium, regardless of
whether you started with H2(g) and Cl(g) or whether you started
with HCl(g).
Section Summary
In this section, you learned how to recognize equilibrium. As well,
you learned about the conditions that are needed for equilibrium to be
reached. Later in this chapter, you will examine what happens when
some equilibrium conditions in a system are changed. You will learn
how chemists can control conditions to increase the yield of reactions.
Energy is an important component of most equilibrium systems. The
input or output of energy in a system causes the temperature to change.
Thus, the requirement that an equilibrium system be closed means that
the temperature of the system must remain constant. In the next section,
you will examine more closely the effects of thermodynamics on
equilibrium systems. In particular, you will examine the factors that
affect the amount of reactant and product in a reaction and the
factors that determine whether or not a reaction is spontaneous.
Section Review
1
2
3
K/U
Give two physical and two chemical processes that are
examples of reversible changes that are not at equilibrium.
K/U
Explain, in terms of reaction rates, how the changes that take
place in a reversible reaction approach equilibrium.
K/U
A sealed carbonated-drink bottle contains a liquid drink with a
space above it. The space contains carbon dioxide at a pressure of
about 405 kPa.
(a) What changes are taking place at the molecular level?
(b) Which macroscopic properties are constant?
4
K/U
Agree or disagree with the following statement, and give reasons
to support your answer: “In a sealed jar of water at equilibrium, the
quantity of water molecules in the liquid state equals the quantity of
water vapour molecules.”
5
I
Ice and slush are a feature of Canadian winters. Under what
conditions do ice and water form an equilibrium mixture?
Electronic Learning Partner
Observe a molecular view
of dynamic equilibrium in
your Chemistry 12 Electronic
Learning Partner.
Chapter 7  Reversible Reactions and Chemical Equilibrium • MHR 327
7.2
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
(cid:2) identify qualitatively entropy
changes that are associated
with physical and chemical
processes
(cid:2) describe how reactions
have a tendency to achieve
minimum energy and
maximum entropy
(cid:2) explain the effect of
changes in enthalpy,
entropy, and temperature
on a chemical reaction
(cid:2) communicate your under-
standing of the following
terms: favourable change,
entropy (S), second law of
thermodynamics, free
energy
Thermodynamics and Equilibrium
You can easily predict what will happen in a number of physical and
chemical processes. What will happen if you let go of a pencil that you
are holding tip-down on a table? What will you observe if you add a few
drops of food colouring to some water in a glass? If a piece of paper starts
to burn in a plentiful supply of air, what are the products of the reaction?
How will an iron nail change if it is left outside? These are all examples
of favourable (or spontaneous) changes. A favourable change is a change
that has a natural tendency to happen under certain conditions.
What Conditions Favour a Change?
What conditions determine whether or not a change is favourable? How
are different conditions related to equilibrium, where forward and reverse
changes occur at the same rate? The answers to these questions are linked
to two important concepts in thermodynamics: enthalpy and entropy.
Enthalpy and Favourable Changes
Energy is a key condition in favourable changes. For example, you know
that a ball always rolls downhill. Its gravitational potential energy is
lower at the bottom of the hill than at the top. For the ball to roll uphill—
an unfavourable (or non-spontaneous) change— you have to apply energy
to the ball. Chemical reactions are similar. When products have less
enthalpy than reactants, the reaction releases energy. Therefore, the
reaction is exothermic. Are favourable changes those that are exothermic
under certain conditions?
Certainly many favourable physical and chemical changes are
exothermic. Some favourable changes, however, involve no release of
energy. Others are actually endothermic. For example, a favourable
endothermic chemical reaction occurs when barium hydroxide and
ammonium thiocyanate are placed in an Erlenmeyer ﬂask, as shown
in Figure 7.4.
Ba(OH)2 • 8H2O(s) + 2NH4SCN(s) → Ba(SCN)2(aq) + 10H2O((cid:4)) + 2NH3(g)
∆H = +170 kJ
When the ﬂask is stoppered and the contents are shaken, the solids
intermingle. The reaction produces a slush-like mixture. This favourable,
but endothermic, reaction absorbs enough energy to freeze a thin layer of
water under the ﬂask.
A favourable
Figure 7.4
endothermic reaction occurs when
barium hydroxide is mixed with
ammonium thiocyanate. If you
removed the stopper in photograph
(B), you would detect the charac-
teristic odour of ammonia.
A
B
328 MHR • Unit 4  Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
Temperature and Favourable Changes
Another condition that determines whether or not a particular reaction is
favoured is temperature. Consider the reversible synthesis reaction
between mercury and oxygen, and the decomposition of mercury(II) oxide.
Hg((cid:4)) + 1
2
O2(g)
(cid:2)(cid:3) HgO(s) ∆H = ± 90.8 kJ
From left to right, the reaction is exothermic. Therefore, the enthalpy
change, ∆H, is negative. If the enthalpy change was the only condition
that determined whether a reaction is favourable, then the synthesis
reaction would take place. The synthesis reaction does take place—but
only at relatively moderate temperatures. Above 400˚C, the reverse
reaction is favourable. The decomposition of HgO(s) occurs. Thus, the
direction in which this reaction proceeds depends on temperature.
This is fundamentally different from the dependence of reaction rate
on temperature that you learned about in Unit 3. The reaction between
Hg((cid:4)), O2(g), and HgO(s) does not just change its rate with a change in
temperature, it changes its direction.
Temperature and Enthalpy Alone
Cannot Explain Favourable Reactions
Temperature and enthalpy are not the only conditions that determine
whether a change is favourable. Consider the process shown in Figure 7.5.
A closed valve links two ﬂasks together. The left ﬂask contains an ideal
gas. The right ﬂask is evacuated. When the valve is opened, you expect the
gas to diffuse into the evacuated ﬂask until the pressure in both ﬂasks is
equal. You do not expect to see the reverse process—with all the gas mole-
cules ending up in one of the ﬂasks—unless work is done on the system.
flask with ideal gas
evacuated flask
ideal gas in both flasks
closed valve
open valve
Figure 7.5
must the gas be ideal?
If the gas is ideal, this favourable change involves no change in energy. Why
The process shown in Figure 7.5 is certainly a favourable change. Yet no
exchange of energy is involved. The condition that inﬂuences this change
is called entropy. It is an important condition in all physical and chemical
changes.
Entropy and Favourable Changes
Entropy, S, is the tendency toward randomness or disorder in a system.
It is also a thermodynamic property that can be measured. It can be used
to describe qualitative changes in energy.
An ordered arrangement of particles (atoms, ions, or molecules) has
lower entropy (smaller disorder) than the same number of particles in
random arrangements. Thus, the entropy of a pure substance depends on
its state. The entropy of a system increases (becomes more disordered)
with temperature, because the motion of particles becomes more chaotic
at higher temperatures. See Figure 7.6 on the next page.
Chapter 7  Reversible Reactions and Chemical Equilibrium • MHR 329
solid
liquid
gas
increasing entropy
Figure 7.6
changes state from solid to liquid to gas.
The entropy of the particles in a sample of matter increases as the matter
The mathematical deﬁnition of entropy describes the probability of a
given arrangement of particles. A system of moving particles with low
entropy probably has greater order than a similar system with higher
entropy. Why say “probably”? Consider gas molecules in a container at
room temperature. The gas molecules are moving rapidly, colliding with
other molecules and the walls of the container. They have relatively large
entropy. What if two different gases occupy the same container? It is pos-
sible, in principle, for the gases to separate so they are on opposite sides
of the container. Given the huge number of particles, however, the proba-
bility of this happening is so close to zero that chemists say it will never
happen. Nevertheless, it remains possible. The outcome is not certain.
As you know from Unit 3, chemists often use the terms “system” and
“surroundings” to describe a chemical reaction. The system is the reaction
itself—the reactants and products. The surroundings are everything else
in the universe. According to the ﬁrst law of thermodynamics (the law
of conservation of energy) the algebraic sum of the energy changes in
a system and its surroundings is zero. Unlike energy, entropy is not
conserved. The total amount of entropy is increasing. This is part of the
second law of thermodynamics: the total entropy of the universe is
constantly increasing. The key word here is “total.” If you are studying
a system, you must add together changes in the entropy of the system,
∆Ssys, and changes in the entropy of the surroundings, ∆Ssurr.
Consider what happens to you and your classmates (the particles in a
“system”) on your way to class. Initially, you and your classmates are in
different places in the school, walking with different velocities toward the
classroom. Going to class represents a relatively large amount of entropy.
The ﬁnal state of the system, when everyone is seated, represents a
330 MHR • Unit 4  Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
smaller amount of entropy. Thus, the entropy of the system decreased.
How, then, did the entropy of the universe increase?
The answer to this question involves changes to the surroundings.
Each of you, on your way to class, metabolized energy. The movement
and heat from your bodies added to the entropy of the air particles around
you. In fact, the increase in the entropy of the surroundings was greater
than the decrease in the entropy of the system. Therefore, the total
entropy of the universe increased.
What does entropy have to do with favourable chemical changes and
equilibrium systems? All favourable changes involve an increase in the
total amount of entropy. Recall the endothermic reaction in Figure 7.4.
Ba(OH)2 • 8H2O(s) + 2NH4SCN(s) → Ba(SCN)2(aq) + 10H2O((cid:4)) + 2NH3(g)
∆H = +170 kJ
The reaction is favourable, partly because the reactants are two solids and
the products are a solution, water, and a gas. The products have a much
larger entropy than the reactants. This helps to make the reaction
favourable.
Now recall the reaction between mercury and oxygen. It favours
the formation of HgO below about 400˚C, but the decomposition of HgO
above 400˚C. This reaction highlights the importance of temperature to
favourable change. Enthalpy, entropy, and temperature are linked in a
concept called free energy.
Free Energy and Equilibrium
Imagine a perfect engine — an engine without any friction between its
moving parts. This engine would still be unable to convert all the energy
in a fuel into useful work. The reason is that some energy, such as the
energy of the hot exhaust, is used to increase the entropy of the surround-
ings. The term free energy means available energy. In a chemical change,
free energy is a measure of the useful work that can be obtained from a
reaction. Free energy is often called Gibbs free energy, and given the
symbol G, in honour of Josiah Willard Gibbs (1839–1903). Gibbs, a
professor of chemistry at Harvard University, developed the concept
of free energy and the equations that describe it.
The change in the free energy of a system, ∆G, at constant temperature
is given by the equation ∆G = ∆H − T∆S. In this equation, as in most
chemistry equations, the temperature, T, must be in Kelvin degrees. The
symbol ∆H represents the change in enthalpy. The symbol ∆S represents
the change in entropy.
change in free energy
change in entropy
∆G = ∆H − T∆S
change in enthalpy
Kelvin temperature
The value of ∆G for a chemical reaction tells us whether the reaction is a
source of useful energy. Such energy can be converted into another form,
such as mechanical energy to drive machinery or electrical energy in a
battery. The rest of the energy from the reaction enters the environment as
heat. It increases the entropy of the surroundings.
Biology
L I N K
The concept of free energy
appears in other areas of
science, notably biology.
Find out the meanings of
the terms “exergonic” and
“endergonic.” How are these
terms related to free energy?
Chapter 7  Reversible Reactions and Chemical Equilibrium • MHR 331
The equation ∆G = ∆H − T∆S, and the sign of ∆G, can help to explain
why some chemical reactions are favourable at room temperature, why
others are not, and how temperature affects the direction of a reaction.
The change in the free energy of a chemical reaction is related
to the direction of the reaction and to equilibrium as follows:
• When ∆G is negative, the forward reaction is favourable.
• When ∆G is zero, the reaction is at equilibrium.
• When ∆G is positive, the reaction is favourable in the reverse direction
but not in the forward direction.
Exothermic reactions are often favourable because the sign of ∆H is
negative. The equation shows that exothermic reactions are unfavourable
only when ∆S is negative and the value of −T∆S is large enough to make
∆G positive. This is what happens in the reaction between mercury
and oxygen.
Hg((cid:4)) + 1
2
∆H = −90.8 kJ
O2(g) → HgO(s)
From left to right, the reaction is exothermic. There is a decrease in
entropy because gas molecules react to form a solid. At temperatures
greater than about 400˚C (673 K), the value of −T∆S is positive and greater
than 90.8 kJ. Thus, ∆G becomes positive. The forward reaction is no
longer favourable, as experiments conﬁrm.
In most reactions, the entropy of the system increases (S is positive),
so the value of −T∆S is negative. Therefore, most reactions tend to be
more favourable at higher temperatures. At low temperatures, reactions
are likely to be favourable only if they are highly exothermic.
Section Summary
Table 7.1 shows how you can use the signs of ∆H and ∆S to determine
whether a chemical reaction is favourable. It also shows how ∆H and ∆S
may vary with temperature. Keep in mind that a favourable reaction may
be fast or slow. Thermodynamics makes no prediction about the rate of a
reaction, only whether or not it can take place. Also, before any reaction
begins, the activation energy must be supplied.
Table 7.1 How the Signs of ∆H and ∆S Affect the Favourability of a Reaction
∆H
−
∆S
+
−T∆S
−
+
−
+
−
−
+
+
+
−
Comments and examples
Both ∆H and ∆S favour the reaction. The
reaction is favourable at all temperatures.
Example: 2O3(g) → 3O2(g)
Neither ∆H nor ∆S favours the reaction. The
reaction is unfavourable at all temperatures.
Example: 3O2(g) → 2O3(g)
∆H is favourable, but ∆S is not. The reaction
is likely to be favourable at relatively
low temperatures.
Example: Hg((cid:4)) +  1
2O2(g) → HgO(s)
–
∆S is favourable, but ∆H is not. The reaction
is likely to be favourable at higher temperatures.
Example: HgO(s) → Hg((cid:4)) +  1
2O2(g)
–
332 MHR • Unit 4  Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
Note that the entropy of a system cannot increase forever. Eventually,
a maximum state of disorder is reached. When this happens, the system
appears to have constant properties, even though changes are still taking
place at the molecular level. We say that a chemical system is at equilibri-
um when it has constant observable properties. Therefore, equilibrium
occurs when a system has reached its maximum entropy. In the next
section, you will look more closely at the reactants and products of
chemical systems and learn how equilibrium is measured.
Section Review
1
2
K/U
Explain the difference between a favourable chemical change
and an unfavourable chemical change. Give two examples of each
type of change.
C
Write a short paragraph, or use a graphic organizer, to show
the relationship among the following concepts: favourable chemical
change, temperature, enthalpy, entropy, free energy.
3
K/U
In each process, how does the entropy of the system change?
(a) ice melting
(b) water vapour condensing
(c) sugar dissolving in water
(d) HCl(g) + NH3(g) → NH4Cl(s)
(e) CaCO3(s) → CaO(s) + CO2(g)
4
K/U
What is the sign of the entropy change in each chemical
reaction?
(a) N2O4(g) → 2NO2(g)
(b) PCl3(g) + Cl2(g) → PCl5(g)
(c) 2Al(s) + 3
2
O2(g) → Al2O3(s)
(d) N2(g) + 3H2(g) → 2NH3(g)
(e) S(s) + O2(g) → SO2(g)
5
When water freezes, the phase change that occurs is exothermic.
I
H2O((cid:4)) → H2O(s) ∆H = −6.02 kJ
Based on the change in enthalpy, you would expect that water would
always freeze. Use the concepts of entropy and free energy to explain
why this phase change is favourable only below 0˚C.
Chapter 7  Reversible Reactions and Chemical Equilibrium • MHR 333
7.3
The Equilibrium Constant
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
(cid:2) express your understanding
of the law of chemical
equilibrium as it applies to
concentrations of reactants
and products at equilibrium
(cid:2) collect experimental data
to determine an equilibrium
constant for concentration
(cid:2) solve equilibrium problems
involving concentrations of
reactants and products
(cid:2) communicate your under-
standing of the following
terms: law of chemical
equilibrium, equilibrium
constant (Kc), ICE table
Chemists use both thermodynamics and rate to study chemical reactions.
Thermodynamics determines whether a reaction will occur at a certain
temperature and when equilibrium will be reached. The rate of a reaction
determines the time it takes for a certain concentration of product to form.
In this section, you will learn about the extent of a reaction: the relative
concentrations of products to reactants at equilibrium.
Opposing Rates and the Law of Chemical Equilibrium
In 1864, two Norwegian chemists, Cato Guldberg and Peter Waage,
summarized their experiments on chemical equilibrium in the law of
chemical equilibrium: At equilibrium, there is a constant ratio between
the concentrations of the products and reactants in any change.
Figure 7.7 shows how the law of chemical equilibrium applies to one
chemical system. Chemists have studied this system extensively. It
involves the reversible reaction between two gases: dinitrogen tetroxide,
which is colourless, and nitrogen dioxide, which is dark brown.
N2O4(g)
colourless
(cid:2)(cid:3) 2NO2(g)
brown
By observing the intensity of the brown colour in the mixture, chemists
can determine the concentration of nitrogen dioxide.
A
B
C
D
n
o
i
t
a
r
t
n
e
c
n
o
C
NO2
N2O4
Time
n
o
i
t
a
r
t
n
e
c
n
o
C
NO2
N2O4
Time
As this system nears equilibrium, the rate of the forward reaction decreases
Figure 7.7
and the rate of the reverse reaction increases. At equilibrium, the macroscopic properties of
this system are constant. Changes at the molecular level take place at equal rates.
334 MHR • Unit 4  Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
Dinitrogen tetroxide gas is produced by vaporizing dinitrogen
tetroxide liquid. Dinitrogen tetroxide liquid boils at 21˚C. If a small
quantity is placed in a sealed ﬂask at 100˚C, it vaporizes, ﬁlling the ﬂask
with dinitrogen tetroxide gas.
Suppose that the initial concentration of N2O4(g) is 0.0200 mol/L.
The initial concentration of NO2(g) is zero. The initial rate of the forward
reaction, kf, is relatively large, while the initial rate of the reverse
reaction, kr, is zero. The initial conditions correspond to the ﬁrst
exchange in the ExpressLab on page 325, where the reactant cylinder was
full and the product cylinder was empty. As the reaction proceeds, the
rate of the forward reaction decreases because the concentration of N2O4(g)
decreases. At the same time, the rate of the reverse reaction increases
because the concentration of NO2(g) increases. At equilibrium, kf = kr.
There are no further changes in the relative amounts of N2O4 and NO2.
How did the ExpressLab on
page 325 model a reaction
approaching equilibrium? How
did it model the situation when
equilibrium was reached?
The Equilibrium Constant
From other experiments involving the reaction between nitrogen
tetroxide and nitrogen dioxide, chemists know that both the forward
and reverse reactions involve elementary steps. Thus, you can write rate
equations for the reactions.
Forward reaction: N2O4(g) → 2NO2(g) Reverse reaction: 2NO2(g) → N2O4(g)
Forward rate:
Reverse rate:
kf [NO2]2
kf [N2O4]
At equilibrium,
Foward rate = Reverse rate
kf [N2O4] = kr [NO2]2
The ratio of rate constants is another constant. The forward rate constant,
kf, divided by the reverse rate constant, kr, is called the equilibrium
constant, Keq.
kf
kr
= Keq = [NO2]2
[N2O4]
You can write rate equations for these reactions because they are
elementary mechanisms. Guldberg and Waage, however, showed that
similar results are found for any reaction, regardless of the mechanism.
For any general equilibrium equation, let P, Q, R, and S represent
chemical formulas and a, b, c, and d represent their respective
coefﬁcients in the chemical equation.
aP + bQ (cid:2)(cid:3) cR + dS
Recall that molar concentrations are indicated by square brackets.
The equilibrium expression is usually expressed in terms of molar
concentrations. Thus, the subscript “c” is usually used instead of “eq”
in the equilibrium constant.
Kc = [R]c[S]d
[P]a[Q]b
This equilibrium expression depends only on the stoichiometry of the
reaction. By convention, chemists always write the concentrations of the
products in the numerator and the concentrations of the reactants in the
denominator. Each concentration term is raised to the power of the coefﬁ-
cient in the chemical equation. The terms are multiplied, never added.
The following Sample Problem shows how to ﬁnd the equilibrium
expression for a reaction. In this chapter, you will use equilibrium
expressions for homogeneous reactions (mostly reactions between gases).
In Chapters 8 and 9, you will learn how to use equilibrium expressions
for heterogeneous systems.
C H E M
FA C T
The law of chemical equili-
brium is sometimes known as
the law of mass action. Before
the term “concentration” was
used, the concept of amount
per unit volume was called
“active mass.”
Chapter 7  Reversible Reactions and Chemical Equilibrium • MHR 335
Sample Problem
Writing Equilibrium Expressions
Problem
One of the steps in the production of sulfuric acid involves the catalytic
oxidation of sulfur dioxide.
2SO2(g) + O2(g) → 2SO3(g)
Write the equilibrium expression.
What Is Required?
You need to ﬁnd an expression for Kc.
What Is Given?
You know the balanced chemical equation.
Plan Your Strategy
The expression for Kc is a fraction. The concentration of the product
is in the numerator, and the concentrations of the reactants are in the
denominator. Each concentration term must be raised to the power of
the coefﬁcient in the balanced equation.
Act on Your Strategy
[SO3]2
Kc =
[SO2]2[O2]
Check Your Solution
The square brackets indicate concentrations. The product is in the
numerator, and each term is raised to the power of the coefﬁcient in
the chemical equation. The coefﬁcient or power of 1 is not written,
thus following chemistry conventions.
Practice Problems
Write the equilibrium expression for each homogeneous reaction.
1. The reaction between ethanol and ethanoic acid to form ethyl
ethanoate and water:
CH3CH2OH((cid:4)) + CH3COOH((cid:4))
(cid:2)(cid:3) CH3CHOOCH2CH3((cid:4)) + H2O((cid:4))
2. The reaction between nitrogen gas and oxygen gas at high
temperatures:
N2(g) + O2(g)
(cid:2)(cid:3) 2NO(g)
3. The reaction between hydrogen gas and oxygen gas to form water
vapour:
2H2(g) + O2(g)
(cid:2)(cid:3) 2H2O(g)
4. The reduction-oxidation equilibrium of iron and iodine ions in
aqueous solution:
(aq) + 2I−
2Fe3+
Note: You will learn about reduction-oxidation reactions in the
next unit.
(aq) + I2(aq)
(cid:2)(cid:3) 2Fe2+
(aq)
5. The oxidation of ammonia (one of the reactions in the production of
nitric acid):
4NH3(g) + 5O2(g)
(cid:2)(cid:3) 4NO(g) + 6H2O(g)
336 MHR • Unit 4  Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
The Equilibrium Constant and Temperature
Adding a chemical that is involved in a reaction at equilibrium increases
the rate at which this chemical reacts. The rate, however, decreases as the
concentration of the added chemical decreases. Eventually, equilibrium
is re-established with the same equilibrium constant. For a given system
at equilibrium, the value of the equilibrium constant depends only on
temperature. Changing the temperature of a reacting mixture changes the
rate of the forward and reverse reactions by different amounts, because
the forward and reverse reactions have different activation energies. A
reacting mixture at one temperature has an equilibrium constant whose
value changes if the mixture is allowed to reach equilibrium at a different
temperature.
The numerical value of the equilibrium constant does not depend
on whether the starting point involves reactants or products. These
are just labels that chemists use to identify particular chemicals in the
reaction mixture. Also, at a given temperature, the value of Kc does not
depend on the starting concentrations. The reaction gives the same ratio
of products and reactants according to the equilibrium law. Remember,
however, that Kc is calculated using concentration values when the
system is at equilibrium.
Sample Problem
Calculating an Equilibrium Constant
Problem
A mixture of nitrogen and chlorine gases was kept at a certain
temperature in a 5.0 L reaction ﬂask.
N2(g) + 3Cl2(g)
(cid:2)(cid:3) 2NCl3(g)
When the equilibrium mixture was analyzed, it was found to contain
0.0070 mol of N2(g), 0.0022 mol of Cl2(g), and 0.95 mol of NCl3(g).
Calculate the equilibrium constant for this reaction.
What Is Required?
You need to calculate the value of Kc.
What Is Given?
You have the balanced chemical equation and the amount of each
substance at equilibrium.
Plan Your Strategy
Step 1 Calculate the molar concentration of each compound at
equilibrium.
Step 2 Write the equilibrium expression. Then substitute the
equilibrium molar concentrations into the expression.
Act on Your Strategy
Step 1 The reaction takes place in a 5.0 L ﬂask. Calculate the molar
concentrations at equilibrium.
[N2] = 0.0070 mol
= 1.4 × 10−3 mol/L
5.0 L
Continued ...
Chapter 7  Reversible Reactions and Chemical Equilibrium • MHR 337
PROBLEM TIP
Notice that units are not
included when using or calcu-
lating the value of Kc. This is
the usual practice. The units
do not help you check your
solution.
Continued ...
[Cl2] = 0.0022 mol
5.0 L
[NCl3] = 0.95 mol
5.0 L
= 1.9 × 10−1 mol/L
= 1.9 × 10−1 mol/L
Step 2 Write the equilibrium expression. Substitute the equilibrium
molar concentrations into the expression.
Kc = [NCl3]2
[N2][Cl2]3
=
(1.9 × 10−1)2
(1.4 × 10−3) × (4.4 × 10−4)3
= 3.0 × 1011
Check Your Solution
The equilibrium expression has the product terms in the numerator
and the reactant terms in the denominator. The exponents in the
equilibrium expression match the corresponding coefﬁcients in the
chemical equation. The molar concentrations at equilibrium were
substituted into the expression.
Practice Problems
6. The following reaction took place in a sealed ﬂask at 250˚C.
(cid:2)(cid:3) PCl3(g) + Cl2(g)
PCl5(g)
At equilibrium, the gases in the ﬂask had the following
concentrations: [PCl5] = 1.2 × 10−2 mol/L, [PCl3] = 1.5 × 10−2 mol/L,
and [Cl2] = 1.5 × 10−2 mol/L. Calculate the value of Kc at 250˚C.
7. Iodine and bromine react to form iodine monobromide, IBr.
(cid:2)(cid:3) 2IBr(g)
I2(g) + Br2(g)
At 250˚C, an equilibrium mixture in a 2.0 L ﬂask contained 0.024 mol
of I2(g), 0.050 mol of Br2(g), and 0.38 mol of IBr(g). What is the value of
Kc for the reaction at 250˚C?
8. At high temperatures, carbon dioxide gas decomposes into carbon
monoxide and oxygen gas. At equilibrium, the gases have the follow-
ing concentrations: [CO2(g)] = 1.2 mol/L, [CO(g)] = 0.35 mol/L, and
[O2(g)] = 0.15 mol/L. Determine Kc at the temperature of the reaction.
9. Hydrogen sulﬁde is a pungent, poisonous gas. At 1400 K, an
equilibrium mixture was found to contain 0.013 mol/L hydrogen,
0.046 mol/L sulfur in the form of S2(g), and 0.18 mol/L hydrogen
sulﬁde. Calculate the equilibrium constant, at 1400 K, for the
following reaction.
2H2S(g)
(cid:2)(cid:3) 2H2(g) + S2(g)
10. Methane, ethyne, and hydrogen form the following equilibrium
mixture.
(cid:2)(cid:3) C2H2(g) + 3H2(g)
2CH4(g)
While studying this reaction mixture, a chemist analyzed a 4.0 L
sealed ﬂask at 1700˚C. The chemist found 0.46 mol of CH4(g), 0.64 mol
of C2H2(g), and 0.92 mol of H2(g). What is the value of Kc for the
reaction at 1700˚C?
338 MHR • Unit 4  Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
Measuring Equilibrium Concentrations
The equilibrium constant, Kc, is calculated by substituting equilibrium
concentrations into the equilibrium expression. Experimentally, this
means that a reaction mixture must come to equilibrium. Then one or
more properties are measured. The properties that are measured depend
on the reaction. Common examples for gaseous reactions include colour,
pH, and pressure. From these measurements, the concentrations of the
reacting substances can be determined. Thus, you do not need to measure
all the concentrations in the mixture at equilibrium. You can determine
some equilibrium concentrations if you know the initial concentrations
of the reactants and the concentration of one product at equilibrium.
For example, a mixture of iron(III) nitrate and potassium thiocyanate,
(aq) . The reactant solutions are nearly colourless. The product
in aqueous solution, react to form the iron(III) thiocyanate ion,
Fe(SCN)2+
solution ranges in colour from orange to blood-red, depending on its
concentration. The nitrate and potassium ions are spectators. Therefore,
the net ionic equation is
Fe3+
(cid:2)(cid:3) Fe(SCN)2+
(aq)
(aq)
(aq) + SCN−
colourless
red
Think about a chemical system
at equilibrium. Are the concen-
trations of the reactants and
products in the same ratio
as the coefﬁcients in the
chemical equation? Explain
your answer.
Because the reaction involves a colour change, you can determine the
concentration of Fe(SCN)2+
(aq) by measuring the intensity of the colour.
You will ﬁnd out how to do this in Investigation 7-A. For now, assume
that it can be done. From the measurements of colour intensity, you
can calculate the equilibrium concentration of Fe(SCN)2+
(aq) . Then,
knowing the initial concentration of each solution, you can calculate
the equilibrium concentration of each ion using the chemical equation.
Suppose, for instance, that the initial concentration of Fe3+
(aq) is
(aq) is 0.0010 mol/L.
(aq) react. So, if there is 4.5 × 10−4 mol/L of Fe(SCN)2+
(aq) is 4.5 × 10−4 mol/L . From the stoichiometry of the equation,
(aq) forms when equal amounts of Fe3+
0.0064 mol/L and the initial concentration of SCN−
When the solutions are mixed, the red complex ion forms. By measuring
the intensity of its colour, you can determine that the concentration of
Fe(SCN)2+
each mole of Fe(SCN)2+
SCN−
equilibrium, then the same amounts of both Fe3+
(aq) must
have reacted. This represents the change in their concentrations. The
equilibrium concentration of a reacting species is the sum of its initial
concentration and the change that results from the reaction. Therefore,
the concentration of Fe3+
0.005 95 mol/L, or 0.0060 mol/L. You can calculate the equilibrium
concentration of SCN−
(aq) at equilibrium is (0.0064 − 0.000 45) mol/L =
(aq) and SCN−
(aq) the same way, and complete the table below.
−
(aq) and
(aq) at
Concentration (mol/L)
Fe3+
(aq)
+
SCN
(aq)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
Fe(SCN)2+
(aq)
Initial
Change
Equilibrium
0.0064
−4.5 × 10−4
0.0060
0.0010
−4.5 × 10−4
5.5 × 10−4
0
4.5 × 10−4
4.5 × 10−4
Finally, you can calculate Kc by substituting the equilibrium
concentrations into the equilibrium expression.
In the following investigation, you will collect experimental data
to determine an equilibrium constant.
Chapter 7  Reversible Reactions and Chemical Equilibrium • MHR 339
S K I L L   F O C U S
Predicting
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
Communicating results
(aq)
(aq) ions. You will calculate the
You will prepare four equilibrium mixtures
with different initial concentrations of Fe3+
ions and SCN−
initial concentrations of these reacting ions from
the volumes and concentrations of the stock
solutions used, and the total volumes of the
equilibrium mixtures. Then you will determine
the concentration of Fe(SCN)2+ ions in each
mixture by comparing the colour intensity of the
mixture with the colour intensity of a solution
that has known concentration. After you ﬁnd
the concentration of Fe(SCN)2+ ions, you will
use it to calculate the concentrations of the
other two ions at equilibrium. You will substitute
the three concentrations for each mixture into
the equilibrium expression to determine the
equilibrium constant.
Measuring an
Equilibrium Constant
The colour intensity of a solution is related to the
concentration of the ions and the depth of the
solution. By adjusting the depth of a solution
with unknown concentration until it has the
same intensity as a solution with known concen-
tration, you can determine the concentration
of the unknown solution. For example, if the
concentration of a solution is lower than the
standard, the depth of the solution has to be
greater in order to have the same colour intensity.
Thus, the ratio of the concentrations of two solu-
tions with the same colour intensity is inversely
proportional to the ratio of their depths.
In this investigation, you will examine
the homogeneous equilibrium between
iron(III) (ferric) ions, thiocyanate ions, and
ferrithiocyanate ions, Fe(SCN)2+ .
(aq) + SCN−
(cid:2)(cid:3) Fe(SCN)2+
Fe3+
(aq)
(aq)
Which solution is the least concentrated? Why is the colour intensity the same when you look vertically through the solutions?
340 MHR • Unit 4  Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
Question
What is the value of the equilibrium constant at
room temperature for the following reaction?
Fe3+
(aq) + SCN−
(aq)
(cid:2)(cid:3) Fe(SCN)2+
(aq)
Prediction
Write the equilibrium expression for this
reaction.
Safety Precautions
• The Fe(NO3)3 solution is acidiﬁed with nitric
acid. It should be handled with care. Wash any
spills on your skin or clothing with plenty of
water, and inform your teacher.
• All glassware must be clean and dry before
using it.
Materials
3 beakers (100 mL)
5 test tubes (18 mm × 150 mm)
5 ﬂat-bottom vials
test tube rack
labels or grease pencil
thermometer
stirring rod
strip of paper
diffuse light source, such as a light box
medicine dropper
3 Mohr pipettes (5.0 mL)
20.0 mL Mohr pipette
pipette bulb
30 mL 0.0020 mol/L KSCN(aq)
30 mL 0.0020 mol/L Fe(NO3)3(aq) (acidiﬁed)
25 mL 0.200 mol/L Fe(NO3)3(aq) (acidiﬁed)
distilled water
Procedure
1. Copy the following tables into your notebook,
and give them titles. You will use the tables to
record your measurements and calculations.
2. Label ﬁve test tubes and ﬁve vials with the
numbers 1 through 5. Label three beakers
with the names and concentrations of the
stock solutions: 2.00 × 10−3 mol/L KSCN,
2.00 × 10−3 mol/L Fe(NO3)3, and 0.200 mol/L
Fe(NO3)3. Pour about 30 mL of each stock
solution into its labelled beaker. Be sure to
distinguish between the different concentra-
tions of the iron(III) nitrate solutions. Make
sure that you choose the correct solution when
needed in the investigation. Measure the vol-
ume of each solution as carefully as possible
to ensure the accuracy of your results.
Test tube
Fe(NO3)3  (mL)
H2O (mL)
KSCN (mL)
Initial  [SCN–] (mol/L)
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
3.0
2.0
1.0
0
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
Depth of solution
in vial (mm)
Depth of
standard solution (mm)
Depth of standard solution
Depth of solution in vial
2
3
4
5
Vial
2
3
4
5
Chapter 7  Reversible Reactions and Chemical Equilibrium • MHR 341
3. Prepare the standard solution of FeSCN2+ in
test tube 1. Use the 20 mL Mohr pipette to
transfer 18.0 mL of 0.200 mol/L Fe(NO3)3(aq)
into the test tube. Then use a 5 mL pipette to
add 2.0 mL of 2.00 × 10−3 mol/L KSCN. The
large excess of Fe3+
SCN−
(aq) will react to form Fe(SCN)2+
4. Pipette 5.0 mL of 2.0 × 10−3 mol/L Fe(NO3)3(aq)
(aq) is to ensure that all the
(aq) .
into each of the other four test tubes
(labelled 2 to 5).
5. Pipette 3.0 mL, 2.0 mL, 1.0 mL, and 0 mL
of distilled water into test tubes 2 to 5.
6. Pipette 2.0 mL, 3.0 mL, 4.0 mL, and 5.0 mL of
2.0 × 10−3 mol/L KSCN(aq) into test tubes 2 to
5. Each of these test tubes should now contain
10.0 mL of solution. Notice that the ﬁrst table
you prepared (in step 1) shows the volumes of
the liquids you added to the test tubes. Use a
stirring rod to mix each solution. (Remember
to rinse the stirring rod with water and then
dry it with a paper towel before you stir each
solution. Measure and record the temperature
of one of the solutions. Assume that all the
solutions are at the same temperature.
7. Pour about 5 mL of the standard solution from
test tube 1 into vial 1.
8. Pour some of the solution from test tube 2
into vial 2. Look down through vials 1 and 2.
Add enough solution to vial 2 to make its
colour intensity about the same as the colour
intensity of the solution in vial 1. Use a sheet
of white paper as background to make your
rough colour intensity comparison.
9. Wrap a sheet of paper around vials 1 and 2
to prevent light from entering the sides of the
solutions. Looking down through the vials
over a diffuse light source, adjust the volume
of the standard solution in vial 1 until the
colour intensity in the vials is the same. Use
a medicine dropper to remove or add standard
solution. Be careful not to add standard
solution to vial 2.
10. When the colour intensity is the same in
both vials, measure and record the depth of
solution in each vial as carefully as possible.
11. Repeat steps 9 and 10 using vials 3 to 5.
12. Discard the solutions into the container
supplied by your teacher. Rinse the test tubes
and vials with distilled water. Then return all
the equipment. Wash your hands.
13. Copy the following table into your notebook,
to summarize the results of your calculations.
(a) Calculate the equilibrium concentration of
Fe(SCN)2+ in the standard solution you pre-
pared in test tube 1. The [Fe(SCN)2+]standard
is essentially the same as the starting con-
centration of SCN−
(aq) in test tube 1. The
large excess of Fe3+
(aq) ensured that the
reaction of SCN− was almost complete.
Remember, however, to include the
volume of Fe(NO3)3(aq) in the total volume
of the solution for your calculation.
Test tube
Initial concentrations
[Fe3+]i
[SCN−]i
Equilibrium concentrations
[Fe3+]eq
[SCN−]eq
[Fe(SCN)2+]eq
Equilibrium constant, Kc
2
3
4
5
342 MHR • Unit 4  Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
3. Use your four sets of data to evaluate the
following expressions:
[Fe(SCN)2+][Fe3+][SCN−]
[Fe3+] + [SCN−]
[Fe(SCN)2+]
Do these expressions give a value that is more
constant than your equilibrium constant?
Make up another expression, and evaluate it
using your four sets of data. How constant is
its value?
4. Suppose that the following reaction was the
(aq)
(cid:2)(cid:3) Fe(SCN)2
equilibrium reaction.
(aq) + 2SCN−
Fe3+
(a) Would the equilibrium concentration of the
product be different from the concentration
of the product in the actual reaction?
Explain.
(aq)
+
(b) Would the value of Kc be different from the
value you calculated earlier? Explain.
Conclusion
5. Write a short conclusion, summarizing your
results for this investigation.
(aq)
(b) Calculate the initial concentration of Fe3+
in test tubes 2 to 5. [Fe3+]i is the same in
these four test tubes. They all contained the
same volume of Fe(NO3)3(aq), and the total
ﬁnal volume was the same. Remember to
use the total volume of the solution in your
calculation.
(c) Calculate the initial concentration of
(aq) in test tubes 2 to 5. [SCN−]i is
SCN−
different in each test tube.
(d) Calculate the equilibrium concentration
of Fe(SCN)2+ in test tubes 2 to 5. Use the
following equation:
[FeSCN2+]eq = Depth of standard solution
Depth of solution in vial
× [FeSCN2+]standard
(e) Based on the stoichiometry of the reaction,
each mole of Fe(SCN)2+ is formed by the
reaction of one mole of Fe3+ with one mole
of SCN−. Thus, you can ﬁnd the equilibri-
um concentrations of these ions by using
the equations below:
[Fe3+]eq = [Fe3+]i − [Fe(SCN)2+]eq
[SCN−]eq = [SCN−]i − [Fe(SCN)2+]eq
(f) Calculate four values for the equilibrium
constant, Kc, by substituting the equilibri-
um concentrations into the equilibrium
expression. Find the average of your four
values for Kc.
Analysis
1. How did the colour intensity of the solutions
in test tubes 2 to 5 vary at equilibrium?
Explain your observation.
2. How consistent are the four values you
calculated for Kc? Suggest reasons that could
account for any differences.
Chapter 7  Reversible Reactions and Chemical Equilibrium • MHR 343
Equilibrium Calculations
The Sample Problems that follow all involve homogeneous equilibrium
systems. Each problem illustrates a particular type of system and includes
brief tips. Each problem also includes a table like the one on page 339 to
organize the data. Because this table is used to record the initial, change,
and equilibrium values of the reacting species, it is often called an ICE
table. In Chapters 8 and 9, you will use ICE tables again to help you solve
problems that involve heterogeneous equilibrium systems.
Sample Problem
Finding Equilibrium Amounts From Initial Amounts and Kc
Problem
The following reaction increases the proportion of hydrogen gas for use
as a fuel.
CO(g) + H2O(g)
(cid:2)(cid:3) H2(g) + CO2(g)
This reaction has been studied at different temperatures to ﬁnd the
optimum conditions. At 700 K, the equilibrium constant is 8.3. Suppose
that you start with 1.0 mol of CO(g) and 1.0 mol of H2O(g) in a 5.0 L
container. What amount of each substance will be present in the
container when the gases are at equilibrium, at 700 K?
What Is Required?
You need to ﬁnd the amount (in moles) of CO(g), H2O(g), H2(g), and CO2(g)
at equilibrium.
What Is Given?
You have the balanced chemical equation. You know the initial amount
of each gas, the volume of the container, and the equilibrium constant.
Plan Your Strategy
Step 1 Calculate the initial concentrations.
Step 2 Set up an ICE table. Record the initial concentrations you
calculated in step 1 in your ICE table. Let the change in molar
concentrations of the reactants be x. Use the stoichiometry of
the chemical equation to write and record expressions for the
equilibrium concentrations.
Step 3 Write the equilibrium expression. Substitute the expressions for
the equilibrium concentrations into the equilibrium expression.
Solve the equilibrium expression for x.
Step 4 Calculate the equilibrium concentration of each gas. Then use the
volume of the container to ﬁnd the amount of each gas.
Act on Your Strategy
Step 1 The initial amount of CO is equal to the initial amount of H2O.
∴[CO] = [H2O] = 1.0 mol
5.0 L
= 0.20 mol/L
PROBLEM TIP
Generally, it is best to let
x represent the substance with
the smallest coefﬁcient in the
chemical equation. This helps
to avoid fractional values of x
in the equilibrium expression.
Fractional values make solving
the expression more difﬁcult.
344 MHR • Unit 4  Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
PROBLEM TIP
In this problem, the right-
hand side of the equilibrium
expression is a perfect square.
Noticing perfect squares, then
taking the square root of both
sides, makes solving the equa-
tion easier. It avoids solving a
quadratic equation.
Step 2 Set up an ICE table.
Concentration (mol/L)
Initial
Change
CO(g)
0.20
−x
+
H2O(g)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
H2(g)
+
CO2(g)
0.20
−x
0
+x
0 + x
0
+x
0 + x
Equilibrium
0.20 − x
0.20 − x
Step 3
Kc = [H2][CO2]
[CO][H2O]
0.83 =
(x)(x)
(0.20 − x)(0.20 − x)
=
(x)2
(0.20 − x)2
± 0.911 =
(x)
(0.20 − x)
Solving for both values,
x = 0.148 and x = 0.306
Step 4 The value x = 0.306 is physically impossible because it would
result in a negative concentration of both CO and H2O at
equilibrium.
∴[H2] = [CO2] = 0.15 mol/L
[CO] = [H2O] = 0.20 − 0.15 = 0.05 mol/L
To ﬁnd the amount of each gas, multiply the concentration of each
gas by the volume of the container (5.0 L).
Amount of H2(g) = CO2(g) = 0.75 mol
Amount of CO(g) = H2O(g) = 0.25 mol
Check Your Solution
The equilibrium expression has product terms in the numerator
and reactant terms in the denominator. The amounts of chemicals at
equilibrium are given in moles. Check Kc.
Kc = (0.75)2
(0.25)2
This is close to the given value, Kc = 8.3. The difference is due to
mathematical rounding.
= 9.0
Many problems do not involve perfect squares. You may need to use a
quadratic equation to solve the equilibrium expression.
Sample Problem
Solving an Equilibrium Expression Using a Quadratic Equation
Problem
The following reaction has an equilibrium constant of 25.0 at 1100 K.
H2(g) + I2(g)
(cid:2)(cid:3) 2HI(g)
2.00 mol of H2(g) and 3.00 mol of I2(g) are placed in a 1.00 L reaction
vessel at 1100 K. What is the equilibrium concentration of each gas?
Continued ...
Chapter 7  Reversible Reactions and Chemical Equilibrium • MHR 345
Continued ...
What Is Required?
You need to ﬁnd [H2], [I2], and [HI].
What Is Given?
You have the balanced chemical equation. You know the equilibrium
constant for the reaction, Kc = 25. You also know the concentrations of
the reactants and product: [H2]i = 2.00 mol/L , [I2]i = 3.00 mol/L, and
[HI]i = 0.
Plan Your Strategy
Step 1 Set up an ICE table. Let the change in molar concentrations of the
reactants be x. Use the stoichiometry of the chemical equation to
write expressions for the equilibrium concentrations. Record these
expressions in your ICE table.
Step 2 Write the equilibrium expression. Substitute the expressions for
the equilibrium concentrations into the equilibrium expression.
Rearrange the equilibrium expression into the form of a quadratic
equation. Solve the quadratic equation for x.
Step 3 Substitute x into the equilibrium line of the ICE table to ﬁnd the
equilibrium concentrations.
Act on Your Strategy
Step 1 Set up an ICE table.
Concentration (mol/L)
Initial
Change
+
H2(g)
2.00
−x
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
I2(g)
3.00
−x
Equilibrium
2.00 − x
3.00 − x
Step 2 Write and solve the equilibrium expression.
2HI(g)
0
+2x
+2x
Kc = [HI]2
[H2][I2]
25.0 =
(2x)2
(2.00 − x)(3.00 − x)
This equation does not involve a perfect square. It must be
re-arranged into a quadratic equation.
0.840x2 − 5.00x + 6.00 = 0
Recall that a quadratic equation of the form ax2 + bx + c = 0
has the following solution:
√
−b ±
b2 − 4ac
2a
−(−5.00) ±
√
x =
∴x =
= 5.00 ± 2.2
1.68
25.0 − 20.16
1.68
PROBLEM TIP
In the equilibrium expression,
the numerator is [HI]2. The
concentration is 2x, so the
substitution is (2x)2 = 4x 2.
A common mistake is to write
2x 2. You can avoid this mistake
by using brackets.
x = 4.3 and x = 1.7
346 MHR • Unit 4  Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
Step 3 The value x = 4.3 is not physically possible. It would result in
negative concentrations of H2 and I2 at equilibrium. The concen-
tration of each substance at equilibrium is found by substituting
x = 1.7 into the last line of the ICE table.
Concentration (mol/L)
H2(g)
+
I2(g)
Equilibrium
2.00 − 1.7
3.00 − 1.7
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
2HI(g)
3.4
Applying the rule for subtraction involving measured values,
[H2] = 0.3 mol/L
[I2] = 1.3 mol/L
[HI] = 3.4 mol/L
Check Your Solution
The coefﬁcients in the chemical equation match the exponents in the
equilibrium expression. To check your concentrations, substitute them
back into the equilibrium expression.
3.42
0.3 × 1.3
Kc =
= 30
Solving the quadratic equation gives a value of x, correct to one
decimal place. As a result, [H2] can have only one signiﬁcant ﬁgure.
The calculated value of Kc is equal to the given value, within the error
introduced by rounding.
Practice Problems
11. At 25˚C, the value of Kc for the following reaction is 82.
(cid:2)(cid:3) 2ICl(g)
I2(g) + Cl2(g)
0.83 mol of I2(g) and 0.83 mol of Cl2(g) are placed in a 10 L container
at 25˚C. What are the concentrations of the three gases at equilibrium?
12. At a certain temperature, Kc = 4.0 for the following reaction.
(cid:2)(cid:3) H2(g) + F2(g)
2HF(g)
A 1.0 L reaction vessel contained 0.045 mol of F2(g) at equilibrium.
What was the initial amount of HF in the reaction vessel?
13. A chemist was studying the following reaction.
(cid:2)(cid:3) NO(g) + SO3(g)
SO2(g) + NO2(g)
In a 1.0 L container, the chemist added 1.7 × 10−1 mol of SO2(g) to
1.1 × 10−1 mol of NO2(g). The value of Kc for the reaction at a certain
temperature is 4.8. What is the equilibrium concentration of SO3(g) at
this temperature?
14. Phosgene, COCl2(g), is an extremely toxic gas. It was used during
World War I. Today it is used to manufacture pesticides, pharmaceuti-
cals, dyes, and polymers. It is prepared by mixing carbon monoxide
and chlorine gas.
CO(g) + Cl2(g)
(cid:2)(cid:3) COCl2(g)
Continued ...
Chapter 7  Reversible Reactions and Chemical Equilibrium • MHR 347
Continued ...
0.055 mol of CO(g) and 0.072 mol of Cl2(g) are placed in a 5.0 L
container. At 870 K, the equilibrium constant is 0.20. What are the
equilibrium concentrations of the mixture at 870 K?
15. Hydrogen bromide decomposes at 700 K.
(cid:2)(cid:3) H2(g) + Br2(g) Kc = 4.2 × 10−9
2HBr(g)
0.090 mol of HBr is placed in a 2.0 L reaction vessel and heated to
700 K. What is the equilibrium concentration of each gas?
Qualitatively Interpreting the Equilibrium Constant
The Sample Problem on page 344 showed how to calculate the amounts of
gases at equilibrium for the following reaction.
CO(g) + H2O(g)
(cid:2)(cid:3) H2(g) + CO2(g)
Recall that the equilibrium constant for this reaction was 8.3 at 700 K.
1.0 mol of CO(g) and 1.0 mol of H2O(g) were put in a 5.0 L container. At
equilibrium, 0.48 mol of H2(g) and 0.48 mol of CO2(g) were present. The
starting amounts were in stoichiometric ratios. Consequently, if the reac-
tion had gone to completion, there would have been no limiting reactant.
You would have expected 1.0 mol of both H2(g) and CO2(g). Thus, you can
calculate the percent yield of the reaction as follows:
Percent yield = Equilibrium [H2] × 100%
= 0.48 × 100%
1.0
Maximum [H2]
= 48%
This value indicates the extent of the reaction. It is linked to the size of
Kc. As you know, the equilibrium expression is always written with the
product terms over the reactant terms. Therefore, a large Kc means that the
concentration of products is larger than the concentration of reactants at
equilibrium. When referring to a reaction with a large Kc, chemists often
say that the position of equilibrium lies to the right, or that it favours the
products. Similarly, if Kc is small, the concentration of reactants is larger
than the concentration of products. Chemists say that the position of
equilibrium lies to the left, or that it favours reactants. Thus, the
following general statements are true:
• When K > 1, products are favoured. The equilibrium lies far to the right.
Reactions where K is greater than 1010 are usually regarded as going to
completion.
• When K ≈ 1, there are approximately equal concentrations of reactants
and products at equilibrium.
• When K < 1, reactants are favoured. The equilibrium lies far to the left.
Reactions in which K is smaller than 10−10 are usually regarded as not
taking place at all.
Notice that the subscript “c” has been left off K in these general state-
ments. This reﬂects the fact that there are other equilibrium constants
that these statements apply to, not just equilibrium constants involving
concentrations. You will learn about other types of equilibrium constants
in the next two chapters. For the rest of this chapter, though, you will
continue to see the subscript “c” used.
348 MHR • Unit 4  Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
Does a small value of Kc
indicate a slow reaction? Use
an example to justify your
answer.
In the Sample Problem and Practice Problems below, you will
consider how temperature affects the extent of a reaction. Keep in mind
that the size of Kc is not related to the time that a reaction takes to achieve
equilibrium. Very large values of Kc may be associated with reactions
that take place extremely slowly. The time that a reaction takes to reach
equilibrium depends on the rate of the reaction. This is determined by
the size of the activation energy.
Sample Problem
Temperature and the Extent of a Reaction
Problem
Consider the reaction of carbon monoxide and chlorine to form
phosgene, COCl2(g).
CO(g) + Cl2(g)
(cid:2)(cid:3) COCl2(g)
At 870 K, the value of Kc is 0.20. At 370 K, the value of Kc is 4.6 × 107 .
Based on only the values of Kc, is the production of COCl2(g) more
favourable at the higher or lower temperature?
What Is Required?
You need to choose the temperature that favours the greater
concentration of product.
What Is Given?
Kc = 0.2 at 870 K
Kc = 4.6 × 107 at 370 K
Plan Your Strategy
Phosgene is a product in the chemical equation. A greater concentration
of product corresponds to a larger value of Kc.
Act on Your Strategy
The value of Kc is larger at 370 K. The position of equilibrium lies far
to the right. It favours the formation of COCl2 at the lower temperature.
Check Your Solution
The problem asked you to choose the temperature for a larger concentra-
tion of the product. Kc is expressed as a fraction with product terms in
the numerator. Therefore, the larger value of Kc corresponds to the larger
concentration of product.
Practice Problems
16. For the reaction H2(g) + I2(g)
(cid:2)(cid:3) 2HI(g), the value of Kc is 25.0 at 1100 K
and 8.0 × 102 at room temperature, 300 K. Which temperature favours
the dissociation of HI(g) into its component gases?
17. Three reactions, and their equilibrium constants, are given below.
I. N2(g) + O2(g)
II. 2NO(g) + O2(g)
III. N2O4(g)
(cid:2)(cid:3) 2NO(g) Kc = 4.7 × 10−31
(cid:2)(cid:3) 2NO2(g) Kc = 1.8 × 10−6
(cid:2)(cid:3) 2NO2(g) Kc = 0.025
Continued ...
Chapter 7  Reversible Reactions and Chemical Equilibrium • MHR 349
Continued ...
Arrange these reactions in the order of their tendency to form
products.
18. Identify each reaction as essentially going to completion or
not taking place.
(a) N2(g) + 3Cl2(g)
(b) 2CH4(g)
(c) 2NO(g) + 2CO(g)
(cid:2)(cid:3) 2NCl3(g) Kc = 3.0 × 1011
(cid:2)(cid:3) C2H6(g) + H2(g) Kc = 9.5 × 10−13
(cid:2)(cid:3) N2(g) + 2CO2(g) Kc = 2.2 × 1059
19. Most metal ions combine with other ions in solution. For example,
in aqueous ammonia, silver(I) ions are at equilibrium with different
complex ions.
(cid:2)(cid:3) [Ag(NH3)2]+
[Ag(H2O)2]+
At room temperature, Kc for this reaction is 1 × 107. Which of the
two silver complex ions is more stable? Explain your reasoning.
(aq) + 2NH3(aq)
(aq) + 2H2O((cid:4))
20. Consider the following reaction.
(cid:2)(cid:3) 2HCl(g) Kc = 2.4 × 1033 at 25˚C
H2(g) + Cl2(g)
HCl(g) is placed in a reaction vessel. To what extent do you expect the
equilibrium mixture to dissociate into H2(g) and Cl2(g)?
The Meaning of a Small Equilibrium Constant
Understanding the meaning of a small equilibrium constant can
sometimes help to simplify a calculation that would otherwise involve
a quadratic equation. When Kc is small compared with the initial concen-
tration, the value of the initial concentration minus x is approximately
equal to the initial concentration. Thus, you can ignore x. Of course, if the
initial concentration of a substance is zero, any equilibrium concentration
of the substance, no matter how small, is signiﬁcant. In general, values
of Kc are not measured with accuracy better than 5%. Therefore, making
the approximation is justiﬁed if the calculation error you introduce is
less than 5%.
To help you decide whether or not the approximation is justiﬁed,
divide the initial concentration by the value of Kc. If the answer is greater
than 500, the approximation is justiﬁed. If the answer is between 100 and
500, it may be justiﬁed. If the answer is less than 100, it is not justiﬁed.
The equilibrium expression must be solved in full.
Sample Problem
Using the Approximation Method
Problem
The atmosphere contains large amounts of oxygen and nitrogen. The two
gases do not react, however, at ordinary temperatures. They do react at
high temperatures, such as the temperatures produced by a lightning
ﬂash or a running car engine. In fact, nitrogen oxides from exhaust gases
are a serious pollution problem.
A chemist is studying the following equilibrium reaction.
N2(g) + O2(g)
(cid:2)(cid:3) 2NO(g)
350 MHR • Unit 4  Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
The chemist puts 0.085 mol of N2(g) and 0.038 mol of O2(g) in a 1.0 L
rigid cylinder. At the temperature of the exhaust gases from a particular
engine, the value of Kc is 4.2 × 10−8. What is the concentration of NO(g)
in the mixture at equilibrium?
What Is Required?
You need to ﬁnd the concentration of NO at equilibrium.
What Is Given?
You have the balanced chemical equation. You know the value of Kc and
the following concentrations: [N2] = 0.085 mol/L and [O2] = 0.038 mol/L.
Plan Your Strategy
Step 1 Divide the smallest initial concentration by Kc to determine
whether you can ignore the change in concentration.
Step 2 Set up an ICE table. Let x represent the change in [N2] and [O2].
Step 3 Write the equilibrium expression. Substitute the equilibrium
concentrations into the equilibrium expression. Solve the
equilibrium expression for x.
Step 4 Calculate [NO] at equilibrium.
Act on Your Strategy
Step 1
Smallest initial concentration
Kc
=
0.038
4.2 × 10−8
= 9.0 × 105
Because this is well above 500, you can ignore the changes in
[N2] and [O2].
Step 2
Concentration (mol/L)
Initial
Change
+
N2(g)
0.085
−x
O2(g)
0.038
−x
Equilibrium
0.085 − x ≈ 0.085
0.038 − x ≈ 0.038
Step 3
Kc = [NO]2
[N2][O2]
(2x)2
0.085 × 0.038
−8 =
4.2 × 10
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
2NO(g)
0
+2x
2x
=
x =
4x2
0.003 23
√
3.39 × 10−11
= 5.82 × 10
−6
Step 4 [NO] = 2x
Therefore, the concentration of NO(g) at equilibrium is 1.2 × 10−5 mol/L.
Continued ...
Chapter 7  Reversible Reactions and Chemical Equilibrium • MHR 351
Continued ...
Check Your Solution
First, check your assumption that x is negligible compared with the
initial concentrations. Your assumption is valid because, using the rules
for subtracting measured quantities, 0.038 − (5.8 × 10−6) = 0.038. Next,
check the equilibrium values:
(1.2 × 10−5)2
0.0085 × 0.038
= 4.5 × 10−8
This is equal to the equilibrium constant, within rounding errors in the
calculation.
Practice Problems
21. The following equation represents the equilibrium reaction for the
dissociation of phosgene gas.
(cid:2)(cid:3) CO(g) + Cl2(g)
COCl2(g)
At 100˚C, the value of Kc for this reaction is 2.2 × 10−8. The initial
concentration of COCl2(g) in a closed container at 100˚C is 1.5 mol/L.
What are the equilibrium concentrations of CO(g) and Cl2(g)?
22. Hydrogen sulﬁde is a poisonous gas with a characteristic, offensive
(cid:2)(cid:3) 2H2(g) + S2(g)
odour.  It dissociates at 1400˚C, with Kc equal to 2.4 × 10−4.
H2S(g)
4.0 mol of H2S is placed in a 3.0 L container. What is the equilibrium
concentration of H2(g) at 1400˚C?
23. At a certain temperature, the value of Kc for the following reaction is
(cid:2)(cid:3) N2(g) + 3Cl2(g)
3.3 × 10−12.
2NCl3(g)
A certain amount of nitrogen trichloride, NCl3(g), is put in a 1.0 L
reaction vessel at this temperature. At equilibrium, 4.6 × 10−4 mol
of N2(g) is present. What amount of NCl3(g) was put in the reaction
vessel?
24. At a certain temperature, the value of Kc for the following reaction
(cid:2)(cid:3) 2NO(g)
is 4.2 × 10−8.
N2(g) + O2(g)
0.45 mol of N2(g) and 0.26 mol of O2(g) are put in a 6.0 L reaction
vessel. What is the equilibrium concentration of NO(g) at this
temperature?
25. At a particular temperature, Kc for the decomposition of carbon
dioxide gas is 2.0 × 10−6.
(cid:2)(cid:3) 2CO(g) + O2(g)
2CO2(g)
3.0 mol of CO2 is put in a 5.0 L container. Calculate the equilibrium
concentration of each gas.
352 MHR • Unit 4  Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
Section Summary
In this section, you learned that the equilibrium constant, Kc, is a ratio
of product concentrations to reactant concentrations. You used concentra-
tions to ﬁnd K, and you used K to ﬁnd concentrations. You also used an
ICE table to track and summarize the initial, change, and equilibrium
quantities in a reaction. You found that the value of Kc is small for reac-
tions that reach equilibrium with a high concentration of reactants, and
the value of Kc is large for reactions that reach equilibrium with a low
concentration of reactants. In the next section, you will learn how to
determine whether or not a reaction is at equilibrium, and, if it is not,
in which direction it will go to achieve equilibrium.
Section Review
1
K/U
Write equilibrium expressions for each homogeneous reaction.
(cid:2)(cid:3) SbCl3(g) + Cl2(g)
(a) SbCl5(g)
(b) 2H2(g) + 2NO(g)
(c) 2H2S(g) + CH4(g)
(cid:2)(cid:3) N2(g) + 2H2O(g)
(cid:2)(cid:3) 4H2(g) + CS2(g)
2
I
When 1.0 mol of ammonia gas is injected into a 0.50 L ﬂask, the
following reaction proceeds to equilibrium.
(cid:2)(cid:3) N2(g) + 3H2(g)
2NH3(g)
At equilibrium, 0.30 mol of hydrogen gas is present.
(a) Calculate the equilibrium concentrations of N2(g) and NH3(g).
(b) What is the value of Kc?
3
I
At a certain temperature, Kc for the following reaction between
sulfur dioxide and nitrogen dioxide is 4.8.
SO2(g) + NO2(g)
SO2(g) and NO2(g) have the same initial concentration: 0.36 mol/L.
What amount of SO3(g) is present in a 5.0 L container at equilibrium?
(cid:2)(cid:3) NO(g) + SO3(g)
4
I
Phosphorus trichloride reacts with chlorine to form phosphorus
(cid:2)(cid:3) PCl5(g)
pentachloride.
PCl3(g) + Cl2(g)
0.75 mol of PCl3 and 0.75 mol of Cl2 are placed in a 8.0 L reaction
vessel at 500 K. What is the equilibrium concentration of the mixture?
The value of Kc at 500 K is 49.
5
MC
Hydrogen gas has several advantages and disadvantages as a
potential fuel. Hydrogen can be obtained by the thermal decomposition
of water at high temperatures.
(cid:2)(cid:3) 2H2(g) + O2(g) Kc = 7.3 × 10−18 at 1000˚C
2H2O(g)
(a) The initial concentration of water in a reaction vessel is 0.055 mol/L.
What is the equilibrium concentration of H2(g) at 1000˚C?
(b) Comment on the practicality of the thermal decomposition of water
to obtain H2(g).
Chapter 7  Reversible Reactions and Chemical Equilibrium • MHR 353
7.4
Predicting the
Direction of a Reaction
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
(cid:2) explain how to use
Le Châtelier’s principle to
predict the direction in
which a chemical system at
equilibrium will shift when
concentration changes
(cid:2) apply Le Châtelier’s principle
to make and test predictions
about how different factors
affect a chemical system at
equilibrium
(cid:2) communicate your
understanding of the
following terms: reaction
quotient (Q c), Le Châtelier’s
principle, common ion effect
So far in this chapter, you have worked with reactions that have reached
equilibrium. What if a reaction has not yet reached equilibrium, however?
How can you predict the direction in which the reaction must proceed to
reach equilibrium? To do this, you substitute the concentrations of reac-
tants and products into an expression that is identical to the equilibrium
expression. Because these concentrations may not be the concentrations
that the equilibrium system would have, the expression is given a
different name: the reaction quotient. The reaction quotient, Qc, is an
expression that is identical to the equilibrium constant expression, but
its value is calculated using concentrations that are not necessarily
those at equilibrium.
The Relationship Between the Equilibrium Constant
and the Reaction Quotient
Recall the general reaction aP + bQ (cid:2)(cid:3) cR + dS . The reaction quotient
expression for this reaction is
Qc = [R]c[S]d
[P]a[Q]b
You can calculate a value for Qc by substituting the concentration of each
substance into this expression. If the value of Qc is equal to Kc, the system
must be at equilibrium. If Qc is greater than Kc, the numerator must be
very large. The concentrations of the chemicals on the right side of the
equation must be more than their concentrations at equilibrium. In this
situation, the system attains equilibrium by moving to the left. Conversely,
if Qc is less than Kc, the system attains equilibrium by moving to the
right. Figure 7.8 summarizes these relationships between Qc and Kc.
Qc
Kc
progress
of reaction
Kc
Qc
Kc
Qc
progress
of reaction
reactants
products
equilibrium
reactants
products
This diagram shows how Qc and Kc determine reaction direction. When
Figure 7.8
Qc < Kc, the system attains equilibrium by moving to the right, favouring products. When
Qc = Kc, the system is at equilibrium. When Qc > Kc, the system attains equilibrium by moving
to the left, favouring reactants.
The next Sample Problem shows you how to calculate Qc and interpret
its value.
354 MHR • Unit 4  Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
Sample Problem
Determining the Direction of Shift to Attain Equilibrium
Problem
Ammonia is one of the world’s most important chemicals, in terms of the
quantity manufactured. Some ammonia is processed into nitric acid and
various polymers. Roughly 80% of ammonia is used to make fertilizers,
such as ammonium nitrate. In the Haber process for manufacturing
ammonia, nitrogen and hydrogen combine in the presence of a catalyst.
N2(g) + 3H2(g)
(cid:2)(cid:3) 2NH3(g)
At 500˚C, the value of Kc for this reaction is 0.40. The following concen-
trations of gases are present in a container at 500˚C: [N2(g)] = 0.10 mol/L,
[H2(g)] = 0.30 mol/L, and [NH3(g)] = 0.20 mol/L. Is this mixture of gases
at equilibrium? If not, in which direction will the reaction go to reach
equilibrium?
What Is Required?
You need to calculate Qc and interpret its value.
What Is Given?
You have the balanced chemical equation. You know that the value of Kc
is 0.40. You also know the concentrations of the gases: [N2] = 0.10 mol/L,
[H2] = 0.30 mol/L, and [NH3] = 0.20 mol/L.
Plan Your Strategy
Write the expression for Qc, and then calculate its value. Compare
the value of Qc with the value of Kc. Decide whether the system is at
equilibrium and, if not, in which direction the reaction will go.
Act on Your Strategy
Qc = [NH3]2
[N2][H2]3
(0.20)2
(0.10)(0.30)3
=
= 14.8
∴Qc > 0.40
The system is not at equilibrium. The reaction will proceed by moving
to the left.
Check Your Solution
Check your calculation of Qc. (Errors in evaluating fractions with
exponents are common.) The value of Kc is less than one, so you would
expect the numerator to be less than the denominator. This is difﬁcult to
evaluate without a calculator, however, because of the powers.
Chapter 7  Reversible Reactions and Chemical Equilibrium • MHR 355
Practice Problems
26. The following reaction takes place inside a cylinder with a movable
piston.
(cid:2)(cid:3) N2O4(g)
2NO2(g)
At room temperature, the equilibrium concentrations inside the
cylinder are [NO2] = 0.0206 mol/L and [N2O4] = 0.0724 mol/L.
(a) Calculate the value of Kc.
(b) Calculate the concentration of each gas at the moment that the
piston is used to halve the volume of the reacting mixture. Assume
that the temperature remains constant.
(c) Determine the value of Qc when the volume is halved.
(d) Predict the direction in which the reaction will proceed
to re-establish equilibrium.
27. Ethyl acetate is an ester that can be synthesized by reacting ethanoic
acid (acetic acid) with ethanol. At room temperature, the equilibrium
constant for this reaction is 2.2.
CH3COOH((cid:4)) + CH3CH2OH((cid:4))
Various samples were analyzed. The concentrations are given in the
table below. Decide whether each sample is at equilibrium. If it is
not at equilibrium, predict the direction in which the reaction will
proceed to establish equilibrium.
(cid:2)(cid:3) CH3COOCH2CH3(l) + H2O((cid:4))
Sample
[CH3COOH]
(mol/L)
[CH3CH2OH]
(mol/L)
[CH3COOCH2CH3]
(mol/L)
[H2O] (mol/L)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
0.10
0.084
0.14
0.063
0.10
0.13
0.21
0.11
0.10
0.16
0.33
0.15
0.10
0.28
0.20
0.17
28. In the past, methanol was obtained by heating wood without
allowing the wood to burn. The products were collected, and
methanol (sometimes called “wood alcohol”) was separated by
distillation. Today methanol is manufactured by reacting carbon
monoxide with hydrogen gas.
CO(g) + 2H2(g)
At 210˚C, Kc for this reaction is 14.5. A gaseous mixture at 210˚C
contains the following concentrations of gases: [CO] = 0.25 mol/L,
[H2] = 0.15 mol/L, and [CH3OH] = 0.36 mol/L. What will be the
direction of the reaction if the gaseous mixture reaches equilibrium?
(cid:2)(cid:3) CH3OH(g)
Le Châtelier’s Principle
What happens to a system at equilibrium if the concentration of one of the
reacting chemicals is changed? This question has practical importance,
because many manufacturing processes are continual. Products are
removed and more reactants are added without stopping the process. For
example, consider the Haber process that was mentioned in the previous
Sample Problem.
356 MHR • Unit 4  Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
N2(g) + 3H2(g)
(cid:2)(cid:3) 2NH3(g)
At 500˚C, Kc is 0.40. The gases have the following concentrations:
[N2] = 0.10 mol/L, [H2] = 0.10 mol/L, and [NH3] = 0.0063 mol/L. (You
can check this by calculating Qc and making sure that it is equal to Kc.)
Ammonia can be removed from the equilibrium mixture by cooling
because ammonia liqueﬁes at a higher temperature than either nitrogen
or hydrogen. What happens to an equilibrium mixture if some ammonia
is removed? To ﬁnd out, you need to calculate Qc.
Qc = [NH3]2
[N2][H2]3
If ammonia is removed from the equilibrium mixture, the numerator will
decrease, so Qc will be smaller than Kc. When Qc < Kc, the system attains
equilibrium by moving to the right. Why? The system must respond to
the removal of ammonia by forming more ammonia. Similarly, if nitrogen,
hydrogen, or both were added, the system would re-establish equilibrium
by shifting to the right. As long as the temperature remains constant,
the re-established equilibrium will have the same Kc as the original
equilibrium.
A French chemist, Henri Le Châtelier, experimented with various
chemical equilibrium systems. (See Figure 7.9.) In 1888, Le Châtelier
summarized his work on changes to equilibrium systems in a general
statement called Le Châtelier’s principle. It may be stated as follows:
A dynamic equilibrium tends to respond so as to relieve the effect of any
change in the conditions that affect the equilibrium.
Le Châtelier’s principle predicts the way that an equilibrium system
responds to change. For example, when the concentration of a substance
in a reaction mixture is changed, Le Châtelier’s principle qualitatively
predicts what you can show quantitatively by evaluating the reaction quo-
tient. If products are removed from an equilibrium system, more products
must be formed to relieve the change. This is just as you would predict,
because Qc will be less than Kc.
Le Châtelier’s principle also predicts what will happen when other
changes are made to an equilibrium system. For example, you can use Le
Châtelier’s principle to predict the effects of changing the volume of a
cylinder that contains a mixture of gases, or the effects of changing the
temperature of an equilibrium system. In the next investigation, you will
use Le Châtelier’s principle to predict the effects of making various
changes to different equilibrium systems. The Chemistry Bulletin that
follows the investigation considers applications of Le Châtelier’s principle
to areas outside of chemistry. Afterward, you will continue your studies of
Le Châtelier’s principle and equilibrium systems in chemistry.
Henri Le Châtelier
Figure 7.9
(1850–1936) specialized in mining
engineering. He studied the thermo-
dynamics involved in heating ores
to obtain metals. His results led
to important advances in the under-
standing of equilibrium systems.
Electronic Learning Partner
Your Chemistry 12 Electronic
Learning Partner can help you
reinforce your understanding
of Le Châtelier’s principle.
Chapter 7  Reversible Reactions and Chemical Equilibrium • MHR 357
S K I L L   F O C U S
Predicting
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
Part 2
25 mL beaker
2 test tubes
test tube rack
scoopula
0.01 mol/L NH3(aq)
6.0 mol/L HCl(aq)
phenolphthalein solution
NH4Cl(s)
Part 3
4 small test tubes
CoCl2(s)
ethanol
concentrated HCl(aq) in a dropper bottle
0.1 mol/L AgNO3(aq) in a dropper bottle
distilled water in a dropper bottle
25 mL or 50 mL beaker
test tube rack
test tube holder
hot-water bath (prepared by your teacher)
cold-water bath (prepared by your teacher)
Part 4
small piece of copper
concentrated nitric acid
test tube
test tube rack
one-hole stopper
glass delivery tube
short length of rubber tubing
syringe with a cap or rubber stopper
to seal the tip
NO2(g)/N2O4(g) tubes
boiling water
ice water
Perturbing Equilibrium
In this investigation, you will use Le Châtelier’s
principle to predict the effect of changing one
factor in each system at equilibrium. Then you
will test your prediction using a colour change
or the appearance (or disappearance) of a
precipitate.
Question
How can Le Châtelier’s principle qualitatively
predict the effect of a change in a chemical
equilibrium?
Predictions
Your teacher will give you a table that lists four
equilibrium systems and the changes you will
make to each system. In the appropriate column,
record your predictions for each test. If you
predict that the change will cause the system
to re-attain equilibrium by shifting toward the
reactants, record “left.” If you predict that the
system will re-establish equilibrium by shifting
toward the products, record “right.”
Safety Precautions
• Potassium chromate and barium chloride
are toxic.
• Hydrochloric acid and sodium hydroxide
are corrosive. Wash any spills on your skin
or clothing with plenty of cool water. Inform
your teacher immediately.
Materials
Part 1
3 test tubes
0.1 mol/L K2CrO4(aq)
1 mol/L HCl(aq)
1 mol/L NaOH(aq)
1 mol/L Fe(NO3)3(aq)
1 mol/L BaCl2(aq)
358 MHR • Unit 4  Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
Procedure
Part 1  The Chromate/Dichromate Equilibrium
Equilibrium System
H+
(aq) + 2CrO4
(aq)
2−
(cid:2)(cid:3) Cr2O7
2−
(aq) + OH−
(aq)
yellowish orange
1. Pour about 5 mL of 0.1 mol/L K2CrO4(aq) into
each of three test tubes. You will use test
tube 1 as a colour reference.
2. Add 5 drops of HCl(aq) to test tube 2. Record
any colour change.
3. Add 5 drops of NaOH(aq) to test tube 2. Record
what happens.
4. Finally, add 5 drops of Fe(NO3)3(aq) to test
tube 2. A precipitate of Fe(OH)3(s) should
form. Note the colour of the solution above
the precipitate.
5. Add 5 drops of BaCl2(aq) to test tube 3. A pre-
cipitate of BaCrO4(s) should form. Record the
colour of the solution above the precipitate.
3. To the other test tube, add a few drops of
HCl(aq) until you see a change. Again note
the colour change. (The H+ ions combine
with the OH− ions, removing them from the
equilibrium mixture.)
4. Dispose of the chemicals as instructed by your
teacher.
Part 3  Concentration and Temperature
Changes
Safety Precautions
• Concentrated hydrochloric acid is hazardous to
your eyes, skin, and clothing. Treat spills with
baking powder and copious amounts of cool
water. Inform your teacher immediately.
• Ethanol is ﬂammable. Keep samples of ethanol
and the supply bottle away from open ﬂames.
Equilibrium System
(aq) + 4Cl−
2+
Co(H2O)6
(aq)
(cid:2)(cid:3) CoCl4
2−
(aq) + 6H2O((cid:4))
6. Dispose of the chemicals as instructed by
pink
blue or purple
your teacher.
∆H = + 50 kJ/mol
Part 2  Changes to a Base Equilibrium System
Safety Precautions
Ammonia and hydrochloric acid are corrosive.
Wash any spills on your skin or clothing with
plenty of cool water. Inform your teacher
immediately.
Equilibrium System
NH3(aq) + H2O((cid:4))
(cid:2)(cid:3) NH4
+
(aq) + OH−
(aq)
1. Pour about 10 mL of NH3(aq) into a small
beaker. Place the beaker on a sheet of white
paper. Add 2 drops of phenolphthalein
indicator.
2. Divide the solution equally into two small
test tubes. To one of the test tubes, add a
few small crystals of NH4Cl(s) on the end
of a scoopula. Record your observations.
1. Measure about 15 mL of ethanol into a small
beaker.
2. Record the colour of the CoCl2. Dissolve a
small amount (about half the size of a pea)
in the beaker of ethanol. The solution should
be blue or purple. If it is pink, add drops of
concentrated HCl(aq) until the solution is
blue-purple.
3. Divide the cobalt solution equally among the
four small test tubes. Put one of the test tubes
aside as a control.
4. To each of the other three test tubes, add
3 drops of distilled water, one drop at a time.
Stir after you add each drop. Record any
change in colour that occurs with each drop.
5. To one of the test tubes from step 4, add 5
drops of concentrated HCl, one drop at a time
with stirring. Record the results.
Chapter 7  Reversible Reactions and Chemical Equilibrium • MHR 359
6. Silver and chloride ions combine to form a
Equilibrium System
precipitate of AgCl. To the third test tube, add
AgNO3(aq), one drop at a time, until no more
precipitate appears. Record the colour of the
solution as the chloride ions precipitate.
7. Record the colour of the liquid mixture in
the fourth test tube. Use a test tube holder to
immerse this test tube in the hot-water bath.
Record any colour change.
8. Place the test tube from step 7 in the
cold-water bath. Record any colour change.
9. Dispose of the chemicals as instructed by
your teacher.
Part 4  Investigating Gaseous Equilibria
CAUTION
These are not student tests. Your
teacher may demonstrate this equilibrium if a
suitable fume hood is available for the ﬁrst test,
and if sealed tubes containing a mixture of nitro-
gen dioxide, NO2(g), and dinitrogen tetroxide,
N2O4(g), are available for the second test. If either
or both tests are not demonstrated, refer to the
photographs that show the changes.
Safety Precautions
• Concentrated nitric acid is highly corrosive
and a strong oxidizing agent.
• Nitrogen dioxide and dinitrogen tetroxide are
poisonous gases.
N2O4(g)
(cid:2)(cid:3) 2NO2(g) ∆H = + 59 kJ/mol
colourless
brown
1. Your teacher will use sealed tubes that con-
tain a mixture of N2O4(g) and NO2(g). One tube
will be placed in boiling water, and a second
tube will be placed in ice water. A third tube
(if available) will remain at room temperature
as a control. Compare and record the colour
of the gas mixture at each temperature.
2. NO2(g) can be prepared by reacting copper
with concentrated nitric acid. The gas is
poisonous. The reaction, if your teacher
performs it, must take place in a fume hood.
3. By using a one-hole stopper, glass delivery
tube, and a short length of rubber tubing,
some NO2(g) can be collected in a syringe. The
syringe is then sealed by attaching a cap or by
pushing the needle into a rubber stopper.
4. Observe what happens when the syringe
plunger is pressed down sharply, changing the
volume of the equilibrium mixture. You will
observe an immediate change in colour. Then,
if the plunger is held in a ﬁxed position, the
colour will change over a few seconds as the
system re-establishes equilibrium. Carefully
record these colour changes.
These three tubes contain a mixture of NO2(g) and N2O4(g). The tube on the left is in an ice-water mixture. The centre tube is at
room temperature. The tube on the right is in boiling water. Given that NO2(g) is brown, can you explain the shift in equilibrium?
Think about Le Châtelier’s principle and the enthalpy of the reaction between the two gases.
360 MHR • Unit 4  Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
Analysis
1. Compare the predictions you made using
Le Châtelier’s principle with the observations
you made in your tests. Account for any
differences.
2. In which tests did you increase the concentra-
tion of a reactant or a product? Did your
observations indicate a shift in equilibrium to
form more or less of the reactant or product?
3. In which tests did you decrease the concentra-
tion of a reactant or product? Did your obser-
vations indicate a shift in equilibrium to form
more or less of the reactant or product?
4. In two of the systems you studied, the
enthalpy changes were given.
N2O4(g)
Co(H2O)6
(cid:2)(cid:3) 2NO2(g) ∆H = + 59kJ/mol
2+
2−
(aq) + 4Cl−
(cid:2)(cid:3) CoCl4
(aq)
(aq) + 6H2O((cid:4))
∆H = + 50 kJ/mol
(a) Are these systems endothermic or
exothermic when read from left to right?
(b) When heated, did these systems shift to the
left or to the right? In terms of the energy
change, was the observed shift in equilibri-
um toward the endothermic or exothermic
side of the reaction?
(c) Do you think the value of Kc changed or
remained the same when the equilibrium
mixture was heated? Explain your answer.
5. Think about the N2O4(g)/NO2(g) equilibrium.
(a) How was the total pressure of the
mixture affected when the plunger was
pushed down?
(b) How was the pressure of the mixture
affected by the total number of gas
molecules in the syringe?
(c) Explain the observed shift in equilibrium
when the plunger was pushed down. In
your explanation, refer to Le Châtelier’s
principle and the total amount of gas in
the syringe.
(d) What would be the effect, if any, on the
following equilibrium system if the volume
was reduced? Explain.
2IBr(g)
(cid:2)(cid:3) I2(g) + Br2(g)
Conclusion
6. How did your results compare with your
predictions? Discuss and resolve any
discrepancies with your class.
The sealed syringe contains a mixture of NO2(g) and N2O4(g). The photograph on the left shows an equilibrium mixture at
atmospheric pressure. The middle photograph shows that the plunger has been pushed down, increasing the pressure. Two
changes cause the darker appearance of the gas mixture. First, the concentration of gases is greater. Second, decreasing the
volume heats the gas. This causes a shift toward NO2(g). The photograph on the right shows the result a few seconds after the
plunger was pushed down. The gas has cooled back to room temperature. The colour of the mixture is less brown, indicating
a shift toward N2O4(g).
Chapter 7  Reversible Reactions and Chemical Equilibrium • MHR 361
Chemistry Bulletin
Le Châtelier’s Principle:
Beyond Chemistry
How is Le Châtelier’s principle related to predator-prey
interactions in ecosystems?
Le Châtelier’s principle is a general statement
about how any system in equilibrium—not
just a chemical system—responds to change.
Le Châtelier principle concerns the conservation
of energy or matter. There are corresponding
laws in several other areas of science.
Heinrich Lenz studied the direction of the
current that is induced in a conductor as a result
of changing the magnetic ﬁeld near it. You can think
of this as the change in a system in electromagnetic
equilibrium. Lenz published his law in 1834. It states
that when a conductor interacts with a magnetic
ﬁeld, there must be an induced current that
opposes the interaction, because of the law of con-
servation of energy. Lenz’s law is used to explain
the direction of the induced current in generators,
transformers, inductors, and many other systems.
In geology, John Pratt and George Airy
introduced the idea of isostacy in 1855. Earth’s
crust is in gravitational equilibrium in almost
all places. The crust responds to changes in the
load on it, however, by slowly moving vertically.
Examples of how the load on Earth’s crust can
change include the weathering of mountain ranges
and the melting of ice caps. Geologists estimate
362 MHR • Unit 4  Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
that the ice over parts of Scandinavia and northern
Europe was well over 2 km thick during the last ice
age. As a result of the ice melting and the removal
of the weight pushing down on Earth’s crust, the
central part of Scandinavia has risen over 500 m.
This uplift is continuing. Here gravitational
potential energy is being conserved.
In ecology, ecosystems are really examples
of steady state systems. Ecosystems involve a
ﬂow of energy in only one direction, from the Sun.
Nevertheless, populations of plants and animals
develop stable numbers that react to external
changes, such as disease and variations in the
weather. For example, if the number of carnivores
in an ecosystem increases, more herbivores are
eaten and the herbivore population decreases.
The carnivores then have difﬁculty ﬁnding food.
Their populations decrease due to competition,
emigration, and starvation until a new balance,
however delicate, is attained.
Le Châtelier’s principle also applies to biology.
Homeostasis is the tendency of a body system
to remain in a state of equilibrium. Examples of
homeostasis include the maintenance of body
temperature (homeothermy) and the pH balance
of blood.
In economics, the law of supply and demand
is similar to Le Châtelier’s principle. When the price
of a commodity, such as the price of a kilogram of
apples, is constant, the market for the commodity
is at equilibrium. If the supply of the commodity
falls, the equilibrium is changed. The market
adjusts by increasing the price, which tends to
increase the supply.
Making Connections
1. Identify and describe two other examples,
in science or other ﬁelds, that illustrate
Le Châtelier’s principle.
2. Draw diagrams to show the above examples
of Le Châtelier’s principle in human physiology,
ecology, and economics. Show how different
conditions affect the equilibrium and how the
systems react to establish a new equilibrium.
The Effect of Ions on Aqueous Equilibrium Systems
Many important equilibrium systems involve ions in aqueous solution.
The common ion effect applies Le Châtelier’s principle to ions in aqueous
solution. As its name suggests, the common ion effect involves adding
an ion to a solution in which the ion is already present in solution. It is
really a concentration effect. The equilibrium shifts away from the added
ion, as predicted by Le Châtelier’s principle.
An aqueous solution that contains certain ions can be added to
another solution to form a precipitate, if the ions have low solubility.
For example, adding silver nitrate solution to test for Cl−
(aq) is effective
due to the very low solubility of silver chloride. You can use the precipi-
tation of an insoluble salt to remove almost all of a particular ion from
a solution and, as a result, cause a shift in the position of equilibrium
of the original solution. The common ion effect is important in the
solubility of salts. The precipitation of insoluble salts is used to identify
the presence of unknown ions. You will learn more about the common
ion effect in Chapter 9.
The Effect of Temperature Changes on the Position of Equilibrium
As you know, the value of the equilibrium constant changes with tempera-
ture, because the rates of the forward and reverse reactions are affected.
Le Châtelier’s principle still holds, however. It can be used to predict the
effect of temperature changes on a system when the sign of the enthalpy
change for the reaction is known. For example, the dissociation of sulfur
trioxide is endothermic.
2SO3(g)
∆H = 197 kJ
(cid:2)(cid:3) 2SO2(g) + O2(g)
As the reaction proceeds from left to right, energy is absorbed by the
chemical system and converted to chemical potential energy. If an
equilibrium mixture of these gases is heated, energy is added to the
system. Le Châtelier’s principle predicts a shift that will relieve the
imposed change. Therefore, the shift will tend to remove the added
energy. This will happen if the equilibrium shifts to the right, increasing
the amount of SO2(g) and O2(g) formed. As a result, the value of Kc will
increase. The shift in equilibrium is consistent (as it must be) with the
law of conservation of energy.
Suppose that the equilibrium of an endothermic reaction shifted
to the left when the system was heated. From right to left, the reaction
is exothermic. Thus, a shift to the left would release energy to the sur-
roundings. This would make the mixture hotter. The equilibrium would
shift still more to the left, releasing more and more energy. Clearly, this
cannot happen without violating the law of conservation of energy.
The effect of temperature on the position of equilibrium can be
summarized as follows:
• Endothermic change (∆H > 0): An increase in temperature shifts the
equilibrium to the right, forming more products. The value of Kc
increases. A decrease in temperature shifts the equilibrium to the left,
forming more reactants. The value of Kc decreases.
• Exothermic change (∆H < 0): An increase in temperature shifts the equi-
librium to the left, forming more reactants. The value of Kc decreases.
A decrease in temperature shifts the equilibrium to the right, forming
more products. The value of Kc increases.
C H E M
FA C T
Chickens have no sweat
glands. When the temperature
rises, they tend to breathe
faster. This lowers the concen-
tration of carbonate ions in
their blood. Because eggshells
are mostly calcium carbonate,
faster-breathing chickens lay
eggs with thinner shells.
Rather than installing expen-
sive air conditioning, chicken
farmers can supply carbonated
water for their chickens to
drink when the temperature
reaches “fowl” highs. How
does this relate to
Le Châtelier’s principle?
Chapter 7  Reversible Reactions and Chemical Equilibrium • MHR 363
The Effects of Volume and Pressure Changes on Equilibrium
When the volume of a mixture of gases decreases, the pressure of the
gases must increase. Le Châtelier’s principle predicts a shift in equili-
brium to relieve this change. Therefore, the shift must tend to reduce the
pressure of the gases. Molecules striking the walls of a container cause
gas pressure, so a reduction in gas pressure at constant temperature must
mean fewer gas molecules. Consider the following reaction again.
2SO3(g)
(cid:2)(cid:3) 2SO2(g) + O2(g)
2SO3(g)
2SO2(g) + O2(g)
)
L
/
l
o
m
(
n
o
i
t
a
r
t
n
e
c
n
o
C
SO3
SO2
O2
Time
initial
equilibrium
final
equilibrium
sudden decrease
in volume
Note the changes
Figure 7.10
in the concentrations of the
reacting gases. When the new
equilibrium is established, the
concentrations are different.
Compare the concentrations of
the gases in the ﬁrst equilibrium
and second equilibrium.
There are two gas molecules on the left side of the equation.
There are three gas molecules on the right side. Consequently,
if the equilibrium shifts to the left, the pressure of the mix-
ture will decrease. Reducing the volume of an equilibrium
mixture of gases, at constant temperature, causes a shift in
equilibrium in the direction of fewer gas molecules. What if
there is the same number of gas molecules on both sides of
the reaction equation? Changing the volume of the container,
as shown in Figure 7.10, has no effect on the position of
equilibrium. The value of Kc will be unchanged, as long as
there is no change in temperature.
It is possible to increase the total pressure of gases in
a rigid container by injecting more gas. If the injected gas
reacts with the other gases in the equilibrium mixture,
the effect is the same as increasing the concentration of a
reactant. The equilibrium shifts to reduce the amount of
added gas. If the injected gas does not react with the other
gases (if an “inert” gas is added), there is no effect on the
equilibrium. This is because the added gas is not part of
the equilibrium system. Its addition causes no change in
the volume of the container. Nitrogen (because of its low
reactivity) and the noble gases are often used as inert gases.
If the container expands when an inert gas is added, the
effect is the same as increasing the volume and therefore
decreasing the pressure of the reacting gases.
The Effect of a Catalyst on Equilibrium
A catalyst speeds up the rate of a reaction, either by allowing a
different reaction mechanism or by providing additional mechanisms.
The overall effect is to lower the activation energy, which increases the
rate of reaction. The activation energy is lowered the same amount for
the forward and reverse reactions, however. There is the same increase
in reaction rates for both reactions. As a result, a catalyst does not affect
the position of equilibrium. It only affects the time that is taken to achieve
equilibrium.
Table 7.2 summarizes the effect of a catalyst, and other effects of
changing conditions, on a system at equilibrium. The Sample Problem
that follows provides an opportunity for you to use Le Châtelier’s
principle to predict the equilibrium shift in response to various
conditions.
364 MHR • Unit 4  Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
Table 7.2 The Effects of Changing Conditions on a System at Equilibrium
Type of reaction
Change to system
Effect on Kc Direction of change
all reactions
increasing any reactant
concentration, or decreasing
any product concentration
decreasing any reactant
concentration, or increasing
any product concentration
no effect
toward products
no effect
toward reactants
using a catalyst
no effect
no change
exothermic
increasing temperature
decreases
toward reactants
decreasing temperature
increases
toward products
endothermic
increasing temperature
increases
toward products
decreasing temperature
decreases
toward reactants
equal number of
reactant and product
gas molecules
changing the volume of the
container, or adding a
non-reacting gas
no effect
no change
more gaseous
product molecules
than reactant
gaseous molecules
decreasing the volume
of the container at constant
temperature
increasing the volume of the
container at constant temperature,
or adding a non-reacting gas at
contstant pressure
no effect
toward reactants
no effect
toward products
fewer gaseous
product molecules
than reactant
gaseous molecules
decreasing the volume of the
container at constant temperature
increasing the volume of the
container at constant temperature
no effect
toward products
no effect
toward reactants
Sample Problem
Using Le Châtelier’s Principle
Problem
The following equilibrium takes place in a rigid container.
PCl5(g)
(cid:2)(cid:3) PCl3(g) + Cl2(g) ∆H = 56 kJ
In which direction does the equilibrium shift as a result of each change?
(a) adding phosphorus pentachloride gas
(b) removing chlorine gas
(c) decreasing the temperature
(d) increasing the pressure by adding helium gas
(e) using a catalyst
What Is Required?
You need to determine whether each change causes the equilibrium to
shift to the left or the right, or whether it has no effect.
What Is Given?
You have the balanced chemical equation. You know that the enthalpy
change is 56 kJ. Therefore, the reaction is endothermic.
Continued ...
Chapter 7  Reversible Reactions and Chemical Equilibrium • MHR 365
Continued ...
Plan Your Strategy
Identify the change. Then use the chemical equation to determine the
shift in equilibrium that will minimize the change.
Act on Your Strategy
(a) [PCl5] increases. Therefore, the equilibrium must shift to minimize
[PCl5]. The reaction shifts to the right.
(b) [Cl2] is reduced. Therefore, the equilibrium must shift to increase
[Cl2]. The reaction shifts to the right.
(c) The temperature decreases. Therefore, the equilibrium must shift in
the direction in which the reaction is exothermic. From left to right,
the reaction is endothermic. Thus, the reaction must be exothermic
from right to left. The reaction shifts to the left if the temperature is
decreased.
(d) Helium does not react with any of the gases in the mixture.
The position of equilibrium does not change.
(e) A catalyst has no effect on the position of equilibrium.
Check Your Solution
Check the changes. Any change that affects the equilibrium reaction
must result in a shift that minimizes it.
Practice Problems
29. Consider the following reaction.
H2(g) + I2(g) + 52 kJ (cid:2)(cid:3) 2HI(g)
In which direction does the equilibrium shift if there is an increase in
temperature?
30. A decrease in the pressure of each equilibrium system below is
caused by increasing the volume of the reaction container. In which
direction does the equilibrium shift?
(a) CO2(g) + H2(g)
(b) 2NO2(g)
(c) 2CO2(g)
(d) CH4(g) + 2H2S(g)
(cid:2)(cid:3) N2O4(g)
(cid:2)(cid:3) 2CO(g) + O2(g)
(cid:2)(cid:3) CS2(g) + 4H2(g)
(cid:2)(cid:3) CO(g) + H2O(g)
31. The following reaction is exothermic.
(cid:2)(cid:3) N2(g) + 2H2O(g)
2NO(g) + 2H2(g)
In which direction does the equilibrium shift as a result of
each change?
(a) removing the hydrogen gas
(b) increasing the pressure of gases in the reaction vessel by
decreasing the volume
(c) increasing the pressure of gases in the reaction vessel by pumping
in argon gas while keeping the volume of the vessel constant
(d) increasing the temperature
(e) using a catalyst
366 MHR • Unit 4  Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
32. In question 31, which changes affect the value of Kc? Which changes
do not affect the value of Kc?
33. Toluene, C7H8, is an important organic solvent. It is made industrially
from methyl cyclohexane.
(cid:2)(cid:3) C7H8(g) + 3H2(g)
C7H14(g)
The forward reaction is endothermic. State three different changes to
an equilibrium mixture of these reacting gases that would shift the
equilibrium toward greater production of toluene.
Applying Le Châtelier’s Principle: Manufacturing Ammonia
Industrial processes must be run at optimal conditions to be economic.
This means more than simply manipulating the reaction conditions to
maximize the extent of the reaction. Business people, and the profession-
als they hire to advise them, must consider other factors as well. These
factors include the rate of the reaction, safety, the location of the plant, the
cost to build and operate the plant, the cost of acquiring reactant materi-
als, the cost of transporting products, and the cost of hiring, educating,
and maintaining plant workers.
The chapter introduction mentioned the importance of nitrogen to
plants and animals. Despite nitrogen’s abundance in the atmosphere, its
low reactivity means that there is a limited supply in a form that organ-
isms can use. In nature, bacteria and the energy of lightning supply the
nitrates and other nitrogen compounds that plants need to survive.
Humans use technology to produce these compounds for our extensive
agricultural industry.
In this chapter, you learned about the Haber process for manufactur-
ing ammonia. You used this process to help you understand various
concepts related to equilibrium. As you can see in Figure 7.11, ammonia
is a valuable industrial chemical. Its annual global production is well over
100 million tonnes. The vast majority of ammonia, roughly 80%, is used
to make fertilizers. You will now examine how the equilibrium concepts
you have been studying work together to provide society with a reliable,
cost-effective supply of ammonia.
Before World War I, the main source of nitrates for human use was
from large deposits of bird droppings in Peru and sodium nitrate from
Chile. These sources were becoming scarce and expensive. Then Fritz
Haber (1868–1934), a lecturer in a technical college in Germany, began
to experiment with ways to manufacture ammonia. Haber knew that
ammonia could be easily converted to nitrates and other useful nitrogen
Unit Issue Prep
To begin preparing for the Unit 4
Issue, make a simpliﬁed sketch of
the carbon cycle,
Chapter 7  Reversible Reactions and Chemical Equilibrium • MHR 367
Ammonia (HN3)
nitric acid (HNO3)
fertilizers
other
polymers
ammonium
nitrate
(NH4NO3)
explosives
cleaning
products
refrigeration
fertilizers
explosives
pharmaceuticals
rubber stabilizers
Figure 7.11
the top ﬁve industrial chemicals in the world.
Because ammonia is used to manufacture many essential products, it is one of
compounds. What he needed was a method for producing large quantities
of ammonia at minimal cost.
Haber experimented with the direct synthesis of ammonia.
N2(g) + 3H2(g)
(cid:2)(cid:3) 2NH3(g) ∆H˚ = −92 kJ/mol
Because the reaction is exothermic, heat is released as the reaction
proceeds. Le Châtelier’s principle predicts that the yield of ammonia
is greater at lower temperatures. Just as in the contact process for manu-
facturing sulfuric acid, however, high yield is not the only important
factor. The rate of reaction for ammonia synthesis is too slow at low
temperatures.
Le Châtelier’s principle also predicts that the yield of ammonia is
greater at higher pressures. High-pressure plants are expensive to build
and maintain, however. In fact, the ﬁrst industrial plant that manufactured
ammonia had its reaction vessel blow up. A German chemical engineer,
Carl Bosch, solved this problem by designing a double-walled steel vessel
that could operate at several hundred times atmospheric pressure. Modern
plants operate at pressures in the range of 20 200 kPa to 30 400 kPa.
The gas mixture is kept pressurized in a condenser. (See Figure 7.12.)
Ammonia is removed from the reaction vessel by cooling the gas mixture.
Because of the hydrogen bonding between ammonia molecules, the gas
condenses into a liquid while the nitrogen and hydrogen remain as gases.
Nitrogen is removed to shift the equilibrium toward the production of
more ammonia. Once the ammonia is removed, the gases are recycled
back to the reaction vessel in a continuous operation.
368 MHR • Unit 4  Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
unreacted
H2(g) and N2(g)
= H2
= N2
= NH3
H2(g)
+
N2(g)
compressor
reaction
chamber with
catalyst bed
NH3(g)
H2(g)
N2(g)
ammonia
condenser
NH3((cid:4))
storage
tank
Figure 7.12
ammonia. The catalyst is a mixture of MgO, Al2O3, and  SiO2, with embedded iron crystals.
This diagram shows the stages in the Haber-Bosch process for manufacturing
By manipulating the pressure and removing ammonia from the reaction
vessel, Haber successfully increased the yield of ammonia. To increase the
rate of the reaction, Haber needed to ﬁnd a catalyst. A catalyst would
allow the reaction to proceed at higher temperatures— a compromise
between rate and yield. Some historians claim that Haber performed more
than 6500 experiments trying to ﬁnd a suitable catalyst. He ﬁnally chose
an iron catalyst. This catalyst works well at the relatively moderate
temperature of 400˚C that is used for the reaction. It lasts about ﬁve years
before losing its effectiveness.
Haber received the Nobel prize for Chemistry in 1918. Bosch received
a Nobel prize in 1931 for his work on high pressure reactions. Today the
Haber-Bosch process is used to manufacture virtually all the ammonia
that is produced in the world. Plants are usually located near a source of
natural gas, which is used to obtain the hydrogen gas.
CH4(g) + H2O(g) → CO(g) + 3H2(g)
The other raw material is air, which provides an inexhaustible supply of
nitrogen gas.
Section Summary
In this section, you learned that the expression for the reaction quotient
is the same as the expression for the equilibrium constant. The concentra-
tions that are used to solve these expressions may be different, however.
When Qc is less than Kc, the reaction proceeds to form more products.
When Qc is greater than Kc, the reaction proceeds to form more reactants.
These changes continue until Qc is equal to Kc. Le Châtelier’s principle
describes this tendency of a chemical system to return to equilibrium after
a change moves it from equilibrium. The industrial process for manufac-
turing ammonia illustrates how chemical engineers apply Le Châtelier’s
principle to provide the most economical yield of a valuable chemical
product.
Kc is only one of several equilibrium constants that chemists use to
describe chemical systems. In the next chapter, you will learn how
equilibrium applies to chemical systems that involve acids and bases.
C H E M
FA C T
During World War I, Haber
helped to develop the technol-
ogy for deploying phosgene,
chlorine, and mustard gas as
weapons of chemical warfare.
His wife Clara, also a chemist,
was disgusted by the use
of science in war. When her
husband refused to stop his
support of the war effort, she
committed suicide.
Web
L I N K
www.mcgrawhill.ca/links/
chemistry12
Sulfuric acid, methanol, and
polystyrene are other industri-
ally important chemicals
that depend on equilibrium
reactions for their production.
Choose one of these chemi-
cals, or another industrial
chemical. Research methods
that are used to produce it,
as well as the products that
are derived from it. To start
your research, go to the web
site above and click on Web
Links. Prepare a report that
outlines what you learned.
Chapter 7  Reversible Reactions and Chemical Equilibrium • MHR 369
Section Review
1
I
In which direction does the equilibrium shift as a result of the
change to each homogeneous equilibrium system?
(a) Adding Cl2(g): 2Cl2(g) + O2(g)
(b) Removing N2(g): 2NO2(g)
(c) Using a catalyst: CH4(g) + H2O(g)
(d) Decreasing the total volume of the reaction container:
(cid:2)(cid:3) 2Cl2O(g)
(cid:2)(cid:3) N2(g) + 2O2(g)
(cid:2)(cid:3) CO2(g) + H2(g)
2NO2(g)
(cid:2)(cid:3) N2O4(g)
(e) Increasing the temperature: CO(g) + 3H2(g)
(cid:2)(cid:3) CH4(g) + H2O(g)
∆H = −230 kJ
2
I
For each reversible reaction, determine whether the forward
reaction is favoured by high temperatures or low temperatures.
(cid:2)(cid:3) 2NO2(g) ∆H = + 59 kJ
(cid:2)(cid:3) I2(g) + Cl2(g) ∆H = −35 kJ
(a) N2O4(g)
(b) 2ICl(g)
(c) 2CO2(g) + 566 kJ (cid:2)(cid:3) 2CO(g) + O2(g)
(d) 2HF(g)
(cid:2)(cid:3) H2(g) + F2(g) ∆H = −536 kJ
3
I
In each reaction, the volume of the reaction vessel is decreased.
(cid:2)(cid:3) 2NO(g)
What is the effect (if any) on the position of equilibrium?
(a) N2(g) + O2(g)
(b) 4HCl(g) + O2(g)
(c) 2H2S(g) + CH4(g)
(d) 2CH3COOH(aq) + Ba(OH)2(aq)
(cid:2)(cid:3) 2Cl2(g) + 2H2O(g)
(cid:2)(cid:3) 4H2(g) + CS2(g)
(cid:2)(cid:3) Ba(CH3COO)2(aq) + 2H2O((cid:4))
4
MC
As you learned, the Haber process is used to produce ammonia.
(a) Write the chemical equation for the Haber process.
(b) Describe three changes that would increase the yield of ammonia,
and explain why.
5
MC
A key step in the production of sulfuric acid is the conversion of
sulfur dioxide to sulfur trioxide. This step is exothermic.
(a) Write the chemical equation for this step, showing the sign of ∆H.
(b) Describe three changes that would increase the yield of sulfur
trioxide.
(c) Explain why the reaction is carried out at a relatively high
temperature.
(d) Why is a catalyst (vanadium pentoxide) used?
370 MHR • Unit 4  Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
Careers
in Chemistry
Anesthesiology:
A Career in Pain Management
Laila Raﬁk Karwa
Dr. Laila Raﬁk Karwa is a specialist in pain. She
prevents it, manages it, and alleviates it. She is
an anesthesiologist.
Anesthesiologists are medical doctors who are
responsible for inducing sleep before surgery, and
for managing patients’ pain before, during, and after
surgery. Anesthesiologists are also involved in
managing pain in patients who have severe
illnesses, or acute or chronic pain. For example,
Karwa’s areas of interest include pediatric and
obstetric anesthesia and acute pain management.
Anesthesiologists must have an intimate
knowledge of the chemical and physical properties
of gases. Many anesthetics are inhaled and are
delivered to the bloodstream by diffusion. The
speed at which diffusion occurs between the lungs,
the blood, and other tissues of the body depends
on a constant called the partition coefﬁcient. This
constant is a ratio that describes the equilibrium
concentrations of a solute that is dissolved in two
separate phases. The solute becomes separated
(partitioned) between the two solvents in such a way
that its concentration in one is directly proportional
to its concentration in the other.
Gases diffuse from areas of high concentration
to areas of low concentration. The speed at which
diffusion occurs in the body depends on partition
coefﬁcients. The faster the concentration in the lung
and brain tissues reaches the inhaled concentration
of an anesthetic, the sooner a patient is induced.
Dr. Karwa enjoys the immediate gratiﬁcation
that comes with anesthesiology and the speed at
which the anesthetics exact their effects. “What I like
most about my job is the ability to let patients have
their surgery being completely unaware of it, and to
make them as pain-free as possible during and after
surgery,” she says. She chose medicine as a career
because she was interested in biology and because
she wanted to help other people with their health
problems, after witnessing her father’s struggles
with rheumatic heart disease.
Dr. Karwa completed high school in Bombay,
India, and later studied medicine at the University
of Bombay. After medical school, she immigrated
to Canada. She completed residency training in
anesthesia at the University of Toronto and now
works at St. Joseph’s Health Science Centre as a
staff anesthesiologist.
In Canada, students who are interested in a
career as an anesthesiologist must complete two to
three years of university before applying to medical
school. Many medical schools in Canada require
applicants to have taken courses in speciﬁc subjects
in the biological and physical sciences, and to
have some background in the humanities or social
sciences. This education also helps students prepare
for the Medical College Admissions Test (MCAT),
which is required for application to most medical
schools. The MCAT tests an applicant’s aptitude for
science, verbal reasoning, and writing. Most medical
school programs in Canada are four years long.
Medical school graduates who decide to do
specialty training in anesthesiology must complete
a postgraduate residency program, which usually
takes at least ﬁve years.
Making Career Connections
1. Although anesthesiologists tend to be associated
with surgery, they also work outside the conﬁnes
of the operating room. Research other locations
where you might ﬁnd an anesthesiologist.
2. Anesthetics are powerful medications. What risks
to patients’ health do anesthesiologists have to
consider when they administer anesthetics?
3. Anesthetics are classiﬁed into three main groups:
general, regional, and local. Research the criteria
for this classiﬁcation, and explain the distinctions.
Chapter 7  Reversible Reactions and Chemical Equilibrium • MHR 371
Review
Reﬂecting on Chapter 7
Summarize this chapter in the format of your
choice. Here are a few ideas to use as guidelines:
• State the four conditions that apply to all
equilibrium systems. Give examples to
illustrate these conditions.
• Identify conditions that favour a reaction, and
explain how they are related to equilibrium.
• Describe how enthalpy and entropy are related
to chemical equilibrium.
• Compare the ﬁrst and second laws of
thermodynamics.
• Use experimental data to determine an
equilibrium constant for concentration.
• Describe how to use an ICE table to solve
problems that involve Kc.
• Compare Qc and Kc to determine the direction
of a chemical reaction.
• Explain the meaning of a small value of Kc.
• Use Le Châtelier’s principle to predict the
direction of a reaction.
• Outline the effects of changing conditions on a
chemical system at equilibrium.
• Summarize the use of equilibrium and
Le Châtelier’s principle in industrial processes,
such as the production of ammonia and
sulfuric acid.
Reviewing Key Terms
For each of the following terms, write a sentence
that shows your understanding of its meaning.
equilibrium
homogeneous equilibrium
heterogeneous equilibrium
favourable change
entropy (S)
second law of thermodynamics
free energy
law of chemical equilibrium
equilibrium constant (Kc)
ICE table
reaction quotient (Qc)
Le Châtelier’s principle
common ion effect
372 MHR • Unit 4  Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
Knowledge/Understanding
1. Explain the difference between the rate of
a reaction and the extent of a reaction.
2. At equilibrium, there is no overall change in
the concentrations of reactants and products.
Why, then, is this state described as dynamic?
3. For a reaction that goes to completion, is Kc
very large or very small? Explain why.
4. In a chemical reaction, the change in enthalpy
and the change in entropy are determined by
the nature of the compounds involved.
(a) What signs of ∆H and ∆S indicate that both
factors contribute to a favourable reaction?
(b) What signs of ∆H and ∆S indicate that
both factors combine to make a reaction
unfavourable?
5. Name the factors that can affect the equilibrium
of a reaction.
6. Increasing temperature tends to increase the
solubility of a solid in a liquid, but it tends to
decrease the solubility of gases. Explain why.
7. The following reaction is at equilibrium.
Which condition will produce a shift to the
right: a decrease in volume or a decrease in
temperature? Explain why.
H2(g) + Cl2(g)
(cid:2)(cid:3) 2HCl(g) + heat
8. The following system is at equilibrium. Will an
increase in pressure result in a shift to the left
or to the right? How do you know?
2CO2(g)
(cid:2)(cid:3) 2CO + O2(g)
9. Consider the following reaction.
(cid:2)(cid:3) CH4(g) + H2O(g)
CO(g) + 3H2(g)
(a) The volume and temperature are kept
constant, but the pressure on the system is
increased. Explain how this affects the con-
centration of the reactants and products, and
the direction in which the equilibrium shifts.
(b) When equilibrium has been re-established,
which substance(s) will show an increase in
concentration?
Inquiry
10. The following equation represents the
dissociation of hydrogen iodide gas. At 430˚C,
the value of Kc is 0.20.
(cid:2)(cid:3) H2(g) + I(g)
2HI(g)
Some HI(g) is placed in a closed container
at 430˚C. Analysis at equilibrium shows that
the concentration of I2(g) is 5.6 × 10−4 mol/L.
What are the equilibrium concentrations of
H2(g) and HI(g)?
11. The oxidation of sulfur dioxide to sulfur
(cid:2)(cid:3) 2SO3(g)
trioxide is an important reaction. At 1000 K,
the value of Kc is 3.6 × 10−3.
2SO2(g) + O2(g)
A closed ﬂask originally contains 1.7 mol/L
SO2(g) and 1.7 mol/L O2(g). What is [SO3] at
equilibrium when the reaction vessel is
maintained at 1000 K?
12. Ethanol and propanoic acid react to form the
ester ethyl propanoate, which has the odour
of bananas.
CH3CH2OH((cid:4)) + CH3CH2COOH((cid:4))
(cid:2)(cid:3)
CH3CH2COOCH2CH3 + H2O((cid:4))
At 50˚C, Kc for this reaction is 7.5. If 30.0 g of
ethanol is mixed with 40.0 g of propanoic acid,
what mass of ethyl propanoate will be present
in the equilibrium mixture at 50˚C?
Hint: Calculate the initial amounts of the
reactants. Then solve the equilibrium equation
using amounts instead of concentrations. The
volume of the mixture does not affect the
calculation.
13. 0.50 mol of CO(g) and 0.50 mol of H2O(g)
are placed in a 10 L container at 700 K.
The following reaction occurs.
CO(g) + H2O(g)
What is the concentration of each gas that is
present at equilibrium?
(cid:2)(cid:3) H2(g) + CO2(g) Kc = 8.3
14. Sulfur atoms combine to form molecules that
have different numbers of atoms depending
on the temperature. At about 1050˚C, the
following dissociation occurs.
S8(g)
The initial concentration of S8(g) in a ﬂask is
9.2 × 10−3 mol/L, and the equilibrium concen-
tration of the same gas is 2.3 × 10−3 mol/L.
What is the value of Kc?
(cid:2)(cid:3) 4S2(g)
15. Perpetual motion machines seem to be a
favourite project for inventors who do not
understand the second law of thermodynamics.
Design a simple machine that, once started,
would recycle energy and, according to the
ﬁrst law of thermodynamics, should carry on
forever. Why does the second law of thermody-
namics rule out the possibility of ever making
a perpetual motion machine?
16. Consider an equilibrium in which oxygen gas
reacts with gaseous hydrogen chloride to form
gaseous water and chlorine gas. At equilibrium,
the gases have the following concentrations:
[O2] = 8.6 × 10−2 mol/L,
[HCl] = 2.7 × 10−2 mol/L,
[H2O] = 7.8 × 10−3 mol/L,
[Cl2] = 3.6 × 10−3 mol/L.
(a) Write a balanced chemical equation for
this reaction.
(b) Calculate the value of the equilibrium
constant.
17. Sulfur trioxide gas reacts with gaseous
hydrogen ﬂuoride to produce gaseous sulfur
hexaﬂuoride and water vapour. The value of Kc
is 6.3 × 10−3.
(a) Write a balanced chemical equation for
this reaction.
(b) 2.9 mol of sulfur trioxide is mixed with
9.1 mol of hydrogen ﬂuoride in a 4.7 L ﬂask.
Set up an equation to determine the equilib-
rium concentration of sodium hexaﬂuoride.
(c) Explain why you are likely unable to solve
this equation.
18. The following results were collected for two
experiments that involve the reaction, at 600˚C,
between gaseous sulfur dioxide and oxygen to
form gaseous sulfur trioxide. Show that the
value of Kc was the same in both experiments.
Experiment 1
Experiment 2
Initial
concentration
(mol/L)
[SO2] = 2.00
[O2] = 1.50
[SO3] = 3.00
Equilibrium
concentration
(mol/L)
[SO2] = 1.50
[O2] = 1.25
[SO3] = 3.50
Initial
concentration
(mol/L)
[SO2] = 0.500
[O2] = 0
[SO3] = 0.350
Equilibrium
concentration
(mol/L)
[SO2] = 0.590
[O2] = 0.0450
[SO3] = 0.260
Chapter 7  Reversible Reactions and Chemical Equilibrium • MHR 373
19. Write the chemical equation for the reversible
reaction that has the following equilibrium
expression.
Kc = [NO]4[H2O]6
[NH3]4[O2]5
Assume that, at a certain temperature,
[NO] and [NH3] are equal. Also assume
that [H2O] = 2.0 mol/L and [O2] = 3.0 mol/L .
What is the value of Kc at this temperature?
Communication
20. Discuss the following statements, which
are attributed to the chemist Harry Bent:
• The ﬁrst law of thermodynamics says you
cannot win, you can only break even.
• The second law of thermodynamics says
you cannot break even.
21. Equal amounts of hydrogen gas and iodine
vapour are heated in a sealed ﬂask.
(a) Sketch a graph to show how [H2(g)] and
[HI(g)] change over time.
(b) Would you expect a graph of [I2(g)] and [HI(g)]
to appear much different from your ﬁrst
graph? Explain why.
(c) How does the value of Qc change over time
for this reaction?
25. One of the steps in the Ostwald process for the
production of nitric acid involves the oxidation
of ammonia.
4NH3(g) + 5O2(g)
(cid:2)(cid:3) 4NO(g) + 6H2O(g)
∆H = −905 kJ
(a) State the reaction conditions that favour
the production of nitrogen monoxide.
(b) A rhodium/platinum alloy is used as a
catalyst. What effect does the catalyst have
on the rate of reaction? What effect does the
catalyst have on the position of equilibrium?
(c) Explain why the reaction temperature is
relatively high, typically about 900˚C.
(d) A relatively low pressure of about 710 kPa
is used. Suggest why.
(e) In the next step of the Ostwald process,
nitrogen monoxide is mixed with air to form
nitrogen dioxide.
2NO(g) + O2(g)
Why are the gases cooled for this reaction?
What do you think happens to the heat that
is extracted?
(cid:2)(cid:3) 2NO2(g) ∆H = −115 kJ
(f) Finally, the nitrogen dioxide reacts with
water to form nitric acid.
3NO2(g) + H2O((cid:4))
What is done with the NO(g) that is formed?
Name three uses of this product.
(cid:2)(cid:3) 2HNO3(aq) + NO(g)
22. A younger student in your school wants to
grow a crystal of copper(II) sulfate. Write a
short explanation that outlines how the student
can use a small crystal and a saturated solution
of copper(II) sulfate to grow a larger crystal.
26. Polystyrene is one of our most useful polymers.
Polystyrene resin is manufactured from styrene,
which is made as follows:
C6H5CH2CH3(g) + 123 kJ (cid:2)(cid:3) C6H5CHCH2(g) + H2(g)
(a) Predict the effects (if any) on this
Making Connections
23. The tendency of systems to reach a maximum
state of entropy has been applied to the
social sciences. Does the second law of
thermodynamics help to explain the increase
in garbage on the streets? Justify your answer.
24. At 25˚C, the value of Kc for the reaction
(cid:2)(cid:3) 2NO(g) Kc = 4.7 × 10−31
between nitrogen and oxygen is 4.7 × 10−31:
N2(g) + O2(g)
Assuming that air is composed of 80% nitrogen
by volume and 20% oxygen by volume,
estimate the concentration of nitric oxide to
be expected in the atmosphere. Why is the
actual [NO] usually greater?
374 MHR • Unit 4  Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
equilibrium if the following changes
are made:
• increasing the applied pressure
• removing styrene
• reducing the temperature
• adding a catalyst
• adding helium
27. (a) Based on your predictions in question 26,
select the conditions that would maximize
the equilibrium yield of styrene.
(b) Why are the conditions you selected
unlikely to be used by industry? What
conditions must be used to maximize the
yield of an industrial process?
22. [H2] = 8.6 × 10−2 mol/L 23. 6.1 × 10−5 mol
24. [NO] = 1.2 × 10−5 mol/L 25. [CO2] = 0.59 mol/L ;
[CO] = 1.1 × 10−2 mol/L; [O2] = 5.6 × 10−3 mol/L
26.(a) Kc = 171 (b) [NO2] = 0.0412 mol/L;
[N2O4] = 0.145 mol/L (c) Qc = 85.3 (d) right  27.(a) right (b) left
(c) at equilibrium (d) left  28. left  29. right  30.(a) no change
(b) left (c) right (d) right  31.(a) left (b) right (c) no change (d) left
(e) no change  32. Only (d) changes the value of Kc.
33. adding methyl cyclohexane; removing toluene;
decreasing the pressure; increasing the temperature
Section Review: 7.2:  3.(a) increases (b) decreases (c) increases
(d) decreases (e) increases  4.(a) + (b) − (c) − (d) − (e) +
7.3: 1.(a)
[SbCl3][Cl2]
[SbCl5]
(b)
[N2][H2O]2
[H2]2[NO]2 (c)
[H2]4[CS2]
[H2S]2[CH4]
2.(a) [N2] = 0.20 mol/L; [NH3] = 1.6 mol/L (b) Kc = 0.017
3. 1.2 mol  4. [PCl3] = [Cl] = 0.035 mol/L ;
[PCl5] = 0.059 mol/L 5.(a) [H2] = 3.5 × 10−7 mol/L (b) an
impractical method  7.4: 1.(a) right (b) right (c) unchanged
(d) right (e) left  2.(a) high temperatures (b) low temperatures
(c) high temperatures (d) low temperatures  3.(a) unchanged
(b) right (c) left (d) unchanged (because liquid volumes are
largely unaffected by pressure changes)
4.(a) N2 + 3H2
increasing the pressure; lowering the temperature
(because the reaction is exothermic)
(cid:2)(cid:3) 2NH3 (b) adding N2 or H2; removing NH3;
(c) In practice, the pressure of the ethyl benzene
is kept low. An inert substance—super-
heated steam—is added to keep the total
pressure of the mixture at atmospheric
pressure. What advantage does this method
have over running the reaction without
the steam at a pressure that is less than
atmospheric pressure?
(d) The super-heated steam supplies energy to
the system. Why is this desirable? It also
reacts with any carbon that is formed as a
by-product at high temperatures, preventing
the carbon from contaminating the catalyst.
What products are formed as a result of the
reaction between carbon and steam?
(e) What is the advantage of using super-heated
steam at 600˚C rather than ordinary steam at
100˚C?
(f) In practice, an iron oxide catalyst is used.
Explain why this is desirable.
(g) At 600˚C, with an iron oxide catalyst, the
conversion is only about 35% complete.
The yield could be increased by raising the
temperature. Suggest two plausible reasons
why this is not done.
(h) The ethyl benzene that has not reacted is
separated from the styrene by fractional
distillation. The boiling point of ethyl
benzene is 136˚C, and the boiling point of
styrene is 146˚C. The styrene, of course,
is used to make polystyrene. What is done
with the ethyl benzene?
Answers to Practice Problems and Short Answers to
6. 1.9 × 10−2 7. 1.2 × 102 8. 0.013
Section Review Questions
Practice Problems: 1. Kc = [CH3COOCH2CH3][H2O]
CH3CH2OH][CH3COOH]
4. Kc = [Fe2+]2[I2]
3. Kc = [H2O]2
2. Kc = [NO]2
[Fe3+]2[I−]2
[H2]2[O2]
[N2][O2]
5. Kc = [NO]4[H2O]6
[NH3]4[O2]5
9. 2.4 × 10−4 10. 0.15  11. [I2] = [Cl2] = 0.015 mol/L;
[ICl] = 14 mol/L 12. HF = 0.11 mol
13. [SO3] = 0.089 mol/L 14. [CO] = 0.011 mol/L ;
[Cl2] = 0.014 mol/L; [COCl2] = 3.1 × 10−5 mol/L
15. [HBr] = 0.045 mol/L; [H2] = [Br2] = 2.9 × 10−6 mol/L
16. 1100 K 17. III, II, I 18.(a) completion (b) no reaction
(c) completion  19. Ag(NH3)2]+
dissociation  21. [CO] = [Cl2] = 1.8 × 10−4 mol/L
(aq) 20. essentially no
Chapter 7  Reversible Reactions and Chemical Equilibrium • MHR 375
Acids, Bases, and pH
For many people, the word “acid” evokes the image of a fuming, highly
corrosive, dangerous liquid. This image is fairly accurate for concentrated
hydrochloric acid, a strong acid. Most acids, however, are not as corrosive
as hydrochloric acid, although they may still be very hazardous. For
example, hydroﬂuoric acid can cause deep, slow-healing tissue burns if
it is handled carelessly. It is used by artists and artisans who etch glass. It
reacts with the silica in glass to form a compound that dissolves, leaving
the glass with a brilliant surface. Hydroﬂuoric acid is highly corrosive.
Even a 1% solution is considered to be hazardous. Yet chemists classify
hydroﬂuoric acid as a weak acid.
You learned about acids and bases in your previous chemistry course.
In this chapter, you will extend your knowledge to learn how the struc-
ture of a compound determines whether it is an acid or a base. You will
use the equilibrium constant of the reaction of an acid or base with water
to determine whether the acid or base is strong or weak. You will apply
your understanding of dissociation and pH to investigate buffer solutions:
solutions that resist changes in pH. Finally, you will examine acid-base
titrations that involve combinations of strong and weak acids and bases.
The hydrohalic acids (HX(aq)), where X represents a
halogen) include HF, HCl, HBr, and HI. Only HF is a
weak acid. The rest are strong acids. What factors
account for this difference?
C h a p t e r   P r e v i e w
8.1 Explaining the
Properties of Acids
and Bases
8.2 The Equilibrium of
Weak Acids and Bases
8.3 Bases and Buffers
8.4 Acid-Base Titration
Curves
P r e r e q u i s i t e
C o n c e p t s   a n d   S k i l l s
Before you begin this chapter,
review the following concepts
and skills:
(cid:2) writing net ionic equations
(Concepts and Skills
Review)
(cid:2) calculating molar concen-
trations (Concepts and
Skills Review)
(cid:2) solving equilibrium
problems (Chapter 7,
sections 7.3 and 7.4)
(cid:2) explaining the
mathematical properties
of logarithms (previous
studies)
(cid:2) performing acid-base
titrations (previous
studies)
376 MHR • Unit 4  Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
Explaining the Properties
of Acids and Bases
8.1
Table 8.1 outlines properties of acids and bases that you have examined in
previous courses. In this section, you will review two theories that help to
explain these and other properties. As well, you will use your under-
standing of molecular structure to help you understand why acids and
bases differ in strength.
Table 8.1 Examples and Common Properties of Acids and Bases
Example
Acids
Bases
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
(cid:2) compare strong acids
and bases, and weak acids
and bases, in terms of
equilibrium
(cid:2) identify conjugate acid-base
acetyl salicylic acid
sodium hydroxide
pairs
(cid:2) solve problems that involve
strong acids and strong
bases
(cid:2) communicate your under-
standing of the following
terms: hydronium ion
(H3O+
(aq)), conjugate
acid-base pair, monoprotic
acids, polyprotic acids
solid
liquid
gas
acetic acid
hydrogen chloride
aniline
ammonia
Property
Acids
Bases
Acids taste sour.
Bases taste bitter.
Acids do not have a
characteristic texture.
Bases feel slippery.
taste
Never taste
CAUTION
chemicals in a lab.
Never
texture of solution
CAUTION
deliberately touch
chemicals. Strong,
concentrated acids
and bases will burn
your skin.
reaction with
phenolphthalein
Acidic phenolphthalein
is colourless.
Basic phenolphthalein
is pink.
reaction with litmus
paper
Acids turn blue litmus
red.
Bases turn red litmus blue.
reaction with metals
reaction with
carbonates
reaction with
ammonium chloride
Acids react with
metals above hydrogen
in the activity series to
displace H2(g).
Bases react with certain
metals (such as Al) to
form H2(g).
Carbon dioxide is formed.
No reaction occurs.
No reaction occurs.
Ammonia, NH3, a gas
with a characteristic
odour, is produced.
neutralization
reaction
Acids neutralize basic
solutions.
Bases neutralize acidic
solutions.
reaction with fatty
acids
aqueous property
of oxides
No reaction occurs.
Non-metal oxides form
acidic solutions:
for example,
CO2(g) + H2O((cid:2)) → H2CO3(aq)
Bases react to form soap
(a saponification reaction).
Metal oxides form basic
solutions: for example,
CaO(s) + H2O((cid:2)) → Ca(OH)2(aq)
amount of dissociation
in aqueous solution
(strength)
Strong acids dissociate
completely. Weak acids
dissociate only partially.
Strong bases dissociate
completely. Weak bases
dissociate only partially.
Chapter 8  Acids, Bases, and pH • MHR 377
The following ExpressLab highlights concepts that you will examine in
this section, as well as later in the chapter.
ExpressLab
Comparing Acid-Base Reactions
You will perform three acid-base reactions. Before
you begin, read the Procedure and make a predic-
tion about the relative rates of these reactions.
Safety Precautions
The solutions that are used in this lab are irritants
and should be handled with care. Wash any spills
on your skin or clothing with plenty of water. Inform
your teacher immediately.
Materials
powdered calcium carbonate, CaCO3(s)
3 squeeze bottles, each containing one of the
following solutions: 2.0 mol/L HCl(aq);
2.0 mol/L CH3COOH(aq); mixture of
2.0 mol/L CH3COOH(aq) and 2.0 mol/L NaCH3COO(aq)
scoopula
3 test tubes
test tube rack
labels or grease pencil
Procedure
1. Label each test tube to identify the solution
it will contain. Then ﬁll each test tube with the
corresponding solution, to a depth of about 2 cm.
2. Add a small amount of CaCO3(s) (enough to cover
the tip of a scoopula) to each test tube. Try to
add the same amount of CaCO3(s) to all three
test tubes.
3. Record your observations. Rank the rates of the
three reactions from fastest to slowest.
Analysis
1. (a) What rate-related change did you observe
in each test tube?
(b) If you wanted to collect quantitative data
for each reaction, how could you modify
the experiment?
2. In all three test tubes, the following reaction
occurred.
CaCO3(s) + 2H3O+
(aq) → CO2(g) + Ca2+
The only difference between the test tubes was
the concentration of H+
(aq) in the acidic solutions
that reacted with CaCO3(s). Explain your ranking
of the rates of reaction in terms of [H3O+].
(aq) + 3H2O((cid:2))
3. The concentrations of HCl(aq) and CH3COOH(aq)
were identical. The following dissociation
reactions occurred.
HCl(aq) + H2O((cid:2))
(cid:3)(cid:4) H3O+
CH3COOH(aq) + H2O((cid:2))
Explain your ranking of the [H3O+] in these
solutions in terms of the extent of the
equilibrium dissociation.
(aq) + CH3COO−
(cid:3)(cid:4) H3O+
(aq) + Cl+
(aq)
(aq)
4. The third solution was a mixture of 2.0 mol/L
CH3COOH(aq) and 2.0 mol/L NaCH3COO(aq) . How
did the addition of sodium acetate affect the
equilibrium of the dissociation reaction of
acetic acid?
5. Explain your ranking of the rate of the reaction
between calcium carbonate and the solution
that was a mixture of acetic acid and sodium
acetate.
The Arrhenius Theory of Acids and Bases
According to the Arrhenius theory (1887), acids and bases are deﬁned
in terms of their structure and the ions produced when they dissolve
in water.
• An acid is a substance that dissociates in water to form H+
(aq). Two
examples of Arrhenius acids are hydrochloric acid, HCl, and sulfuric
acid, H2SO4.
• A base is a substance that dissociates in water to form OH−
(aq). Two
examples of Arrhenius bases are sodium hydroxide, NaOH, and
potassium hydroxide, KOH.
378 MHR • Unit 4  Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
(aq) and OH−
The Arrhenius theory explains acid-base reactions as a combination of
H+
(aq). It provides insight into the heat of neutralization for
the reaction between a strong acid and a strong base. (Strong acids and
bases dissociate completely into ions in solution.) For example, consider
the following reaction.
HCl(aq) + NaOH(aq) → NaCl(aq) + H2O((cid:2))
∆H = −56 kJ
The total ionic equation for this reaction is
(aq) → Na+
H+
Subtracting spectator ions from both sides, the net ionic equation is
(aq) + H2O((cid:2))
(aq) + OH−
(aq) + Na+
(aq) + Cl−
(aq) + Cl−
∆H = −56 kJ
H+
(aq) + OH−
(aq) → H2O((cid:2)) ∆H = −56 kJ
Different combinations of strong Arrhenius acids and bases react with the
same exothermic result. Measurements always show the release of 56 kJ of
energy per mole of water formed. This makes sense, because the net ionic
equation is the same regardless of the speciﬁc neutralization reaction that
occurs.
The Arrhenius theory has limitations, however. For example, H+
(aq),
a bare proton, does not exist in water. The positive charge on a proton is
attracted to the region of negative charge on the lone pair of electrons on
a water molecule’s oxygen atom. The combination is a hydrated proton
called a hydronium ion, H3O+
(aq).
H+
(aq) + H2O((cid:2)) → H3O+
(aq)
The hydronium ion, itself, forms hydrogen bonds with other water
molecules. (See Figure 8.1.) Thus, a better formula for the ion that is
present in acidic solutions is [H(H2O)n]+, where n is usually 4 or 5. For
convenience, however, chemists usually use a single hydronium ion
when writing equations.
hydrogen bond
+
H3O+
In aqueous solution,
Figure 8.1
the hydronium ion, H3O+, forms
hydrogen bonds with other water
molecules.
The Arrhenius theory also has limitations for explaining certain reactions.
For example, aqueous solutions of ammonia are basic. They react with
acids in neutralization reactions, even though ammonia does not contain
the hydroxide ion. Many aqueous solutions of salts with no hydroxide
ions are basic, too. Some reactions take place without any liquid solvent.
For example, ammonium chloride can be formed by the reaction between
ammonia and hydrogen chloride, which are both gases:
NH3(g) + HCl(g) → NH4Cl(s)
Chapter 8  Acids, Bases, and pH • MHR 379
The Brønsted-Lowry Theory
The limitations of the Arrhenius theory of acids and bases are overcome
by a more general theory, called the Brønsted-Lowry theory. This theory
was proposed independently, in 1923, by Johannes Brønsted, a Danish
chemist, and Thomas Lowry, an English chemist. It recognizes an
acid-base reaction as a chemical equilibrium, having both a forward
reaction and a reverse reaction that involve the transfer of a proton. The
Brønsted-Lowry theory deﬁnes acids and bases as follows:
• An acid is a substance from which a proton can be removed. (Some
chemists describe Brønsted-Lowry acids as “proton-donors.”)
• A base is a substance that can accept a proton. (Some chemists describe
Brønsted-Lowry bases as “proton-acceptors.”)
Note that the word “proton” refers to the nucleus of a hydrogen atom — an
H+ ion that has been removed from the acid molecule. It does not refer
to a proton removed from the nucleus of another atom, such as oxygen or
sulfur, that may be present in the acid molecule. As mentioned previously,
H+ ions share electrons with any species (ion or molecule) that has a lone
pair of electrons. In aqueous solution, the proton bonds with a water
molecule to form the hydronium ion. Unlike the Arrhenius theory,
however, the Brønsted-Lowry theory is not restricted to aqueous solutions.
For example, the lone pair of electrons on an ammonia molecule can bond
with H+, and liquid ammonia can act as a base.
Definition Term
Arrhenius Theory
Brønsted-Lowry Theory
acid
base
a substance that contains
hydrogen and dissociates
in water to form H+
(aq)
a substance that contains
the hydroxide group and
dissociates in water to
form OH−
(aq)
a substance from which
a proton can be removed
a substance that can
accept a proton from
an acid
Conjugate Acid-Base Pairs
The dissociation of acetic acid in water is represented in Figure 8.2.
This dissociation is an equilibrium reaction because it proceeds in both
directions. Acetic acid is weak, so only a few ions dissociate. The position
of equilibrium lies to the left, and the reverse reaction is favoured. In
the reverse reaction, the hydronium ion gives up a proton to the acetate
ion. Thus, these ions are an acid and a base, respectively, as shown in
Figure 8.3. The acid on the left (CH3COOH) and the base on the right
(CH3COO−) differ by one proton. They are called a conjugate acid-base
pair. Similarly, H2O and H3O+ are a conjugate acid-base pair.
CH3
C
O
O
H
+
O
H
H
+
H
+
CH3
C
−
O
O
H
O
H
acid
(acetic acid)
base
(water)
acid
(hydronium ion)
base
(acetate ion)
Figure 8.2
The dissociation of acetic acid, a weak acid, in water
380 MHR • Unit 4  Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
CH3
C
O
O
H
+
O
H
H
+
H
+
CH3
C
−
O
O
H
O
H
acid
base
conjugate acid
conjugate base
conjugate pair
conjugate pair
Figure 8.3
Conjugate acid-base pairs in the dissociation of acetic acid in water
Unlike the Arrhenius theory, the Brønsted-Lowry theory of acids and
bases can explain the basic properties of ammonia when it dissolves in
water. See Figure 8.4.
conjugate pair
N
+
O
O
HH
H
base
H
H
+
−
+
HO
H
N
HH
H
acid
conjugate acid
conjugate base
conjugate pair
Figure 8.4
The dissociation of ammonia, a weak base, in water
Aqueous ammonia is a weak base, so relatively few hydroxide ions form.
The position of equilibrium lies to the left. In the forward reaction, the
water molecule gives up a proton and acts as an acid. A substance that
can act as a proton donor (an acid) in one reaction and a proton acceptor
(a base) in another reaction is said to be amphoteric. (Water acts as an
acid in the presence of a stronger base, and as a base in the presence of a
stronger acid.
Sample Problem
Identifying Conjugate Acid-Base Pairs
Problem
Identify the conjugate acid-base pair in each reaction.
(cid:3)(cid:4) H2PO4
(a) H3PO4(aq) + H2O((cid:2))
(cid:3)(cid:4) HPO4
−
(aq) + OH−
(b) H2PO4
−
(aq) + H3O+
2−
(aq)
(aq) + H2O((cid:2))
(aq)
Continued ...
Chapter 8  Acids, Bases, and pH • MHR 381
Continued ...
Solution
On the left side of the equation, the acid is the molecule or ion that
donates a proton. The base is the molecule or ion that accepts the
proton. On the right side of the equation, you can identify the conjugate
acid and base by the difference of a single proton from the base and acid
on the left side.
(a) The conjugate acid-base pairs are H3PO4 /H2PO4
− and H2O /H3O+.
conjugate pair
base
conjugate acid
H3PO4(aq)   +   H2O((cid:2))
H2PO4
−
(aq)    +    H3O+
(aq)
acid
conjugate base
conjugate pair
(b) The conjugate acid-base pairs are H2PO4
−/HPO4
2− and OH−/H2O.
conjugate pair
base
(aq)    +   OH−
(aq)
−
conjugate acid
HPO4
2−
(aq)    +    H2O((cid:2))
conjugate base
conjugate pair
H2PO4
acid
Check Your Solution
In each case, the acid has one more proton than its conjugate base.
Practice Problems
1. Name and write the formula of the conjugate base of each molecule
or ion.
(a) HCl
−
(b) HCO3
(c) H2SO4
+
(d) N2H5
2. Name and write the formula of the conjugate acid of each molecule
or ion.
−
(a) NO3
(b) OH−
(c) H2O
−
(d) HCO3
3. Identify the conjugate acid-base pairs in each reaction.
(cid:3)(cid:4) H2S(aq) + OH−
(aq)
(a) HS−
(b) O2−
(aq) + H2O((cid:2))
(aq) + H2O((cid:2)) → 2OH−
(aq)
4. Identify the conjugate acid-base pairs in each reaction.
(a) H2S(aq) + NH3(aq)
(b) H2SO4(aq) + H2O((cid:2)) → H3O+
(cid:3)(cid:4) NH4
+
(aq) + HS−
(aq)
−
(aq) + HSO4
(aq)
382 MHR • Unit 4  Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
Molecular Structure and the Strength of Acids and Bases
When a strong acid or base dissolves in water, almost every acid or base
molecule dissociates. While there are many acids and bases, most are
weak. Thus, the number of strong acids and strong bases is fairly small.
Strong Acids
• binary acids that have the general formula HX(aq) , where X = Cl,
Br, and I (but not F): for example, hydrochloric acid, HCl, and
hydrobromic acid, HBr (HCl and HBr are hydrohalic acids: acids
that have hydrogen bonded to atoms of the halogen elements.)
• oxoacids (acids containing oxygen atoms) in which the number of
oxygen atoms exceeds, by two or more, the number of protons that
can be dissociated: for example, nitric acid, HNO3, sulfuric acid,
H2SO4, perchloric acid, HClO4, and chloric acid, HClO3
The binary acids of non-metals exhibit periodic trends in their acid
strength, as shown in Figure 8.5. Two factors are responsible for this
trend: the electronegativity of the atom that is bonded to hydrogen,
and the strength of the bond.
increasing acid strength
increasing electronegativity
18(VIIIA)
13
(IIIA)
14
(IVA)
15
(VA)
16
(VIA)
17
(VIIA)
CH4 NH3 H2O
HF
H2S
HCl
H2Se
HBr
H2Te
HI
d
e
c
r
e
a
s
i
n
g
b
o
n
d
s
t
r
e
n
g
t
h
i
n
c
r
e
a
s
i
n
g
a
c
i
d
s
t
r
e
n
g
t
h
Across a period, electronegativity is the most important factor. The acid
strength of hydrides increases as their electronegativity increases. This
happens because an electronegative atom draws electrons away from the
hydrogen atom, making it relatively positive. The negative pole of a water
molecule then strongly attracts the hydrogen atom and pulls it away.
Down a group, bond strength is the most important factor. Acid
strength increases as bond strength decreases. A weaker bond means that
the hydrogen atom is more easily pulled away from the atom to which it
is attached. For example, hydroﬂuoric acid is a stronger acid than water,
but HF is the weakest of the hydrohalic acids because the H-F bond is
relatively strong.
The binary acids
Figure 8.5
show periodic trends, which are
related to electronegativity and
bond strength.
Chapter 8  Acids, Bases, and pH • MHR 383
C H E M
FA C T
You might wonder how HCl(aq),
HBr(aq), and HI(aq) can be
described as increasing in
strength, since each acid
dissociates completely in
water. This trend becomes
apparent if you add equal
concentrations of the acids
to a solvent that is less basic
than water, such as pure
acetic acid. You will ﬁnd
that the acids dissociate to
different extents.
Oxoacids increase in strength with increasing numbers of oxygen
atoms, as shown in Figure 8.6. The hydrogen atoms that dissociate
in water are always attached to oxygen atoms. Oxygen is more
electronegative than hydrogen, so oxygen atoms draw electrons away from
hydrogen atoms. The more oxygen atoms there are in a molecule, the
greater is the polarity of the bond between each hydrogen atom and the
oxygen atom it is attached to, and the more easily the water molecule can
tear the hydrogen atom away.
increasing acid strength
O
H
δ+
O Cl
δ−
H
δ+
O Cl
δ−
O
H
δ+ δ−
O Cl
O
O Cl
O
H
δ+ δ−
O
O
hypochlorous
acid
chlorous
acid
chloric
acid
perchloric
acid
Figure 8.6
The relative strength of oxoacids increases with the number of oxygen atoms.
Acids such as HCl, CH3COOH, and HF are monoprotic acids. They have
only a single hydrogen atom that dissociates in water. Some acids have
more than one hydrogen atom that dissociates. These acids are called
polyprotic acids. For example, sulfuric acid has two hydrogen atoms that
can dissociate.
H2SO4(aq) + H2O((cid:2))
−
(aq) + H2O((cid:2))
HSO4
(cid:3)(cid:4) H3O+
(cid:3)(cid:4) H3O+
Sulfuric acid is a far stronger acid than the hydrogen sulfate ion, because
much more energy is required to remove a proton from a negatively
charged ion. The strength of a polyprotic acid decreases as the number of
hydrogen atoms that have dissociated increases.
−
(aq) + HSO4
2−
(aq) + SO4
(aq)
(aq)
Strong bases are conﬁned to the oxides and hydroxides from Groups 1
(IA) and 2 (IIA).
Strong Bases
• all oxides and hydroxides of the alkali metals: for example, sodium
hydroxide, NaOH, and potassium hydroxide, KOH
• alkaline earth (Group 2 (IIA)) metal oxides and hydroxides below
beryllium: for example, calcium hydroxide, Ca(OH)2, and barium
hydroxide, Ba(OH)2
The strong basic oxides have metal atoms with low electronegativity.
Thus, the bond to oxygen is ionic and is relatively easily broken by the
attraction of polar water molecules. The oxide ion always reacts with
water molecules to produce hydroxide ions.
O2−
(aq) + H2O((cid:2)) → 2OH−
(aq)
Magnesium oxide and magnesium hydroxide are not very soluble. They
are strong bases, however, because the small amount that does dissolve
dissociates almost completely into ions. Beryllium oxide is a weak base.
(It is the exception in Group 2 (IIA).) It is a relatively small atom, so the
bond to oxygen is strong and not easily broken by water molecules.
384 MHR • Unit 4  Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
Calculations That Involve Strong Acids and Bases
When a strong acid dissociates completely into ions in water, the
concentration of H3O+
acid. Similarly, when a strong base dissociates completely in water, the
concentration of OH−
(aq) is equal to the concentration of the strong base.
(aq) is equal to the concentration of the strong
Sample Problem
Calculating Ion Concentrations in Acidic and Basic Solutions
Problem
During an experiment, a student pours 25.0 mL of 1.40 mol/L nitric
acid into a beaker that contains 15.0 mL of 2.00 mol/L sodium
hydroxide solution. Is the resulting solution acidic or basic? What is the
concentration of the ion that causes the solution to be acidic or basic?
What Is Required?
You must determine the ion in excess and its concentration.
What Is Given?
You have the following data:
Volume of nitric acid = 25.0 mL
[HNO3] = 1.40 mol/L
Volume of sodium hydroxide = 15.0 mL
[NaOH] = 2.00 mol/L
Plan Your Strategy
Step 1 Write the chemical equation for the reaction.
Step 2 Calculate the amount of each reactant using the following equation.
Amount (in mol) = Concentration (in mol/L) × Volume (in L)
Step 3 Determine the limiting reactant.
Step 4 The reactant in excess is a strong acid or base. Thus, the excess
amount results in the same amount of H3O+ or OH−.
Step 5 Calculate the concentration of the excess ion by using the amount
in excess and the total volume of the solution.
Act on Your Strategy
Step 1 HNO3(aq) + NaOH(aq) → NaNO3(aq) + H2O((cid:2))
Step 2 Amount of HNO3 = 1.40 mol/L × 0.0250 L
= 0.0350 mol
Amount of NaOH = 2.00 mol/L × 0.0150 L
= 0.0300 mol
Step 3 The reactants combine in a 1:1 ratio. The amount of NaOH is less,
so this reactant must be the limiting reactant.
Step 4 Amount of excess HNO3(aq) = 0.0350 mol − 0.0300 mol
Therefore, the amount of H3O+
Step 5 Total volume of solution = 25.0 mL + 15.0 mL = 40.0 mL
= 0.005 0 mol
(aq) is 5.0 × 10−3 mol.
+
[H3O
] = 5.0 × 10−3 mol
0.0400 L
= 0.12 mol/L
Continued ...
Chapter 8  Acids, Bases, and pH • MHR 385
Continued ...
The solution is acidic, and [H3O+] is 0.12 mol/L.
Check Your Solution
The chemical equation has a 1:1 ratio between reactants. The amount of
acid is greater than the amount of base. Therefore, the resulting solution
should be acidic, which it is.
Practice Problems
5. Calculate the concentration of hydronium ions in each solution.
(a) 4.5 mol/L HCl(aq)
(b) 30.0 mL of 4.50 mol/L HBr(aq) diluted to 100.0 mL
(c) 18.6 mL of 2.60 mol/L HClO4(aq) added to 24.8 mL of 1.92 mol/L
NaOH(aq)
(d) 17.9 mL of 0.175 mol/L HNO3(aq) added to 35.4 mL of
0.0160 mol/L Ca(OH)2(aq)
6. Calculate the concentration of hydroxide ions in each solution.
(a) 3.1 mol/L KOH(aq)
(b) 21.0 mL of 3.1 mol/L KOH diluted to 75.0 mL
(c) 23.2 mL of 1.58 mol/L HCl(aq) added to 18.9 mL of 3.50 mol/L
NaOH(aq)
(d) 16.5 mL of 1.50 mol/L H2SO4(aq) added to 12.7 mL of 5.50 mol/L
NaOH(aq)
7. Determine whether reacting each pair of solutions results in an
acidic solution or a basic solution. Then calculate the concentration
of the ion that causes the solution to be acidic or basic. (Assume
that the volumes in part (a) are additive. Assume that the volumes in
part (b) stay the same.)
(a) 31.9 mL of 2.75 mol/L HCl(aq) added to 125 mL of 0.0500 mol/L
Mg(OH)2(aq)
(b) 4.87 g of NaOH(s) added to 80.0 mL of 3.50 mol/L HBr(aq)
8. 2.75 g of MgO(s) is added to 70.0 mL of 2.40 mol/L HNO3(aq). Is the
solution that results from the reaction acidic or basic? What is the
concentration of the ion that is responsible for the character of the
solution?
Section Summary
Strong acids and bases (and strong electrolytes) dissociate completely in
water. Therefore, you can use the concentrations of these compounds to
determine the concentrations of the ions they form in aqueous solutions.
You cannot, however, use the concentrations of weak acids, bases, and
electrolytes in the same way. Their solutions contain some particles
that have not dissociated into ions. Nevertheless, important changes in
[H3O+] and [OH−] take place because dissolved ions affect the dissociation
of water.
386 MHR • Unit 4  Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
In the next section, you will focus on the equilibrium of water. You
will discover how the pH scale is related to the concentrations of the ions
that form when water dissociates. As well, you will learn how to calculate
the pH values of solutions of weak acids and bases.
Section Review
1
K/U
Phosphoric acid, H3PO4(aq) is triprotic. It has three hydrogen ions
that may be dissociated.
(a) Write an equation to show the dissociation of each proton.
−
(b) Show that H2PO4
(aq) can act as either an acid or a base.
−
(c) Which is the stronger acid, H3PO4(aq) or H2PO4
(aq) ? Explain
your answer.
2
K/U
Para-aminobenzoic acid (PABA) is a weak monoprotic acid that is
used in some sunscreen lotions. Its formula is C6H4NH2COOH. What is
the formula of the conjugate base of PABA?
3
K/U
Boric acid, B(OH)3(aq), is used as a mild antiseptic in eye-wash
solutions. The following reaction takes place in aqueous solution.
−
(aq) + H3O+
B(OH)3(aq) + 2H2O((cid:2))
(a) Identify the conjugate acid-base pairs.
(cid:3)(cid:4) B(OH)4
(aq)
(b) Is boric acid strong or weak? How do you know?
4
K/U
Classify each compound as a strong acid, weak acid, strong
base, or weak base.
(a) butyric acid, CH3CH2CH2COOH (responsible for the odour of
rancid butter)
(b) hydroiodic acid, HI(aq) (added to some cough syrups)
(c) potassium hydroxide, KOH (used in the manufacture of soft soaps)
(d) red iron oxide, Fe2O3 (used as a colouring pigment in paints)
5
C
Distinguish between a concentrated solution of a weak base, and
a dilute solution of a strong base. Give an example of each.
Chapter 8  Acids, Bases, and pH • MHR 387
8.2
The Equilibrium of
Weak Acids and Bases
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
(cid:2) deﬁne and perform
calculations that involve
the ion product constant
for water, Kw, and the acid
dissociation constant, Ka
(cid:2) compare strong acids and
bases in terms of equilibrium
(cid:2) compare weak acids and
bases in terms of equilibrium
(cid:2) communicate your
understanding of the
following terms: ion product
constant for water ( Kw ),
pH, pOH, acid dissociation
constant (Ka), percent
dissociation
The dissociation of an acidic or basic compound in aqueous solution
produces ions that interact with water. The pH of the aqueous solution is
determined by the position of equilibrium in reactions between the ions
that are present in solution and the water molecules. Pure water contains
a few ions, produced by the dissociation of water molecules:
(aq)
2H2O((cid:2))
(aq) + OH−
(cid:3)(cid:4) H3O+
At 25˚C, only about two water molecules in one billion dissociate. This
is why pure water is such a poor conductor of electricity. In neutral
water, at 25˚C, the concentration of hydronium ions is the same as the
concentration of hydroxide ions: 1.0 × 10−7 mol/L. These concentrations
must be the same because the dissociation of water produces equal num-
bers of hydronium and hydroxide ions. Because this is an equilibrium
reaction, and because the position of equilibrium of all reactions changes
with temperature, [H3O+] is not 1.0 × 10−7 mol/L at other temperatures.
The same is true of [OH−] .
The Ion Product Constant for Water
The equilibrium constant, Kc, for the dissociation of water is given by the
following expression.
Kc = [H3O+][OH−]
[H2O]2
So few ions form that the concentration of water is essentially constant.
The product Kc[H2O]2 is equal to the product of the concentrations of
hydronium ions and hydroxide ions. The equilibrium value of the
concentration ion product [H3O+][OH−] at 25˚C is called the ion product
constant for water. It is given the symbol Kw.
−
+
Kc[H2O]2 = [H3O
]
][OH
−7 mol/L × 1.0 × 10
−14
−7 mol/L
= 1.0 × 10
= 1.0 × 10
= Kw
The units are commonly dropped, as in other equilibrium expressions you
have encountered.
The concentration of H3O+ in the solution of a strong acid is equal
to the concentration of the dissolved acid, unless the solution is very
dilute. Consider [H3O+] in a solution of 0.1 mol/L hydrochloric acid.
All the molecules of HCl dissociate in water, forming a hydronium ion
concentration that equals 0.1 mol/L. The increased [H3O+] pushes the
dissociation reaction between water molecules to the left, in accordance
with Le Châtelier’s principle. Consequently, the concentration of hydro-
nium ions that results from the dissociation of water is even less than
1 × 10−7 mol/L. This [H3O+] is negligible compared with the 0.1 mol/L
concentration of the hydrochloric acid. Unless the solution is very dilute
(about 1 × 10−7 mol/L), the dissociation of water molecules can be ignored
when determining [H3O+] of a strong acid.
388 MHR • Unit 4  Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
Similarly, the concentration of hydroxide ions can be determined from
the concentration of the dissolved base. If the solution is a strong base,
you can ignore the dissociation of water molecules when determining
[OH−], unless the solution is very dilute. When either [H3O+] or [OH−] is
known, you can use the ion product constant for water, Kw, to determine
the concentration of the other ion. Although the value of Kw for water is
1.0 × 10−14 at 25˚C only, you can use this value unless another value is
given for a different temperature.
] and [OH−] in Aqueous Solutions at 25˚C
+
[H3O
In an acidic solution, [H3O+] is greater than 1.0 × 10−7 mol/L and
[OH−] is less than 1.0 × 10−7 mol/L.
In a neutral solution, both [H3O+] and [OH−] are equal to
1.0 × 10−7 mol/L.
In a basic solution, [H3O+] is less than 1.0 × 10−7 mol/L and [OH−]
is greater than 1.0 × 10−7 mol/L.
Sample Problem
Determining [H3O+] and [OH–]
Problem
Find [H3O+] and [OH−] in each solution.
(a) 2.5 mol/L nitric acid
(b) 0.16 mol/L barium hydroxide
Solution
−14
You know that nitric acid is a strong acid and barium hydroxide is a
strong base. Since both dissociate completely in aqueous solutions,
you can use their molar concentrations to determine [H3O+] or [OH−].
You can ﬁnd the concentration of the other ion using Kw:
Kw = 1.0 × 10
−
+
= [H3O
]
][OH
+
(a) [HNO3] = 2.5 mol/L, so [H3O
] = 2.5 mol/L
] = 1.0 × 10−14 mol/L
2.5
−15 mol/L
= 4.0 × 10
H2O
−
[OH
(b) Ba(OH)2
Ba2+
(aq) + 2OH−
(aq)
Each mole of Ba(OH)2 in solution forms two moles of OH− ions.
∴ [OH−] = 2 × 0.16 = 0.32 mol/L
] = 1.0 × 10−14 mol/L
0.32
−14 mol/L
= 3.1 × 10
+
[H3O
Check Your Solution
For a solution of a strong acid, as in part (a), [H3O+] should be greater
than 1.0 × 10−14 and [OH−] should be less than 1.0 × 10−14. For a solution
of strong base, [OH−] should be greater than, and [H3O+] should be less
than, 1.0 × 10−14.
Chapter 8  Acids, Bases, and pH • MHR 389
Sulfuric acid is the only
common strong diprotic acid.
Explain why the concentration
of hydronium ions in a solution
of 1.0 mol/L H2SO4(aq) is
1.0 mol/L, not 2.0 mol/L.
Practice Problems
9. Determine [H3O+] and [OH−] in each solution.
(a) 0.45 mol/L hydrochloric acid
(b) 1.1 mol/L sodium hydroxide
10. Determine [H3O+] and [OH−] in each solution.
(a) 0.95 mol/L hydrobromic acid
(b) 0.012 mol/L calcium hydroxide
Web
L I N K
www.mcgrawhill.ca/links/
chemistry12
Many people, for both personal
and professional reasons, rely
on pH meters to provide quick,
reliable pH measurements. Use
the Internet to ﬁnd out how a
pH meter works, and what jobs
or tasks it is used for. To start
your research, go to the web
site above and click on Web
Links. Prepare a brief report, a
web page, or a brochure to
present your ﬁndings.
11. [OH−] is 5.6 × 10−14 mol/L in a solution of hydrochloric acid. What is
the molar concentration of the HCl(aq)?
12. [H3O+] is 1.7 × 10−14 in a solution of calcium hydroxide. What is the
molar concentration of the Ca(OH)2(aq)?
pH and pOH
You can describe the acidity of an aqueous solution quantitatively by
stating the concentration of the hydronium ions that are present. [H3O+]
is often, however, a very small number. The pH scale was devised by a
Danish biochemist named Søren Sørensen as a convenient way to repre-
sent acidity (and, by extension, basicity). The scale is logarithmic, based
on 10. Think of the letter p as a mathematical operation representing –log.
The pH of a solution is the exponential power of hydrogen (or hydroni-
um) ions, in moles per litre. It can therefore be expressed as follows:
pH = −log[H3O+]
The practical range of the pH scale, shown in Figure 8.7, is from 0 to 14.
A solution of a strong acid that is more concentrated than 1.0 mol/L
would give a negative pH. Since you can determine [H3O+] of such
solutions directly from the concentration of the acid, the pH scale offers
no advantage. Similarly, the pH of a strong base that is more concentrated
than 1.0 mol/L is greater than 14. Note that pH is a dimensionless
quantity. In other words, it has no units.
You can calculate the pOH (the power of hydroxide ions) of a solution
from the [OH−].
pOH = −log[OH−]
Kw = [H3O+][OH−] = 1.0 × 10−14 at 25˚C
∴ pH + pOH = 14
Math
L I N K
Prove the relationship
pH + pOH = 14 as follows.
Record the ion product
equation and its value at 25˚C.
Take the logarithm of both
sides. Then reverse the sign
of each term. What is your
result?
Sample Problem
Calculating pH and pOH
Problem
A liquid shampoo has a hydroxide ion concentration of 6.8 × 10−5 mol/L
at 25˚C.
(a) Is the shampoo acidic, basic, or neutral?
(b) Calculate the hydronium ion concentration.
(c) What is the pH and the pOH of the shampoo?
390 MHR • Unit 4  Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
Solution
(a) Compare [OH−] in the shampoo with [OH−] in neutral water at 25˚C.
[OH−] = 6.8 × 10−5 mol/L , which is greater than 1 × 10−7 mol/L.
Therefore, the shampoo is basic.
(b) Use the equation [H3O+] = 1.0 × 10−14
to ﬁnd the hydronium ion
[OH−]
concentration.
+
[H3O
] = 1.0 × 10−14
6.8 × 10−5
= 1.5 × 10
−10 mol/L
(c) Substitute known values into the equations pH = −log[H3O+]
and pOH = −log[OH−] .
−10)
pH = −log(1.5 × 10
= 9.83
pOH = −log(6.8 × 10
−5)
= 4.17
Check Your Solution
pH + pOH = 14
PROBLEM TIP
When you work with
logarithms, the number of
signiﬁcant digits in a number
must equal the number of
digits after the decimal in
the number’s logarithm. Here
1.5 × 10−10 has two signiﬁcant
digits. Therefore, the calcu-
lated pH, 9.83, must have two
signiﬁcant digits after the
decimal.
I
C
S
A
B
E
R
O
M
I
I
C
D
C
A
E
R
O
M
H
p
14
13
12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
1mol/L NaOH (14.0)
lye (sodium hydroxide)
(13.0)
household ammonia
(11.9)
milk of magnesia
(antacid) (10.5)
detergent solution
(approximately 10)
ocean water (7.0–8.3)
blood (7.4)
NEUTRAL
milk (6.4)
urine (4.8–7.5)
rainwater (5.6)
tomatoes (4.2)
vinegar (2.4–3.4)
lemon juice (2.2–2.4)
stomach acid
(mainly HCl) (1.0–3.0)
1 mol/L HCl (0.0)
basic solution
[H3O+]
<
[OH
−
]
neutral solution
[H3O+]
=
[OH
−
]
acidic solution
The pH scale is
Figure 8.7
logarithmic. Each change by one
unit on the scale represents a
change of 10 in the hydronium ion
concentration of a solution.
[H3O+]
>
[OH
−
]
Chapter 8  Acids, Bases, and pH • MHR 391
Another Way to Find [H3O+] and [OH−]
You can calculate [H3O+] or [OH−] by ﬁnding the antilog of the pH or pOH.
[H3O+] = 10−pH
[OH−] = 10−pOH
If you are using a calculator, you can use it to ﬁnd the antilog of a
number in one of two ways. If the logarithm is entered in the calculator,
you can press the two keys ˆ and l in sequence. (Some calculators
may have a ˛ button instead.) Alternatively, since [H3O+] = 10−pH and
[OH−] = 10−pOH, you can enter 10, press the y button, enter the negative
value of pH (or pOH), and then press =.
Sample Problem
Finding pOH, [H3O+], and [OH–]
Problem
If the pH of urine is outside the normal range of values, this can indicate
medical problems. Suppose that the pH of a urine sample was measured
to be 5.53 at 25˚C. Calculate pOH, [H3O+], and [OH−] for the sample.
Solution
You use the known value, pH = 5.53, to calculate the required values.
pOH = 14.00 − 5.53
= 8.47
+
] = 10
[H3O
−5.53
= 3.0 × 10
−6 mol/L
−
] = 10
[OH
−8.47
= 3.4 × 10
−9 mol/L
Check Your Solution
In this problem, the ion product constant is a useful check:
−6) × (3.4 × 10
−
+
] = (3.0 × 10
][OH
[H3O
−14
= 1.0 × 10
−9)
This value equals the expected value for Kw at 25˚C.
Practice Problems
13. [H3O+] of a sample of milk is found to be 3.98 × 10−7 mol/L. Is the
milk acidic, neutral, or basic? Calculate the pH and [OH−] of the
sample.
14. A sample of household ammonia has a pH of 11.9. What is the pOH
and [OH−] of the sample?
15. Phenol, C6H5OH, is used as a disinfectant. An aqueous solution of
phenol was found to have a pH of 4.72. Is phenol acidic, neutral, or
basic? Calculate [H3O+], [OH−], and pOH of the solution.
16. At normal body temperature, 37˚C, the value of Kw for water is
2.5 × 10−14. Calculate [H3O+] and [OH−] at this temperature. Is pure
water at 37˚C acidic, neutral, or basic?
392 MHR • Unit 4  Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
17. A sample of baking soda was dissolved in water and the pOH of the
solution was found to be 5.81 at 25˚C. Is the solution acidic, basic,
or neutral? Calculate the pH, [H3O+], and [OH−] of the solution.
18. A chemist dissolved some Aspirin™ in water. The chemist then
measured the pH of the solution and found it to be 2.73 at 25˚C.
What are [H3O+] and [OH−] of the solution?
The Acid Dissociation Constant
Many common foods (such as citrus fruits), pharmaceuticals (such as
Aspirin™), and some vitamins (such as niacin, vitamin B3) are weak
acids. When a weak acid dissolves in water, it does not completely disso-
ciate. The concentration of the hydronium ions, and the concentration of
the conjugate base of the acid that is formed in solution, depend on the
initial concentration of the acid and the amount of acid that dissociates.
You can represent any weak monoprotic acid with the general formula
HA. The equilibrium of a weak monoprotic acid in aqueous solution can
be expressed as follows:
HA(aq) + H2O(aq)
(cid:3)(cid:4) H3O+
(aq) + A−
(aq)
The equilibrium expression for this reaction is
Kc = [H3O+][A−]
[HA][H2O]
In dilute solutions, the concentration of water is almost constant.
Multiplying both sides of the equilibrium expression by [H2O] gives
the product of two constants on the left side. This new constant is called
the acid dissociation constant, Ka. (Some chemists refer to the acid
dissociation constant as the acid ionization constant. With either name,
the symbol is Ka.)
Kc[H2O] = Ka = [H3O+][A−]
[HA]
C H E M
FA C T
Niacin is found in many foods,
including corn. The niacin
in corn, however, cannot be
absorbed in the intestinal
tract. In regions of the world
where corn is a major part
of the diet, niacin deﬁciency
can occur. If you add calcium
oxide or wood ash to the water
in which you boil corn, the
resulting basic solution allows
the niacin to be absorbed. The
ﬂour for making corn tortillas
is commonly prepared using
this method.
You can determine the value of Ka for a particular acid by measuring the
pH of a solution. In the following investigation, you will add sodium
hydroxide to acetic acid, which is a weak acid. (See Figure 8.8.) By graph-
ing pH against the volume of sodium hydroxide that you added, you will
be able to calculate the concentration of the acetic acid. Then you will be
able to determine the acid dissociation constant, Ka, for this acid.
O
C
H3C
O
H
+
H2O
O
C
H3C
O−
+
H3O+
Figure 8.8
Acetic acid is a weak monoprotic acid.
Chapter 8  Acids, Bases, and pH • MHR 393
S K I L L   F O C U S
Predicting
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
Procedure
1. Your teacher will give you the molar
concentration of the NaOH solution. Record
this concentration in your notebook, as well
as the volume of the pipette (in mL).
2. Copy the table below into your notebook, to
record your observations. Leave plenty of
space. You will collect 15 to 30 sets of data,
depending on the concentration of the acid.
Volume of NaOH added (mL)
pH
0.00
3. Label a clean, dry beaker for each liquid.
Obtain about 40 mL of acetic acid and about
70 mL of NaOH solution.
4. Rinse a clean burette with about 10 mL of
NaOH solution. Discard the rinse with plenty
of water. Then set up a retort stand, burette
clamp, meniscus reader, and funnel. Fill the
burette with NaOH solution. Make sure that
the solution ﬁlls the tube below the tap with
no air bubbles. Remove the funnel.
meniscus
reader
burette clamp
Ka of Acetic Acid
In your previous chemistry course, you learned
how to determine the molar concentration of
an acid by adding a basic solution of known
concentration and measuring the volume of the
basic solution required to reach the endpoint.
This procedure is called a titration. The endpoint
is the point at which an indicator changes colour.
In this investigation, you will be given a
sample of acetic acid with an unknown concen-
tration. Instead of measuring the volume of the
basic solution required to reach the endpoint,
however, you will measure the pH. Then you
will graph the data you collected and use the
graph to calculate the molar concentration of the
acetic acid and its Ka.
Question
In a solution of acetic acid, how does the
concentration of hydronium ions compare with
the concentration of acetic acid?
Materials
25 mL pipette and pipette bulb
retort stand
burette and burette clamp
2 beakers (150 mL)
Erlenmeyer ﬂask (150 mL)
labels
meniscus reader
sheet of white paper
funnel
acetic acid, CH3COOH, solution
sodium hydroxide, NaOH, solution
dropper bottle containing phenolphthalein
pH meter or pH paper
Safety Precautions
Both CH3COOH and NaOH are corrosive. Wash
any spills on your skin or clothing with plenty
of cool water. Inform your teacher immediately.
394 MHR • Unit 4  Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
5. Obtain a clean 25 mL pipette and a suction
3. Calculate the molar concentration of the
bulb. Rinse the pipette with 5 mL to 10 mL of
CH3COOH, and discard the rinse with plenty
of water. Pipette 25.00 mL of CH3COOH into
an Erlenmeyer ﬂask. Add two or three drops
of phenolphthalein indicator.
6. Record the initial pH of the solution. Make
sure that the glass electrode is immersed
deeply enough to get an accurate reading.
If necessary, tip the ﬂask to one side. Place
a sheet of white paper under the ﬂask.
7. Add 2 mL of NaOH from the burette. Record
the volume carefully, correct to two decimal
places. Swirl the contents of the Erlenmeyer
ﬂask, then measure the pH of the solution.
8. Repeat step 7 until the pH rises above 2.0.
Add 1 mL amounts until the pH reaches 5.0.
9. Above pH = 5.0, add NaOH in 0.2 mL or
0.1 mL portions. Continue to swirl the con-
tents of the ﬂask and take pH readings. Record
the volume at which the phenolphthalein
changes from colourless to pink.
10. Above pH = 11, add 1 mL portions until the
pH reaches at least 12.
11. Wash the liquids down the sink with plenty
of water. Rinse the pipette and burette with
distilled water. Leave the burette tap open.
Analysis
1. Write the chemical equation for the
neutralization reaction you observed.
2. Plot a graph of your data, with pH on
the vertical axis and volume of NaOH on
the horizontal axis. Your graph should
show a steep rise in pH as the volume of
NaOH becomes enough to neutralize all the
CH3COOH. Take the midpoint on the graph
(where the graph rises steeply) and read off
the volume of NaOH. This is the volume of
NaOH that was needed to neutralize all the
CH3COOH. Compare the volume on your
graph with the volume you recorded when the
phenolphthalein indicator ﬁrst turned pink.
CH3COOH. Use the ratio in which the acid
and base react, determined from the chemical
equation. You can use the following equation
to ﬁnd the amount of a chemical in solution.
Amount (in mol) = Concentration (in mol/L)
× Volume (in L)
Determine the amount of NaOH added, using
its concentration (given by your teacher) and
the volume on your graph (from question 2).
4. Write the expression for Ka for the dissocia-
tion of CH3COOH in water.
5. Use the initial pH of the CH3COOH (before
you added any base) to ﬁnd the initial [H3O+].
What was the initial [CH3COO−]?
6. Assume that the amount of CH3COOH that
dissociates is small compared with the initial
concentration of the acid. If this is true, the
equilibrium value of [CH3COOH] is equal to
the initial concentration of the acid. Use your
values of [H3O+], [CH3COO−], and [CH3COOH]
to calculate Ka for acetic acid. Hint:
[H3O+] = [CH3COO−]
7. Refer to the volume of NaOH on your graph
(from question 2). Calculate half this volume.
On your graph, ﬁnd the pH when the solution
was half-neutralized.
8. Calculate [H3O+] when the CH3COOH was
half-neutralized. How does this value com-
pare with your value of Ka for CH3COOH?
Conclusion
9. Calculate the percent difference between
your value for Ka and the accepted value.
State two sources of error that might account
for any differences.
Application
10. Do the values you calculated for [H3O+] and
[CH3COOH] prove that CH3COOH is a weak
acid? Explain.
Chapter 8  Acids, Bases, and pH • MHR 395
pH and Ka of a Weak Acid
Table 8.2 lists the acid dissociation constants for selected acids at 25˚C.
Notice that weak acids have Ka values that are between 1 and about
1 × 10−16. Very weak acids have Ka values that are less than 1 × 10−16.
The smaller the value of Ka, the less the acid ionizes in aqueous solution.
Problems that involve the concentrations of ions formed in aqueous
solutions are considered to be equilibrium problems. The steps for solving
acid and base equilibrium problems are similar to the steps you learned in
Chapter 7 for solving equilibrium problems.
Solving Equilibrium Problems That Involve Acids and Bases
The steps that you will use to solve acid and base equilibrium prob-
lems will vary depending on the problem. Below are a few general
steps to guide you.
• Write the chemical equation. Use the chemical equation to set up an
ICE table for the reacting substances. Enter any values that are given
in the problem. (Note: For the problems in this textbook, you can
assume that the concentrations of hydronium ions and hydroxide
ions in pure water are negligible compared with the concentrations
of these ions when a weak acid or weak base is dissolved in water.)
• Let x represent the change in concentration of the substance with
the smallest coefﬁcient in the chemical equation.
• For problems that give the initial concentration of the acid, [HA],
compare the initial concentration of the acid with the acid
dissociation constant, Ka.
• If
[HA]
Ka
> 500, the change in the initial concentration, x, is
negligible and can be ignored.
• If
[HA]
Ka
< 500, the change in the initial concentration, x, may
not be negligible. The equilibrium equation will be more complex,
possibly requiring the solution of a quadratic equation.
Table 8.2 Some Acid Dissociation Constants for Weak Acids at 25˚C
Acid
acetic acid
chlorous acid
formic acid
Formula
CH3COOH
HClO2
HCOOH
hydrocyanic acid
hydrofluoric acid
hydrogen oxide (water)
HCN
HF
H2O
lactic acid
nitrous acid
phenol
CH3CHOHCOOH
HNO2
C6H5OH
Acid dissociation constant, Ka
1.8 × 10−5
1.1 × 10−2
1.8 × 10−4
6.2 × 10−10
6.6 × 10−4
1.0 × 10−14
1.4 × 10−4
7.2 × 10−4
1.3 × 10−10
396 MHR • Unit 4  Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
Percent Dissociation
The percent dissociation of a weak acid is the fraction of acid molecules
that dissociate compared with the initial concentration of the acid,
expressed as a percent. (Some chemists refer to percent dissociation as
percent of dissociation.) The percent dissociation depends on the value
of Ka for the acid, as well as the initial concentration of the weak acid.
The following Sample Problems show how to solve problems that involve
percent dissociation.
Sample Problem
Determining Ka and Percent Dissociation
Problem
Propanoic acid, CH3CH2COOH, is a weak monoprotic acid that is used
to inhibit mould formation in bread. A student prepared a 0.10 mol/L
solution of propanoic acid and found that the pH was 2.96. What is
the acid dissociation constant for propanoic acid? What percent of its
molecules were dissociated in the solution?
What Is Required?
You need to ﬁnd Ka and the percent dissociation for propanoic acid.
What Is Given?
You have the following data:
Initial [CH3CH2COOH] = 0.10 mol/L
pH = 2.96
Plan Your Strategy
Step 1 Write the equation for the dissociation equilibrium of propanoic
acid in water. Then set up an ICE table.
Step 2 Write the equation for the acid dissociation constant. Substitute
equilibrium terms into the equation.
Step 3 Calculate [H3O+] using [H3O+] = 10−pH
Step 4 Use the stoichiometry of the equation and [H3O+] to substitute
for the unknown term, x, and calculate Ka.
Step 5 Calculate the percent dissociation by expressing the fraction
of molecules that dissociate out of 100.
Act on Your Strategy
Step 1 Use the equation for the dissociation equilibrium of propanoic
acid in water to set up an ICE table.
Concentration (mol/L)
CH3CH2COOH(aq)
+ H2O((cid:2))
CH3CH2COO−
(aq) +
H3O+
(aq)
Initial
Change
Equilibrium
0.10
−x
0.10 − x
0
+x
+x
~0
+x
+x
Continued ...
Chapter 8  Acids, Bases, and pH • MHR 397
Continued ...
Step 2 Ka = [CH3CH2COO−][H3O+]
CH3CH2COOH]
(x)(x)
(0.10 − x)
=
Step 3 The value of x is equal to [H3O+] and [CH3CH2COOH].
+
] = 10
[H3O
−3 mol/L
−2.96
= 1.1 × 10
(1.1 × 10−3)2
0.10 − (1.1 × 10−3)
−5
= 1.2 × 10
Step 4 Ka =
Step 5 Percent dissociation = 1.1 × 10−3 mol/L
× 100
0.10 mol/L
= 1.1%
Check Your Solution
The value of Ka and the percent dissociation are reasonable for a
weak acid.
Sample Problem
Calculating pH
Problem
Formic acid, HCOOH, is present in the sting of certain ants. What is the
pH of a 0.025 mol/L solution of formic acid?
What Is Required?
You need to calculate the pH of the solution.
What Is Given?
You know the concentration of formic acid:
[HCOOH] = 0.025 mol/L
The acid dissociation constant for formic acid is listed in Table 8.2:
Ka = 1.8 × 10−4
Plan Your Strategy
Step 1 Write the equation for the dissociation equilibrium of formic acid
in water. Then set up an ICE table.
Step 2 Write the equation for the acid dissociation constant. Substitute
equilibrium terms into the equation.
Step 3 Check the value of
[HCOOH]
Ka
to see whether or not the amount
that dissociates is negligible compared with the initial concentra-
tion of the acid.
Step 4 Solve the equation for x. If the amount that dissociates is not
negligible compared with the initial concentration of acid, you
will need to use a quadratic equation.
Step 5 pH = −log [H3O+]
398 MHR • Unit 4  Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
Act on Your Strategy
Step 1
Concentration (mol/L)
HCOOH(aq)
+ H2O((cid:2))
HCOO−
(aq) +
H3O+
(aq)
Initial
Change
Equilibrium
0.025
−x
0.025 − x
0
+x
+x
~0
+x
+x
Step 2 Ka = [HCOO−][H3O+]
[HCOOH]
(x)(x)
(0.025 − x)
=
= 1.8 × 10
−4
Step 3
[HCOOH]
Ka
=
0.025
1.8 × 10−4
= 139
Since this value is less than 500, the amount that dissociates is
not negligible compared with the initial concentration of the acid.
Step 4 Rearrange the equation into a quadratic equation.
x2
(0.025 − x)
= 1.8 × 10
−4
x2 + (1.8 × 10
−4)x − (4.5 × 10
−6) = 0
√
−b ±
b2 − 4ac
2a
−(1.8 × 10−4) ±
√
x =
=
(1.8 × 10−4)2 − 4 × 1 × (−4.5 × 10−6)
2 × 1
x = 0.0020 or x = −0.002
The negative value is not reasonable, since a concentration term
cannot be negative.
∴ x = 0.0020 mol/L = [H3O+]
Step 5 pH = −log 0.0020
= 2.70
The pH of a solution of 0.025 mol/L formic acid is 2.70.
Check Your Solution
The pH indicates an acidic solution, as expected. Data that was given
in the problem has two signiﬁcant digits, and the pH has two digits
following the decimal place. It is easy to make a mistake when solving
a quadratic equation. You can estimate a solution to this problem, by
assuming that (0.025 − x) is approximately equal to 0.025.
x2
0.025
= 1.8 × 10
−4
−6
x2 = 4.5 × 10
x = 2.1 × 10
−3 mol/L
This answer is very close to the answer obtained by solving the
quadratic equation. Therefore, the solution is probably correct.
Chapter 8  Acids, Bases, and pH • MHR 399
Practice Problems
19. Calculate the pH of a sample of vinegar that contains 0.83 mol/L
acetic acid. What is the percent dissociation of the vinegar?
20. In low doses, barbiturates act as sedatives. Barbiturates are made
from barbituric acid, a weak monoprotic acid that was ﬁrst prepared
by the German chemist Adolph von Baeyer in 1864. The formula
of barbituric acid is C4H4N2O3. A chemist prepares a 0.10 mol/L
solution of barbituric acid. The chemist ﬁnds the pH of the solution
to be 2.50. What is the acid dissociation constant for barbituric acid?
What percent of its molecules dissociate?
21. A solution of hydroﬂuoric acid has a molar concentration of
0.0100 mol/L. What is the pH of this solution?
22. Hypochlorous acid, HOCl, is used as a bleach and a germ-killer.
A chemist ﬁnds that 0.027% of hypochlorous acid molecules are
dissociated in a 0.40 mol/L solution of the acid. What is the value
of Ka for the acid?
23. The word “butter” comes from the Greek butyros. Butanoic acid
(common name: butyric acid) gives rancid butter its distinctive odour.
Calculate the pH of a 1.0 × 10−2 mol/L solution of butanoic acid
(Ka = 1.51 × 10−5 ).
24. Caproic acid, C5H11COOH, occurs naturally in coconut and palm oil.
It is a weak monoprotic acid, with Ka = 1.3 × 10−5. A certain aqueous
solution of caproic acid has a pH of 2.94. How much acid was
dissolved to make 100 mL of this solution?
Polyprotic Acids
As you know, polyprotic acids have more than one hydrogen atom that
dissociates. Each dissociation has a corresponding acid dissociation
constant. How can you calculate the pH of a solution of a polyprotic acid?
Problems that involve polyprotic acids can be divided into as many
sub-problems as there are hydrogen atoms that dissociate. The ion concen-
trations that are calculated for the ﬁrst dissociation are substituted as
initial ion concentrations for the second dissociation, and so on. You
can see this in the following Sample Problem.
Sample Problem
Calculations That Involve Polyprotic Acids
Problem
Phosphoric acid, H3PO4, is one of the world’s most important industrial
chemicals. It is mainly used to manufacture phosphate fertilizers. It is
also the ingredient that gives cola drinks their tart, biting taste. Calculate
the pH, [H2PO4
phosphoric acid.
2−] of a 3.5 mol/L aqueous solution of
−], and [HPO4
What Is Required?
You need to ﬁnd pH and [H2PO4
−].
400 MHR • Unit 4  Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
What Is Given?
You know that [H3PO4] = 3.5 mol/L. From data tables, you can ﬁnd
Ka1
= 7.0 × 10−3 and Ka2
= 6.3 × 10−8 .
Plan Your Strategy
Step 1 Write the equation for the dissociation equilibrium of phosphoric
acid in water. Then set up an ICE table.
Step 2 Write the dissociation equation for Ka1.
Step 3 Determine whether or not the dissociation of H3PO4 is negligible,
compared with the initial concentration.
Step 4 Solve the equation for x.
−
Step 5 Write the equation for the dissociation equilibrium of H2PO4
in water. Set up an ICE table using the concentrations you
calculated for the ﬁrst dissociation as initial concentrations here.
Step 6 Write the dissociation equation for Ka2.
Step 7 Determine whether or not the dissociation of H2PO4
negligible, compared with the initial concentration.
− is
Step 8 Solve the equation for x.
Step 9 Calculate [H3O+] and pH.
Step 10 Calculate [H2PO4
−].
Act on Your Strategy
Step 1
Concentration (mol/L)
H3PO4(aq)
+ H2O((cid:2))
H2PO4
−
(aq) +
H3O+
(aq)
Initial
Change
Equilibrium
3.5
−x
3.5 − x
0
+x
x
~0
+x
x
Step 2 Ka1
= [H2PO4
−][H3O+]
[H3PO4]
−3
= 7.0 × 10
(x)(x)
(3.5 − x)
=
Step 3
[H3PO4]
Ka1
=
3.5
7.0 × 10−3
= 500
Therefore, x is probably negligible, compared with 3.5.
Step 4 7.0 × 10
−3 = x2
3.5
x = 0.16 mol/L
Step 5
Concentration (mol/L)
H2PO4
−
(aq)
+ H2O((cid:2))
(cid:3)(cid:4)
HPO4
2−
(aq) +
H3O+
(aq)
Initial
Change
Equilibrium
0.16
−x
0.16 − x
0
+x
x
0.16
+x
(0.16 + x)
Continued ...
Chapter 8  Acids, Bases, and pH • MHR 401
Step 6 Ka2
[H2PO4
= [HPO4
2−][H3O+]
−]
= (x)(0.16 + x)
(0.16 − x)
−]
=
0.16
6.3 × 10−8
Step 7
[H2PO4
Ka2
= 2.5 × 106
This is much greater than 500, so x is negligible compared
with 0.16.
Step 8 Ka2
= 6.3 × 10−8 = (x)(0.16)
(0.16)
= x
x = [HPO4
2−
]
−8
= 6.3 × 10
Step 9 pH = −log 0.16
= 0.80
Step 10 [H2PO4
−] = 0.16 − x = 0.16 (because x is negligible)
Check Your Solution
[H3O+] results from the ﬁrst dissociation of phosphoric acid, so the
second dissociation has a negligible effect on the concentration of
hydronium ions or the pH of the solution. You would expect this,
because the second dissociation is much weaker than the ﬁrst.
Polyprotic Acids and [H3O+]
All polyprotic acids, except sulfuric acid, are weak. Their second
dissociation is much weaker than their ﬁrst dissociation. For this reason,
when calculating [H3O+] and pH of a polyprotic acid, only the ﬁrst
dissociation needs to be considered. The calculation is then the same as
the calculation for any weak monoprotic acid. In the Sample Problem,
2−] was found to be the same as the second dissociation constant,
[HPO4
Ka2. The concentration of the anions formed in the second dissociation
of a polyprotic acid is equal to Ka2.
The only common strong polyprotic acid is sulfuric acid.
Nevertheless, it is strong only for the ﬁrst dissociation. Like the second
dissociation of other polyprotic acids, the second dissociation of sulfuric
acid is weak.
−
(aq) + H3O+
H2SO4(aq) + H2O((cid:2)) → HSO4
(cid:3)(cid:4) SO4
2−
−
(aq) + H3O+
(aq) + H2O((cid:2))
HSO4
100% dissociation
(aq)
(aq) Ka = 1.0 × 10−2
[H3O+] in a solution of sulfuric acid is equal to the concentration of the
acid. Only in dilute solutions (less than 1.0 mol/L) does the second disso-
ciation of sulfuric acid contribute to the hydronium ion concentration.
Practice Problems
25. Carbonated beverages contain a solution of carbonic acid. Carbonic
acid is also important for forming the ions that are present in blood.
CO2(aq) + H2O((cid:2))
H2CO3(aq) + H2O((cid:2))
−
(aq) + H2O((cid:2))
HCO3
(cid:3)(cid:4) H2CO3(aq)
(cid:3)(cid:4) HCO3
(cid:3)(cid:4) CO3
2−
= 4.5 × 10−7
= 4.7 × 10−11
−
(aq) + H3O+
(aq) + H3O+
(aq) Ka1
(aq) Ka2
402 MHR • Unit 4  Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
Calculate the pH of a solution of 5.0 × 10−4 mol/L carbonic acid.
What is [CO3
2−] in the solution?
26. Adipic acid is a diprotic acid that is used to manufacture nylon. Its
formula can be abbreviated to H2Ad. The acid dissociation constants
= 3.87 × 10−6. What is the
= 3.71 × 10−5 and Ka2
for adipic acid are Ka1
pH of a 0.085 mol/L solution of adipic acid?
27. Hydrosulfuric acid, H2S(aq), is a weak diprotic acid that is sometimes
used in analytical work. It is used to precipitate metal sulﬁdes, which
tend to be very insoluble. Calculate the pH and [HS−
7.5 × 10−3 mol/L solution.
(aq)] of a
28. What is the value of Ka when water acts as a Brønsted-Lowry acid?
Write the expression for Ka2 if water acts as a diprotic acid.
Section Summary
In this section, you learned about the relationship between the pH scale
and the concentrations of the ions that form when water and weak acids
dissociate. In the next section, you will learn that the equilibrium of weak
bases is similar to the equilibrium of weak acids. As you will see, solu-
tions that contain a mixture of a weak acid and a salt of its conjugate base
have properties with important biochemical and industrial applications.
Section Review
1
K/U
Complete the following table by calculating the missing
values and indicating whether each solution is acidic or basic.
[H3O+] (mol/L)
3.7 × 10−5
(e)
(i)
(m)
pH
(a)
10.41
(j)
(n)
[OH−] (mol/L)
pOH
Acidic or basic?
(b)
(f)
7.0 × 10−2
(o)
(c)
(g)
(k)
8.9
(d)
(h)
(l)
(p)
2
3
4
I
Lactic acid, CH3CHOHCOOH, is a monoprotic acid that is produced
by muscle activity. It is also produced from milk by the action of
bacteria. What is the pH of a 0.12 mol/L solution of lactic acid?
I
A 0.10 mol/L solution of a weak acid was found to be 5.0%
dissociated. Calculate Ka.
I
Oxalic acid, HOOCCOOH, is a weak diprotic acid that occurs
naturally in some foods, including rhubarb. Calculate the pH of a
solution of oxalic acid that is prepared by dissolving 2.5 g in 1.0 L
of water. What is the concentration of hydrogen oxalate, HOOCCOO−,
in the solution?
5
I
A sample of blood was taken from a patient and sent to a laboratory
for testing. Chemists found that the blood pH was 7.40. They also
found that the hydrogen carbonate ion concentration was 2.6 × 10−2
mol/L. What was the concentration of carbonic acid in the blood?
Chapter 8  Acids, Bases, and pH • MHR 403
8.3
Bases and Buffers
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
(cid:2) solve problems that
involve the base dissociation
constant, Kb
(cid:2) describe the properties
and components of a buffer
solution
(cid:2) identify systems in which
buffer solutions are found,
and explain how they
function
(cid:2) communicate your
understanding of the
following terms: base
dissociation constant (Kb),
buffer solution, buffer
capacity
Many compounds that are present in plants are weak bases. Caffeine
in coffee and piperidine in black pepper are two examples. A weak
base, represented by B, reacts with water to form an equilibrium solution
of ions.
B(aq) + H2O((cid:2))
(cid:3)(cid:4) HB+
(aq) + OH−
(aq)
The equilibrium expression for this general reaction is given as follows:
Kc = [HB+][OH−]
[B][H2O]
The concentration of water is almost constant in dilute solutions.
Multiplying both sides of the equilibrium expression by [H2O] gives the
product of two constants on the left side. The new constant is called the
base dissociation constant, Kb.
Kc[H2O] = [HB+][OH−]
Table 8.3 lists the base dissociation constants for several weak bases at
25˚C. Nitrogen-containing compounds are Brønsted-Lowry bases, because
the lone pair of electrons on a nitrogen atom can bond with H+ from
water. The steps for solving problems that involve weak bases are similar
to the steps you learned for solving problems that involve weak acids.
= Kb
[B]
Table 8.3 Some Base Dissociation Constants at 25°C
Base
Formula
ethylenediamine
NH2CH2CH2NH2
dimethylamine
methylamine
trimethylamine
ammonia
hydrazine
pyridine
aniline
urea
(CH3)2NH
CH3NH2
(CH3)3N
NH3
N2H4
C5H5N
C6H5NH2
NH2CONH2
Base dissociation constant, Kb
5.2 × 10−4
5.1 × 10−4
4.4 × 10−4
6.5 × 10−5
1.8 × 10−5
1.7 × 10−6
1.4 × 10−9
4.2 × 10−10
1.5 × 10−14
Sample Problem
Solving Problems Involving Kb
Problem
The characteristic taste of tonic water is due to the addition of quinine.
Quinine is a naturally occurring compound that is also used to treat
malaria. The base dissociation constant, Kb, for quinine is 3.3 × 10−6.
Calculate [OH−] and the pH of a 1.7 × 10−3 mol/L solution of quinine.
What Is Required?
You need to ﬁnd [OH−] and pH.
404 MHR • Unit 4  Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
What Is Given?
Kb = 3.3 × 10−6
Concentration of quinine = 1.7 × 10−3 mol/L
Plan Your Strategy
Step 1 Let Q represent the formula of quinine. Write the equation
for the equilibrium reaction of quinine in water. Then set up an
ICE table.
Step 2 Write the equation for the base dissociation constant. Substitute
equilibrium terms into the equation.
Step 3 Calculate the value of
to determine whether or not the
[Q]
Kb
amount of quinine that dissociates is negligible compared with the
initial concentration.
Step 4 Solve the equation for x. If the amount that dissociates is not neg-
ligible compared with the initial concentration of the base, you
will need to use a quadratic equation.
−
Step 5 pOH = −log [OH
]
pH = 14.00 − pOH
Q (aq)
1.7 × 10−3
−x
(1.7 × 10−3) − x
+
H2O((cid:2))
(cid:3)(cid:4)
HQ+
(aq)
+
OH−
(aq)
0
+x
x
~0
+x
x
Act on Your Strategy
Step 1
Concentration (mol/L)
Initial
Change
Equilibrium
Step 2
Kb = [HQ+][OH−]
[Q]
(x)(x)
(1.7 × 10−3) − x
3.3 × 10
−6 =
Step 3
[Q]
Kb
= 1.7 × 10−3
3.3 × 10−6
= 515
Since this value is greater than 500, the amount that dissociates is
probably negligible, compared with the initial concentration
of the base.
Step 4 3.3 × 10
−6 =
x2
1.7 × 10−3
x = ± 7.5 × 10
−5
The negative root is not reasonable.
∴ x = 7.5 × 10−5 mol/L = [OH−]
Step 5 pOH = −log 7.5 × 10
−5
= 4.13
pH = 14.00 − pOH
∴ pH = 9.87
Check Your Solution
The pH of the solution is greater than 7, as expected for a basic solution.
Chapter 8  Acids, Bases, and pH • MHR 405
Sample Problem
Calculating Kb
Problem
Pyridine, C5H5N , is used to manufacture medications and vitamins.
Calculate the base dissociation constant for pyridine if a 0.125 mol/L
aqueous solution has a pH of 9.10.
What Is Required?
You need to ﬁnd Kb.
What Is Given?
[C5H5N] = 0.125 mol/L
pH = 9.10
Plan Your Strategy
Step 1 Write the equation for the equilibrium reaction of pyridine in
water. Then set up an ICE table.
Step 2 Write the equation for the base dissociation constant. Substitute
equilibrium terms into the equation.
Step 3 pOH = 14.0 − pH
Step 4 [OH−] = 10−pOH
Step 5 Substitute for x into the equilibrium equation. Calculate the value
of Kb.
Act on Your Strategy
Step 1
Concentration (mol/L)
C5H5N(aq)
+ H2O((cid:2))
(cid:3)(cid:4)
C5H5NH+
(aq) +
OH−
(aq)
Initial
Change
Equilibrium
0.125
−x
0.125 − x
Step 2 Kb = [C5H5NH+][OH−]
[C5H5N]
=
(x)(x)
(0.125 − x)
Step 3 pOH = 14.00 − 9.10 = 4.90
0
+x
x
~0
+x
x
−
] = 10
Step 4 [OH
−4.90
= 1.3 × 10
Step 5 0.125 − (1.3 × 10
−5 mol/L
−5) = 0.125
Kb = (1.3 × 10−5)2
0.125
−9
= 1.4 × 10
Check Your Solution
The value of Kb is reasonable for a weak organic base. The ﬁnal answer
has two signiﬁcant digits, consistent with the two decimal places in the
given pH.
406 MHR • Unit 4  Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
Practice Problems
29. An aqueous solution of household ammonia has a molar
concentration of 0.105 mol/L. Calculate the pH of the solution.
30. Hydrazine, N2H4, has been used as a rocket fuel. The concentration
of an aqueous solution of hydrazine is 5.9 × 10−2 mol/L. Calculate
the pH of the solution.
31. Morphine, C17H19NO3, is a naturally occurring base that is used to
control pain. A 4.5 × 10−3 mol/L solution has a pH of 9.93. Calculate
Kb for morphine.
32. Methylamine, CH3NH2, is a ﬁshy-smelling gas at room temperature.
It is used to manufacture several prescription drugs, including
methamphetamine. Calculate [OH−] and pOH of a 0.25 mol/L
aqueous solution of methylamine.
33. At room temperature, trimethylamine, (CH3)3N, is a gas with a
strong ammonia-like odour. Calculate [OH−] and the percent of
trimethylamine molecules that react with water in a 0.22 mol/L
aqueous solution.
34. An aqueous solution of ammonia has a pH of 10.85. What is the
concentration of the solution?
Acids and Their Conjugate Bases
There is an important relationship between the dissociation constant
for an acid, Ka, and the dissociation constant for its conjugate base, Kb.
Consider acetic acid and its dissociation in water.
CH3COOH(aq) + H2O(aq)
(aq) + CH3COO−
(cid:3)(cid:4) H3O+
(aq)
Ka is given by the following expression.
Ka = [CH3COO−][H3O+]
[CH3COOH]
The acetate ion is the conjugate base of acetic acid. A soluble salt of the
conjugate base, such as sodium acetate, forms acetate ions in solution.
The solution acts as a base with water.
CH3COO−
Kb is given by the expression below.
(cid:3)(cid:4) CH3COOH(aq) + OH−
(aq) + H2O(aq)
(aq)
[CH3COO−]
The product KaKb gives an interesting result.
Kb = [CH3COOH][OH−]
KaKb = [H3O+][CH3COO−]
[CH3COOH]
−
+
= [H3O
]
][OH
= Kw
× [CH3COOH][OH−]
[CH3COO−]
Thus, for an acid and its conjugate base (or a base and its conjugate acid),
KaKb = Kw. One interpretation of the result is the stronger an acid, the
weaker its conjugate base must be. This makes sense chemically, because
a strong acid gives up a proton from each molecule. Therefore, its conju-
gate base does not bond with the proton. In summary, then, the strength
of an acid and its conjugate base are inversely related. The conjugate of a
strong acid is always a weak base, and, conversely, the conjugate of a
strong base is always a weak acid.
Chapter 8  Acids, Bases, and pH • MHR 407
Sample Problem
Solving Problems Involving Ka and Kb
Problem
Sodium acetate, CH3COONa, is used for developing photographs. Find
the value of Kb for the acetate ion. Then calculate the pH of a solution
that contains 12.5 g of sodium acetate dissolved in 1.00 L of water.
(Only the acetate ion affects the pH of the solution.)
What Is Required?
You need to ﬁnd Kb and pH.
What Is Given?
Ka for acetic acid = 1.81 × 10−5
12.5 g of CH3COONa is dissolved in 1.00 L of water.
Plan Your Strategy
Step 1 Find Kb using the relationship KaKb = Kw
Step 2 Calculate [CH3COO−].
Step 3 Write the chemical equation for the acetate ion acting as a base.
Then set up an ICE table.
Step 4 Write the dissociation equation for Kb, and substitute equilibrium
values.
Step 5 Determine whether or not the dissociation of the acetate ions is
negligible compared with its initial concentration.
Step 6 Solve the equation for x.
Step 7 Calculate [H3O+] using Kw = [H3O+][OH−].
Step 8 Calculate pH from pH = −log[H3O+]
Act on Your Strategy
Step 1 Kb for CH3COO
− = Kw
Ka
= 1.0 × 10−14
1.8 × 10−5
−10
= 5.6 × 10
Step 2 M(CH3COONa) = 82.0 g/mol
Amount =
12.5 g
82.0 g/mol
= 0.152 mol/L
In aqueous solution,
CH3COONa (cid:3)(cid:4) Na+
∴ [CH3COO−] = 0.152 mol/L
(aq) + CH3COO−
(aq)
Step 3
Concentration (mol/L)
CH3COO−
(aq)
+ H2O((cid:2))
(cid:3)(cid:4)
CH3COOH(aq)
+
OH−
(aq)
Initial
Change
Equilibrium
0.152
−x
0.152 − x
0
+x
x
~0
+x
x
408 MHR • Unit 4  Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
Step 4 Kb = [CH3COOH][OH−]
[CH3COO−]
(x)(x)
0.152 − x
=
Step 5
[CH3COO−]
Kb
=
0.152
5.6 × 10−10
> 500
Therefore, x is negligible compared with the initial concentration.
Step 6 5.6 × 10−10 =
x2
0.152
+
Step 7 [H3O
Solving the equation (since only the positive root is reasonable),
x = 9.2 × 10−6 = [OH−]
] = Kw
[OH−]
= 1.0 × 10−14
9.2 × 10−6
= 1.1 × 10
−9 mol/L
+
Step 8 pH = −log[H3O
]
= −log 1.1 × 10
= 8.96
−9
Check Your Solution
The solution is weakly basic. The acetate ion is a very weak base, so the
answer is reasonable.
Practice Problems
35. Use the table of Ka values in Appendix E to list the conjugate bases of
the following acids in order of increasing base strength: formic acid,
HCOOH; hydroﬂuoric acid, HF(aq); benzoic acid, C6H5COOH;
phenol, C6H5OH.
36. Kb for ammonia, NH3, is 1.8 × 10−5. Kb for trimethylamine, (CH3)3N, is
6.5 × 10−5. Which is the stronger acid, NH4
+ or (CH3)3NH+?
37. Sodium benzoate is used as a food preservative. Calculate the pH of
a 1.0 mol/L aqueous solution of sodium benzoate. (Only the benzoate
ion affects the pH of the solution.)
38. The hydrogen sulﬁte ion, HSO3
−, is amphoteric. Write chemical
equations to show how it acts ﬁrst as an acid and then as a base.
Buffer Solutions
A solution that contains a weak acid/conjugate base mixture or a weak
base/conjugate acid mixture is called a buffer solution. A buffer solution
resists changes in pH when a moderate amount of an acid or a base is
added to it. (See Figure 8.9.) For example, adding 10 mL of 1.0 mol/L
hydrochloric acid to 1 L of water changes the pH from 7 to about 3, a
difference of 4 units. Adding the same amount of acid to 1 L of buffered
solution might change the pH by only 0.1 unit.
Chapter 8  Acids, Bases, and pH • MHR 409
Buffer
capacity
exceeded
H
p
Buffer resists
changes in pH
Buffer
capacity
exceeded
addition of acid
addition of base
Figure 8.9
change in pH.
Adding a moderate amount of an acid or a base to a buffer solution causes little
Buffer solutions can be made in two different ways:
1. by using a weak acid and one of its salts: for example, by mixing
acetic acid and sodium acetate
2. by using a weak base and one of its salts: for example, by mixing
ammonia and ammonium chloride
How does a buffer solution resist changes in pH when an acid or a base
is added? Consider a buffer solution that is made using acetic acid and
sodium acetate. Acetic acid is weak, so most of its molecules are not
dissociated and [CH3COOH] is high. Sodium acetate is soluble and a
good electrolyte, so [CH3COO−] is also high. Adding an acid or a base has
little effect because the added H3O+ or OH− ions are removed by one of
the components in the buffer solution. The equilibrium of the reactions
between the ions in solution shifts, as predicted by Le Châtelier’s
principle and described below.
• Adding an acid to a buffer: Acetate ions react with the hydronium
ions added to the solution.
CH3COO−
(aq) + H3O+
(aq)
(cid:3)(cid:4) CH3COOH(aq) + H2O((cid:2))
The position of equilibrium shifts to the right. Here hydronium ions
are removed, by acetate ions, from the sodium acetate component.
• Adding a base to a buffer: Hydroxide ions react with the hydronium
ions that are formed by the dissociation of acetic acid.
H3O+
(aq) + OH−
(aq)
(cid:3)(cid:4) 2H2O((cid:2))
1.0
0.30
0.10
)
L
/
l
o
m
(
n
o
i
t
a
r
t
n
e
c
n
o
C
s
t
n
e
n
o
p
m
o
c
r
e
f
f
u
b
f
o
0.030
4.8
4.9
5.0
5.1
(initial
pH = 4.74)
pH
These four buffer
Figure 8.10
solutions have the same initial
pH but different concentrations
(shown by the numbers beside or
on the bars). The pH increases with
the addition of a certain amount of
strong base. The more concentrated
the buffer solution is (that is, the
higher its buffer capacity), the
smaller the change in pH is.
The position of this water equilibrium shifts to the right, replacing
hydronium ions.
Buffer solutions have two important characteristics. One of these
characteristics is the pH of the solution. The other is its buffer capacity:
the amount of acid or base that can be added before considerable change
occurs to the pH. The buffer capacity depends on the concentration of
the acid/conjugate base (or the base/conjugate acid) in the buffer solution.
When the ratio of the concentration of the buffer components is close to 1,
the buffer capacity has reached its maximum. As well, a buffer that is
more concentrated resists changes to pH more than than a buffer that is
more dilute. This idea is illustrated in Figure 8.10, with buffer solutions
of acetic acid and acetate of different concentrations.
410 MHR • Unit 4  Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
Buffers in the Blood
Buffers are extremely important in biological systems. The pH of arterial
blood is about 7.4. The pH of the blood in your veins is just slightly
less. If the pH of blood drops to 7.0, or rises above 7.5, life-threatening
problems develop. To maintain its pH within a narrow range, blood
contains a number of buffer systems. The most important buffer system
in the blood depends on an equilibrium between hydrogen carbonate ions
and carbonate ions. Dissolved carbon dioxide reacts with water to form
hydrogen carbonate ions.
The HCO3
(cid:3)(cid:4) HCO−
3(aq) + H3O+
CO2(aq) + 2H2O((cid:2))
2− .
− dissociates in water to form CO3
(cid:3)(cid:4) CO3
2−
(aq) + H3O+
−
(aq) + H2O((cid:2))
HCO3
(aq)
(aq)
If metabolic changes add H3O+ ions to the blood, the excess H3O+ ions are
− ions.
removed by combining with HCO3
−
(aq) + HCO3
(cid:3)(cid:4) CO2(aq) + 2H2O((cid:2))
H3O+
(aq)
Web
L I N K
www.mcgrawhill.ca/links/
chemistry12
Some aspirin products are
sold in buffered form. Infer the
reasoning behind this practice.
Is there clinical evidence to
support it? To ﬁnd out, go to
the web site above and click
on Web Links. Conduct further
research to investigate
whether there is more recent
evidence either in support of
or disproving the effectiveness
of buffering aspirin.
If excess OH− ions enter the blood, they are removed by reacting with the
hydrogen carbonate, HCO3
−, ions.
−
(aq) + HCO3
OH−
(cid:3)(cid:4) CO3
2−
(aq) + H2O((cid:2))
(aq)
Section Summary
In this section, you compared strong and weak acids and bases using
your understanding of chemical equilibrium, and you solved problems
involving their concentrations and pH. Then you considered the effect on
pH of buffer solutions: solutions that contain a mixture of acid ions and
base ions. In the next section, you will compare pH changes that occur
when solutions of acids and bases with different strengths react together.
Section Review
1
I
Phenol, C6H5OH, is an aromatic alcohol with weak basic properties.
It is used as a disinfectant and cleanser. Calculate the molar concen-
tration of OH− ions in a 0.75 mol/L solution of phenolate, C6H5O−, ions
(Kb = 7.7 × 10−5). What is the pH of the solution?
2
3
4
5
6
I
Potassium sorbate is a common additive in foods. It is used to
inhibit the formation of mould. A solution contains 1.82 g of sorbate,
−, ions (Ka = 1.7 × 10−5 ) dissolved in 250 mL of water. What is
C6H7O2
the pH of the solution?
I
Write the chemical formula for the conjugate base of hypobromous
acid, HOBr. Calculate Kb for this ion.
K/U
Describe how a buffer solution differs from an aqueous acidic or
basic solution.
MC
Explain the function and importance of buffers in blood.
C
Explain why an aqueous mixture of NaCl and HCl does not act as a
buffer, but an aqueous mixture of NH3 and NH4Cl does.
Chapter 8  Acids, Bases, and pH • MHR 411
8.4
Acid-Base Titration Curves
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
(cid:2) interpret acid-base titration
curves and the pH at the
equivalence point
(cid:2) communicate your under-
standing of the following
terms: acid-base titration
curve, equivalence point
In Investigation 8-A, you performed a titration and graphed the changes
in the pH of acetic acid solution as sodium hydroxide solution was added.
A graph of the pH of an acid (or base) against the volume of an added base
(or acid) is called an acid-base titration curve.
Titrations are common analytical procedures that chemists perform,
with the usual goal of determining the concentration of one of the
reactants. The equivalence point is the point in a titration when the acid
and base that are present completely react with each other. If chemists
know the volumes of both solutions at the equivalence point, and the con-
centration of one of them, they can calculate the unknown concentration.
As you can see in Figure 8.11, the equivalence point is the middle of
the steep rise that occurs in a titration curve. The endpoint of a titration
occurs when the indicator changes colour, which happens over a range
of about 2 pH units. The pH changes rapidly near the equivalence point.
Therefore, the change in colour usually takes place in a fraction of a
millilitre, with the addition of a single drop of solution. Chemists have
access to a variety of indicators that change colour at different pH values.
The colour changes and ranges for three common indicators are given
in Table 8.4.
Table 8.4 Data on the Endpoints of Three Common Acid-Base Indicators
Indicator
Colour change at endpoint
Approximate range
bromocresol green
yellow to blue
methyl red
red to yellow
phenolphthalein
colourless to pink
3.8–5.2
4.3–6.2
8.2–10.0
When an indicator is used in a titration, the range of pH values at which
its endpoint occurs must include, or be close to, the equivalence point.
Some representative acid-base titration curves, shown in Figures 8.11,
8.12, and 8.13, will illustrate this point.
Titration Curve for a
Strong Acid With a Strong Base
These titrations have a pH of 7 at equivlence.
Indicators such as phenolphthalein, methyl red,
and bromocresol green can be used, because
their endpoints are close to the equivalence
point. Many chemists prefer phenolphthalein
because the change from colourless to pink is
easy to see.
phenolphthalein
pH = 7.00 at
equivalence point
methyl red
H
p
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Volume of strong base added (mL)
Figure 8.11
strong acid-strong base titration
The curve for a
412 MHR • Unit 4  Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
Titration Curve for a Weak Acid With a Strong Base
These titrations have pH values that are greater than 7 at equivalence. In the
titration shown in Figure 8.12, the equivalence point occurs at a pH of 8.80.
Therefore, phenolphthalein is a good indicator for this titration. Methyl red
is not, because its endpoint is too far from the equivalence point.
H
p
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
phenolphthalein
buffer region
pH = 8.80 at
equivalence point
methyl red
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Volume of strong base added (mL)
Titration Curve for a Weak Base With a Strong Acid
These titrations have pH values that are less than 7 at the equivalence
point. The equivalence point in the titration shown in Figure 8.13,
involving ammonia and hydrochloric acid, occurs at a pH of 5.27. Either
methyl red or bromocresol green could be used as an indicator, but not
phenolphthalein.
H
p
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
buffer region
phenolphthalein
pH = 5.27 at
equivalence
point
methyl red
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Volume of HCl(aq) added (mL)
The curve for a weak
Figure 8.12
acid-strong base titration: The weak
acid here is propanoic acid,
CH3CH2COOH.
Figure 8.13
weak base-strong acid titration
The curve for a
Section Summary
In this section, you examined acid-base titration curves for combinations
of strong and weak acids and bases. You may have noticed the absence
of a curve for the reaction of a weak acid with a weak base. A weak
acid-weak base titration curve is difﬁcult to describe quantitatively,
because it has competing equilibria. You may learn about this curve in
future chemistry courses.
Chapter 8  Acids, Bases, and pH • MHR 413
In the next chapter, you will extend your knowledge of equilibria
involving aqueous ions. You will learn how to calculate the pH at an
equivalence point, so you can select an appropriate indicator for any
acid-base titration. You will also learn why equilibrium is important to
the solubility of compounds that are slightly soluble, and how to predict
whether a precipitate will form as the result of a reaction between ions
in solution.
Section Review
1
K/U
In this section, you examined acid-base titration curves.
(a) Distinguish between the equivalence point and the endpoint for
a titration.
(b) When choosing an indicator, do the pH values of the two points
need to coincide exactly? Explain.
2
K/U
In a titration, a basic solution is added to an acidic solution, and
measurements of pH are taken. Compare a strong acid-strong base
titration and a strong acid-weak base titration in terms of
(a) the initial pH
(b) the quantity of base that is needed to reach the equivalence point
(c) the pH at the equivalence point
Assume that the concentrations of the two solutions are identical.
C
Sketch the pH curve for the titration of a weak acid with a strong
base.  Show the equivalence point on your sketch. Suggest an indicator
that might be used, and explain your selection.
C
Suggest an indicator that could be used for the titration of potassi-
um hydroxide with nitrous acid. Explain your suggestion.
I
Estimate the pH of a solution in which bromocresol green is blue,
and methyl red is orange.
3
4
5
414 MHR • Unit 4  Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
Review
Reﬂecting on Chapter 8
Summarize this chapter in the format of your
choice. Here are a few ideas to use as guidelines:
• Relate the microscopic properties of acids and
bases to their macroscopic properties.
• Identify conjugate acid-base pairs for selected
acid-base reactions, and compare their strengths.
• State the relationship among Ka, Kb, and Kw.
• Outline the relationship among [H3O+], pH,
[OH−], and pOH.
• Describe two examples of buffer solutions in
your daily life, and explain how they function.
Reviewing Key Terms
For each of the following terms, write a sentence
that shows your understanding of its meaning.
hydronium ion (H3O+
(aq)) conjugate acid-base
monoprotic acids
ion product constant
polyprotic acids
pH
pair
for water (Kw)
acid dissociation
constant (Ka)
percent dissociation
pOH
base dissociation
constant (Kb)
buffer capacity
buffer solution
acid-base titration curve equivalence point
Knowledge/Understanding
1. Give two examples of each of the following
acids and bases.
(a) Arrhenius acids
(b) Brønsted-Lowry bases
(c) Brønsted-Lowry bases that are not
Arrhenius bases
2. Classify each compound as a strong acid, strong
base, weak acid, or weak base.
(a) phosphoric acid, H3PO4 (used in cola
beverages and rust-prooﬁng products)
(b) chromic acid, H2CrO4 (used in the
production of wood preservatives)
(c) barium hydroxide, Ba(OH)2, a white, toxic
base (can be used to de-acidify paper)
(d) CH3NH2, commonly called methylamine
(is responsible for the characteristic smell
of ﬁsh that are no longer fresh)
3. Write a chemical formula for each acid or base.
(a) the conjugate base of OH−
(b) the conjugate acid of ammonia, NH3
−
(c) the conjugate acid of HCO3
−
(d) the conjugate base of HCO3
4. Decide whether each statement is true or false,
and explain your reasoning.
(a) HBr is a stronger acid than HI.
(b) HBrO2 is a stronger acid than HBrO.
−.
(c) H2SO3 is a stronger acid than HSO3
5. Arrange the following aqueous solutions in
order of pH, from lowest to highest:
2.0 mol/L HClO4, 2.0 mol/L NaCl, 0.20 mol/L
CH3COOH, 0.02 mol/L HCl.
6. In each pair of bases, which is the stronger
2−
base?
−
(a) HSO4
(aq) or SO4
(b) S2−
(aq)
−
2−
(aq) or H2PO4
(c) HPO4
−
(aq) or CO3
(d) HCO3
(aq) or HS−
2−
(aq)
(aq)
(aq)
7. (a) Use Appendix E to ﬁnd the values of Ka for
hydrosulfuric acid, HS−
−
acid, HSO3
(aq).
(aq), and sulfurous
(b) Write equations for the base dissociation
constants of HS−
−
(aq) and HSO3
(aq).
(c) Calculate the value of Kb for each ion.
(d) Which is the stronger base, HS−
(aq) or
−
HSO3
(aq)? Explain.
8. While the pH of blood must be maintained
within strict limits, the pH of urine can vary.
The sulfur in foods, such as eggs, is oxidized in
the body and excreted in the urine. Does the
presence of sulﬁde ions in urine tend to
increase or decrease the pH? Explain.
9. Sodium methanoate, NaHCOO, and methanoic
acid, HCOOH, can be used to make a buffer
solution. Explain how this combination resists
changes in pH when small amounts of acid or
base are added.
10. Oxoacids contain an atom that is bonded to
one or more oxygen atoms. One or more of
these oxygen atoms may also be bonded to
hydrogen. Consider the following oxoacids:
HBrO3(aq) , HClO3(aq), HClO4(aq), and H2SO3(aq).
(a) What factors are used to predict the
strengths of oxoacids?
(b) Arrange the oxoacids above in the order of
increasing acid strength.
Chapter 8  Acids, Bases, and pH • MHR 415
Inquiry
11. What is the pH of a mixture of equal
volumes of 0.040 mol/L hydrochloric acid
and 0.020 mol/L sodium hydroxide?
12. Suppose that 15.0 mL of sulfuric acid just
neutralized 18.0 mL of 0.500 mol/L sodium
hydroxide solution. What is the concentration
of the sulfuric acid?
13. A student dissolved 5.0 g of vitamin C in
250 mL of water. The molar mass of ascorbic
acid is 176 g/mol, and its Ka is 8.0 × 10−5.
Calculate the pH of the solution. Note:
Abbreviate the formula of ascorbic acid
to HAsc.
14. Benzoic acid is a weak, monoprotic acid
(Ka = 6.3 × 10−5). Its structure is shown below.
Calculate the pH and the percent dissociation
of each of the following solutions of benzoic
acid. Then use Le Châtelier’s principle to
explain the trend in percent dissociation of the
acid as the solution becomes more dilute.
(a) 1.0 mol/L (b) 0.10 mol/L (c) 0.01 mol/L
COOH
15. Hypochlorous acid, HOCl, is a weak acid that
is found in household bleach.  It is made by
dissolving chlorine gas in water.
(aq) + Cl−
Cl2(g) + 2H2O((cid:2))
(a) Calculate the pH and the percent
(aq) + HOCl(aq)
(cid:3)(cid:4) H3O+
solution, what is the acid dissociation constant
for salicylic acid?
COOH
OH
Communication
19. List the oxoacids of bromine (HOBr, HBrO2 ,
HBrO3 , and HBrO4 ) in order of increasing
strength. What is the order of increasing
strength for the conjugate bases of these acids?
20. Consider the following acid-base reactions.
−
HBrO2(aq)+CH3COO
(aq)
(cid:3)(cid:4) CH3COOH(aq) + BrO
(aq) + H2O((cid:2))
(cid:3)(cid:4) HS−
−
2(aq)
H2S(aq) + OH−
−
(aq)+CH3COOH(aq)
HS
(aq)
(cid:3)(cid:4) H2S(aq) + CH3COO
−
(aq)
If each equilibrium lies to the right, arrange the
following compounds in order of increasing
acid strength: HBrO2 , CH3COOH, H2S, H2O.
21. Discuss the factors that can be used to predict
the relative strength of different oxoacids.
22. The formula of methyl red indicator can be
abbreviated to HMr. Like most indicators,
methyl red is a weak acid.
HMr(aq) + H2O((cid:2))      H3O+
The change between colours (when the
indicator colour is orange) occurs at a pH
of 5.4. What is the equilibrium constant for
the reaction?
(aq) + Mr−
(aq)
dissociation of a 0.065 mol/L solution
of hypochlorous acid.
(b) What is the conjugate base of hypochlorous
acid? What is its value for Kb?
16. Calculate the pH of a 1.0 mol/L aqueous
solution of sodium benzoate. Note: Only the
benzoate ion affects the pH of the solution.
17. Calculate the pH of a 0.10 mol/L aqueous solu-
tion of sodium nitrite, NaNO2. Note: Only the
nitrite ion affects the pH of the solution.
18. A student prepared a saturated solution of
salicylic acid and measured the pH of the
solution. The student then carefully evaporated
100 mL of the solution and collected the solid.
If the pH of the solution was 2.43, and 0.22 g
was collected after evaporating 100 mL of the
416 MHR • Unit 4  Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
23. Gallic acid is the common name for
3,4,5-trihydroxybenzoic acid.
(a) Draw the structure of gallic acid.
(b) Ka for gallic acid is 3.9 × 10−5. Calculate Kb
for the conjugate base of gallic acid. Then
write the formula of the ion.
24. (a) Sketch the pH curves you would expect if
you titrated
• a strong acid with a strong base
• a strong acid with a weak base
• a weak acid with a strong base
(b) Congo red changes colour over a pH range of
3.0 to 5.0. For which of the above titrations
would Congo red be a good indicator to use?
Making Connections
25. Citric acid can be added to candy to give a
sour taste. The structure of citric acid is
shown below.
O
O
H
O
H
O C
H
H
C
C
C
H
H
C
O
H
O
C O H
(a) Identify the acidic hydrogen atoms that are
removed by water in aqueous solution. Why
do water molecules pull these hydrogen
atoms away, rather than other hydrogen
atoms in citric acid?
(b) Why does citric acid not form OH− ions in
aqueous solution, and act as a base?
(c) When citric acid and sodium hydrogen car-
bonate are used in bubble gum, the bubble
gum foams when chewed. Suggest a reason
why this happens.
26. (a) Imagine that you have collected a sample
of rainwater in your community. The pH of
your sample is 4.52. Unpolluted rainwater
has a pH of about 5.6. How many more
hydronium ions are present in your sample,
compared with normal rainwater? Calculate
the ratio of the concentration of hydronium
ions in your sample to the concentration of
hydronium ions in unpolluted rainwater.
(b) You have been invited to a community
meeting to explain your ﬁndings to local
residents. No one at the meeting has a
background in chemistry. In a paragraph,
write what you would say at this meeting.
(c) Suggest at least two possible factors that
could be responsible for the pH you meas-
ured. What observations would you want
to make, and what data would you want to
collect, to help you gain conﬁdence that one
of these factors is responsible?
Answers to Practice Problems and Short Answers to
Section Review Questions
Practice Problems: 1.(a) chloride ion, Cl−
CO3
2.(a) nitric acid, HNO3 (b) water, H2O (c) hydronium ion,
H3O+
(d) carbonic acid, H2CO3 3.(a) HS−/H2S and H2O/OH−
(b) carbonate ion,
(d) hydrazine, N2H4
−
(c) hydrogen sulfate ion, HSO4
2−
= [O2−][H3O+]
[OH−]
5.(a) 4.5 mol/L (b) 1.35 mol/L
+
4.(a) H2S/HS− and NH3/NH4
2−] = 4.7 × 10−11 mol/L 26. pH = 2.74
(b) O2−/OH− and H2O/OH−
− and H2O/H3O+
(b) H2SO4/HSO4
(c) 0.02 mol/L (d) 0.0375 mol/L  6.(a) 3.1 mol/L
(b) 0.87 mol/L (c) 0.701 mol/L (d) 0.697 mol/L  7.(a) acidic
solution; [H3O+] = 0.479 mol/L (b) acidic solution;
[H3O+] = 1.98 mol/L 8. acidic solution; [H3O+] = 0.46 mol/L
9.(a) [H3O+] = 0.45 mol/L; [OH−] = 2.2 × 10−14 mol/L
(b) [OH−] = 1.1 mol/L; [H3O+] = 9.1 × 10−15 mol/L
10.(a) [H3O+] = 0.95 mol/L; [OH−] = 1.1 × 10−14 mol/L
(b) [OH−] = 0.024 mol/L ; [H3O+] = 4.2 × 10−13 mol/L
11. [HCl] = 0.18 mol/L 12. [Ca(OH)2] = 0.29 mol/L 13. acidic;
pH = 6.400 ; [OH−] = 2.51 × 10−8 mol/L 14. pOH = 2.1;
[OH−] = 8 × 10−3 mol/L 15. acidic;
[H3O+] = 1.9 × 10−5 mol/L; [OH−] = 5.2 × 10−10 ; pOH = 9.28
16. [H3O+] = [OH−] = 1.6 × 10−7 ; neutral
17. basic; pH = 8.19; [H3O+] = 6.5 × 10−9 mol/L;
[OH−] = 1.5 × 10−6 mol/L 18. [H3O+] = 1.9 × 10−3 mol/L;
[OH−] = 5.4 × 10−12 mol/L 19. pH = 2.41; 0.46% dissociation
20. Ka = 1.0 × 10−4; percent dissociation = 3.2%
21. pH = 2.65 22. Ka = 2.9 × 10−8 23. pH = 3.411 24. 1.2 g
25. pH = 4.82; [CO3
27. pH = 4.59; [HS−] = 2.6 × 10−5 mol/L 28. Ka = 1.0 × 10−14 ;
29. pH = 11.14 30. pH = 10.50
Ka2
31. Kb = 1.6 × 10−6 32. [OH−] = 1.0 × 10−2 mol/L; pOH = 1.98
33. [OH−] = 3.8 × 10−3 mol/L; percent dissociation = 1.7%
34. [NH3] = 2.8 × 10−2 mol/L
35. C6H5O− > C6H5COO− > HCOO− > F−
37. pH = 9.10 38. as an acid:
(cid:3)(cid:4) H3O+
−
(aq) + H2O((cid:2))
HSO3
(cid:3)(cid:4) OH−
−
(aq) + H2O((cid:2))
HSO3
Section Review: 8.1:
1.(a) H3PO4(aq) + H2O(aq)
(cid:3)(cid:4) HPO4
−
(aq) + H2O(aq)
H2PO4
(cid:3)(cid:4) PO4
3−
2−
(aq) + H2O(aq)
HPO4
−
(aq) + H2O(aq)
(b) as an acid: H2PO4
−
(aq) + H3O+
as a base: H2PO4
(aq)
(c) H3PO4(aq) is much stronger (although it is still a weak
−
(aq).  2. C6H4NH2COO−
acid) than H2PO4
and H2O/H3O+
(b) weak  4.(a) weak acid
(b) strong acid (c) strong base (d) weak base
8.2: 1.(a) 4.43 (b) 2.70 × 10−10 (c) 9.57 (d) acidic (e) 3.9 × 10−11
(f) 2.6 × 10−4 (g) 3.59 (h) basic (i) 1.4 × 10−13 (j) 12.85 (k) 1.15
(l) basic (m) 8 × 10−6 (n) 5.1 (o) 1 × 10−9 (p) acidic  2. pH = 2.39
3. Ka = 2.5 × 10−4 4.  pH = 1.70;
[HOOCCOO−] = 5.4 × 10−5 mol/L
5. [H2CO3] = 2.3 × 10−3 mol/L
8.3: 1. [OH−] = 7.6 × 10−3 mol/L; pH = 11.88 2. pH = 8.80
3. OBr−; Kb = 3.6 × 10−6 8.4: 4. phenolphthalein  5. pH ∼ 5.0
(aq) + SO3
(aq) + H2SO3(aq)
−
(aq) + H3O+
(aq) ;
(cid:3)(cid:4) H3PO4(aq) + H2O(aq)
2−
(aq) + H3O+
−
3.(a) B(OH)3/B(OH)4
(aq) ; as a base:
(cid:3)(cid:4) H2PO4
(aq) + H3O+
(aq) + H3O+
(cid:3)(cid:4) HPO4
+
36. NH4
(aq) ;
(aq) ;
(aq)
2−
2−
Chapter 8  Acids, Bases, and pH • MHR 417
Aqueous Solutions and
Solubility Equilibria
The kidneys are sometimes called the master chemists of the body. They
work to maintain the constant composition of the blood by helping to bal-
ance water and the various ions that are present in the blood. A very
important equilibrium in the blood, which the kidneys help to control,
involves calcium ions and phosphate ions.
3Ca2+
(cid:2)(cid:3) Ca3(PO4)2(s)
(aq) + 2PO4
(aq)
3−
This equilibrium sometimes causes problems, however. For example,
calcium phosphate helps to give bones their rigidity. If the kidneys remove
too many phosphate ions from the blood due to disease, the position of
equilibrium shifts to the left, as predicted by Le Châtelier’s principle. More
calcium phosphate dissolves in the blood, reducing bone density. The loss
of too much calcium phosphate can lead to osteoporosis.
If the kidneys remove too many calcium ions from the blood, the
equilibrium position in the kidneys shifts to the right. Solid calcium
phosphate can form in the kidneys, producing kidney stones. Kidney
stones, which are painful, can also form as the result of calcium oxalate
precipitating in the kidneys. Precipitates of other compounds can affect
different areas of the body: gallstones in the gall bladder and gout in
the joints are two examples.
In this chapter, you will continue your study of acid-base reactions.
You will ﬁnd out how ions in aqueous solution can act as acids or bases.
Then, by applying equilibrium concepts to ions in solution, you will be
able to predict the solubility of ionic compounds in water and the forma-
tion of a precipitate.
This kidney stone formed when potassium oxalate
precipitated out of solution in a kidney. How can you
predict whether a precipitate, such as potassium
oxalate, will form in an aqueous solution?
C h a p t e r   P r e v i e w
9.1
9.2
9.3
The Acid-Base
Properties of Salt
Solutions
Solubility Equilibria
Predicting the
Formation of a
Precipitate
P r e r e q u i s i t e
C o n c e p t s   a n d   S k i l l s
Before you begin this chapter,
review the following concepts
and skills:
(cid:2) solving equilibrium
problems (Chapter 7,
section 7.3)
(cid:2) identifying conjugate acid-
base pairs and comparing
their strengths (Chapter 8,
section 8.1)
(cid:2) interpreting acid-base
titration curves (Chapter 8,
section 8.4)
418 MHR • Unit 4  Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
The Acid-Base Properties of
Salt Solutions
9.1
At the end of Chapter 8, you learned that when just enough acid and
base have been mixed for a complete reaction, the solution can be acidic,
neutral, or basic. The reaction between an acid and a base forms an
aqueous solution of a salt. The properties of the dissolved salt determine
the pH of a titration solution at equivalence. Figure 9.1 shows the acidic,
basic, or neutral properties of three salt solutions.
In this section, you will learn how to predict the pH of an aqueous
solution of a salt. Predicting the pH is useful when you are performing a
titration experiment, because you need to choose an indicator that
changes colour at a pH value that is close to the pH at equivalence.
Acidic and Basic Properties of Salts
The acidic or basic property of an aqueous solution of a salt results from
reactions between water and the dissociated ions of the salt. Some ions do
not react with water. They are neutral in solution. Ions that do react with
water produce a solution with an excess of H3O+
(aq). The extent
of the reaction determines the pH of the solution. As you will see, the
reaction between an ion and water is really just another acid-base reaction.
Is there a way to classify salts so that you can predict whether their
(aq) or OH−
solutions in water will be basic, acidic, or neutral? In the following
ExpressLab, you will determine the pH values of solutions of various
salts. Then you will analyze your results to decide if there is a pattern.
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
(cid:2) predict qualitatively whether
a solution of a speciﬁc
salt will be acidic, basic,
or neutral
(cid:2) solve problems that involve
acid-base titration data and
the pH at the equivalence
point
(cid:2) communicate your under-
standing of the following
terms: equivalence point,
end-point
002(09)1496
[CATCH PHOTO P 9.1 : TWO SET-UP SHOTS, (A) AND
(B) . (A) FIRST SHOT SHOWS THREE SOLUTIONS IN
250 mL BEAKERS. THE SOLUTIONS ARE:
NH4NO3(acidic), NaNO3 (neutral), NaOCl (basic).
THE BEAKERS ARE CLEARLY LABELLED
NH4NO3(aq), NaNO3(aq), NaOCl(aq). BESIDE THE
BEAKER IS A DROPPER BOTTLE CLEARLY LABELLED
“UNIVERSAL INDICATOR”.
A
B
Photograph (A) shows three aqueous salt solutions. Photograph (B) shows the
Figure 9.1
solutions after a some universal indicator solution has been added to each one. The orange
colour indicates an acidic solution, the yellow colour indicates a neutral solution, and the
purple colour indicates a basic solution.
Chapter 9  Aqueous Solutions and Solubility Equilibria • MHR 419
ExpressLab
Testing the pH of Salt Solutions
In this ExpressLab, you will measure the pH
values of solutions of different salts with the same
concentration in mol/L. The pH of a solution gives
the relative [H3O+], compared with the [OH−]. From
this information, you can infer which ion in the salt
reacted with water to the greatest extent.
Safety Precaution
Salt
NH4Cl
NaCl
NaCH3COO
K2CO3
unknown
pH of aqueous solution
• Some of the salts are irritants. Wear gloves and
goggles at all times.
Materials
dropper bottles containing 0.1 mol/L solutions of
each of the following salts: ammonium chloride,
NH4Cl(aq) ; sodium chloride, NaCl(aq); sodium
acetate, NaCH3COO(aq) ; potassium carbonate,
K2CO3(aq)
unknown salt
universal pH paper
spot plate
Procedure
1. Copy the following table into your notebook and
title it. Before you test each salt, write the formula
of the salt in the appropriate box. (You will not be
testing any salt that results from the reaction of a
weak base and a weak acid.)
Strong acid
Weak acid
Strong base
Weak base
2. Copy the following table into your notebook,
to record your observations. Give your table
a title.
3. Pour a small volume of one of the solutions into
the well of a spot plate. Test the solution using
universal pH paper. By comparing the colour of
the paper, estimate the pH of the solution.
Record your results in you table.
4. Repeat step 3 for each of the solutions.
Analysis
1. An ion that does not react with water has no
effect on the pH of water. If both the cation and
the anion in a salt do not react with water, a
solution of the salt will be neutral. Which salt
consists of cations and anions that do not react
with water? How did you classify this salt in
terms of the strength of the acid and base used
to form it?
2. If a salt consists of one ion that does not react
with water, and another ion that does, the pH of
a solution of the salt will be affected by the ion
that reacts with water.
(a) Which salt(s) formed acidic solutions?
Which ion accounts for the acidic nature of
the solution?
(b) Which salt(s) formed basic solutions?
Which ion accounts for the basic nature of
the solution?
3. Classify your unknown salt in terms of the
strength of the base and the acid from which
the salt was formed.
Salts That Dissolve and Form Neutral Solutions
In the following equation, HA(aq) represents a strong acid, which
dissociates completely in water.
HA(aq) + H2O((cid:4)) → H3O+
(aq) + A−
(aq)
Interpreting the equation from right to left, the conjugate base of the
acid, A−, has no tendency to combine with hydronium ions in water.
Therefore, it is a weak base. In fact, the anion that is formed by a strong
acid is a much weaker base than water, so it does not react with water.
Consequently, when a salt that contains the anion of a strong acid is
dissolved in water, the anion has no effect on the pH of the solution.
420 MHR • Unit 4  Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
For example, the conjugate base of hydrochloric acid, HCl, is Cl−. The
chloride ion is a very weak base, so it does not react signiﬁcantly with
water. Therefore, the chloride ion, and the conjugate bases of other strong
acids, do not affect the pH of an aqueous solution.
Similarly, the cations that form strong bases (the alkali metals and
the metals below beryllium in Group 2 (IIA)) do not tend to react with
hydroxide ions. These cations are weaker acids than water. Therefore,
when a salt contains one of these ions (for example, Na+) the cation has
no effect on the pH of an aqueous solution.
If a salt contains the cation of a strong base and the anion of a strong
acid, neither ion reacts with water. Therefore, the solution has a pH
of 7. Sodium chloride is an example of such a salt. It is formed by the
reaction of sodium hydroxide (a strong base) and hydrochloric acid
(a strong acid). Salts of strong bases and strong acids dissolve in water
and form neutral solutions.
Salts That Dissolve and Form Acidic Solutions
A weak base, such as aqueous ammonia, dissociates very little. Therefore,
the equilibrium lies to the left.
NH3(aq) + H2O((cid:4))
(cid:2)(cid:3) NH4
+
(aq) + OH−
Interpreting this equation from right to left, the ammonium ion,
(which is the conjugate acid of aqueous ammonia) is a relatively strong
acid, compared to water. In solution, ammonium ions react with water,
resulting in an acidic solution:
+
(aq) + H2O((cid:4))
NH4
(cid:2)(cid:3) NH3(aq) + H3O+
(aq)
If a salt consists of the cation of a weak base and the anion of a strong
acid, only the cation reacts with water. The solution has a pH that is less
than 7. Salts of weak bases and strong acids dissolve in water and form
acidic solutions.
Salts That Dissolve and Form Basic Solutions
A weak acid, HA, forms a conjugate base, A−, that is relatively strong.
The reaction of such an anion with water results in a solution that is basic.
For example, consider acetic acid, CH3COOH(aq), a weak acid. The conju-
gate base of acetic acid, CH3COO−
water. It reacts with water to form a basic solution.
(aq), is relatively strong, compared to
CH3COO−
(aq) + H2O((cid:4))
(cid:2)(cid:3) CH3COOH(aq) + OH−
(aq)
If a salt consists of the cation of a strong base and the anion of a weak
acid, such as NaCH3COO, only the anion reacts signiﬁcantly with water.
The reaction produces hydroxide ions. Therefore, the solution will have a
pH that is greater than 7. Salts of strong bases and weak acids dissolve in
water and form basic solutions.
Salts of Weak Bases and Weak Acids
If a salt consists of the cation of a weak base and the anion of a weak acid,
both ions react with water. The solution is weakly acidic or weakly basic,
depending on the relative strength of the ions that act as the acid
or the base. You can determine which ion is stronger by comparing the
values of Ka and Kb associated with the cation and the anion, respectively.
If Ka > Kb, the solution is acidic. If Kb > Ka, the solution is basic.
C H E M
FA C T
A reaction between an ion
and water is sometimes called
a hydrolysis reaction. An
ammonium ion hydrolyzes, but
a sodium ion does not. An
acetate ion hydrolyzes, but a
chloride ion does not.
Chapter 9  Aqueous Solutions and Solubility Equilibria • MHR 421
The values of Ka
Figure 9.2
and Kb are shown for acid-base
conjugate pairs. A strong acid, such
as HCl(aq), forms a conjugate base,
Cl−
(aq) , that is too weak to react
signiﬁcantly with water. A weaker
acid, such as CH3COOH(aq), forms a
conjugate base, CH3COO−
(aq), that is
strong enough to react signiﬁcantly
with water.
Figure 9.2 shows the relationship between acid-base conjugate pairs.
CI−
HOBr
OBr−
CH3COO−
HCN
+
NH4
CH3COOH
CN−
NH3
HCI
Ka/Kb
10−20
10−16
10−12
10−8
10−4
100
104
108
weaker
stronger
The following list summarizes the acidic and basic properties of salts.
Table 9.1 shows the acid-base properties of salts in relation to the acids
and bases that react to form them.
Acidic and Basic Properties of Salts
• The salt of a strong acid/weak base dissolves to form an acidic
solution.
• The salt of a weak acid/strong base dissolves to form a basic solution.
• The salt of a weak acid/weak base dissolves to form an acidic
solution if Ka for the cation is greater than Kb for the anion.
The solution is basic if Kb for the anion is greater than Ka for
the cation.
Table 9.1  The Acid-Base Properties of Various Salts
Anion derived from a strong acid
Anion derived from a weak acid
Cation derived
from a strong base
Cation derived
from a weak base
Reaction with water:
neither ion
Solution: neutral
Examples: NaCl, K2SO4,
Ca(NO3)2
Reaction with water:
only the cation
Solution: acidic
Examples: NH4Cl, NH4NO3,
NH4ClO4
Reaction with water:
only the anion
Solution: basic
Examples: NaCH3COO, KF,
Mg(HSO4)2
Reaction with water:
both ions
Solution: neutral if Ka = Kb,
acidic if Ka> Kb,
basic if Kb > Ka
Examples: NH4CN (basic),
(NH4)2S (basic),
NH4NO2  (acidic)
Sodium Fluoride: A Basic Salt That Protects Teeth
Sugar is a common ingredient in prepared foods. When sugar remains on
your teeth, bacteria in your mouth convert it into an acid. The principal
constituent of tooth enamel is a mineral called hydroxyapatite,
Ca10(PO4)6(OH)2. Hydroxyapatite reacts with acids to form solvated ions
and water. (Solvated ions are ions surrounded by solvent particles.)
Eventually, a cavity forms in the enamel.
To help prevent acid from damaging tooth enamel, many water treat-
ment plants add small concentrations (about 1 ppm) of salts, such as NaF,
422 MHR • Unit 4  Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
C H E M
FA C T
If you cannot brush your teeth
after a sweet snack, try chew-
ing sugar-free gum. Chewing
gum stimulates the production
of saliva, which is usually
weakly alkaline. The saliva
helps to neutralize acids on
your teeth. Eating cheese for
dessert also helps to neutralize
acid, because cheese is basic.
to the water. You may notice that a ﬂuoride salt has also been added to
your toothpaste. Fluoride ions displace OH− from hydroxyapatite to form
ﬂuoroapatite, Ca10(PO4)6F2, as shown in the equation below.
(aq) → Ca10(PO4)6F2(s) + 2OH−
Ca10(PO4)6(OH)2(s) + 2F−
(aq)
The ﬂuoride ion is a much weaker base than the hydroxide ion, and
ﬂuoroapatite is therefore less reactive towards acids.
The following Sample Problem shows you how to predict the acidity
or basicity of aqueous salt solutions.
Sample Problem
Predicting the Acidity or Basicity of Salts
Problem
Predict the acid/base property of an aqueous solution of each of the
following salts. If you predict that the solution is not neutral, write the
equation for the reaction that causes the solution to be acidic or basic.
(a) sodium phosphate, Na3PO4 (commonly called trisodium phosphate,
TSP, used in detergents and dishwashing compounds)
(b) ammonium nitrate, NH4NO3 (used as a fertilizer)
(c) sodium chloride, NaCl, (used to de-ice winter roads)
(d) ammonium hydrogen carbonate, NH4HCO3 (used in baked foods as a
leavening agent)
What Is Required?
Predict whether each aqueous solution is acidic, basic, or neutral. Write
equations that represent the solutions that are acidic or basic.
What Is Given?
The formula of each salt is given.
Plan Your Strategy
Determine whether the cation is from a strong or weak base, and whether
the anion is from a strong or weak acid. Ions derived from weak bases or
weak acids react with water and affect the pH of the solution. If both
ions react with water, compare the equilibrium constants (Ka and Kb) to
determine which reaction goes farthest to completion.
Act On Your Strategy
(a) Sodium phosphate, Na3PO4, is the salt of a strong base (NaOH) and a
3−
weak acid (HPO4
(aq) + H2O((cid:4))
PO4
The solution is basic.
2−). Only the phosphate ions react with water.
(cid:2)(cid:3) HPO4
(aq) + OH−
(aq)
2−
(b) Ammonium nitrate, NH4NO3, is the salt of a weak base (NH3(aq)) and a
strong acid (HNO3). Only the ammonium ions react with water.
+
(aq) + H2O((cid:4))
NH4
The solution is acidic.
(cid:2)(cid:3) NH3(aq) + H3O+
(aq)
(c) Sodium chloride, NaCl, is the salt of a strong base (NaOH) and
a strong acid (HCl(aq)). Neither ion reacts with water, so the solution
is neutral.
Continued ...
Chapter 9  Aqueous Solutions and Solubility Equilibria • MHR 423
Continued ...
(d) Ammonium hydrogen carbonate, NH4HCO3, is the salt of a weak base
(NH3(aq)) and a weak acid (H2CO3(aq)). Both ions react with water.
+
(aq) + H2O((cid:4))
NH4
−
(aq) + H2O((cid:4))
HCO3
(cid:2)(cid:3) NH3(aq) + H3O+
(cid:2)(cid:3) H2CO3(aq) + OH−
(aq)
(aq)
+ and Kb for HCO3
The equilibrium that lies farther to the right has the greater inﬂuence
on the pH of the solution. The equilibrium constants you need are Ka
−. Each ion is the conjugate of a compound
for NH4
for which the appropriate constant is given in tables.
From Appendix E, Kb for NH3(aq) is 1.8 × 10−5. Using KaKb = Kw,
Ka for NH4
+ = 1.0 × 10−14
1.8 × 10−5
−10
= 5.6 × 10
Similarly, from Appendix E, Ka for H2CO = 4.5 × 10
Kb for HCO3
−7.
− = 1.0 × 10−14
4.5 × 10−7
−8
= 2.2 × 10
Because Kb for the hydrogen carbonate reaction is larger than Ka for
the ammonium ion reaction, the solution is basic.
Check Your Solution
The equations that represent the reactions with water support the
prediction that NH4NO3 dissolves to form an acidic solution and Na3PO4
dissolves to form a basic solution. Calcium chloride is the salt of a strong
base-strong acid, so neither ion reacts with water and the solution is
neutral. Both ions in ammonium hydrogen carbonate react with water.
+, the salt dissolves to
− is greater than Ka for NH4
Because Kb for HCO3
form a weakly basic solution.
Practice Problems
1. Predict whether an aqueous solution of each salt is neutral, acidic,
or basic.
(a) NaCN
(b) LiF
(c) Mg(NO3)2
(d) NH4I
2. Is the solution of each salt acidic, basic, or neutral? For solutions that
are not neutral, write equations that support your predictions.
(a) NH4BrO4
(c) NaOBr
(b) NaBrO4
(d) NH4Br
3. Ka for benzoic acid, C6H5COOH, is 6.3 × 10−5. Ka for phenol, C6H5OH,
(aq)?
is 1.3 × 10−10. Which is the stronger base, C6H5COO−
Explain your answer.
(aq) or C6H5O−
4. Sodium hydrogen sulﬁte, NaHSO3, is a preservative that is used to
prevent the discolouration of dried fruit. In aqueous solution, the
hydrogen sulﬁte ion can act as either an acid or a base. Predict
whether NaHSO3 dissolves to form an acidic solution or a basic
solution. (Refer to Appendix E for ionization data.)
424 MHR • Unit 4  Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
Calculating pH at Equivalence
In an acid-base titration, you carefully measure the volumes of acid and
base that react. Then, knowing the concentration of either the acid or
the base, and the stoichiometric relationship between them, you calculate
the concentration of the other reactant. The equivalence point in the
titration occurs when just enough acid and base have been mixed for a
complete reaction to occur, with no excess of either reactant. As you
learned in Chapter 8, you can ﬁnd the equivalence point from a graph that
shows pH versus volume of one solution added to the other solution. To
determine the equivalence point experimentally, you need to measure the
pH. Because pH meters are expensive, and the glass electrodes are fragile,
titrations are often performed using an acid-base indicator.
An acid-base indicator is usually a weak, monoprotic organic acid.
The indicator is in equilibrium between the undissociated acid, which is
one colour, and its conjugate base, which is a different colour.
HIn(aq) + H2O((cid:4))
colour 1
(cid:2)(cid:3) H3O+
(aq) + In−
(aq)
colour 2
For example, one indicator, called methyl red, is red when the pH is
below 4.2, and yellow when the pH is above 6.2. The point in a titration
at which an indicator changes colour is called the end-point. The colour
change occurs over a range of about 2 pH units, but the pH of a solution
changes rapidly near the equivalence point. Often a single drop of base
causes the shift from colour 1 to colour 2. For methyl red, the end-point
occurs over the pH range 4.2 to 6.2. Therefore, this indicator is used when
an acid-base titration results in a moderately acidic solution at equiva-
lence. Figure 9.3 shows the colours and end-points of various indicators.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
pH
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
Crystal violet
Thymol blue
2,4-Dinitrophenol
Bromophenol blue
Bromocresol green
Methyl red
Alizarin
Bromothymol blue
Phenol red
Phenolphthalein
Alizarin yellow R
Figure 9.3
Thymol blue and alizarin are diprotic. They change colour over two different ranges.
A range of indicators are available with different end-points are available.
To choose the appropriate indicator for a particular titration, you must
know the approximate pH of the solution at equivalence. As you learned
in Chapter 8, an acid-base titration curve provides this information.
What if you do not have a titration curve? You can calculate the pH at
equivalence using what you know about salts.
Chapter 9  Aqueous Solutions and Solubility Equilibria • MHR 425
For example, suppose that you are titrating a strong acid solution
against a weak base. At the equivalence point, the ﬂask contains an
aqueous solution of the salt that is formed by the reaction. The solution of
a salt of a weak base and a strong acid is acidic, so methyl red may be an
appropriate indicator. The pH at equivalence in a titration is the same as
the pH of an aqueous solution of the salt formed.
Sample Problem
Calculating pH at Equivalence
Problem
2.0 × 101 mL of 0.20 mol/L NH3(aq) is titrated against 0.20 mol/L HCl(aq).
Calculate the pH at equivalence. Use Figure 9.3 to select an
appropriate indicator.
What Is Required?
You need to calculate the pH at equivalence. As well, you need to
ﬁnd an indicator that changes colour at a pH that is close to the same
pH at equivalence.
What Is Given?
You know that 20 mL of 0.20 mol/L NH3(aq) base reacts with 0.20 mol/L
HCl(aq). Tables of Ka and Kb values are in Appendix E. Figure 9.3 shows
the pH ranges and colour changes for various indicators.
Plan Your Strategy
Step 1 Write the balanced chemical equation for the reaction
Step 2 Calculate the amount (in mol) of NH3(aq), using its volume and
concentration. Then, determine the amount (in mol) of HCl(aq) that
is needed to react with all the NH3(aq).
Step 3 Find the volume of HCl(aq), based on the amount and
concentration of HCl(aq).
Step 4 Calculate the concentration of the salt formed, based on the
amount (in mol) and the total volume of the solution. Decide
which ion reacts with water. Write the equation that represents
the reaction.
Step 5 Determine the equilibrium constant for the ion that is involved
in the reaction. Then divide the [NH4
whether the change in concentration of the ammonium ion can
be ignored.
+] by Ka to determine
Step 6 Set up an ICE table for the ion that is involved in the reaction with
water. Let x represent the change in the concentration of the ion
that reacts.
Step 7 Write the equilibrium expression. Substitute the equilibrium
concentrations into the expression, and solve for x.
Step 8 Use the value of x to determine the [H3O+]. Then calculate the pH
of the solution. Using Figure 9.3, choose an indicator that changes
colour in a range that includes the pH of the solution.
426 MHR • Unit 4  Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
Act on Your Strategy
Step 1 The following chemical equation represents the reaction.
NH3(aq) + HCl(aq) → NH4Cl(aq)
Step 2 Amount (in mol) of NH3(aq) = 0.20 mol/L × 0.020 L
= 4.0 × 10
NH3(aq) and HCl(aq) react in a 1:1 ratio. Therefore, 4.0 × 10−3 mol of
HCl(aq) is needed.
−3 mol
Step 3 Amount (in mol) HCl(aq) = 4.0 × 10
−3 mol
= 0.20 mol/L × Volume HCl(aq) (in L)
Volume HCl(aq) = 4.0 × 10−3 mol
0.20 mol/L
= 0.020 L
Step 4 From the chemical equation, the amount of NH4Cl that is
formed is equal to the amount of acid or base that reacts.
Therefore, 4.0 × 10−3 mol of ammonium chloride is formed.
Total volume of solution = 0.020 L + 0.020 L
= 0.040 L
[NH4Cl] = 4.0 × 10−3 mol
4.0 × 10−2 L
= 0.10 mol/L
+
(aq) in solution. NH4
(aq) is the
+
(aq) and Cl−
The salt forms NH4
conjugate acid of a weak base, so it reacts with water. Cl−
the conjugate base of a strong acid, so it does not react with water.
The pH of the solution is therefore determined by the extent of the
following reaction.
+
(aq) + H2O((cid:4))
NH4
(cid:2)(cid:3) NH3(aq) + H3O+
(aq) is
(aq)
Step 5 From Appendix E, Kb for NH3(aq) is 1.8 × 10−5.
+
Ka for the conjugate acid, NH4
(aq), can be calculated using the
relationship KaKb = Kw.
Ka = Kw
Kb
= 5.6 × 10
= 1.0 × 10−14
1.8 × 10−5
−10
+]
[NH4
Ka
=
0.10
5.6 × 10−10
= 1.8 × 108
This is well above 500, so the change in [NH4
ignored.
+], x, can be
Step 6
Concentration (mol/L)
+
NH4
(aq)
+
H2O((cid:4))
(cid:2)(cid:3)
NH3(aq)
+
H3O+
(aq)
Initial
Change
Equilibrium
0.10
−x
0.10−x
(~0.10)
—
—
—
0
+x
x
~0
+x
x
Continued ...
Chapter 9  Aqueous Solutions and Solubility Equilibria • MHR 427
Continued ...
Step 7
5.6 × 10
+]
Ka = [NH3][H3O+]
[NH4
−10 = (x)(x)
0.10
√
5.6 × 10−11
x =
= ±7.5 × 10
+
x = [H3O
]
−6 mol/L
Step 8
−6 mol/L
= 7.5 × 10
+
pH = −log[H3O
]
= −log 7.5 × 10
= 5.13
−6
(only the positive value
makes sense)
Methyl red, which changes colour over pH 4.2 to 6.2, is a
good choice for an indicator. If methyl red was not available,
bromocresol green, which changes colour in the pH range 3.8–5.2,
could be used.
Check Your Solution
The titration forms an aqueous solution of a salt derived from a weak base
and a strong acid. The solution should be acidic, which is supported by
the calculation of the pH.
PROBLEM TIP
When you are determining
the concentration of ions in
solution, remember to use the
ﬁnal volume of the solution.
In Practice Problem 6, for
example, the ﬁnal volume of
the solution is 50 mL because
20 mL of base is added to
30 mL of acid. You can assume
that the total volume is the
sum of the reactant volumes,
because the reactant solutions
are dilute.
Practice Problems
5. After titrating sodium hydroxide with hydroﬂuoric acid, a chemist
determined that the reaction had formed an aqueous solution of
0.020 mol/L sodium ﬂuoride. Determine the pH of the solution.
6. Part way through a titration, 2.0 × 101 mL of 0.10 mol/L sodium
hydroxide has been added to 3.0 × 101 mL of 0.10 mol/L
hydrochloric acid. What is the pH of the solution?
7. 0.025 mol/L benzoic acid, C6H5COOH, is titrated with 0.025 mol/L
sodium hydroxide solution. Calculate the pH at equivalence.
8. 50.0 mL of 0.10 mol/L hydrobromic acid is titrated with 0.10 mol/L
aqueous ammonia. Determine the pH at equivalence.
Section Summary
In this section, you learned why solutions of different salts have different
pH values. You learned how to analyze the composition of a salt to
predict whether the salt forms an acidic, basic, or neutral solution.
Finally, you learned how to apply your understanding of the properties
of salts to calculate the pH at the equivalence point of a titration. You
used the pH to determine a suitable indicator for the titration. In section
9.2, you will further investigate the equilibria of solutions and learn how
to predict the solubility of ionic compounds in solution.
428 MHR • Unit 4  Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
Section Review
1
2
3
4
5
K/U
Sodium carbonate and sodium hydrogen carbonate both dissolve
to form basic solutions. Comparing solutions with the same concentra-
tion, which of these salts forms the more basic solution? Explain.
K/U
Determine whether or not each ion reacts with water. If the ion
does react, write the chemical equation for the reaction. Then predict
whether the ion forms an acidic solution or a basic solution.
(d) OCl−
(a) Br−
+
(b) CH3NH3
−
(c) ClO4
K/U
Predict whether sodium dihydrogen citrate, NaH2C6H5O7,
dissolves to form an acidic or a basic solution. (Refer to Appendix E)
I
A chemist measures the pH of aqueous solutions of Ca(OH)2, CaF2,
NH4NO3, KNO3, and HNO3. Each solution has the same concentration.
Arrange the solutions from most basic to most acidic.
I
A student uses a transfer pipette to put 25.00 mL of 0.100 mol/L
acetic acid into an Erlenmeyer ﬂask. Then the student adds sodium
hydroxide from a burette to the ﬂask, and records the following read-
ings of volume and pH.
volume (mL)
0.00
6.00
10.00
12.00
14.00
14.40
14.60
14.80
15.20
15.40
16.00
pH
2.8
4.2
5.1
5.5
6.2
6.5
6.8
7.6
9.8
10.5
11.4
(a) Draw a graph that shows the results. Plot pH on the vertical axis and
the volume of base added on the horizontal axis. Use speadsheet
software if available.
(b) From your graph, what is the pH at the equivalence point?
(c) Determine the initial concentration of the sodium hydroxide.
(d) Use Figure 9.3 to suggest a suitable indicator for this titration.
6
C
Congo red is an indicator that changes colour in the pH range 3.0
to 5.0. Suppose that you are titrating an aqueous sodium hydroxide
solution with nitric acid added from a burette. Is congo red a suitable
indicator? If so, explain why. If not, will the end-point occur before or
after the equivalence point? Explain your answer.
7
8
9
K/U
If you were titrating a strong base with a weak acid, which of
these indicators might be suitable: bromphenol blue, bromthymol blue,
or phenolphthalein? (Refer to Figure 9.3.)
I
MC
0.10 mol/L hydrochloric acid is titrated with 0.10 mol/L
methylamine, CH3NH2. Calculate the pH at the equivalence point.
Sodium phosphate, Na3PO4, is sold at hardware stores as TSP
(trisodium phosphate). Crystals of Na3PO4 are dissolved in water to
make an effective cleaning solution. TSP can be used, for example, to
prepare a surface before painting.
(a) Explain why TSP is an effective cleaning solution.
(b) Suggest safety precautions you should take when using TSP.
(c) Explain why you should never mix a solution of TSP with other
household cleaning products.
Chapter 9  Aqueous Solutions and Solubility Equilibria • MHR 429
9.2
Solubility Equilibria
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
(cid:2) perform an experiment to
determine the solubility
product constant (Ksp) for
calcium hydroxide
(cid:2) solve equilibrium problems
that involve concentrations
of reactants and products,
and Ksp
(cid:2) calculate the molar solubility
of a pure substance in water
or in a solution of a common
ion, given Ksp
(cid:2) communicate your under-
standing of the following
term: solubility product
constant (Ksp)
Barium sulfate,
Figure 9.4
BaSO4, is a sparingly soluble ionic
compound that is used to enhance
X-ray imaging.
In Chapter 7, you learned that a saturated solution containing undissolved
solute is an example of a system at equilibrium. Recall from your previous
chemistry course that the solubility of a solute is the amount of solute
that will dissolve in a given volume of solvent at a certain temperature.
In other words, the solubility of a solute indicates how much of that
solute is present in a solution at equilibrium. Data tables often express
solubility as (g solute)/(100 mL solvent). Molar solubility, on the other
hand, is always expressed in terms of (mol solute/L solvent).
The solubility of ionic solids in water covers a wide range of values.
Knowing the concentration of ions in aqueous solution is important in
medicine and in chemical analysis. In this section, you will continue to
study equilibrium. You will examine the solubility equilibria of ionic
compounds in water.
Solubility as an Equilibrium Process
In Chapter 7, you learned that three factors—change in enthalpy (∆H ),
change in entropy (∆S), and temperature (T )—determine whether or not a
change is favoured. The same three factors are important for determining
how much of a salt will dissolve in a certain volume of water. These
factors are combined in the following equation, where ∆G is the change
in free energy of the system.
∆G = ∆H − T∆S
As you know from Chapter 7, a change is favoured when ∆G is negative.
When a salt dissolves, the entropy of the system always increases,
because ions in solution are more disordered than ions in a solid crystal.
An increase in entropy favours the formation of a solution because the
term −T∆S is negative. Most solids dissolve to a greater extent at higher
solution temperatures, because the term −T∆S becomes more negative.
Explaining the overall enthalpy change for a dissolving salt is more
complicated because it involves a number of energy changes. Cations
must be separated from anions, which requires energy. Water molecules
then surround each ion in solution, which releases energy. If the overall
enthalpy change is negative, the formation of a solution is favoured. If the
enthalpy increases, the formation of a solution is not favoured because ∆G
is less negative.
Heterogeneous Equilibrium: A Solubility System
Consider barium sulfate, a sparingly soluble salt. X-ray technicians give
patients a barium sulfate suspension to drink before taking an X-ray of the
large intestine. A suspension of barium sulfate is opaque to X-rays, which
helps to deﬁne this part of the body. (See Figure 9.4.)
When you add barium sulfate crystals to water, barium ions and
sulfate ions leave the surface of the solid and enter the solution. Initially,
the concentration of these ions is very low. Thus, the forward change,
dissolving, occurs at a greater rate than the reverse change:
430 MHR • Unit 4  Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
BaSO4(s)
(cid:2)(cid:3) Ba2+
(aq) + SO4
2−
(aq)
As more ions enter the solution, the rate of the reverse change,
recrystallisation, increases. Eventually, the rate of recrystallisation becomes
equal to the rate of dissolving. As you know, when the forward rate and
the backward rate of a process are equal, the system is at equilibrium.
Because the reactants and the products are in different phases, the reaction
is said to have reached heterogeneous equilibrium. For solubility systems
of sparingly soluble ionic compounds, equilibrium exists between the solid
ionic compound and its dissociated ions in solution.
The Solubility Product Constant
When excess solid is present in a saturated solution, you can write the
equilibrium constant expression for the dissolution of the solid in the
same way that you wrote the equilibrium constant expression for a
homogeneous equilibrium in Chapter 7. For example, the equilibrium
constant expression for barium sulfate is written as follows:
K = [Ba2+
(aq)][SO4
[BaSO4(s)]
The concentration of a solid, however, is itself a constant at a constant
(aq)]
2−
temperature. Therefore, you can combine the term for the concentration
of the solid with the equilibrium constant to arrive at a new constant:
K[BaSO4(s)] = [Ba2+
Ksp = [Ba2+
The new constant is called the solubility product constant, Ksp.
The following Sample Problem shows how to write expressions for Ksp.
(aq)][SO4
(aq)][SO4
(aq)]
(aq)]
2−
2−
Sample Problem
Writing Solubility Product Expressions
Problem
Write the solubility product expression for each compound.
(a) barium carbonate
(b) calcium iodate
(c) copper(II) phosphate
Solution
2−
(cid:2)(cid:3) Ba2+
Ksp = [Ba2+
First write a balanced equation for the equilibrium between excess
solid and dissolved ions in a saturated aqueous solution. Then use the
balanced equation to write the expression for Ksp.
(aq) + CO3
(a) BaCO3(s)
2−
]
][CO3
−
(aq) + 2IO3
−
]2
][IO3
(cid:2)(cid:3) 3Cu2+
(aq) + 2PO4
3−
]2
(cid:2)(cid:3) Ca2+
Ksp = [Ca2+
(c) Cu3(PO4)2(s)
(b) Ca(IO3)2(s)
Ksp = [Cu2+
]3[PO4
(aq)
(aq)
(aq)
3−
PROBLEM TIP
Ion concentration terms in
solubility product expressions
are usually written without
their phases, as you see here.
Check Your Solution
The Ksp expressions are based on balanced equations for saturated
solutions of slightly soluble ionic compounds. The exponents in the Ksp
expressions match the corresponding coefﬁcients in the chemical equa-
tion. The coefﬁcient 1 is not written, following chemical convention.
Chapter 9  Aqueous Solutions and Solubility Equilibria • MHR 431
C H E M
FA C T
One compound that becomes
less soluble at higher tempera-
tures is calcium carbonate,
CaCO3. If you have an electric
kettle, you have probably
noticed a build-up of scale on
the heating element. The scale
is mostly calcium carbonate,
which precipitates out of the
water as it heats up.
Practice Problems
9. Write the balanced chemical equation that represents the dissociation
of each compound in water. Then write the corresponding solubility
product expression.
(a) copper(I) chloride
(c) silver sulfate
(b) barium ﬂuoride
(d) calcium phosphate
10. Write a balanced dissolution equation and solubility product
expression for silver carbonate, Ag2CO3 .
11. Write a balanced dissolution equation and solubility product
expression for magnesium ammonium phosphate, MgNH4PO4.
12. Iron(III) nitrate has a very low solubility.
(a) Write the solubility product expression for iron(III) nitrate.
(b) Do you expect the value of Ksp of iron(III) nitrate to be larger or
smaller than the Ksp for aluminum hydroxide, which has a slightly
higher solubility?
You know intuitively that solubility depends on temperature. For
most ionic compounds, more solute can dissolve in a solvent at higher
temperatures. Chemists determine the solubility of an ionic compound by
experiment, and then use the solubility data to determine Ksp. Like the
equilibrium constant, Ksp is temperature-dependent. Therefore, different
experiments must be carried out to determine Ksp at different temperatures.
Chemical reference books list the solubility of a wide variety of
compounds. In the next Sample Problem, you will learn how to use
measured solubilities to determine Ksp.
Sample Problem
Determing Ksp from Measured Solubilities
Problem
A chemist ﬁnds that the solubility of silver carbonate, Ag2CO3 , is
1.3 × 10−4 mol/L at 25˚C. Calculate Ksp for silver carbonate.
What Is Required?
You need to ﬁnd the value of Ksp for Ag2CO3 at 25˚C.
What Is Given?
You know the solubility of Ag2CO3 at 25˚C.
Plan Your Strategy
Step 1 Write an equation for the dissolution of Ag2CO3 .
Step 2 Use the equation to write the solubility product expression.
Step 3 Find the concentration (in mol/L) of each ion.
Step 4 Substitute the concentrations into the solubility product
expression, and calculate Ksp.
432 MHR • Unit 4  Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
Act on Your Strategy
(aq)
2−
(aq) + CO3
(cid:2)(cid:3) 2Ag+
2−]
Step 1 Ag2CO3(s)
Step 2 Ksp = [Ag+]2[CO3
+
] = 2 × [Ag2CO3]
[Ag
Step 3
= 2 × 1.3 × 10
= 2.6 × 10
] = [Ag2CO3] = 3.2 × 10
2−
]
[CO3
+
Step 4 Ksp = [Ag
]2[CO3
−4 mol/L
−4 mol/L
2−
−2 mol/L
= (2.6 × 10
= 8.8 × 10
−4)2(1.3 × 10
−12
−4)
Based on the given solubility data, Ksp for silver carbonate is
8.8 × 10−12 at 25˚C.
Check Your Solution
The value of Ksp is less than the concentration of the salt, as expected.
It has the correct number of signiﬁcant digits.
Check that you wrote the balanced chemical equation and the
corresponding Ksp equation correctly. Pay attention to molar relationships
and to the exponent of each term in the Ksp equation.
Practice Problems
13. The maximum solubility of silver cyanide, AgCN, is 1.5 × 10−8 mol/L
at 25˚C. Calculate Ksp for silver cyanide.
14. A saturated solution of copper(II) phosphate, Cu3(PO4)2 , has a
concentration of 6.1 × 10−7 g Cu3(PO4)2 per 1.00 × 102 mL of solution
at 25˚C. What is Ksp for Cu3(PO4)2 at 25˚C?
15. A saturated solution of CaF2 contains 1.2 × 1020 formula units of
calcium ﬂuoride per litre of solution. Calculate Ksp for CaF2.
16. The concentration of mercury(I) iodide, Hg2I2, in a saturated solution
at 25˚C is 1.5 × 10−4 ppm.
(a) Calculate Ksp for Hg2I2. The solubility equilibrium is written
as follows:
Hg2I2
(cid:2)(cid:3) Hg2
2+ + 2I−
(b) State any assumptions that you made when you converted ppm
to mol/L.
Determining a Solubility Product Constant
In Investigation 9-A, you will collect solubility data and use these data to
determine a Ksp for calcium hydroxide, Ca(OH)2. When you calculate Ksp,
you assume that the dissolved ionic compound exists as independent
hydrated ions that do not affect one another. This assumption simpliﬁes
the investigation, but it is not entirely accurate. Ions do interfere with
one another. As a result, the value of Ksp that you calculate will be just
an approximation. Ksp values that are calculated from data obtained
from experiments such as Investgation 9-A are generally higher than the
actual values.
Chapter 9  Aqueous Solutions and Solubility Equilibria • MHR 433
MICROSCALE
Predicting
S K I L L   F O C U S
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
Determining Ksp for
Calcium Hydroxide
The value of Ksp for a basic compound, such as
Ca(OH)2, can be determined by performing an
acid-base titration.
Question
What is the value of Ksp for Ca(OH)2?
Predictions
Look up the solubility of Ca(OH)2 in a solubility
table. Do you expect a large or a small value of
Ksp for Ca(OH)2?
Materials
50 mL beaker
white sheet of paper
2 identical microscale pipettes
wash bottle that contains distilled water
phenolphthalein in dropping bottle
glass stirring rod
Petri dish or watch glass
10 mL of recently ﬁltered saturated solution of
Ca(OH)2
10 mL of 0.050 mol/L HCl
Safety Precautions
If you get acid or base on your skin, ﬂush with
plenty of cold water.
Procedure
1. Read the Procedure, and prepare an appropri-
ate data table. Remember to give your table
a title.
2. Add exactly 10 drops of 0.050 mol/L HCl to a
50 mL beaker. To ensure uniform drop size,
use the same type of pipette to dispense the
acid and the base. Also, hold the pipette
vertically when dispensing the solution.
Always record the number of drops added.
434 MHR • Unit 4  Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
3. Place the beaker on the white sheet of paper.
4. To transfer a small amount of indicator to the
acid solution, place one drop of phenolph-
thalein solution on a watch glass. Touch the
drop with the glass rod. Transfer this small
amount of indicator to the HCl in the beaker.
5. Add saturated Ca(OH)2 solution, drop by
drop, to the HCl solution until the solution
turns a permanent pale pink. Swirl the ﬂask,
particularly as the pink begins to appear.
Record the number of drops of Ca(OH)2 that
you added. Conduct as many trials as you can.
6. Dispose of all solutions as directed by your
teacher. Do not dispose of any chemicals
down the drain.
Analysis
1. Determine the average number of drops of
Ca(OH)2 solution that you needed to neutralize
10 drops of 0.050 mol/L HCl.
2. Write the balanced chemical equation for the
dissociation of calcium hydroxide in water.
3. Write the balanced chemical equation that
represents the neutralization of aqueous
Ca(OH)2 with HCl(aq).
4. Use the balanced chemical equation for
the neutralization of HCl with Ca(OH)2 to
determine [OH−] in mol/L. Hint: Why do you
not need to know the volume of one drop?
5. From [OH−], determine [Ca2+] in mol/L.
Conclusion
6. Calculate Ksp for Ca(OH)2. If possible, look up
the accepted value of Ksp for Ca(OH)2.
Calculate your percent error.
Using the Solubility Product Constant
You can use the value of Ksp for a compound to determine the concentra-
tion of its ions in a saturated solution. The following Sample Problem
shows you how to do this. You will use an approach that is similar to the
approach you used in section 7.2 to ﬁnd equilibrium amounts using Kc for
homogeneous equilibria.
Table 9.2 shows the values of Ksp for selected ionic compounds at
25˚C. The compounds are organized from the largest Ksp to the smallest.
You will ﬁnd a more comprehensive table of Ksp values in Appendix E.
Table 9.2 Values of Ksp for Some Ionic Compounds at 25˚C
Suppose that two different
salts, AX and BY2, have
the same Ksp. Are the salts
equally soluble at the same
temperature? Explain your
answer.
Compound
magnesium sulfate, MgSO4
lead(II) chloride, PbCI2
barium fluoride, BaF2
cadmium carbonate, CdCO3
copper(II) hydroxide, Cu(OH)2
silver sulfide, Ag2S
Ksp
5.9 × 10−3
1.7 × 10−5
1.5 × 10−6
1.8 × 10−14
2.2 × 10−20
8 × 10−48
Sample Problem
Calculating Molar Solubility From Ksp
Problem
Lead(II) iodide, PbI2, ﬁlms are being investigated for their usefulness in
X-ray imaging. PbI2 is also used for decorative work, such as mosaics,
because of its attractive golden yellow colour. At 25˚C, Ksp for PbI2 is
9.8 × 10−9. What is the molar solubility of PbI2 in water at 25˚C?
What Is Required?
You need to determine the solubility (in mol/L) of PbI2 at 25˚C.
What Is Given?
At 25˚C, Ksp for PbI2 is 9.8 × 10−9.
Plan Your Strategy
Step 1 Write the dissociation equilibrium equation.
Step 2 Use the equilibrium equation to write an expression for Ksp.
Step 3 Set up an ICE table. Let x represent molar solubility. Use the
stoichiometry of the equilibrium equation to write expressions for
the equilibrium concentrations of the ions.
Step 4 Substitute your expressions into the expression for Ksp, and solve
for x.
Act on Your Strategy
(cid:2)(cid:3) Pb2+
Step 1 PbI2(s)
Step 2 Ksp = [Pb2+][I−]2
(aq) + 2I−
(aq)
Continued ...
Chapter 9  Aqueous Solutions and Solubility Equilibria • MHR 435
Continued ...
Step 3
Concentration (mol/L)
PbI2(s)
(cid:2)(cid:3)
Pb2+
(aq)
+
2I−
(aq)
Initial
Change
Equilibrium
—
—
—
0
+x
x
0
+2x
2x
Step 4
Ksp = [Pb2+
−
]2 = 9.8 × 10
][I
−9
= x × (2x)2
= x × 4x2
= 4x3
∴4x3 = 9.8 × 10
(cid:2)
x = 3
−9
9.8 × 10−9
4
= 1.3 × 10
−3 mol/L
The molar solubility of PbI2 in water is 1.3 × 10−3 mol/L.
Check Your Solution
Recall that x = [Pb2+]eq and 2x = [I−]eq. Substitute these values into the
Ksp equation. You should get the given Ksp.
Practice Problems
17. Ksp for silver chloride, AgCl, is 1.8 × 10−10 at 25˚C.
(a) Calculate the molar solubility of AgCl in a saturated solution
at 25˚C.
(b) How many formula units of AgCl are dissolved in 1.0 L of
saturated silver chloride solution?
(c) What is the percent (m/v) of AgCl in a saturated solution at 25˚C?
18. Iron(III) hydroxide, Fe(OH)3, is an extremely insoluble compound.
Ksp for Fe(OH)3 is 2.8 × 10−39 at 25˚C. Calculate the molar solubility
of Fe(OH)3 at 25˚C.
19. Ksp for zinc iodate, Zn(IO3)2, is 3.9 × 10−6 at 25˚C. Calculate the
solubility (in mol/L and in g/L) of Zn(IO3)2 in a saturated solution.
20. What is the maximum number of formula units of zinc sulﬁde,
ZnS, that can dissolve in 1.0 L of solution at 25˚C? Ksp for ZnS
is 2.0 × 10−22.
The Common Ion Effect
So far, you have considered solubility equilibria for pure substances
dissolved in water. What happens to the solubility of an ionic compound
when it is added to a solution that already contains one of its ions?
Consider a saturated solution of lead(II) chromate. See Figure 9.5(A)
on the next page. The following equation represents this equilibrium.
(cid:2)(cid:3) Pb2+
(aq) + CrO4
PbCrO4(s)
(aq)
2−
436 MHR • Unit 4  Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
A solution of a salt that contains chromate ions, such as sodium
chromate, Na2CrO4(aq), is added to the mixture. More yellow lead(II)
chromate precipitates out of solution, as shown in Figure 9.5(B).
As you learned in Chapter 8, this phenomenon is called the common
ion effect. The observed result is predicted by Le Châtelier’s principle.
Adding a common ion to a solution increases the concentration of that ion
in solution. As a result, equilibrium shifts away from the ion. In this
example, adding chromate ions causes the equilibrium to shift to the left,
and lead(II) chromate precipitates.
A
B
PbCrO4(s)
Pb2+
(aq) + CrO4
2−
(aq)
PbCrO4(s)
Pb2+
(aq) + CrO4
2−
(aq)(added)
Adding chromate ions
Figure 9.5
to an equilibrium system of lead(II)
chromate (A) causes the equilibrium
position to shift to the left. As a
result, more solid lead(II) chromate
precipitates (B).
Analyzing the expression for the solubility product constant gives the
same result.
Ksp = [Pb2+
][CrO4
2−
]
−13 at 25˚C
= 2.3 × 10
Since Ksp is a constant at a given temperature, an increase in the
concentration of one ion must be accompanied by a decrease in the
concentration of the other ion, achieved by the formation of a precipitate.
This explains why solid lead(II) chromate precipitates out of solution.
The next Sample Problem shows how to predict the solubility of an
ionic compound when a common ion is present in solution.
Sample Problem
The Effect of a Common Ion on Solubility
Problem
The solubility of pure PbCrO4(s) in water is 4.8 × 10−7 mol/L.
(a) Qualitatively predict how the solubility will change if PbCrO4(s) is
added to a 0.10 mol/L solution of sodium chromate, Na2CrO4.
(b) Ksp for PbCrO4(s) is 2.3 × 10−13. Determine the solubility of PbCrO4(s)
in a 0.10 mol/L solution of Na2CrO4.
What Is Required?
You need to predict, and then determine, the solubility of PbCrO4
(in mol/L) in a solution of Na2CrO4.
What Is Given?
You know Ksp for PbCrO4 and the concentration of the salt with the
common ion.
Continued ...
Chapter 9  Aqueous Solutions and Solubility Equilibria • MHR 437
Continued ...
Plan Your Strategy
(a) Use Le Châtelier’s principle to make a prediction.
(b)
Step 1 Write the equilibrium equation.
Step 2 Use the equilibrium equation to write an expression for Ksp .
Step 3 Set up an ICE table. Let x represent the concentration of chromate
(the common ion) that is contributed by PbCrO4. Initial conditions
are based on the solution of Na2CrO4.
Step 4 Solve for x, and check your prediction.
Act on Your Strategy
(a) Based on Le Châtelier’s principle, the solubility of PbCrO4 in a
solution that contains a common ion (chromate) will be less than
the solubility of PbCrO4 in water.
(b)
Step 1 PbCrO4(s)
Step 2 Ksp = [Pb2+
Step 3
(cid:2)(cid:3) Pb2+
(aq) + CrO4
2−
] = 2.3 × 10
][CrO4
2−
(aq)
−13
Concentration (mol/L)
PbCrO4(s)
(cid:2)(cid:3)
Pb2+
(aq)
+
2−
CrO4
(aq)
Initial
Change
Equilibrium
—
—
—
0
+x
x
0.10
+x
0.10 + x
Step 4 Since Ksp is very small, you can assume that x is much smaller
than 0.10. To check the validity of this assumption, determine
whether or not 0.10 is more than 500 times greater than Ksp:
0.10
Ksp
=
0.10
2.3 × 10−13
= 4.3 × 1011 > 500
Therefore, in the (0.10 + x) term, x can be ignored. In other words,
(0.10 + x) is approximately equal to 0.10. Therefore, you can
simplify the equation as follows:
] = 2.3 × 10
−13
Ksp = [Pb2+
2−
][CrO4
= (x)(0.10 + x)
≈ (x)(0.10)
∴(x)(0.10) ≈ 2.3 × 10
x ≈ 2.3 × 10
−13
−12 mol/L
The molar solubility of PbCrO4 in a solution of 0.10 mol/L
Na2CrO4 is 2.3 × 10−12 mol/L. Your prediction was correct. The
solubility of PbCrO4 decreases in a solution of common ions.
Check Your Solution
The approximation in step 4 is reasonable. The solubility of x is much
smaller than 0.10. To prove that the approximation works, substitute the
calculated value of x into the initial expression for Ksp.
438 MHR • Unit 4  Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
Practice Problems
Note: Refer to Appendix E, as necessary.
21. Determine the molar solubility of AgCl
(a) in pure water
(b) in 0.15 mol/L NaCl
22. Determine the molar solubility of lead(II) iodide, PbI2, in
0.050 mol/L NaI.
23. Calculate the molar solubility of calcium sulfate, CaSO4,
(a) in pure water
(b) in 0.25 mol/L Na2SO4
24. Ksp for lead(II) chloride, PbCl2, is 1.6 × 10−5. Calculate the molar
solubility of PbCl2
(a) in pure water
(b) in 0.10 mol/L CaCl2
Electronic Learning Partner
To learn more about solubility
equilibria, go to the Chemistry
12 Electronic Learning Partner.
Canadians
in Chemistry
Dr. Joseph MacInnis has a medical degree, but
he does not work in a clinic, a hospital, or a typical
doctor’s ofﬁce. His ofﬁce is the ocean, and he is an
expert in deep-sea diving. He combines his medical
expertise with his knowledge of the properties
of gases to study the effects of deep-sea diving
on humans.
MacInnis was born in Barrie, Ontario, in 1937. In
1963, after graduating from the University of
Toronto’s medical school, he received a fellowship
to study diving medicine at the University of
Pennsylvania. Diving medicine is a specialized ﬁeld,
dealing with the challenges that humans face when
exposed to undersea environments.
For every 10 m below sea level that a diver
descends under water, ambient pressure increases
by one unit of atmospheric pressure. This increase in
pressure, and its effect on heterogeneous equilibria
in the body, is one of the most profound challenges
that a diver encounters. As a diver descends, and
is subjected to increased pressure, gases such as
nitrogen dissolve in the blood and tissues. In the
equilibrium between dissolved nitrogen and gaseous
nitrogen, increased pressure favours dissolved
nitrogen, according to Le Châtelier’s principle. As the
diver ascends to the ocean surface and pressure
decreases, equilibrium favours the nitrogen coming
out of solution.
If a diver ascends too quickly, the lungs cannot
remove the nitrogen fast enough. Gas bubbles form
in the blood, causing decompression sickness.
Decompression sickness is also known as “the
bends,” because one of its symptoms is an inability
to bend the joints.
MacInnis was a consultant to the team that dis-
covered the Titanic, and he was the ﬁrst Canadian to
explore the wreck. In 1991, MacInnis and his team
used small submarines with pressurized hulls to ﬁlm
the wreck in IMAX format. The wreck is about 4000 m
below sea level, but the pressure inside the sub-
marines was kept similar to the pressure above the
surface of the sea.
MacInnis is passionate about the environment,
both below and above the sea. Since 1996,
MacInnis has been Chair of the Friends of the
Environment Foundation, a non-proﬁt organization
that funds projects that help to protect Canada’s
environment. In recognition of his accomplishments,
MacInnis was made a member of the Order of
Canada in 1976.
Chapter 9  Aqueous Solutions and Solubility Equilibria • MHR 439
C O U R S E
C H A L L E N G E
How do buffers in human
blood maintain the blood’s pH?
In the Chemistry Course
Challenge, you will learn about
the buffer system in blood.
How would you design an
investigation to demonstrate
how the system resists
changes in pH?
Buffers and the Common Ion Effect
In Chapter 8, you learned that buffers resist changes in pH when acids or
bases are added. Buffers have many uses in a chemistry lab. For example,
commercial buffers with certiﬁed pH values are available. Chemists in
analytical laboratories use these acidic, basic, and neutral buffers to
ensure the accuracy of their pH meters across the pH range.
Recall, from Chapter 8, that a buffer consists of a weak acid/conjugate
base mixture or a weak base/conjugate acid mixture. One buffer that
you examined previously contains acetic acid and sodium acetate. The
common-ion effect applies to this buffer. The equilibrium of the acetic
acid is affected by the common acetate ion from sodium acetate.
Since buffers are an example of the common-ion effect, the concentra-
tion of ions (hence the pH) of a buffer solution can be calculated using a
method that is similar to the method you used to determine solubility in a
common ion effect problem. You will use Ka, however, instead of Ksp.
Also, buffers are in homogeneous equilibria, unlike saturated solubility
systems, which are in heterogeneous equilibria. Therefore, you need to
consider the initial concentration of the reactants. (The reactants are not
solids, so their concentration is not constant.)
Sample Problem
pH of a Buffer and the Common-Ion Effect
Problem
A buffer solution was made by mixing equal volumes of 0.20 mol/L
solutions of acetic acid and sodium acetate at 25˚C. What is the pH
of the buffer solution?
What Is Required?
You need to determine the pH of the buffer solution.
What Is Given?
0.20 mol/L CH3COOH and 0.20 mol/L CH3COONa are mixed in equal
volumes. Ka for CH3COOH is 1.8 × 10−5.
Plan Your Strategy
Step 1 Determine the initial concentrations of CH3COOH and CH3COO−
in the buffer solution.
Step 2 Write the reaction for the dissociation of CH3COOH. Set up an
ICE table, including the initial concentration of CH3COO− in
the buffer.
Step 3 Write the equation for Ka, and substitute equilibrium terms into
the equation.
Step 4 Solve the equation for x. Assume that x is small compared with
the initial concentrations. Check the validity of this assumption
when you ﬁnd the value of x.
Step 5 pH = − log[H3O+]
440 MHR • Unit 4  Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
Act on Your Strategy
Step 1 When the solutions are mixed, the total volume is twice the
volume of each component volume. Therefore, the concentration
of each component is halved.
[CH3COOH] = [CH3COO−] = 0.10 mol/L
Step 2
Concentration (mol/L)
CH3COOH(aq)
+
H2O((cid:4))
(cid:2)(cid:3)
CH3COO−
(aq)
+
H3O+
(aq)
Initial
Change
Equilibrium
0.10
−x
0.10−x
—
—
—
0.10
+x
0.10 + x
~0
+x
x
Step 3 Ka = [CH3COO−][H3O+]
CH3COOH]
= (0.10 + x)(x)
(0.10 − x)
Step 4 Assume that (0.10 + x) ≈ 0.10 and (0.10 − x) ≈ 0.10.
= 1.8 × 10−5
Ka ≈ (0.10)(x)
(0.10)
∴x = 1.8 × 10
Step 5 pH = − log(1.8 × 10
= 4.74
−5 mol/L
−5)
PROBLEM TIP
You can check whether it rea-
sonable to ignore x by dividing
0.10 by Ka. The value is greater
than 500, so the approximation
is reasonable.
The pH of the buffer solution is 4.74.
Check Your Solution
The value of x (1.8 × 10−5) is negligible compared with the initial
concentration of each component (0.10). A buffer that is made using a
weak acid and its conjugate base should have a pH that is less than 7.
Practice Problems
25. A buffer solution is made by mixing 250 mL of 0.200 mol/L aqueous
ammonia and 400 mL of 0.150 mol/L ammonium chloride. Calculate
the pH of the buffer solution.
26. A buffer solution is made by mixing 200 mL of 0.200 mol/L aqueous
ammonia and 450 mL of 0.150 mol/L ammonium chloride. Calculate
the pH of the buffer solution.
27. A buffer solution contains 0.200 mol/L nitrous acid, HNO2(aq), and
0.140 mol/L potassium nitrite, KNO2(aq). What is the pH of the buffer
solution?
28. A buffer solution is prepared by dissolving 1.80 g of benzoic acid,
C6H5COOH, and 1.95 g of sodium benzoate, NaC6H5COO, in 800 mL
of water. Calculate the pH of the buffer solution.
Chapter 9  Aqueous Solutions and Solubility Equilibria • MHR 441
Section Summary
In this section, you determined the solubility product constant, Ksp, based
on solubility data. You obtained your own solubility data and used these
data to calculate a value for Ksp. You determined the molar solubility of
ionic solutions in pure water and in solutions of common ions, based on
their Ksp values. In section 9.3, you will further explore the implications
of Le Châtelier’s principle. You will use a reaction quotient, Qsp, to
predict whether a precipitate forms. As well, you will learn how selective
precipitation can be used to identify ions in solution.
Section Review
1
K/U
The values of Ksp for binary ionic compounds that contain either
sodium, potassium, or ammonium cations are not listed in a Ksp table.
State why.
2
K/U
A saturated solution of a slightly soluble ionic compound does not
contain any of the solute in solid form. Is this system at equilibrium?
Explain your answer brieﬂy.
3
4
5
C
Does a larger value of Ksp necessarily mean a greater solubility?
To illustrate your answer, calculate and compare the molar solubility
of silver chloride, AgCl (Ksp = 1.8 × 10−10), with silver chromate,
Ag2CrO4 (Ksp = 2.6 × 10−12).
C
Explain why there is no simple relationship between Ksp for a
given compound and the solubility of the compound in g/L.
I
The maximum solubility of barium ﬂuoride, BaF2, at 25˚C,
is 1.3 g/L.
(a) Calculate Ksp for BaF2 at 25˚C.
(b) Calculate the solubility of BaF2 in formula units of BaF2/L.
6
I
A chemist adds 20.0 g of sodium hydroxide, NaOH, to a 1.0 L
solution of 1.0 mol/L acetic acid.
(a) Explain why the resulting solution resists pH changes when an acid
or a base is added.
(b) Calculate the pH of the solution. Assume that there is no change in
the volume of the solution when NaOH is added.
7
A buffer solution is prepared by adding 2.1 g of NaF to
I
5.00 × 102 mL of 0.10 mol/L HF(aq). Calculate the pH of the buffer solu-
tion. Assume that no change in volume results from the addition of
NaF to the HF solution.
8
I
A solution of BaCl2 is added to a solution of Na2SO4.
(a) What do you expect to observe? Include a balanced chemical
equation in your answer.
(b) Calculate the solubility (in mol/L and in g/L) of BaSO4 in pure water.
(c) Calculate the solubility (in mol/L and in g/L) of BaSO4 in
0.085 mol/L Na2SO4.
9
C
Explain why the solubility of nickel(II) carbonate, NiCO3, is unaf-
fected by the addition of NaCl to a saturated solution of NiCO3.
442 MHR • Unit 4  Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
Predicting the Formation
of a Precipitate
In section 9.2, you worked with concentrations of ions in solutions at
equilibrium. You used Ksp to determine the solubility of ionic substances
in pure water and in solutions of common ions. The systems you worked
with were saturated solutions that contained excess, undissolved solute.
How do you predict whether a given concentration of ions will result
in the precipitation of an ionic compound? How can you tell if a solution
is saturated? You substitute the concentrations of the ions into an expres-
sion that is identical to the solubility product expression. Because these
concentrations may not be the same as the concentrations that the
equilibrium system would have, however, the expression has a different
name: the ion product.
Comparing the Ion Product With the Solubility Product
The ion product, Qsp, is an expression that is identical to the solubility
product constant, but its value is calculated using concentrations that
are not necessarily those at equilibrium. (The relationship between the
expression for solubility product, Ksp, and the expression for the ion
product, Qsp, is analogous to the relationship between the equilibrium
constant, Kc, and the reaction quotient, Qc.)
For example, suppose that you slowly add an ionic compound,
such as magnesium sulfate, MgSO4, to water in a beaker. The following
equation represents the dissociation.
9.3
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
(cid:2) predict the formation of
precipitates by using the
solubility product constant
(cid:2) solve equilibrium problems
involving concentrations
of reactants and products
and Ksp
(cid:2) communicate your under-
standing of the following
terms: ion product (Qsp),
fractional precipitation,
qualitative analysis,
quantitative analysis
2−
(cid:2)(cid:3) Mg2+
MgSO4(s)
(aq) Ksp = 5.9 × 10−3
(aq) + SO4
Initially, all the magnesium sulfate dissolves. The solution is not at
equilibrium as long as more solid can dissolve. As you add more solid,
however, the solution reaches equilibrium. The solution is saturated,
and no more salt will dissolve. If you continue to add magnesium sulfate
to the water, you will see an increasing amount of solid in the beaker.
The ion product expression for magnesium sulfate is written
as follows:
2−]
Qsp = [Mg2+][SO4
You calculate Qsp by substituting the concentration of each ion into
the expression. If Qsp is larger than Ksp, the product of the concentrations of
the ions is greater than it would be at equilibrium. For the system to attain
equilibrium, some of the ions must leave the solution by precipitation.
Conversely, if Qsp is less than Ksp, the product of the concentration of the
ions is smaller than it is at equilibrium. Therefore, the solution is not yet
saturated and more ions can be added to the solution without any
precipitation. The relationship between Qsp and Ksp for the dissociation of
a slightly soluble ionic compound is summarized on the next page. Use the
following general equation as a reference.
Solid ionic compound (cid:2)(cid:3) Dissociated ions in solution
Chapter 9  Aqueous Solutions and Solubility Equilibria • MHR 443
Qsp < Ksp • The system attains equilibrium by moving to the right,
favouring dissociation.
• More solid can dissolve.
Qsp = Ksp • The system is at equilibrium.
• No more solid can dissolve.
• No precipitate forms.
Qsp > Ksp • The system attains equilibrium by moving to the left,
favouring precipitation.
• A precipitate forms until equilibrium is reached.
Using the Ion Product Expression
You can use the relationship between the ion product expression and the
solubility product expression to predict whether a precipitate will form
in a given system. One common system involves mixing solutions of two
soluble ionic compounds, which react to form an ionic compound with a
very low solubility. If Qsp > Ksp , based on the initial concentrations of the
ions in solution, the sparingly soluble compound will form a precipitate.
How do you know which ionic compounds are soluble and which are
not? In your previous chemistry course, you learned a set of solubility
guidelines. Table 9.3 summarizes these guidelines. Remember: the higher
guideline takes precedence. (For instance, guideline 3 says that carbonates
have very low solubility. Sodium carbonate is soluble, however, because
guideline 1 says that ionic compounds containing sodium are soluble.)
Chemists do not usually work with solubility products for soluble
compounds. Thus, you will not ﬁnd soluble ionic compounds listed in Ksp
tables. If you see a compound in a Ksp table, you know that it has a low
solubility relative to compounds such as sodium chloride.
Table 9.3  General Solubility Guidelines
Guideline
1
2
3
4
5
Cations
Li+, Na+, K+
Rb+, Cs+, Nh4
Ag+, Pb2+, Hg+
+
Anions
−, CH3COO−,
NO3
ClO3
−
Result
soluble
Exceptions
Ca(ClO3)2 is
insoluble.
2−, PO4
CO3
S2−, OH−
3−,O2−,
very low
solubility
BaO and Ba(OH)2
are soluble. Group 2
(IIA) sulfides tend
to decompose.
Cl−, Br−, I−
Ba2+, Ca2+, Sr2+
Mg2+, Cu2+,Zn2+,
Fe2+, Fe3+, Al3+
2−
SO4
soluble
very low
solubility
soluble
Figure 9.7
A chemist can test
for the presence of chloride ions in
a solution by adding silver nitrate
solution. If a white precipitate
of silver chloride forms, the test
is positive for chloride.
For example, silver nitrate and sodium chloride are both soluble ionic
compounds. When they are mixed in solution, however, they react to form
silver chloride, as shown in Figure 9.7. The equation for the reaction is:
AgNO3(aq) + NaCl(aq)
(cid:2)(cid:3) AgCl(s) + NaNO3(aq)
Silver chloride has a very low solubility. Therefore, a precipitate will form
even if the initial concentration of chloride and silver ions is very small.
The following Sample Problems show you how to decide whether a
precipitate will form under a given set of conditions.
444 MHR • Unit 4  Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
Sample Problem
Predicting Precipitation I
Problem
A common test for chloride ions in a solution involves adding AgNO3(ag)
to the solution being tested. If chloride ions are present in sufﬁcient
quantity, the chemist will observe a white cloudiness that indicates the
formation of a precipitate. Ksp for silver chloride is 1.8 × 10−10.
A drop (0.050 mL) of 6.0 mol/L silver nitrate is added to 1.0 L of
0.10 mol/L sodium chloride. Does a precipitate of silver chloride form?
What Is Required?
Will silver chloride precipitate under the given conditions?
What Is Given?
You know the concentration and volume of the silver nitrate and sodium
chloride solutions. For AgNO3, c = 6.0 mol/L and V = 0.050 mL.
For NaCl, c = 0.10 mol/L and V = 1.0 L. You also know Ksp for silver
chloride.
Plan Your Strategy
Step 1 Determine the concentrations of silver ions and chloride ions in
the reaction mixture.
Step 2 Substitute the ion concentrations into the ion product expression
for silver chloride to determine Qsp.
Step 3 Compare Qsp with Ksp, and predict whether or not a precipitate
will form.
Act on Your Strategy
Step 1 Because the volume of the AgNO3 solution is much smaller than
the volume of the NaCl solution, you can ignore it. In other words,
assume that the ﬁnal volume of the reaction mixture is 1.0 L.
(aq)
(cid:2)(cid:3) Na+
(aq) + Cl−
NaCl(aq)
∴[Cl−] = [NaCl] = 0.10 mol/L
(cid:2)(cid:3) Ag+
−
(aq) + NO3
AgNO3(s)
] = [AgNO3] = c × Vinitial
+
[Ag
(aq)
Vﬁnal
= (6.0 mol/L)(0.050 mL × 1.0 × 10−3 L/mL
1.0 L
= 3.0 × 10
−4 mol/L
−
+
Step 2 Qsp = [Ag
]
][Cl
−4)(0.10)
= (3.0 × 10
−5
= 3.0 × 10
Step 3 Since Qsp > Ksp, AgCl will precipitate until Qsp = 1.8 × 10−10 .
Check Your Solution
The units are correct in the calculation of [Ag+]. It seems reasonable that
a precipitate formed, since Ksp for silver chloride is very small compared
with the concentration of chloride ions and silver ions.
Chapter 9  Aqueous Solutions and Solubility Equilibria • MHR 445
PROBLEM TIP
For Practice Problems 31 and
32, you will need to look up
values of Ksp in Appendix E.
Practice Problems
29. A solution contains 0.15 mol/L of NaCl and 0.0034 mol/L Pb(NO3)2.
Does a precipitate form? Include a balanced chemical equation for the
formation of the possible precipitate. Ksp for PbCl2 is 1.7 × 10−5.
30. One drop (0.050 mL) of 1.5 mol/L potassium chromate, K2CrO4, is
added to 250 mL of 0.10 mol/L AgNO3. Does a precipitate form?
Include a balanced chemical equation for the formation of the
possible precipitate. Ksp for Ag2CrO4 is 2.6 × 10−12.
31. A chemist adds 0.010 g of CaCl2 to 5.0 × 102 mL of 0.0015 mol/L
sodium carbonate, Na2CO3 . Does a precipitate of calcium carbonate
form? Include a balanced chemical equation for the formation of the
possible precipitate.
32. 0.10 mg of magnesium chloride, MgCl2, is added to 2.5 × 102 mL of
0.0010 mol/L NaOH. Does a precipitate of magnesium hydroxide
form? Include a balanced chemical equation for the formation of the
possible precipitate.
The next Sample Problem shows how to predict whether or not a precipi-
tate will form when two signiﬁcant volumes of reactant are mixed together.
You will need to use the solubility guidelines to decide whether or not an
insoluble compound forms.
Sample Problem
Predicting Precipitation II
Problem
A chemist mixes 100.0 mL of 0.25 mol/L Ca(NO3)2 with 200.0 mL of
0.070 mol/L NaF. Does a precipitate form?
What Is Given?
You know the initial concentration and volume of the calcium nitrate
and sodium ﬂuoride solutions. For Ca(NO3)2, c = 0.25 mol/L and
V = 100.0 mL. For NaF, c = 0.070 mol/L and V = 200.0 mL. As well,
you have the solubility guidelines in Table 9.3.
Plan Your Strategy
Step 1 Decide whether a compound with low solubility forms when
calcium nitrate and sodium ﬂuoride are mixed, using the solubility
guidelines.
Step 2 If an insoluble compound forms, write an equation that represents
the reaction. Look up Ksp for the compound in Appendix E.
Step 3 Determine the concentrations of the ions that make up
the compound.
Step 4 Substitute the concentrations of the ions into the ion product
expression for the compound to determine Qsp.
Step 5 Compare Qsp with Ksp, and predict whether or not a precipitate
forms.
446 MHR • Unit 4  Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
Act on Your Strategy
Step 1 According to the solubility guidelines, NaF and Ca(NO3)2 are both
soluble, because ionic compounds that contain sodium or nitrate
ions are soluble. When you mix the solutions, NaNO3, and CaF2
can also form. NaNO3 is soluble, but CaF2 is not, according to
guideline 4.
Step 2 NaF(aq) + Ca(NO3)2(aq)
(cid:2)(cid:3) NaNO3(aq) + CaF2(s)
From Appendix E, Ksp for CaF2 is 3.2 × 10−11.
Step 3 When calculating the volume of the reaction mixture, assume that
it is equal to the sum of the volumes of the solutions. This is a
reasonable assumption, because both solutions are dilute.
[Ca2+
] = [Ca(NO3)2] = c × Vinitial
Vﬁnal
= (0.25 mol/L)(100.0 mL)
(100.0 mL + 200.0 mL
−2 mol/L
= 8.3 × 10
−
[F
] = [NaF] = c × Vinitial
Vﬁnal
= (0.070 mol/L)(200.0 mL)
(100.0 mL + 200.0 mL)
−2 mol/L
Step 4 Qsp = [Ca2+
= 4.7 × 10
−
]2
][F
−2)(4.7 × 10
= (8.3 × 10
−4
= 1.8 × 10
−2)2
Step 5 Since Qsp > Ksp, CaF2 precipitates until Qsp = 3.2 × 10−11 .
Check Your Solution
The units in the calculation of the concentrations of the ions are correct.
It seems reasonable that a precipitate formed, since Ksp for calcium
ﬂuoride is very small compared with the concentrations of the chloride
ions and silver ions.
Practice Problems
33. 1.0 × 102 mL of 1.0 × 10−3 mol/L Pb(NO3)2 is added to 40 mL of
0.040 mol/L NaCl. Does a precipitate form? Include a balanced
chemical equation for the formation of the possible precipitate.
34. 2.3 × 102 mL of 0.0015 mol/L AgNO3 is added to 1.3 × 102 mL of
0.010 mol/L calcium acetate, Ca(CH3COO)2. Does a precipitate form?
Include a balanced chemical equation for the formation of the
possible precipitate. Ksp for AgCH3COO is 2.0 × 10−3.
35. 25 mL of 0.10 mol/L NaOH is added to 5.0 × 102 mL of
0.00010 mol/L cobalt(II) chloride, CoCl2. Does a precipitate form?
Include a balanced chemical equation for the formation of the
possible precipitate.
36. 250 mL of 0.0011 mol/L Al2(SO4)3 is added to 50 mL of 0.022 mol/L
BaCl2. Does a precipitate form? Include a balanced chemical equation
for the formation of the possible precipitate.
Chapter 9  Aqueous Solutions and Solubility Equilibria • MHR 447
Analytical Applications of Precipitation Reactions
In the previous Sample Problems, you saw that combining solutions of
soluble ionic compounds can cause the precipitation of a slightly soluble
ionic compound. Analytical chemists use precipitation reactions to
remove ions from solution or to identify ions in an unknown solution.
Fractional Precipitation
Suppose a chemist has a solution that contains several similar ions. The
chemist wants to remove some of these ions, while leaving other ions in
solution. One way to do this is by fractional precipitation: a process in
which ions are selectively precipitated from solution, leaving other ions.
For example, consider a solution that contains three halide ions: Cl−,
Br−, and I−. Since these halides all come from the same group on the
periodic table, they share many properties. When they are the anions in
slightly soluble ionic compounds, however, they have different solubilities.
(See Table 9.4.) Therefore, chemists can use fractional precipitation to
separate them from solution.
Table 9.4  Values of Ksp for Silver Halides
Silver halide
AgCl
AgBr
AgI
Ksp
1.8 × 10−10
3.3 × 10−13
1.5 × 10−16
Out of the three compounds, silver chloride is the most soluble and
silver iodide is the least soluble. (You can compare the solubilities of
the compounds based on their solubility products because they are all
the same type. Each formula unit contains two ions.)
To separate the halide ions, a chemist adds silver ions to the solution
until most of the iodide ions precipitate out as AgI. The chemist stops
adding silver ions before AgBr begins to precipitate. The chemist then
removes the solid AgI by ﬁltration or by using a centrifuge, as shown in
Figure 9.8. To remove the bromide ions, the chemist repeats the process
with the remaining solution. The chemist adds silver ions until most of
the bromide ions precipitate out as AgBr, but stops adding ions before
AgCl begins to precipitate. By ﬁltering or centrifuging again, the chemist
obtains a solution that contains only chloride ions.
Chemists use a
Figure 9.8
centrifuge to separate a precipitate
from a solution. The centrifuge
spins the samples quickly, and the
resulting force pushes the precipi-
tate to the bottom of the test tube.
The solution can then be decanted.
448 MHR • Unit 4  Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
Web
L I N K
www.mcgrawhill.ca/links/
chemistry12
Bauxite is the most abundant
ore of aluminum. The ﬁrst step
in extracting aluminum from
bauxite is called the Bayer
process. The Bayer process
involves a fractional precipita-
tion of impurities, including
iron(III) oxide and titanium
dioxide. Search the Internet to
ﬁnd the history of the Bayer
process and learn how it
works. Present your ﬁndings
as a poster. To start your
search, go to the web site
above and click on Web Links.
Qualitative Analysis
As well as separating similar ions out of solution, chemists can also use
their understanding of solubility and precipitation reactions to identify
unknown ions in solution. Qualitative analysis is the branch of analytical
chemistry that involves identifying elements, compounds, and ions in
samples of unknown or uncertain composition. The other branch of
analytical chemistry is quantitative analysis. In quantitative analysis,
analytical chemists determine how much of a compound, element, or ion
is in a sample.
One way to identify cations in solution is by selectively precipitating
them out of solution. As you know, cations may form soluble or insoluble
ionic compounds, depending on the anions that are present. For example,
copper(II) chloride, CuCl2 is soluble in water. Copper(II) sulﬁde, CuS, is
insoluble in an acidic solution. Knowing about the relative solubility of
cations when combined with various anions helps chemists identify them.
Using precipitation reactions to identify cations was once a common
part of qualitative analyses. Today, chemists usually identify and quantify
unknowns using instruments such as spectrophotometers. However,
examining the identiﬁcation of cations through precipitation reactions
allows you to see how solubility equilibria can be manipulated. It also
provides an opportunity to solve a chemical “mystery”—what is in the
unknown solution?
To ﬁnd out what cations are in a solution using precipitation reactions,
chemists carry out reactions according to a scheme that incorporates tests
for each component that may be present. One example of such a scheme is
shown in Figure 9.9. This scheme shows how a chemist would analyze an
unknown solution that may contain all, some, or none of the following
ions: silver, Ag+; cadmium, Cd2+; and aluminium, Al3+. The analysis uses
selective, step by step precipitation.
−
add CI
(HCI)
e
g
u
f
i
r
t
n
e
c
+
Ag
Cd2+
AI3+
1
Initially, all
ions are
dissolved.
−
add OH
(NH3)
e
g
u
f
i
r
t
n
e
c
add S2−
(H2S)
e
g
u
f
i
r
t
n
e
c
Cd2+
AI3+
AgCI
2
AI3+
CdS
3
AI(OH)3
4
If silver ion is
present, a white
precipitate will form.
If cadmium ion is
present, a yellow
precipitate will form.
If aluminum is
present, a white
precipitate will form.
Figure 9.9
precipitate forms, it is separated by centrifugation. Then the solution is carefully poured into a new test tube and used in the next step.
This diagram shows a scheme for identifying silver, Ag+, cadmium, Cd2+, and aluminium,  Al3+, ions. After each step, if a
Chapter 9  Aqueous Solutions and Solubility Equilibria • MHR 449
The scheme that is shown in Figure 9.9 is very simple. More complex
qualitative analyses involve many more steps of isolation and identiﬁca-
tion, including some steps that are not precipitation reactions. For
example, some ions, such as sodium, Na+, and potassium, K+, cannot be
precipitated out of an aqueous solution, because the ionic compounds that
contain them are always soluble. Instead, chemists identify these ions
using a ﬂame test. In the following ThoughtLab, you will simulate a
qualitative analysis that includes a ﬂame test.
ThoughtLab
A Qualitative Analysis
Suppose that you are an analytical chemist. You
want to test an unknown solution that contains some
or all of the following ions: silver, Ag+; arsenic, As3+;
chromium, Cr3+; and sodium, Na+. Your laboratory
assistant has already performed some tests on
known solutions of these ions and has made the
following observations:
• As3+ forms a precipitate when H2S(aq) is added.
Cr3+ and Na+ do not form a precipitate when
H2S(aq) is added.
• Ag+ forms a precipitate when HCl(aq) is added. The
other ions do not form a precipitate when HCl(aq)
is added.
• Cr3+ forms a precipitate when a solution of NH3 is
added. (Making the solution basic has the same
effect as adding OH−.) Ag+ also forms a precipitate
in a basic solution.
• Na+ produces a bright yellow ﬂame in a ﬂame test.
Procedure
1. Based on these observations, devise a step-by-
step scheme for testing an unknown solution.
The solution may contain all, some, or just one
of the possible ions. Use Figure 9.9 to help you.
2. Decide which ions are in the unknown solution.
(Remember, the solution may contain one, two,
three, or all of the possible ions listed above.)
Based on your scheme, write down the observa-
tions that you expect to make for this solution.
3. Exchange schemes and observations with a
classmate. Do not tell your classmate which
ions are in your unknown solution. Based on
your classmate’s scheme and observations,
determine which ions are in your classmate’s
unknown solution.
4. Discuss your results with your classmate.
Did you both succeed in identifying the ions
in the unknown solution? If not, you or your
classmate may need to modify your schemes
or observations.
Analysis
1. Explain how qualitative analysis depends on the
different solubilities of ionic compounds.
2. Hg2
2+ forms an insoluble chloride, Hg2Cl2. If
your unknown solution contained a mixture of
all or some of the Hg2
would the scheme you developed be sufﬁcient
to identify all the ions in the solution? Explain
your answer.
2+, Ag+, Cr3+, and As3+ ions,
3. If you were performing this analysis in a
laboratory, what safety precautions would you
need to take? Explain your answer.
Section Summary
In Chapter 9, as in most of Unit 4, you learned about equilibrium reactions.
In this section, you analyzed precipitation reactions. You mainly examined
double-displacement reactions—reactions in which two soluble ionic
compounds react to form a precipitate. You used the solubility product
constant, Ksp, to predict whether or not a precipitate would form for given
concentrations of ions. In Unit 5, you will learn about a class of reactions
that will probably be new to you. You will see how these reactions inter-
convert chemical and electrical energy.
450 MHR • Unit 4  Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
Section Review
1
K/U
Answer the following questions about the ion product.
(a) Under what circumstances would a chemist want to determine Qsp
for a system?
(b) How does Qsp differ from Ksp?
(c) Why are there no tabulated Qsp values?
2
3
4
5
6
7
I
A chemist adds 1.0 mg of NaI to 50 mL of a 0.010 mol/L solution of
Pb(NO3)2. Does a precipitate form? Ksp for PbI2 is 9.8 × 10−9.
How many milligrams of Na2SO4 will just begin to precipitate
I
CaSO4 from 5.0 × 102 mL of a 0.10 mol/L solution of CaCl2? Ksp for
CaSO4 is 2.4 × 10−5. Hint: How does Qsp compare with Ksp at the point
when precipitation just begins?
How many drops of 0.0010 mol/L silver nitrate solution will just
I
begin to precipitate AgCl from 5.0 × 104 mL of a 0.90% (m/v) solution
of NaCl? (Assume that one drop equals 0.050 mL.) Ksp for AgCl
is 1.8 × 10−10.
Ksp for CaSO4 is 2.4 × 10−5, and Ksp for SrSO4 is 3.2 × 10−7.
I
Suppose that you have a 1.0 L solution that is 0.20 mol/L in Ca2+ ions
and 0.20 mol/L in Sr2+ ions. You slowly begin to add solid Na2SO4.
(a) Explain why SrSO4 precipitates ﬁrst.
(b) How many milligrams of Al2(SO4)3 will just begin to precipitate
C
SrSO4 from the solution?
Consider a solution that contains Pb2+, Cu2+, and Mg2+ cations,
present as their (soluble) nitrate salts. How could you selectively
precipitate these cations, given solutions of NaCl, Na2S, and Na3PO4?
Present your answer as a ﬂowchart, with a chemical equation
accompanying each step.
MC
To purify sodium chloride, NaCl, for use as table salt, HCl is
added to a saturated solution of NaCl. Explain how this process works,
using the concept of the ion product. What do you think is the next
step in the process? Explain your answer.
Chapter 9  Aqueous Solutions and Solubility Equilibria • MHR 451
Review
Reﬂecting on Chapter 9
Summarize this chapter in the format of your
choice. Here are a few ideas to use as guidelines:
• Explain how to predict whether a solution of a
speciﬁc salt will be acidic, basic, or neutral.
• Explain how to determine a substance’s
solubility product constant, Ksp, based on the
molar solubility of the substance.
• Explain how to calculate the molar solubility of
a pure substance in water or in a solution of a
common ion, given Ksp.
• Describe how to use Ksp to predict the formation
of a precipitate.
• Identify the effects of solubility equilibria in the
human body.
• Describe how chemists use solubility equilibria
to remove speciﬁc ions from solution and to
identify ions in solution.
Reviewing Key Terms
For each of the following terms, write a sentence
that shows your understanding of its meaning.
equivalence point
end-point
solubility product constant (Ksp)
ion product (Qsp)
fractional precipitation
qualitative analysis
quantitative analysis
Knowledge/Understanding
1. Assume that the aqueous solutions in each pair
have the same concentration. For each pair,
identify which of the two solutions has the
lower pH.
(a) NH4Cl(aq) and KHSO4(aq)
(b) H2S(aq) and KHSO4(aq)
(c) NaHPO4(aq) and CaBr2(aq)
(d) Al(NO3)3(aq) and Al(NO2)2(aq)
2. Suppose that you have the following indicators
available: bromphenol blue, methyl red,
bromthymol blue, and phenolphthalein. Use
Figure 9.3 to suggest an appropriate indicator
for each of the following titrations. Do not do
any calculations.
(a) sulfuric acid with sodium hydroxide
(b) formic acid with sodium hydroxide
(c) pyridine with nitric acid
452 MHR • Unit 4  Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
3. There are many different acid-base indicators.
State two ways in which they are all similar.
4. What substance can be added to an aqueous
solution of propanoic acid to prepare a buffer
solution?
5. Hydrochloric acid is slowly added to a solution
of sodium hydroxide. How does the pH of the
solution change?
6. A solution of a certain salt is tested with litmus
paper, and the litmus turns red. What does this
tell you about the relative strengths of the acid
and base from which the salt is derived?
7. List the names and formulas of three salts that
dissolve in water to form
(a) an acidic solution
(b) a basic solution
8. When performing an acid-base titration, you
should add only a few drops of indicator rather
than a few millilitres. Explain why.
9. Distinguish between the terms “solubility” and
“solubility product constant.”
10. Why do tables of Ksp values for compounds not
include values for soluble compounds?
11. Values of Ksp are given for a certain tempera-
ture. How do the Ksp values for most salts
change if the temperature of the solution
is increased?
12. Write an equation for the dissociation of
each compound in water. Then write the
corresponding Ksp expression.
(a) CuBr
(b) CaCrO4
(c) Ni(OH)2
(d) Mg3(PO4)2
(e) MgNH4PO4
13. For a solubility system to reach equilibrium,
some undissolved solid must be present.
Explain why.
14. Compare the solubility of magnesium hydroxide
in a saturated solution of ammonium chloride
with the solubility of magnesium hydroxide in
pure water. Would you expect magnesium
hydroxide to be more or less soluble, or to have
the same solubility, in the ammonium chloride
solution? Explain your answer.
15. In aqueous solution, the dihydrogen phosphate,
4(aq), ion can act as either an acid or a
H2PO−
base. When tested, a solution containing
− was found to be acidic. Write the
H2PO4
equation for the reaction that took place.
16. Why must Qsp usually be much larger than Ksp
before you can observe a precipitate forming?
17. Silver halide salts are used in black and white
photography. During the developing process,
excess silver halide is removed from the ﬁlm
by using a solution of sodium thiosulfate
(commonly called “hypo”).
AgBr(s) + 2S2O3
What is the effect on this equilibrium if a more
concentrated solution of hypo is used?
(cid:2)(cid:3) Ag(S2O3)2
+ Br−
3−
(aq)
(aq)
(aq)
2−
Inquiry
18. Suppose that you have an aqueous solution of
copper iodide, CuI2, which you must precipitate
and ﬁlter before pouring the remaining liquid
into a disposal beaker.  You decide to use the
common ion effect to precipitate the CuI2. In the
laboratory, you ﬁnd stock solutions of Cu(NO3)2
and NaI with the same concentrations. You want
to use the smallest volume possible. Which
stock solution will you choose to precipitate the
CuI2? Explain your answer.
19. Which has the greater effect on the solubility
of PbI2 in 1.0 L of a saturated solution: the
addition of 0.10 mol of solid Pb(NO3)2, or the
addition of 0.10 mol of solid NaI? Justify your
answer with calculations. Assume that you can
ignore the volume change when solid Pb(NO3)2
is added.
20. Lead(II) iodide and barium sulfate have almost
the same value for Ksp. (Ksp for PbI2 is
9.8 × 10−9, and Ksp for BaSO4 is 1.1 × 10−10.)
What is the ratio of Pb2+
ted solutions of the salts?
(aq) to Ba2+
(aq) in satura-
21. Silver cyanide is used in aqueous solutions
to plate a coating of silver on ornaments,
jewellery, and silver cutlery. What is the
concentration of Ag+
of AgCN?
(aq) in a saturated solution
22. Water with a high chloride ion content is not
safe to drink. The following process is used to
test for the presence of Cl−
(aq): Dissolve 5.0 g of
AgNO3 in 500 mL of distilled water. Add 10
drops of the solution to 10 mL of the water
being tested, and look for a cloudy white
precipitate.
What is the smallest concentration of Cl−
(aq)
in the test water that will cause the formation
of a precipitate?
23. Design an experiment to determine Ksp for
lead(II) chloride, PbCl2, using the following
reaction.
Pb2+
(aq) + Zn(s)
(cid:2)(cid:3) Pb(s) + Zn2+
(aq)
Assume that you have solid PbCl2, a strip of
zinc metal, ﬁlter paper, an electronic balance,
and any other standard laboratory equipment.
(a) Write the equation for the dissolution of
PbCl2 and the corresponding Ksp equation.
(b) Provide a step-by-step procedure, clearly
indicating what needs to be measured
and/or recorded.
(c) Explain how you would use your empirical
data to determine Ksp for PbCl2.
24. Design an experiment to determine Ksp for
lead(II) iodide, PbI2, using the reaction below.
Pb2+
(aq) + CrO4
2−
(cid:2)(cid:3) PbCrO4(s)
(aq)
Assume that you have solid PbCl2, a 0.50 mol/L
solution of K2CrO4, ﬁlter paper, an electronic
balance, and any other standard laboratory
equipment.
(a) Write the equation for the dissolution of PbI2
and the corresponding Ksp equation.
(b) Provide a step-by-step procedure, clearly
indicating what needs to be measured and/or
recorded.
(c) Explain how you would use your empirical
data to determine Ksp for PbI2.
(d) If Ksp for PbI2 is 7.9 × 10−9, explain why the
solubility of PbCrO4 can be ignored. (Ksp for
PbCrO4 is 1.8 × 10−14.)
25. A student titrated 25.0 mL of 0.280 mol/L
hydrochloric acid with 0.360 mol/L sodium
hydroxide solution. The end-point was
observed after adding 18.80 mL of NaOH(aq).
Some of the steps that were followed by the
student are listed below:
1. A transfer pipette was rinsed with water.
The pipette was then used to obtain 25.0 mL
of hydrochloric acid, which was placed in
an Erlenmeyer ﬂask.
2. About 50 mL of water was added to the
Erlenmeyer ﬂask.
3. A few drops of phenolphthalein indicator
were added to the Erlenmeyer ﬂask.
Chapter 9  Aqueous Solutions and Solubility Equilibria • MHR 453
copper strip after the reaction.
(c) Why must the saturated AgCH3CO2 solution
be free of any solid AgCH3CO2?
30. A 0.150 mol/L solution of acetic acid was
titrated with 25.0 mL of 0.250 mol/L sodium
hydroxide.
(a) Calculate the volume of acetic acid that was
needed at the equivalence point.
(b) What is the pH of the solution at equivalence?
(c) Suggest a suitable indicator for this titration.
31. A buffer solution is prepared by adding 30.0 g
of pure acetic acid to 41.0 g of sodium acetate
in water, and then diluting the solution to
1.00 L. What is the pH of the buffer solution?
Communication
32. Are “insoluble” compounds really insoluble?
Explain.
33. Why is the concentration of a solid, undissolved
compound not included in a Ksp expression?
34. Is a supersaturated solution an example of an
equilibrium system? Explain.
35. When a solution of potassium iodide, KI, is
added to a solution of lead (II) nitrate,
Pb(NO3)2, a precipitate forms.
(a) Write a chemical equation for the reaction.
Indicate the physical state of each reactant
and product.
(b) How does the product of the concentration
of the ions that make up the precipitate
compare with the value of Ksp for the precipi-
tate immediately before precipitation begins?
(c) After the precipitate forms, how would
you describe the solution with respect to
the precipitated compound: unsaturated,
saturated, or supersaturated?
36. Explain “fractional precipitation” in your own
words. On what principle is it based?
37. How is the common ion effect an application of
Le Châtelier’s principle? Illustrate your answer
with an example, including diagrams and
chemical equations.
4. A burette was rinsed with water, and then
ﬁlled with the sodium hydroxide solution.
(a) Calculate the volume of NaOH(aq) that
the student should have used to reach
equivalence.
(b) What was the percent error in the
titration?
(c) Which step(s) in the titiration could
account for the error?
26. Assume that you have a solution that is
0.0010 mol/L in Cu+
(aq) and 0.0010 mol/L in
Ag+
(aq). If you begin to add solid NaCl to the
solution, which compound will precipitate
ﬁrst? Explain.
27. A sample of well water contains
1.0 × 10−3 mol/L calcium sulfate and
1.0 × 10−4 mol/L calcium carbonate ion.
A chemist adds barium chloride to the sample.
Which precipitate forms ﬁrst, barium sulfate or
barium carbonate?
28. Solutions that contain dissolved ions have been
shown to conduct electricity.
(a) Design an experiment in which you use a
sensitive conductivity meter to determine
the Ksp of a slightly soluble compound.
(b) How do you propose to calibrate the
conductivity meter?
(c) If your teacher approves of your experimental
design, and if you have access to a conduc-
tivity meter, carry out your experiment to
determine Ksp for Ca(OH)2.
29. A student performs an experiment to determine
Ksp for silver acetate, AgCH3CO2, using the
following reaction.
2Ag+
(cid:2)(cid:3) 2Ag(s) + Cu2+
(aq) + Cu(s)
(aq) .
The student adds a strip of copper metal, with
a known mass, to a saturated solution of
AgCH3CO2.  After the reaction, the copper strip
is washed, dried, and re-weighed.
(a) Write the equilibrium equation that
represents the equilibrium of AgCH3CO2.
Also write the corresponding Ksp equation.
(b) Ksp for AgCH3CO2 is 2.0 × 10−3. A strip of
copper metal, with an initial mass of 23.4 g,
was placed in 1.00 × 102 mL of saturated
AgCH3CO2 solution with no solid AgCH3CO2
present. Calculate the expected mass of the
454 MHR • Unit 4  Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
8.(b) 1.0 × 10−5 mol/L; 2.4 × 10−3 g/L (c) 1.3 × 10−9 mol/L;
3.0 × 10−7 g/L 9.3:  2. Qsp = 1.7 × 10−10 > Ksp, therefore no
precipitate forms.  3. 17 mg  4. one drop  5.(b) 0.18 mg
Making Connections
38. The concentration of calcium, Ca2+, ions in a
city’s water supply is too high.
(a) Explain, with the help of chemical equa-
tion(s), how to use solid sodium carbonate
(washing soda or soda ash), Na2CO3 , to
reduce [Ca2+] in the water.
(b) What challenges would engineers need to
overcome when implementing the system
for reducing [Ca2+] ?
Answers to Practice Problems and Short Answers to
3−
2−
2−]
2−]
−]3
3−]2
(cid:2)(cid:3) Ag+
(cid:2)(cid:3) 2Ag+
(aq) + SO4
(aq) + CO3
(cid:2)(cid:3) 3Ca2+
(aq) (d) acidic;
(aq) + H2O((cid:4))
(cid:2)(cid:3) Mg2+
+][PO4
(cid:2)(cid:3) Cu+
(cid:2)(cid:3) Ba2+
(aq) + Cl−
(aq) + 2F−
(cid:2)(cid:3) NH3(aq) + H3O+
(cid:2)(cid:3) NH3(aq) + H3O+
(cid:2)(cid:3) HOBr(aq) + OH−
(aq) 3. C6H5O− is the
(aq); Ksp = [Ag+]2[SO4
(aq) ; Ksp = [Ca2+]3[PO4
(aq); Ksp = [Cu+][Cl−]
(aq) ; Ksp = [Ba2+][F−]2
3+
(aq);
3+] 12.(a) Ksp = [Fe3+][NO3
(aq) + 2PO4
2−
(aq) ; Ksp = [Ag+]2[CO3
+
(aq) + PO4
(aq) + NH4
Section Review Questions
Practice Problems: 1.(a) basic (b) basic (c) neutral (d) acidic
+
(aq) + H2O((cid:4))
2.(a) acidic; NH4
(aq) (b) neutral
(c) basic; OBr−
+
(aq) + H2O((cid:4))
NH4
stronger base because Ka for its conjugate acid is smaller.
4. acidic  5. 7.74  6. 1.70  7. 8.15  8. 5.28
9.(a) CuCl(s)
(b) BaF2(s)
(c) Ag2SO4(s)
(d) Ca3(PO4)2(s)
10. Ag2CO3(s)
11. MgNH4PO4(s)
Ksp = [Mg2+][NH4
(b) smaller  13. 2.2 × 10−16 14. 1.1 × 10−37 15. 3.2 × 10−11
16.(a) 4.8 × 10−29 (b) 1 g solution = 1 mL solution
17.(a) 1.3 × 10−5 mol/L (b) 7.8 × 1018 formula units of AgCl/L
(c) 1.9 × 10−4% (m/v) 18. 1.0 × 10−10 mol/L
19. 9.9 × 10−3 mol/L; 4.1 g/L
20. 8.5 × 1012 formula units of ZnS/L 21.(a) 1.33 × 10−5 mol/L
(b) 1.18 × 10−9 mol/L 22. 3.9 × 10−6 mol/L
23.(a) 7.02 × 10−3 mol/L (b) 1.97 × 10−4 mol/L
24.(a) 1.6 × 10−2 mol/L (b) 4.0 × 10−4 mol/L 25. 9.18  26. 9.03
27. 310  28. 4.16
29. Qsp = 7.5 × 10−5 > Ksp, therefore a precipitate forms.
30. Qsp = 3.0 × 10−6 > Ksp, therefore a precipitate forms.
31. Qsp = 2.7 × 10−7 > Ksp, therefore a precipitate forms.
32. Qsp = 4.2 × 10−12 < Ksp, therefore no precipitate forms.
33. Qsp = 8.6 × 10−8 < Ksp, therefore no precipitate forms.
34. Qsp = 6.9 × 10−6 < Ksp, therefore no precipitate forms.
35. Qsp = 2.2 × 10−9 > Ksp, therefore a precipitate forms.
36. Qsp = 1.0 × 10−5 > Ksp, therefore a precipitate forms.
Section Review: 9.1: 1. sodium carbonate  2.(a) no reaction
+
(aq) + H2O((cid:4))
(b) CH3NH3
(aq) ; acidic
(c) no reaction (d) OCl−
(aq) + H2O((cid:4))
(aq);
basic  3. acidic  4. Ca(OH)2 , CaF2, KNO3, NH4NO3, HNO3
5.(b) 8.7  (c) 0.167 mol/L (d) phenolphthalein
7. phenolphthalein  8. 5.97  9.2: 5.(a) 1.6 × 10−6 (b) 9.6 × 1017
formula units of BaF2/L 6.(b) 4.74  7. 3.17
(cid:2)(cid:3) CH3NH2(aq) + H3O+
(cid:2)(cid:3) HOCl(aq) + OH−
Chapter 9  Aqueous Solutions and Solubility Equilibria • MHR 455
U N I T   4   An  Issue  to  Analyze
Earth in Equilibrium
Background
Scientists often think about Earth as being composed
of four main systems. The biosphere includes all
living things on Earth. The geosphere includes
non-living things, such as rocks and soil. The
hydrosphere includes all water, such as oceans,
rivers, and even puddles. The atmosphere includes
gases, vapours, and aerosols. These four systems
overlap in many ways. For example, animals are part
of the biosphere, but they interact with components
in the geosphere (living in a burrow or cave), the
hydrosphere (drinking and excreting water), and the
atmosphere (breathing).
Scientists have noticed various shifts in Earth’s
equilibrium in recent years. Since Earth is in a
dynamic equilibrium, some shifts occur naturally.
There is considerable evidence, however, that the
following shifts have been caused by, or at least
strongly inﬂuenced by, human activities. Some of
these shifts may be familiar to you, with names
such as “global warming,” “ozone holes,” and “loss
of biodiversity.”
• an increase in CO2 and CH4 levels in the
atmosphere
• an increase in the amounts and concentrations
of pollutant substances
• a decrease in ozone concentrations in certain
parts of the atmosphere
• an increase in average global temperature
• a decrease in arable land and a corresponding
increase in desert land
• a loss of plant and animal species, both by
observable causes and by unknown causes
• an increase in extreme weather conditions,
such as hurricanes and tornadoes
For this unit issue, you will research the carbon
cycle, either on your own or as part of a group.
Then, as a class, you will discuss the consequences
of human activities on the carbon cycle.
Earth, with its four spheres, is a good approximation
of a closed system. As you learned in Unit 4, a
closed system is subject to the principles of equilib-
rium. Every change to the system affects the whole
equilibrium. Elements such as carbon, nitrogen,
sulfur, and oxygen regularly cycle through Earth’s
four spheres. Thus, Earth is in a constant dynamic
equilibrium.
456 MHR • Unit 4  Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
Plan and Present
1
Research the carbon cycle. Include a general
description of how carbon moves through the
geosphere, biosphere, hydrosphere, and atmos-
phere. (Your teacher may choose to have some
members of the class research different cycles,
such as the phosphorus cycle or the nitrogen
cycle.)
2
3
4
5
Identify speciﬁc chemical reactions and process-
es that involve the movement of carbon from one
system to another. Write balanced equations for
each reaction or process you identify.
Use the reactions and processes you identiﬁed
in step 2, along with your knowledge of equilib-
ria, to identify factors that can increase or
decrease the level of carbon in each system.
Identify human inﬂuences on the carbon cycle.
Choose at least one shift in Earth’s equilibrium
that is listed in “Background.” For each shift
you choose, answer the following questions.
(a) Is the carbon cycle involved? Explain your
answer.
(b) Where on Earth do you think this shift is
most visible? Explain why you think so.
(c) What are some possible causes of this shift?
(d) What are some possible consequences?
6
If you come across information about a shift in
Earth’s equilibrium that is not listed in
“Background,” include a description of this
shift with your research.
7
Have a class discussion on the following topics.
(a) To what extent do human activities affect the
carbon cycle? Are the consequences of any
human activities serious enough to consider
changing these activities?
(b) If your answer to the second question in part
(a) is yes, decide on a priority list of ﬁve
human activities that your class believes
should be changed.
(c) Come up with an action plan for your school
or community to address your concerns.
Assessment
After you have explored this issue, answer the following
questions to assess your work.
(cid:2) Assess your research skills. Was your research on
this issue correct and thorough? Did you use more
than one source? How have your skills improved?
(cid:2) Assess your presentation of information to the
class. Did you use visual aids in your explanation?
Do you think everyone understood what you were
trying to say?
(cid:2) Assess the class discussion. Was a consensus
reached? Do you think the consensus was based
more on scientiﬁc research or on popular media
opinion?
Evaluate the Results
1
If your class developed a priority list of ﬁve
human activities that need changing, list these
activities in your notebook. Explain why each
activity was chosen to be on the list.
2
3
Describe any solutions or suggestions that your
class developed. Are these suggestions likely to
work? Why or why not?
Prepare a report that summarizes the results of
your own research on the carbon cycle.
Extension
4
Do you think any other planets are in dynamic
equilibrium? Do nutrient cycles occur on other
planets? Explain your hypotheses. Then
research the answers to these questions.
Web
L I N K
www.mcgrawhill.ca/links/chemistry12
Go to the web site above, and click on Web Links to ﬁnd
appropriate sites to research this unit issue.
Unit 4  An Issue to Analyze • MHR 457
Review
Knowledge/Understanding
Multiple Choice
In your notebook, write the letter for the best
answer to each question.
1. Which reaction represents a heterogeneous
(cid:2)(cid:3) 2NO2(g)
equilibrium?
(a) N2O4(g)
(b) 2SO2(g) + O2(g)
(c) 3H2(g) + N2(g)
(d) 2NaHCO3(s)
−
(aq) + H+
(e) HCO3
(cid:2)(cid:3) 2SO3(g)
(cid:2)(cid:3) 2NH3(g)
(cid:2)(cid:3) Na2CO3(s) + CO2(g) + H2O(g)
(cid:2)(cid:3) H2CO3(aq)
(aq)
2. Consider the following equilibrium.
(cid:2)(cid:3) 2NO2(g) Kc = 4.8 × 10−3
N2O4(g)
Which set of concentrations represents
equilibrium conditions?
(a) [N2O4(g)] = 4.8 × 10−1 and
[NO2(g)] = 1.0 × 10−4
(b) [N2O4(g)] = 1.0 × 10−1 and
[NO2(g)] = 4.8 × 10−4
(c) [N2O4(g)] = 1.0 × 10−1 and
[NO2(g)] = 2.2 × 10−2
(d) [N2O4(g)] = 2.2 × 10−2 and
[NO2(g)] = 1.0 × 10−1
(e) [N2O4(g)] = 5.0 × 10−2 and
[NO2(g)] = 1.1 × 10−2
3. Choose the equilibrium in which products
are favoured by a decrease in pressure but
reactants are favoured by a decrease in
temperature.
(a) H2(g) + I2(g) + 51.8 kJ (cid:2)(cid:3) 2HI(g)
(b) 2NO2(g)
(c) N2(g) + 3H2(g)
(d) PCl3(g) + Cl2(g)
(e) 2SO2(g) + O2(g)
(cid:2)(cid:3) 2NO(g) + O(g) ∆H = +54 kJ
(cid:2)(cid:3) 2NH3(g) + 92.3 kJ
(cid:2)(cid:3) PCl5(g) ∆H = −84.2 kJ
(cid:2)(cid:3) 2SO3(g) + heat
4. A sample of lemon juice has a pH of 2.
A sample of an ammonia cleaner has a pH
of 10. If the two samples are combined, what
ratio by volume of lemon juice to ammonia
cleaner is needed to yield a neutral solution?
(a) 1:10
(b) 1:8
(c) 1:100
(d) 1:1000
(e) 10:1
5. In which reaction is water acting as an acid?
(a) H2O((cid:4)) + NH3(aq)
(b) H2O((cid:4)) + H3PO4(aq)
(cid:2)(cid:3) H2(g) + 1
(c) H2O((cid:4))
2
(cid:2)(cid:3) OH−
(cid:2)(cid:3) H3O+
O2(g)
+
(aq) + NH4
−
(aq) + H2PO4
(aq)
(aq)
458 MHR • Unit 4  Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
(d) 2H2O((cid:4)) + BaCl2(s)
(e) 2Na2O2(s) + 2H2O((cid:4))
(cid:2)(cid:3) 4NaOH(aq) + O2(g)
6. A solution of a weak acid is titrated with a
(cid:2)(cid:3) BaCl2 + 2H2O(g)
solution of a strong base. What is the pH at the
end-point?
(a) 7
(d) Either (b) or (c) may be correct, depending
(c) <7
(b) >7
on Ka of the acid.
(e) more information about the number of
hydrogen ions is needed
7. 10 mL of 1.0 mol/L HCl is diluted by adding
990 mL of water. What is the pH of the new
solution?
(a) decrease by 2 pH units
(b) decrease by 0.5 pH units
(c) increase by 0.5 pH units
(d) increase by 2 pH units
(e) increase by a factor of 2 pH units
8. Select the correct statement about the following
equilibrium.
2−
HBO3
(a) HBO3
−
(aq) + HSiO3
2−
−
(aq) + H2BO3
−
(aq) and HSiO3
(aq) are a conjugate
(cid:2)(cid:3) SiO3
(aq)
2−
(aq)
acid-base pair.
−
(aq) and SiO3
(b) HSiO3
2−
(aq) are both acting
as acids.
2−
(aq) and SiO3
(c) HBO3
(aq) are both bases.
−
−
(aq) and H2BO3
(d) HSiO3
(aq) are a conjugate
2−
acid-base pair.
(e) SiO3
2−
−
(aq) and H2BO3
(aq) are a conjugate
acid-base pair
9. Select the equation that correctly represents the
dissociation of Al2S3(s) in water.
(a) Al2S3(s)
(b) Al2S3(s)
(c) Al2S3(s)
(d) Al2S3(s)
(e) Al2S3(s)
2−
(aq) + S3
(aq) + 2S3−
(aq) + 3S2−
(aq) + 2S2−
(aq) + 6S−
(cid:2)(cid:3) Al2
3+
(cid:2)(cid:3) 2Al2+
(cid:2)(cid:3) 2Al3+
(cid:2)(cid:3) 3Al3+
(cid:2)(cid:3) 2Al3+
(aq)
(aq)
(aq)
(aq)
(aq)
10. A saturated solution of CH3COOAg contains
2 × 10−3 mol Ag+ per litre of solution. What is
Ksp for CH3COOAg?
(a) 2 × 10−3
(b) 4 × 10−6
(c) 1 × 10−3
(d) 2 × 10−6
(e) 4 × 10−3
11. In an experiment, a chemist determines that
PbC2O4 and Ag2C2O4 have the same Ksp:
1.1 × 10−11. Based on this result, which
statement can the chemist make?
(a) These compounds have the same molar
solubility.
(b) [C2O4
2−] in saturated solutions of these two
compounds is the same.
(c) In saturated solutions of these compounds,
[Ag+] > [Pb2+].
(d) In equal volumes of saturated solutions, a
greater mass of solute is present in PbC2O4.
(e) In saturated solutions of each compound,
PbC2O4 contains 1.5 times as many ions.
Short Answer
In your notebook, write a sentence or a short
paragraph to answer each question.
12. Consider the following equilibrium.
(cid:2)(cid:3) 2SO3(g) ∆H = −198.2 kJ
2SO2(g) + O2(g)
Indicate if reactants or products are favoured,
or if no change occurs, when
(a) the temperature is increased
(b) helium gas is added at constant volume
(c) helium gas is added at constant pressure
13. Explain the reasoning you used to answer
question 12(b).
14. Describe how a decrease in volume will affect
the following equilibrium.
PCl3(g) + Cl2(g)
(cid:2)(cid:3) PCl5(g)
15. Kc for the equilibrium N2O4
(cid:2)(cid:3) 2NO2 is
4.8 × 10−3. What is Kc for the equilibrium
1
2
(cid:2)(cid:3) NO2?
N2O4
16. For the following equilibrium, Kc = 1.0 × 10−15
at 25˚C and Kc = 0.05 at 2200˚C.
(cid:2)(cid:3) 2NO(g)
N2(g) + O2(g)
Based on this information, is the reaction
exothermic or endothermic? Brieﬂy explain
your answer.
17. Kc for the equilibrium system
(cid:2)(cid:3) SO3(g) is 40. What is Kc for
2SO2(g) + 2O2(g)
SO3(g)
(cid:2)(cid:3) SO2(g) + 1
2
O2(g)?
18. 1.0 mol of NH3(g) is placed initially in a 500 mL
ﬂask. The following equilibrium is established.
2NH3(g)
Write an equilibrium expression that describes
the system at equilibrium.
(cid:2)(cid:3) N2(g) + 3H2(g)
19. A mixture is prepared for the following
equilibrium.
I2(aq) + I−
(aq)
(cid:2)(cid:3) I3
−
(aq)
The initial concentrations of I2(aq) and I−
(aq)
are both 0.002 mol/L. When equilibrium is
established, [I2(aq)] = 5.0 × 10−4 mol/L. What is
Kc for this equilibrium?
20. Solutions of NaHCO3(aq) and CaHPO4(aq)
are mixed.
(a) Write the net ionic equation that represents
the equilibrium for this system.
(b) What are the conjugate acid-base pairs?
(c) Are reactants or products favoured in this
system? Give a reason for your answer.
21. What is the pH of a 100 mL sample of
0.002 mol/L H2SO4?
22. A 1.00 L solution contains 1.04 g of KOH. What
is the pH of this solution?
23. What is [H+
(aq)], [OH−
(aq)] , pH, and pOH for a
0.048 mol/L solution of benzoic acid,
C6H5COOH?
24. How many moles of phosphate ions are present
in 200 mL of 0.002 mol/L Fe3(PO4)2?
25. Aqueous solutions of 0.2 mol/L Na2CO3 and
0.2 mol/L AgNO3 are mixed. Write a net ionic
equation that represents the overall reaction.
26. What is the highest concentration of Ca2+ that
can be present in a solution of 0.002 00 mol/L
NH4F(aq)?
27. 20.00 mL of 1.100 × 10−4 mol/L Pb(NO3)2 is
mixed with 80.00 mL of 4.450 × 10−2 mol/L
CaI2. Show, using calculations, if a precipitate
will form.
Inquiry
28. A chemist evaporates 100.0 mL of a saturated
solution of lead chromate to dryness. What
mass of PbCrO4(s) remains?
29. How can a chemist maximize the yield of
CaO(s) in the following equilibrium system?
CaCO3(s) + heat (cid:2)(cid:3) CaO(s) + CO2(g)?
30. Kc for the following system is 1.05 at a certain
temperature.
PCl5(g) + heat (cid:2)(cid:3) PCl3(g) + Cl2(g)
After 0.22 mol of PCl3(g) and 0.11 mol of Cl2(g)
are added to a 500 mL ﬂask, equilibrium
is established.
(a) Explain what happens to the rates of the
forward and reverse reactions as equilibrium
is established.
Unit 4  Review • MHR 459
(b) Calculate the equilibrium concentration of
each component of this equilibrium.
31. Cyanide ion, CN−, reacts with Fe3+ to form the
blue dye that is used in blueprint paper.
Hydrocyanic acid, HCN(aq), is a weak acid, with
Ka = 6.2 × 10−10 .
(a) Calculate Kb for the conjugate base of HCN(aq).
(b) Calculate the pH of 0.120 mol/L KCN(aq).
32. The following solutions have all been prepared
at a concentration of 0.1 mol/L:
CH3COONa(aq), CH3COOH(aq), NH3(aq), and
NaOH(aq). Arrange these solutions in order of
decreasing pH. For each solution, write the
balanced equation that supports your answer.
33. In an experiment to estimate Ksp, a piece of
zinc metal was left in 50.0 mL of a saturated
solution of PbCl2. The lead that was produced
in the displacement reaction was recovered,
and its mass was found to be 0.17 g.
(a) Use this information to determine the con-
centration of Pb2+ in the original solution.
(b) Write the expression for Ksp. Then calculate
Ksp for PbCl2.
34. For the following equilibrium, Kc = 0.81 at a
certain temperature.
(cid:2)(cid:3) NH3(g) + heat
1
2
(a) Explain what will happen to the magnitude
N2(g) + 3
2
H2(g)
of Kc if the temperature is increased.
(b) The initial concentrations of the gases are
[H2(g)] = 0.76 mol/L, [N2(g)] = 0.60 mol/L,
and [NH3(g)] = 0.48 mol/L. Determine if the
concentration of [N2(g)] will increase or
decrease when equilibrium is established.
35. 1 L of 0.002 mol/L Pb(NO3)2 has been prepared.
Given that Ksp for PbCl2 is 1.7 × 10−5, what is
the largest number of moles of NaCl that can
be added to this solution without causing a
precipitate to form?
36. A 10.0 g sample of a commercial washing
powder contains ammonium sulfate,
(NH4)2SO4. The sample is treated with an
excess of NaOH.
(NH4)2SO4(aq) + 2NaOH(aq) → 2NH3(g)
+ Na2SO4(aq) + H2O((cid:4))
The ammonia gas, NH3(g), that forms is dissolved
in 50.0 mL of 0.250 mol/L H2SO4. The following
reaction occurrs.
460 MHR • Unit 4  Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
2NH3(g) + H2SO4(aq) → (NH4)2SO4(aq)
The H2SO4(aq) that is not used up in this reac-
tion is titrated to the end-point with 27.9 mL
of 0.230 mol/L NaOH. Use this information to
calculate the percent of (NH4)2SO4 in the 10.0 g
sample of washing powder.
37. Consider the following equilibrium.
(cid:2)(cid:3) 2XO2(g) + heat.
2XO(s) + O2
(a) Predict whether reactants or products are
favoured when the volume of the container
is increased. Give a reason for your answer.
(b) What do you predict will happen to the
concentration of each substance when the
volume of the container is increased?
(c) At a certain temperature, Kc = 1.00 × 10−4
and the equilibrium concentrations are
[O2] = 1.99 mol/L and
[XO2] = 1.41 × 10−2 mol/L. If the volume of
the container is now doubled, calculate the
concentrations of these gases when equilibri-
um is re-established. Assume that sufﬁcient
XO(s) is present to maintain equilibrium. Are
the concentrations you calculate consistent
with your prediction in part (b)?
38. A sample of Ca(OH)2(s) is allowed to stand in
distilled water until a saturated solution forms.
A 50.0 mL sample of this saturated solution is
neutralized with 24.4 mL of 0.0500 mol/L HCl.
2HCl(aq) + Ca(OH)2(aq) → CaCl2(aq) + 2H2O((cid:4))
Use this information to calculate Ksp
for Ca(OH)2.
39. Tap water that contains Cl− at a concentration
of 50 ppm is used to prepare a 0.100 mol/L
AgNO3 solution. Does a precipitate form?
Communication
40. Under what circumstances is the position of
equilibrium not affected by a change in the
pressure on the system? Give examples, and
explain your answer.
41. Milk of magnesia is a suspension of Mg(OH)2(s)
that can be used as an antacid. Ksp for
Mg(OH)2(s) is only 5.6 × 10−12. If so little of this
base dissolves, how can it be effective as an
antacid? Explain your answer.
42. For HSO3
−, Ka is 6.2 × 10−8 and Kb is
7.7 × 10−13. Your friend is confused because the
product of these two values does not equal Kw.
Write a note that explains to your friend why
this is correct.
43. Use equations to demonstrate how a buffer
system, such as HNO2 : NO2
and OH−.
−, reacts with H3O+
44. Aluminum is a self-protecting metal. It readily
forms an impervious coating of Al2O3 that
protects the aluminum from further corrosion.
Does this reaction occur spontaneously at all
temperatures? Explain your answer.
45. 3.50 g of CO2 are dissolved in 375 mL of pop
to carbonate the drink. Assuming that no other
factors affect the acidity of the carbonated
drink, explain how this information can be
used to calculate its pH. (You do not need to
do the calculation.)
46. Acid-base indicators are often large organic
molecules. Explain why they are sold in the
form of a sodium salt, for general use as an
acid-base indicator.
Making Connections
47. According to guidelines published by the
Ontario Ministry of the Environment in January
2001, the Maximum Acceptable Concentration
(MAC) for Pb2+ in drinking water is 0.010 mg/L.
The water in a community is contaminated
with Pb2+ from an industrial source, at a
concentration of 0.0800 mg/L.
(a) Engineers decide to clean up the water by
increasing its pH. Explain why increasing
the water’s pH will remove the lead ions
from the water.
(b) At what pH is the concentration of lead ions
reduced from 0.0800 mg/L to 0.010 mg/L?
48. A patient’s kidney stones are composed prima-
rily of calcium oxalate, CaC2O4. The patient’s
physician prescribes a medicine that is basic,
and advises the patient to drink plenty of
water. Explain why this is a suitable treatment.
C O U R S E
C H A L L E N G E
The Chemistry of Human Health
In the Course Challenge, you will explore buffer systems
in the body.
• How does the body maintain a constant pH in
the blood?
• How can illness affect the equilibrium in the blood?
• How can you model the buffer system in your blood?
Unit 4  Review • MHR 461
Electrochemistry
U N I T   5   C O N T E N T S
CHAPTER  10
Oxidation-Reduction Reactions
CHAPTER  11
Cells and Batteries
DESIGN  YOUR  OWN  INVESTIGATION
Electroplating
UNIT 5 OVERALL  EXPECTATIONS
What are oxidation-reduction
reactions? How are they
involved in the interconversion
of chemical and electrical
energy?
How are galvanic and elec-
trolytic cells built, and how do
they function? What equations
are used to describe these
types of cells? How can you
solve quantitative problems
related to electrolysis?
What are the uses of batteries
and fuel cells? How is electro-
chemical technology used to
produce and protect metals?
How can you assess the
environmental and safety
issues associated with these
technologies?
Unit Issue Prep
As you progress through Unit 5,
look for the skills and information
you will need for the investigation
at the end of the unit.
462
Canadian engineer Dr. John Hopps,
working with a team of medical
researchers in the late 1940s,
developed one of the most signiﬁcant
medical inventions of the twentieth
century: the pacemaker. The photo-
graph on the right shows a pacemaker
embedded in the body of a heart
patient. A modern pacemaker is
essentially a tiny computer that
monitors a person’s heartbeat and
corrects irregularities as needed.
Pacemakers are particularly useful
in correcting a heartbeat that is
too slow.
The pacemaker device is
surgically placed in a “pocket” of
tissue near the patient’s collarbone.
One or more wires, called “leads,”
are connected to the pacemaker and
threaded down through a major vein
to the patient’s heart. By sending
electrical impulses along the leads to
the heart, the pacemaker can induce
a heartbeat.
A pacemaker obtains electrical
energy from a tiny battery that lasts
for about seven years before it must
be replaced. But how do batteries
supply electrical energy? The answer
lies in a branch of chemistry known
as electrochemistry. In this unit,
you will learn about the connection
between chemical reactions and
electricity. You will also learn about
the chemical reactions that take place
inside batteries.
Oxidation-Reduction
Reactions
K itchen chemistry is an important part of daily life. Cooks use chemistry
all the time to prepare and preserve food. Even the simplest things you
do in the kitchen can involve chemical reactions. For example, you have
probably seen a sliced apple turn brown. The same thing happens to pears,
bananas, avocados, and several other fruits. Slicing the fruit exposes the
ﬂesh to oxygen in the air. Compounds in the fruit react with oxygen to form
brown products. An enzyme in the fruit acts as a catalyst, speeding up this
reaction. How can you stop fruit from turning brown after it is sliced?
A Waldorf salad uses a simple method to prevent fruit from browning.
This type of salad usually consists of diced apples, celery, and walnuts,
covered with a mayonnaise dressing. The dressing keeps the air away
from the food ingredients. Without air, the fruit does not turn brown.
Another way to solve this problem is to prevent the enzyme in the
fruit from acting as a catalyst. Enzymes are sensitive to pH. Therefore,
adding an acid such as lemon juice or vinegar to fruit can prevent the
enzyme from acting. You may have noticed that avocado salad recipes
often include lemon juice. In addition to hindering the enzyme, lemon
juice contains vitamin C, which is very reactive toward oxygen. The
vitamin C reacts with oxygen before the sliced fruit can do so.
In this chapter, you will be introduced to oxidation-reduction
reactions, also called redox reactions. You will discover how to identify
this type of reaction. You will also ﬁnd out how to balance equations for
a redox reaction.
A redox reaction causes
fruit to go brown. How
can you recognize other
redox reactions?
C h a p t e r   P r e v i e w
10.1 Deﬁning Oxidation
and Reduction
10.2 Oxidation Numbers
10.3 The Half-Reaction
Method for Balancing
Equations
10.4 The Oxidation
Number Method for
Balancing Equations
P r e r e q u i s i t e
C o n c e p t s   a n d   S k i l l s
Before you begin this chapter,
review the following concepts
and skills:
(cid:2) balancing chemical, total
ionic, and net ionic equa-
tions (Concepts and Skills
Review)
(cid:2) reaction types, including
synthesis, decomposition,
single displacement, and
double displacement reac-
tions (Concepts and Skills
Review)
(cid:2) the common ionic
charges of metal ions
and non-metal ions, and
the formulas of common
polyatomic ions
(cid:2) drawing Lewis structures
(Concepts and Skills
Review)
(cid:2) electronegativities and
bond polarities (Chapter 4,
section 4.1)
464 MHR • Unit 5  Electrochemistry
Deﬁning Oxidation and Reduction
The term oxidation can be used to describe the process in which
certain fruits turn brown by reacting with oxygen. The original, historical
deﬁnition of this term was “to combine with oxygen.” Thus, oxidation
occurred when iron rusted, and when magnesium was burned in oxygen
gas. The term reduction was used historically to describe the opposite
of oxidation, that is, the formation of a metal from its compounds. An ore
is a naturally occurring solid compound or mixture of compounds from
which a metal can be extracted. Thus, the process of obtaining a metal
from an ore was known as a reduction. Copper ore was reduced to yield
copper, and iron ore was reduced to yield iron.
As you will learn in this chapter, the modern deﬁnitions for oxidation
and reduction are much broader. The current deﬁnitions are based on the
idea of electron transfers, and can now be applied to numerous chemical
reactions. In Unit 1, you saw the terms oxidation and reduction used to
describe changes to carbon-hydrogen and carbon-oxygen bonds within
organic compounds. These changes involve electron transfers, so the
broader deﬁnitions that you will learn in this chapter still apply.
In your previous chemistry course, you compared the reactivities of
metals. You may recall that, when a piece of zinc is placed in an aqueous
solution of copper(II) sulfate, the zinc displaces the copper in a single
displacement reaction. This reaction is shown in Figure 10.1. As the
zinc dissolves, the zinc strip gets smaller. A dark red-brown layer of
solid copper forms on the zinc strip, and some copper is deposited on
the bottom of the beaker. The blue colour of the solution fades, as blue
copper(II) ions are replaced by colourless zinc ions.
10.1
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
(cid:2) describe oxidation and
reduction in terms of
the loss and the gain of
electrons
(cid:2) write half-reactions from
balanced chemical
equations for oxidation-
reduction systems
(cid:2) investigate oxidation-
reduction reactions by com-
paring the reactivities of
some metals
(cid:2) communicate your
understanding of the terms
ore, oxidation, reduction,
oxidation-reduction reaction,
redox reaction, oxidizing
agent, reducing agent, half-
reaction, disproportionation
Figure 10.1
A solid zinc strip reacts with a solution that contains blue copper(II) ions.
Chapter 10  Oxidation-Reduction Reactions • MHR 465
From your earlier work, you
will recognize the sulfate ion,
2−, as a polyatomic ion. To
SO4
review the names and formulas
of common polyatomic ions,
refer to Appendix E, Table E.5.
C H E M
FA C T
Try using a mnemonic to
remember the deﬁnitions for
oxidation and reduction. For
example, in “LEO the lion says
GER,” LEO stands for “Loss of
Electrons is Oxidation.” GER
stands for “Gain of Electrons
is Reduction.” The mnemonic
“OIL RIG” stands for
“Oxidation Is Loss. Reduction
Is Gain.” Make up your own
mnemonic to help you remem-
ber these deﬁnitions.
The reaction in Figure 10.1 is represented by the following equation.
Zn(s) + CuSO4(aq) → Cu(s) + ZnSO4(aq)
This equation can be written as a total ionic equation.
(aq) + SO4
(aq) → Cu(s) + Zn2+
Zn(s) + Cu2+
2−
(aq) + SO4
2−
(aq)
The sulfate ions are spectator ions, meaning ions that are not involved
in the chemical reaction. By omitting the spectator ions, you obtain the
following net ionic equation.
Zn(s) + Cu2+
(aq) → Cu(s) + Zn2+
(aq)
Notice what happens to the reactants in this equation. The zinc atoms
lose electrons to form zinc ions. The copper ions gain electrons to form
copper atoms.
gains 2e−
Zn(s) + Cu2+
(aq) → Cu(s) + Zn2+
(aq)
loses 2e−
The following chemical deﬁnitions describe these changes.
• Oxidation is the loss of electrons.
• Reduction is the gain of electrons.
In the reaction of zinc atoms with copper(II) ions, the zinc atoms lose
electrons and undergo oxidation. In other words, the zinc atoms are
oxidized. The copper(II) ions gain electrons and undergo reduction.
In other words, the copper(II) ions are reduced. Because oxidation and
reduction both occur in the reaction, it is known as an oxidation-reduction
reaction or redox reaction.
Notice that electrons are transferred from zinc atoms to copper(II)
ions. The copper(II) ions are responsible for the oxidation of the zinc
atoms. A reactant that oxidizes another reactant is called an oxidizing
agent. The oxidizing agent accepts electrons in a redox reaction. In this
reaction, copper(II) is the oxidizing agent. The zinc atoms are responsible
for the reduction of the copper(II) ions. A reactant that reduces another
reactant is called a reducing agent. The reducing agent gives or donates
electrons in a redox reaction. In this reaction, zinc is the reducing agent.
A redox reaction can also be deﬁned as a reaction between an
oxidizing agent and a reducing agent, as illustrated in Figure 10.2.
Zn(s) + Cu2+
(aq)
Cu(s) + Zn2+
(aq)
• reducing agent
• donates electrons
• undergoes oxidation
• oxidizing agent
• accepts electrons
• undergoes reduction
In a redox reaction, the reducing agent is oxidized, and the oxidizing
Figure 10.2
agent is reduced. Note that the oxidizing agent does not undergo oxidation, and that
the reducing agent does not undergo reduction.
466 MHR • Unit 5  Electrochemistry
Try the following practice problems to review your understanding of net
ionic equations, and to work with the new concepts of oxidation and
reduction.
Practice Problems
1. Write a balanced net ionic equation for the reaction of zinc with
aqueous iron(II) chloride. Include the physical states of the reactants
and products.
2. Write a balanced net ionic equation for each reaction, including
physical states.
(a) magnesium with aqueous aluminum sulfate
(b) a solution of silver nitrate with metallic cadmium
3. Identify the reactant oxidized and the reactant reduced in each
reaction in question 2.
4. Identify the oxidizing agent and the reducing agent in each reaction
in question 2.
Half-Reactions
To monitor the transfer of electrons in a redox reaction, you can
represent the oxidation and reduction separately. A half-reaction is a
balanced equation that shows the number of electrons involved in either
oxidation or reduction. Because a redox reaction involves both oxidation
and reduction, two half-reactions are needed to represent a redox reaction.
One half-reaction shows oxidation, and the other half-reaction shows
reduction.
As you saw earlier, the reaction of zinc with aqueous copper(II) sulfate
can be represented by the following net ionic equation.
Zn(s) + Cu2+
(aq) → Cu(s) + Zn2+
(aq)
Each neutral Zn atom is oxidized to form a Zn2+ ion. Thus, each Zn atom
must lose two electrons. You can write an oxidation half-reaction to show
this change.
Zn(s) → Zn2+
(aq) + 2e−
Each Cu2+ ion is reduced to form a neutral Cu atom. Thus, each Cu2+ ion
must gain two electrons. You can write a reduction half-reaction to show
this change.
Cu2+
(aq) + 2e− → Cu(s)
If you look again at each half-reaction above, you will notice that
the atoms and the charges are balanced. Like other types of balanced
equations, half-reactions are balanced using the smallest possible
whole-number coefﬁcients. In the following equation, the atoms and
charges are balanced, but the coefﬁcients can all be divided by 2 to give
the usual form of the half-reaction.
2Cu2+
(aq) + 4e− → 2Cu(s)
You can write separate
oxidation and reduction half-
reactions to represent a redox
reaction, but one half-reaction
cannot occur on its own.
Explain why this statement
must be true.
Chapter 10  Oxidation-Reduction Reactions • MHR 467
In most redox reactions, one substance is oxidized and a different
substance is reduced. In a disproportionation reaction, however, a single
element undergoes both oxidation and reduction in the same reaction.
For example, a copper(I) solution undergoes disproportionation in the
following reaction.
2Cu+
(aq) → Cu(s) + Cu2+
(aq)
In this reaction, some copper(I) ions gain electrons, while other copper(I)
ions lose electrons.
gains 1e−
Cu+
(aq) + Cu+
(aq) → Cu(s) + Cu2+
(aq)
loses 1e−
The two half-reactions are as follows.
Oxidation: Cu+
Reduction: Cu+
(aq) → Cu2+
(aq) + 1e− → Cu(s)
(aq) + 1e−
You have learned that half-reactions can be used to represent oxidation
and reduction separately. Half-reactions always come in pairs: an oxidation
half-reaction is always accompanied by a reduction half-reaction, and vice
versa. Try writing and balancing half-reactions using the following practice
problems.
Practice Problems
5. Write balanced half-reactions from the net ionic equation for the
reaction between solid aluminum and aqueous iron(III) sulfate. The
sulfate ions are spectator ions, and are not included.
Al(s) + Fe3+
(aq) + Fe(s)
(aq) → Al3+
6. Write balanced half-reactions from the following net ionic
equations.
(a) Fe(s) + Cu2+
(b) Cd(s) + 2Ag+
(aq) → Fe2+
(aq) → Cd2+
(aq) + Cu(s)
(aq) + 2Ag(s)
7. Write balanced half-reactions for each of the following reactions.
(a) Sn(s) + PbCl2(aq) → SnCl2(aq) + Pb(s)
(b) Au(NO3)3(aq) + 3Ag(s) → 3AgNO3(aq) + Au(s)
(c) 3Zn(s) + Fe2(SO4)3(aq) → 3ZnSO4(aq) + 2Fe(s)
8. Write the net ionic equation and the half-reactions for the
disproportionation of mercury(I) ions in aqueous solution to give
liquid mercury and aqueous mercury(II) ions. Assume that mercury(I)
ions exist in solution as Hg2
2+
.
You already know that some metals are more reactive than others. You
may also have carried out an investigation on the metal activity series
in a previous course. In Investigation 10-A, located on page 470, you
will discover how this series is related to oxidation and reduction. You
will write chemical equations, ionic equations, and half-reactions for
the single displacement reactions of several metals.
C O U R S E
C H A L L E N G E
The Chemistry Bulletin, on
the next page, introduces
you to the terms oxidant
and antioxidant. How may
oxidants and antioxidants
affect human health?
Consider this question to
prepare for your Chemistry
Course Challenge.
468 MHR • Unit 5  Electrochemistry
Chemistry Bulletin
Aging: Is Oxidation a Factor?
Why do we grow old? Despite advances in
molecular biology and medical research, the
reasons for aging remain mysterious. One
theory suggests that aging may be inﬂuenced
by oxidizing agents, also known as oxidants.
Oxidants are present in the environment
and in foods. Nitrogen oxides are oxidants
present in cigarette smoke and urban smog.
Other oxidants include the copper and iron
salts in meat and some plants. Inhaling and
ingesting oxidants such as these can increase
the level of oxidants in our bodies.
Oxidants are also naturally present in
the body, where they participate in important
redox reactions. For example, mitochondria
consume oxygen during aerobic respiration,
and cells ingest and destroy bacteria. Both these
processes involve oxidation and reduction.
As you have just seen, redox reactions
are an essential part of your body’s processes.
However, these reactions can produce free
radicals, which are highly reactive atoms or
molecules with one or more unpaired electrons.
Because they are so reactive, free radicals can
oxidize surrounding molecules by robbing
them of electrons. This process can damage
DNA, proteins, and other macromolecules.
Such damage may contribute to aging, and
to diseases that are common among the aging,
such as cancer, cardiovascular disease, and
cataracts.
The study of oxidative damage has sparked
a debate about the role that antioxidants
might play in illness and aging. Antioxidants
are reducing agents. They donate electrons to
substances that have been oxidized, decreasing
the damage caused by free radicals. Dietary
antioxidants include vitamins C and E,
beta-carotene, and carotenoids.
Most medical researchers agree that people
with diets rich in fruits and vegetables have
a lower incidence of cardiovascular disease,
certain cancers, and cataracts. Although fruits
and vegetables are high in antioxidants, they
also contain ﬁbre and many different vitamins
Carotenoids are pigments found in some fruits and
vegetables, including spinach.
and plant chemicals. It is hard to disentangle
the effects of antioxidants from the beneﬁcial
effects of these other substances.
As a result, the beneﬁts of antioxidant
dietary supplements are under debate.
According to one study, vitamin E supplements
may lower the risk of heart disease. Another
study, however, concludes that taking
beta-carotene supplements does not reduce
the risk of certain cancers.
We can be sure that a balanced diet
including fruits and vegetables is beneﬁcial
to human health. Whether antioxidants confer
these beneﬁts, and whether these beneﬁts
include longevity, remain to be seen.
Making Connections
1. Research vitamins C, E, alpha- and beta-
carotenes, and folic acid. How do they
affect our health? What fruits and vegetables
contain these vitamins?
2. Lycopene is a carotenoid that has been
linked to a decreased risk of pancreatic,
cervical, and prostate cancer. Find out what
fruits and vegetables contain lycopene.
What colour are these fruits and vegetables?
Chapter 10  Oxidation-Reduction Reactions • MHR 469
S K I L L   F O C U S
MICROSCALE
Predicting
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
Single Displacement
Reactions
The metal activity series is shown in the table
below. The more reactive metals are near the top
of the series, and the less reactive metals are near
the bottom. In this investigation, you will relate
the activity series to the ease with which metals
are oxidized and metal ions are reduced.
Predictions
Predict the relative ease with which the metals
aluminum, copper, iron, magnesium, and zinc
can be oxidized. Predict the relative ease with
which the ions of these same metals can be
reduced. Explain your reasoning in both cases.
Activity Series of Metals
Materials
well plate
test tube rack
4 small test tubes
4 small pieces of each of these metals:
aluminum foil, thin copper wire or tiny copper
beads, iron ﬁlings, magnesium, and zinc
dropper bottles containing dilute solutions of
aluminum sulfate, copper(II) sulfate, iron(II)
sulfate, magnesium sulfate, and zinc nitrate
Safety Precautions
• Wear goggles, gloves, and an apron for all parts
of this investigation.
Procedure
1. Place the well plate on a white piece of paper.
Label it to match the table on the next page.
2. In each well plate, place a small piece of the
appropriate metal, about the size of a grain of
rice. Cover each piece with a few drops of the
appropriate solution. Wait 3– 5 min to observe
if a reaction occurs.
3. Look for evidence of a chemical reaction in
each mixture. Record the results, using “y” for
a reaction, or “n” for no reaction. If you are
unsure, repeat the process on a larger scale in
a small test tube.
Metal
lithium
potassium
barium
calcium
sodium
magnesium
aluminum
zinc
chromium
iron
cadmium
cobalt
nickel
tin
lead
copper
mercury
silver
platinum
gold
Most Reactive
Least Reactive
Question
How is the order of the metals in the activity
series related to the ease with which metals are
oxidized and metal ions are reduced?
470 MHR • Unit 5  Electrochemistry
Compound
Metal
Al2(SO4)3
CuSO4
FeSO4
MgSO4
Zn(NO3)2
Al
Cu
Fe
Mg
Zn
4. Discard the mixtures in the waste beaker
supplied by your teacher. Do not pour
anything down the drain.
Analysis
1. For each single displacement reaction
you observed, write
(a) a balanced chemical equation
(b) a total ionic equation
(c) a net ionic equation
2. Write an oxidation half-reaction and a
reduction half-reaction for each net ionic
equation you wrote in question 1. Use the
smallest possible whole-number coefﬁcients
in each half-reaction.
3. Look at each balanced net ionic equation.
Compare the total number of electrons lost
by the reducing agent with the total number
of electrons gained by the oxidizing agent.
4. List the different oxidation half-reactions.
Start with the half-reaction for the most easily
oxidized metal, and end with the half-reaction
for the least easily oxidized metal. Explain
your reasoning. Compare your list with your
ﬁrst prediction from the beginning of this
investigation.
5. List the different reduction half-reactions.
Start with the half-reaction for the most
easily reduced metal ion, and end with the
half-reaction for the least easily reduced
metal ion. Explain your reasoning. Compare
your list with your second prediction from
the beginning of this investigation.
Conclusions
6. Which list from questions 4 and 5 puts the
metals in the same order as they appear in
the activity series?
7. How is the order of the metals in the activity
series related to the ease with which metals
are oxidized and metal ions are reduced?
Applications
8. Use the activity series to choose a reducing
agent that will reduce aqueous nickel(II) ions
to metallic nickel. Explain your reasoning.
9. Use the activity series to choose an oxidizing
agent that will oxidize metallic cobalt to
form aqueous cobalt(II) ions. Explain your
reasoning.
Chapter 10  Oxidation-Reduction Reactions • MHR 471
Unit Investigation Prep
In the end-of-unit investigation,
you will be working with the
metals zinc and copper. Which
metal is more easily oxidized?
Which is more easily reduced?
Section Summary
In this section, you learned to deﬁne and recognize redox reactions, and
to write oxidation and reduction half-reactions. In Investigation 10-A,
you observed the connection between the metal activity series and redox
reactions. However, thus far, you have only worked with redox reactions
that involve atoms and ions as reactants or products. In the next section,
you will learn about redox reactions that involve covalent reactants or
products.
Section Review
1
K/U
Predict whether each of the following single displacement
reactions will occur. If so, write a balanced chemical equation, a
balanced net ionic equation, and two balanced half-reactions. Include
the physical states of the reactants and products in each case.
(a) aqueous silver nitrate and metallic cadmium
(b) gold and aqueous copper(II) sulfate
(c) aluminum and aqueous mercury(II) chloride
2
(a)
K/U
On which side of an oxidation half-reaction are the electrons?
Why?
3
4
5
(b)
K/U
On which side of a reduction half-reaction are the electrons?
Why?
C
Explain why, in a redox reaction, the oxidizing agent undergoes
reduction.
C
In a combination reaction, does metallic lithium act as an oxidizing
agent or a reducing agent? Explain.
I
Write a net ionic equation for a reaction in which
(a) Fe2+ acts as an oxidizing agent
(b) Al acts as a reducing agent
(c) Au3+ acts as an oxidizing agent
(d) Cu acts as a reducing agent
(e) Sn2+ acts as an oxidizing agent and as a reducing agent
6
MC
The element potassium is made industrially by the single
displacement reaction of molten sodium with molten potassium
chloride.
(a) Write a net ionic equation for the reaction, assuming that all
reactants and products are in the liquid state.
(b) Identify the oxidizing agent and the reducing agent in the reaction.
(c) Explain why the reaction is carried out in the liquid state and not in
aqueous solution.
472 MHR • Unit 5  Electrochemistry
10.2
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
(cid:2) describe oxidation and
reduction in terms of
changes in oxidation number
(cid:2) assign oxidation numbers
to elements in covalent mol-
ecules and polyatomic ions
(cid:2) identify redox reactions
using oxidation numbers
(cid:2) communicate your under-
standing of the terms
oxidation numbers,
oxidation, reduction
C H E M
FA C T
Oxidation numbers are just a
bookkeeping method used to
keep track of electron trans-
fers. In a covalent molecule or
a polyatomic ion, the oxidation
number of each element does
not represent an ionic charge,
because the elements are not
present as ions. However, to
assign oxidation numbers to
the elements in a covalent
molecule or polyatomic ion,
you can pretend the bonds
are ionic.
Oxidation Numbers
Redox reactions are very common. Some of them produce light in a
process known as chemiluminescence. In living things, the production
of light in redox reactions is known as bioluminescence. You can actually
see the light from redox reactions occurring in some organisms, such as
glowworms and ﬁreﬂies, as shown in Figure 10.3.
Figure 10.3
Fireﬂies use ﬂashes of light produced by redox reactions to attract a mate.
Not all redox reactions give off light, however. How can you recognize a
redox reaction, and how can you identify the oxidizing and reducing
agents? In section 10.1, you saw net ionic equations with monatomic
elements, such as Cu and Zn, and with ions containing a single element,
such as Cu2+ and Zn2+. In these cases, you could use ionic charges to
describe the transfer of electrons. However, many redox reactions involve
reactants or products with covalent bonds, including elements that exist
as covalent molecules, such as oxygen, O2; covalent compounds, such
as water, H2O; or polyatomic ions that are not spectator ions, such as
−. For reactions involving covalent reactants and
permanganate, MnO4
products, you cannot use ionic charges to describe the transfer of electrons.
Oxidation numbers are actual or hypothetical charges, assigned using
a set of rules. They are used to describe redox reactions with covalent
reactants or products. They are also used to identify redox reactions, and
to identify oxidizing and reducing agents. In this section, you will see
how oxidation numbers were developed from Lewis structures, and then
learn the rules to assign oxidation numbers.
Oxidation Numbers from Lewis Structures
You are probably familiar with the Lewis structure of water, shown in
Figure 10.4A. From the electronegativities on the periodic table in
Figure 10.5, on the next page, you can see that oxygen (electronegativity
3.44) is more electronegative than hydrogen (electronegativity 2.20). The
electronegativity difference is less than 1.7, so the two hydrogen-oxygen
bonds are polar covalent, not ionic. In each bond, the electrons are more
strongly attracted to the oxygen atom than to the hydrogen atom.
A
•
•
• •
•
•
O H
• •
H
B
−2
•
•
• •
O
• •
H
+1
•
•
H
+1
(A) The Lewis
Figure 10.4
structure of water; (B) The formal
counting of electrons with the
more electronegative element
assigned a negative charge
Chapter 10  Oxidation-Reduction Reactions • MHR 473
To assign oxidation numbers to the atoms in a water molecule, you
can consider all the bonding electrons to be “owned” by the more elec-
tronegative oxygen atom, as shown in Figure 10.4B. Thus, each hydrogen
atom in a water molecule is considered to have no electrons, as hydrogen
would in a hydrogen ion, H+. Therefore, the element hydrogen is assigned
an oxidation number of +1 in water. On the other hand, the oxygen atom
in a water molecule is considered to have a ﬁlled octet of electrons, as
oxygen would in an oxide ion, O2− . Therefore, the element oxygen is
assigned an oxidation number of −2 in water. (Note: These are not ionic
charges, since water is a covalent molecule. Also, note that the plus or
minus sign in an oxidation number, such as −2, is written before the
number. The plus or minus sign in an ionic charge, such as 2−, is written
after the number.)
H
2.20
Li
0.98
Be
1.57
Na
0.93
Mg
1.31
B
2.04
C
2.55
N
3.04
O
3.44
F
3.98
Al
1.61
Si
1.90
P
2.19
S
2.58
Cl
3.16
K
0.82
Ca
1.00
Sc
1.36
Ti
1.54
V
1.63
Cr
1.66
Mn
1.55
Fe
1.83
Co
1.88
Ni
1.91
Cu
1.90
Zn
1.65
Ga
1.81
Ge
2.01
As
2.18
Se
2.55
Br
2.96
Rb
0.82
Sr
0.95
Y
1.22
Zr
1.33
Cs
0.79
Ba
0.89
Fr
0.7
Ra
0.9
Lu
1.0
Lr
-
Hf
1.3
Rf
-
Nb
1.6
Ta
1.5
Db
-
Mo
2.16
Tc
2.10
W
1.7
Sg
-
Re
1.9
Bh
-
Ru
2.2
Os
2.2
Hs
-
Rh
2.28
Pd
2.20
Ag
1.93
Cd
1.69
In
1.78
Sn
1.96
Sb
2.05
Ir
2.2
Mt
-
Pt
2.2
Au
2.4
Hg
1.9
Uun
-
Uuu
-
Uub
-
TI
1.8
-
Pb
1.8
Uuq
-
Bi
1.9
-
Te
2.1
Po
2.0
Uuh
-
I
2.66
At
2.2
-
He
-
Ne
-
Ar
-
Kr
-
Xe
-
Rn
-
Uuo
-
La
1.10
Ce
1.12
Pr
1.13
Nd
1.14
Pm
-
Sm
1.17
Eu
-
Gd
1.20
Ac
1.1
Th
1.3
Pa
1.5
U
1.7
Np
1.3
Pu
1.3
Am
-
Cm
-
Tb
-
Bk
-
Dy
1.22
Ho
1.23
Er
1.24
Tm
1.25
Yb
-
Cf
-
Es
-
Fm
-
Md
-
No
-
Figure 10.5
The periodic table, showing electronegativity values
In a chlorine molecule, Cl2, each atom has the same electronegativity, so
the bond is non-polar covalent. Because the electrons are equally shared,
you can consider each chlorine atom to “own” one of the shared elec-
trons, as shown in Figure 10.6. Thus, each chlorine atom in the molecule
is considered to have the same number of electrons as a neutral chlorine
atom. Each chlorine atom is therefore assigned an oxidation number of 0.
A
B
• •
• •
• •
• •
•
•
Cl Cl
•
•
• •
• •
•
•
•
•
Cl Cl
•
•
•
•
• •
• •
Figure 10.6
electrons in a chlorine molecule for oxidation number purposes
(A) The Lewis structure of a chlorine molecule; (B) The formal counting of
00
0
474 MHR • Unit 5  Electrochemistry
Figure 10.7 shows how oxidation numbers are assigned for the
polyatomic cyanide ion, CN−. The electronegativity of nitrogen (3.04) is
greater than the electronegativity of carbon (2.55). Thus, the three shared
pairs of electrons are all considered to belong to the nitrogen atom. As
a result, the carbon atom is considered to have two valence electrons,
which is two electrons less than the four valence electrons of a neutral
carbon atom. Therefore, the carbon atom in CN− is assigned an oxidation
number of +2. The nitrogen atom is considered to have eight valence
electrons, which is three electrons more than the ﬁve valence electrons of
a neutral nitrogen atom. Therefore, the nitrogen atom in CN− is assigned
an oxidation number of −3.
A
B
−
•
•
•
C •
•
•
•
•
•
•
N
−
•
•
•
C •
+2
•
•
•
•
•
•N
−3
Figure 10.7
in a cyanide ion for oxidation number purposes
(A) The Lewis structure of a cyanide ion; (B) The formal counting of electrons
You have seen examples of how Lewis structures can be used to assign
oxidation numbers for polar molecules such as water, non-polar molecules
such as chlorine, and polar polyatomic ions such as the cyanide ion.
In the following ThoughtLab, you will use Lewis structures to assign
oxidation number values, and then look for patterns in your results.
ThoughtLab
Finding Rules for Oxidation Numbers
Procedure
Analysis
1. Use Lewis structures to assign an oxidation
number to each element in the following
covalent molecules.
(a) HI
(d) BBr3
(c) PCl5
(b) O2
2. Use Lewis structures to assign an oxidation
number to each element in the following
polyatomic ions.
(a) OH−
(b) NH4
(c) CO3
2−
+
3. Assign an oxidation number to each of the
following atoms or monatomic ions. Explain
your reasoning.
(b) K
(a) Ne
(d) Mg2+
(c) I−
1. For each molecule in question 1 of the proce-
dure, ﬁnd the sum of the oxidation numbers
of all the atoms present. What do you notice?
Explain why the observed sum must be true for
a neutral molecule.
2. For each polyatomic ion in question 2 of the
procedure, ﬁnd the sum of the oxidation
numbers of all the atoms present. Describe
and explain any pattern you see.
Extension
3. Predict the sum of the oxidation numbers of the
atoms in the hypochlorite ion, OCl− .
4. Test your prediction from question 3.
Chapter 10  Oxidation-Reduction Reactions • MHR 475
Using Rules to Find Oxidation Numbers
Drawing Lewis structures to assign oxidation numbers can be a very
time-consuming process for large molecules or large polyatomic ions.
Instead, the results from Lewis structures have been summarized to
produce a more convenient set of rules, which can be applied more
quickly. Table 10.1 summarizes the rules used to assign oxidation
numbers. You may have discovered some of these rules for yourself in
the ThoughtLab you just completed.
Table 10.1 Oxidation Number Rules
Rules
Examples
1. A pure element has an oxidation
number of 0.
2. The oxidation number of an element
in a monatomic ion equals the
charge of the ion.
3. The oxidation number of hydrogen
in its compounds is +1, except in
metal hydrides, where the oxidation
number of hydrogen is −1.
4. The oxidation number of oxygen in
its compounds is usually −2, but
there are exceptions. These include
peroxides, such as H2O2, and the
compound OF2.
5. In covalent compounds that do not
contain hydrogen or oxygen, the
more electronegative element is
assigned an oxidation number that
equals the negative charge it usually
has in its ionic compounds.
(cid:2)
Na in Na(s), Br in Br2(  ), and P in P4(s)
all have an oxidation number of 0.
The oxidation number of Al in Al3+
is +3. The oxidation number of Se in
Se2− is −2.
The oxidation number of H in H2S or
CH4 is +1. The oxidation number of H
in NaH or in CaH2 is −1.
The oxidation number of O in Li2O or
in KNO3 is −2.
The oxidation number of Cl in PCl3 is
−1. The oxidation number of S in CS2
is −2.
6. The sum of the oxidation numbers
of all the elements in a compound
is 0.
In CF4, the oxidation number of F is −1,
and the oxidation number of C is +4.
(+4) + 4(−1) = 0
7. The sum of the oxidation numbers
of all the elements in a polyatomic
ion equals the charge on the ion.
−
, the oxidation number of O is
In NO2
−2, and the oxidation number of N is +3.
(+3) + 2(−2) = −1
Some oxidation numbers found using these rules are not integers. For
example, an important iron ore called magnetite has the formula Fe3O4.
Using the oxidation number rules, you can assign oxygen an oxidation
number of −2, and calculate an oxidation number of + 8
magnetite contains no iron atoms with this oxidation number. It actually
contains iron(III) ions and iron(II) ions in a 2:1 ratio. The formula of
magnetite is sometimes written as Fe2O3 • FeO to indicate that there are
two different oxidation numbers. The value + 8
3 for the oxidation number
of iron is an average value.
3 for iron. However,
2(+3) + (+2)
3
= + 8
3
Even though some oxidation numbers found using these rules are
averages, the rules are still useful for monitoring electron transfers in
redox reactions.
476 MHR • Unit 5  Electrochemistry
In the following Sample Problem, you will ﬁnd out how to apply
these rules to covalent molecules and polyatomic ions.
Sample Problem
Assigning Oxidation Numbers
Problem
Assign an oxidation number to each element.
(a)SiBr4
(b) HClO4
(c) Cr2O7
2−
Solution
(a) • Because the compound SiBr4 does not contain hydrogen or oxygen,
rule 5 applies. Because SiBr4 is a compound, rule 6 also applies.
• Silicon has an electronegativity of 1.90. Bromine has an
electronegativity of 2.96. From rule 5, therefore, you can assign
bromine an oxidation number of −1.
• The oxidation number of silicon is unknown, so let it be x. You
know from rule 6 that the sum of the oxidation numbers is 0. Then,
x + 4(−1) = 0
x − 4 = 0
x = 4
The oxidation number of silicon is +4. The oxidation number of bromine
is −1.
(b) • Because the compound HClO4 contains hydrogen and oxygen,
rules 3 and 4 apply. Because HClO4 is a compound, rule 6 also
applies.
• Hydrogen has its usual oxidation number of +1. Oxygen has its
usual oxidation number of −2. The oxidation number of chlorine
is unknown, so let it be x. You know from rule 6 that the sum of
the oxidation numbers is 0. Then,
(+1) + x + 4(−2) = 0
x − 7 = 0
x = 7
The oxidation number of hydrogen is +1. The oxidation number
of chlorine is +7. The oxidation number of oxygen is −2.
(c) • Because the polyatomic ion Cr2O7
2− contains oxygen, rule 4
applies. Because Cr2O7
2− is a polyatomic ion, rule 7 also applies.
• Oxygen has its usual oxidation number of −2.
• The oxidation number of chromium is unknown, so let it be x.
You know from rule 7 that the sum of the oxidation numbers is −2.
Then,
2x + 7(−2) = −2
2x − 14 = −2
2x = 12
x = 6
The oxidation number of chromium is +6. The oxidation number of
oxygen is −2.
PROBLEM TIP
When ﬁnding the oxidation
numbers of elements in ionic
compounds, you can work
with the ions separately. For
example, Na2Cr2O7 contains
two Na+ ions, and so sodium
has an oxidation number of +1.
The oxidation numbers of Cr
and O can then be calculated
as shown in part (c) of the
Sample Problem.
Chapter 10  Oxidation-Reduction Reactions • MHR 477
Practice Problems
9. Determine the oxidation number of the speciﬁed element in each of
the following.
(a) N in NF3
(d) P in P2O5
(b) S in S8
(e) C in C12H22O11
2−
(c) Cr in CrO4
(f) C in CHCl3
10. Determine the oxidation number of each element in each of the
following.
(a) H2SO3
(b) OH−
(c) HPO4
2−
11. As stated in rule 4, oxygen does not always have its usual oxidation
number of −2. Determine the oxidation number of oxygen in each of
the following.
(a) the compound oxygen diﬂuoride, OF2
(b) the peroxide ion, O2
2−
12. Determine the oxidation number of each element in each of the
following ionic compounds by considering the ions separately.
Hint: One formula unit of the compound in part (c) contains two
identical monatomic ions and one polyatomic ion.
(a) Al(HCO3)3
(b) (NH4)3PO4
(c) K2H3IO6
Applying Oxidation Numbers to Redox Reactions
You have seen that the single displacement reaction of zinc with
copper(II) sulfate is a redox reaction, represented by the following
chemical equation and net ionic equation.
Zn(s) + CuSO4(aq) → Cu(s) + ZnSO4(aq)
Zn(s) + Cu2+
(aq) → Cu(s) + Zn2+
(aq)
Each atom or ion shown in the net ionic equation can be assigned
an oxidation number. Zn has an oxidation number of 0; Cu2+ has an
oxidation number of +2; Cu has an oxidation number of 0; and Zn2+ has
an oxidation number of +2. Thus, there are changes in oxidation numbers
in this reaction. The oxidation number of zinc increases, while the
oxidation number of copper decreases.
oxidation number increases
(loss of electrons)
Zn + Cu2+
0
+2
→
Zn2+ + Cu
+2
0
oxidation number decreases
(gain of electrons)
In the oxidation half-reaction, the element zinc undergoes an increase
in its oxidation number from 0 to +2.
Zn → Zn2+ + 2e−
+2
0
In the reduction half-reaction, the element copper undergoes a decrease
in its oxidation number from +2 to 0.
Cu2+ + 2e− → Cu
0
+2
478 MHR • Unit 5  Electrochemistry
Therefore, you can describe oxidation and reduction as follows. (Also see
Figure 10.8.)
• Oxidation is an increase in oxidation number.
• Reduction is a decrease in oxidation number.
You can also monitor changes in oxidation numbers in reactions that
involve covalent molecules. For example, oxidation number changes
occur in the reaction of hydrogen and oxygen to form water.
2H2(g) + O2(g) → 2H2O((cid:2))
0
0
+1 −2
Because hydrogen combines with oxygen in this reaction, hydrogen
undergoes oxidation, according to the historical deﬁnition given at the
beginning of section 10.1. Hydrogen also undergoes oxidation according
to the modern deﬁnition, because the oxidation number of hydrogen
increases from 0 to +1. Hydrogen is the reducing agent in this reaction.
The oxygen undergoes reduction, because its oxidation number decreases
from 0 to −2. Oxygen is the oxidizing agent in this reaction.
The following Sample Problem illustrates how to use oxidation num-
bers to identify redox reactions, oxidizing agents, and reducing agents.
oxidation
numbers
+5
+4
+3
+2
+1
0
−1
−2
−3
−4
−5
n
o
i
t
a
d
x
o
i
n
o
i
t
c
u
d
e
r
Sample Problem
Identifying Redox Reactions
Problem
Determine whether each of the following reactions is a redox reaction.
If so, identify the oxidizing agent and the reducing agent.
(a) CH4(g) + Cl2(g) → CH3Cl(g) + HCl(g)
(b) CaCO3(s) + 2HCl(aq) → CaCl2(aq) + H2O((cid:2)) + CO2(g)
Solution
Find the oxidation number of each element in the reactants and
products. Identify any elements that undergo an increase or a decrease
in oxidation number during the reaction.
(a) The oxidation number of each element in the reactants and products
is as shown.
CH4(g) + Cl2(g) → CH3Cl(g) + HCl(g)
−4 +1
• The oxidation number of hydrogen is +1 on both sides of the
−2 +1 −1
+1 −1
0
equation, so hydrogen is neither oxidized nor reduced.
• Both carbon and chlorine undergo changes in oxidation number, so
the reaction is a redox reaction.
• The oxidation number of carbon increases from −4 to −2. The car-
bon atoms on the reactant side exist in methane molecules, CH4(g),
so methane is oxidized. Therefore, methane is the reducing agent.
• The oxidation number of chlorine decreases from 0 to −1, so
elemental chlorine, Cl2(g), is reduced. Therefore, elemental chlorine
is the oxidizing agent.
(b) Because this reaction involves ions, write the equation in its total
ionic form.
CaCO3(s) + 2H+
(aq) + 2Cl−
(aq) → Ca2+
(aq) + 2Cl−
(aq) + H2O((cid:2)) + CO2(g)
Oxidation and
Figure 10.8
reduction are directly related to
changes in oxidation numbers.
PROBLEM TIPS
• Use the fact that the sum
of the oxidation numbers
in a molecule is zero to
check the assignment of
the oxidation numbers.
• Make sure that a
reaction does not include
only a reduction or only
an oxidation. Oxidation
and reduction must
occur together in a redox
reaction.
In part (b) of the Sample
Problem, you can assign
oxidation numbers to each
element in the given chemical
equation or in the net ionic
equation. What are the advan-
tages and the disadvantages
of each method?
Continued ...
Chapter 10  Oxidation-Reduction Reactions • MHR 479
In your previous chemistry
course, you classiﬁed
reactions into four main types:
synthesis, decomposition,
single displacement, and
double displacement. You
also learned to recognize
combustion reactions and
neutralization reactions. You
have now learned to classify
redox reactions. In addition,
you have also learned about a
special type of redox reaction
known as a disproportionation
reaction.
1. Classify each reaction in
two ways.
(a) magnesium reacting
with a solution of
iron(II) nitrate
Mg + Fe(NO3)2
→ Fe + Mg(NO3)2
(b) hydrogen sulﬁde
burning in oxygen
2H2S + 3O2
→ 2SO2 + 2H2O
(c) calcium reacting with
chlorine
Ca + Cl2 → CaCl2
2. Classify the formation of
water and oxygen from
hydrogen peroxide in
three ways.
2H2O2 → 2H2O + O2
Continued ...
(aq) → Ca2+
The chloride ions are spectator ions, which do not undergo oxidation
or reduction. The net ionic equation is as follows.
CaCO3(s) + 2H+
(aq) + H2O((cid:2)) + CO2(g)
For the net ionic equation, the oxidation number of each element in
the reactants and products is as shown.
(aq) → Ca2+
CaCO3(s) + 2H+
+1
+2 +4 −2
(aq) + H2O((cid:2)) + CO2(g)
+1 −2
+4 −2
+2
No elements undergo changes in oxidation numbers, so the reaction
is not a redox reaction.
Practice Problems
13. Determine whether each reaction is a redox reaction.
(a) H2O2 + 2Fe(OH)2 → 2Fe(OH)3
(b) PCl3 + 3H2O → H3PO3 + 3HCl
14. Identify the oxidizing agent and the reducing agent for the redox
reaction(s) in the previous question.
15. For the following balanced net ionic equation, identify the reactant
that undergoes oxidation and the reactant that undergoes reduction.
Br2 + 2ClO2
− → 2Br− + 2ClO2
16. Nickel and copper are two metals that are important to the Ontario
economy, particularly in the Sudbury area. Nickel and copper ores
usually contain the metals as sulﬁdes, such as NiS and Cu2S. Do the
extractions of these pure elemental metals from their ores involve
redox reactions? Explain your reasoning.
Section Summary
In this section, you extended your knowledge of redox reactions to
include covalent reactants and products. You did this by learning how
to assign oxidation numbers and how to use them to recognize redox
reactions, oxidizing agents, and reducing agents. In the next section, you
will extend your knowledge further by learning how to write balanced
equations that represent redox reactions.
Section Review
1
C
At the beginning of section 10.1, it was stated that oxidation
originally meant “to combine with oxygen.” Explain why a metal that
combines with the element oxygen undergoes oxidation as we now
deﬁne it. What happens to the oxygen in this reaction? Write a bal-
anced chemical equation for a reaction that illustrates your answer.
2
K/U
Determine whether each of the following reactions is a redox
reaction.
(a) H2 + I2 → 2HI
(b) 2NaHCO3 → Na2CO3 + H2O + CO2
480 MHR • Unit 5  Electrochemistry
(c) 2HBr + Ca(OH)2 → CaBr2 + 2H2O
(d) PCl5 → PCl3 + Cl2
3
4
5
K/U
Write three different deﬁnitions for a redox reaction.
C
Explain why ﬂuorine has an oxidation number of −1 in all its
compounds.
C
When an element combines with another element, is the reaction
a redox reaction? Explain your answer.
6
(a)
I
Use the oxidation number rules to ﬁnd the oxidation number
2−.
of sulfur in a thiosulfate ion, S2O3
(b) The Lewis structure of a thiosulfate ion is given here. Use the Lewis
structure to ﬁnd the oxidation number of each sulfur atom.
• •
•
• O
• •
2−
• •
•
•S
• •
•
•
•
•
•
•
• •
• •
O
S
O
•
•
• •
•
•
•
•
•
•
(c) Compare your results from parts (a) and (b) and explain any
differences.
(d) What are the advantages and disadvantages of using Lewis
structures to assign oxidation numbers?
(e) What are the advantages and disadvantages of using the oxidation
number rules to assign oxidation numbers?
7
(a)
MC
The Haber Process for the production of ammonia from
nitrogen and hydrogen is a very important industrial process.
Write a balanced chemical equation for the reaction. Use oxidation
numbers to identify the oxidizing agent and the reducing agent.
(b) When ammonia is reacted with nitric acid to make the common fer-
tilizer ammonium nitrate, is the reaction a redox reaction? Explain.
(Hint: Consider the two polyatomic ions in the product separately.)
8
MC
Historically, the extraction of a metal from its ore was known as
reduction. One way to reduce iron ore on an industrial scale is to use
a huge reaction vessel, 30 m to 40 m high, called a blast furnace. The
reactants in a blast furnace are an impure iron ore, such as Fe2O3,
mixed with limestone, CaCO3 , and coke, C, which is made from coal.
The solid mixture is fed into the top of the blast furnace. A blast of
very hot air, at about 900˚C, is blown in near the bottom of the furnace.
The following reactions occur.
2C + O2 → 2CO
Fe2O3 + 3CO → 2Fe + 3CO2
The limestone is present to convert sand or quartz, SiO2, which is
present as an impurity in the ore, to calcium silicate, CaSiO3.
CaCO3 → CaO + CO2
CaO + SiO2 → CaSiO3
(a) Which of the four reactions above are redox reactions?
(b) For each redox reaction that you identiﬁed in part (a), name the
oxidizing agent and the reducing agent.
C H E M
FA C T
Redox reactions are involved
in some very important indus-
trial processes, such as iron
and steel production. However,
the widespread use of metals
has occupied a relatively small
part of human history. In the
Stone Age, humans relied
on stone, wood, and bone
to make tools and weapons.
The Stone Age ended in many
parts of the world with the
start of the Bronze Age, which
was marked by the use of cop-
per and then bronze (an alloy
of copper and tin). In the Iron
Age, bronze was replaced by
the use of iron. The dates of
the Bronze Age and the Iron
Age vary for different parts of
the world.
Chapter 10  Oxidation-Reduction Reactions • MHR 481
10.3
The Half-Reaction Method for
Balancing Equations
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
(cid:2) investigate oxidation-
reduction reactions by
reacting metals with
acids and by combusting
hydrocarbons
(cid:2) write balanced equations
for redox reactions using the
half-reaction method
Did you know that redox reactions are an important part of CD
manufacturing? The CDs you buy at a music store are made of Lexan,
the same plastic used for riot shields and bulletproof windows. The CDs
are coated with a thin aluminum ﬁlm. They are copies of a single master
disc, which is made of glass coated with silver, as seen in Figure 10.9.
Silver is deposited on a glass disc by the reduction of silver ions with
methanal, HCHO, also known as formaldehyde. In the same reaction,
formaldehyde is oxidized to methanoic acid, HCOOH, also known as
formic acid. The redox reaction occurs under acidic conditions.
Figure 10.9
disc with silver.
The production of CDs depends on a redox reaction used to coat the master
You have seen many balanced chemical equations and net ionic equations
that represent redox reactions. There are speciﬁc techniques for balancing
these equations. These techniques are especially useful for reactions that
take place under acidic or basic conditions, such as the acidic conditions
used in coating a master CD with silver.
In section 10.1, you learned to divide the balanced equations for some
redox reactions into separate oxidation and reduction half-reactions. You
will now use the reverse approach, and discover how to write a balanced
equation by combining two half-reactions. To do this, you must ﬁrst
understand how to write a wide range of half-reactions.
482 MHR • Unit 5  Electrochemistry
Balancing Half-Reactions
In the synthesis of potassium chloride from its elements, metallic
potassium is oxidized to form potassium ions, and gaseous chlorine is
reduced to form chloride ions. This reaction is shown in Figure 10.10.
Each half-reaction can be balanced by writing the correct formulas for
the reactant and product, balancing the numbers of atoms, and then
adding the correct number of electrons to balance the charges. For the
oxidation half-reaction,
K → K+ + e−
The atoms are balanced. The net charge on each side is 0. For the
reduction half-reaction,
Cl2 + 2e− → 2Cl−
The atoms are balanced. The net charge on each side is −2.
K
K
Cl2
K+
Cl−
K+
Cl−
2K(s)
0
Potassium
+
Cl2(g)
0
Chlorine
2KCl(s)
+1 −1
Potassium chloride
Grey potassium metal, which is stored under oil, reacts very vigorously with
Figure 10.10
greenish-yellow chlorine gas to form white potassium chloride. The changes in oxidation
numbers show that this synthesis reaction is also a redox reaction.
Redox reactions do not always take place under neutral conditions.
Balancing half-reactions is more complicated for reactions that take place
in acidic or basic solutions. When an acid or base is present, H+ or OH−
ions must also be considered. However, the overall approach is similar.
This approach involves writing the correct formulas for the reactants and
products, balancing the atoms, and adding the appropriate number of
electrons to one side of the half-reaction to balance the charges.
Chapter 10  Oxidation-Reduction Reactions • MHR 483
Balancing Half-Reactions for Acidic Solutions
The following steps are used to balance a half-reaction for an acidic
solution. The Sample Problem that follows applies these steps.
Step 1 Write an unbalanced half-reaction that shows the formulas of
the given reactant(s) and product(s).
Step 2 Balance any atoms other than oxygen and hydrogen ﬁrst.
Step 3 Balance any oxygen atoms by adding water molecules.
Step 4 Balance any hydrogen atoms by adding hydrogen ions.
Step 5 Balance the charges by adding electrons.
Sample Problem
Balancing a Half-Reaction in Acidic Solution
Problem
Write a balanced half-reaction that shows the reduction of
permanganate ions, MnO4
solution.
−, to manganese(II) ions in an acidic
Solution
Step 1 Represent the given reactant and product with correct formulas.
MnO4
− → Mn2+
Step 2 Balance the atoms, starting with the manganese atoms. Here, the
manganese atoms are already balanced.
Step 3 The reduction occurs in aqueous solution, so add water
molecules to balance the oxygen atoms.
MnO4
− → Mn2+ + 4H2O
Step 4 The reaction occurs in acidic solution, so add hydrogen ions to
balance the hydrogen atoms.
− + 8H+ → Mn2+ + 4H2O
MnO4
Step 5 The atoms are now balanced, but the net charge on the left side
is 7+, whereas the net charge on the right side is 2+. Add ﬁve
electrons to the left side to balance the charges.
MnO4
− + 8H+ + 5e− → Mn2+ + 4H2O
Practice Problems
17. Write a balanced half-reaction for the reduction of cerium(IV) ions
to cerium(III) ions.
18. Write a balanced half-reaction for the oxidation of bromide ions to
bromine.
19. Balance each of the following half-reactions under acidic conditions.
(a) O2 → H2O2
(b) H2O → O2
(c) NO3
− → N2
20. Balance each of the following half-reactions under acidic conditions.
(a) ClO3
− → Cl−
−
(b) NO → NO3
(c) Cr2O7
2− → Cr3+
The ability to balance a single
half-reaction as a bookkeeping
exercise does not mean that a
single half-reaction can occur
on its own. In a redox reaction,
oxidation and reduction must
both occur.
484 MHR • Unit 5  Electrochemistry
Balancing Half-Reactions for Basic Solutions
The following steps are used to balance a half-reaction for a basic solution.
The Sample Problem that follows applies these steps.
Step 1 Write an unbalanced half-reaction that shows the formulas of
the given reactant(s) and product(s).
Step 2 Balance any atoms other than oxygen and hydrogen ﬁrst.
Step 3 Balance any oxygen and hydrogen atoms as if the conditions
are acidic.
Step 4 Adjust for basic conditions by adding to both sides the same
number of hydroxide ions as the number of hydrogen ions
already present.
Step 5 Simplify the half-reaction by combining the hydrogen ions
and hydroxide ions on the same side of the equation into water
molecules.
Step 6 Remove any water molecules present on both sides of the
half-reaction.
Step 7 Balance the charges by adding electrons.
Sample Problem
Balancing a Half-Reaction in Basic Solution
Problem
Write a balanced half-reaction that shows the oxidation of thiosulfate
ions, S2O3
2−, to sulﬁte ions, SO3
2−, in a basic solution.
Solution
Step 1 Represent the given reactant and product with correct formulas.
S2O3
2− → SO3
2−
Step 2 Balance the atoms, beginning with the sulfur atoms.
S2O3
2− → 2SO3
2−
Step 3 Balance the oxygen and hydrogen atoms as if the solution
is acidic.
S2O3
S2O3
2− + 3H2O → 2SO3
2− + 3H2O → 2SO3
2−
2− + 6H+
Step 4 There are six hydrogen ions present, so adjust for basic
conditions by adding six hydroxide ions to each side.
S2O3
2− + 3H2O + 6OH− → 2SO3
2− + 6H+ + 6OH−
Step 5 Combine the hydrogen ions and hydroxide ions on the right side
into water molecules.
S2O3
2− + 3H2O + 6OH− → 2SO3
2− + 6H2O
Step 6 Remove three water molecules from each side.
S2O3
2− + 3H2O
Step 7 The atoms are now balanced, but the net charge on the left side
2− + 6OH− → 2SO3
is 8−, whereas the net charge on the right side is 4−. Add four
electrons to the right side to balance the charges.
S2O3
2− + 6OH− → 2SO3
2− + 3H2O + 4e−
Chapter 10  Oxidation-Reduction Reactions • MHR 485
Practice Problems
21. Write a balanced half-reaction for the oxidation of chromium(II) ions
to chromium(III) ions.
22. Write a balanced half-reaction for the reduction of oxygen to oxide
ions.
23. Balance each of the following half-reactions under basic conditions.
(b) CN− → CNO−
2− → C2O4
(e) CO3
−
(a) Al → Al(OH)4
(d) CrO4
2− → Cr(OH)3
− → MnO2
(c) MnO4
2−
24. Balance each of the following half-reactions.
(a) FeO4
(b) ClO2
2− → Fe3+ (acidic conditions)
− → Cl− (basic conditions)
Half-Reaction Method for Balancing Redox Reactions
Recall that, if you consider a redox reaction as two half-reactions,
electrons are lost in the oxidation half-reaction, and electrons are gained
in the reduction half-reaction. For example, you know the reaction of
zinc with aqueous copper(II) sulfate.
Zn(s) + CuSO4(aq) → Cu(s) + ZnSO4(aq)
Removing the spectator ions leaves the following net ionic equation.
Zn(s) + Cu2+
(aq) → Cu(s) + Zn2+
(aq)
• You can break the net ionic equation into two half-reactions:
Oxidation half-reaction: Zn → Zn2+ + 2e−
Reduction half-reaction: Cu2+ + 2e− → Cu
• You can also start with the half-reactions and use them to produce a net
ionic equation. If you add the two half-reactions, the result is as follows.
Zn + Cu2+ + 2e− → Cu + Zn2+ + 2e−
Removing the two electrons from each side results in the original net
ionic equation.
As shown above, you can use half-reactions to write balanced net
ionic equations for redox reactions. In doing so, you use the fact that
no electrons are created or destroyed in a redox reaction. Electrons
are transferred from one reactant (the reducing agent) to another (the
oxidizing agent).
Balancing a Net Ionic Equation
You know from Investigation 10-A that magnesium metal, Mg(s), displaces
aluminum from an aqueous solution of one of its compounds, such as
aluminum nitrate, Al(NO3)3(aq). To obtain a balanced net ionic equation
for this reaction, you can start by looking at the half-reactions. Magnesium
atoms undergo oxidation to form magnesium ions, which have a 2+
charge. The oxidation half-reaction is as follows.
Mg → Mg2+ + 2e−
Aluminum ions, which have a 3+ charge, undergo reduction to form
aluminum atoms. The reduction half-reaction is as follows.
Al3+ + 3e− → Al
486 MHR • Unit 5  Electrochemistry
Math
L I N K
The lowest or least common
multiple (LCM) of two numbers
is the smallest multiple of each
number. For example, the LCM
of 2 and 1 is 2; the LCM of 3
and 6 is 6; and the LCM of 2
and 5 is 10. One way to ﬁnd the
LCM of two numbers is to list
the multiples of each number
and to ﬁnd the smallest num-
ber that appears in both lists.
For the numbers 6 and 8,
• the multiples of 6 are:
6, 12, 18, 24, 30,…
• the multiples of 8 are:
8, 16, 24, 32, 40,…
Thus, the LCM of 6 and 8 is 24.
What is the LCM of the
numbers 4 and 12?
What is the LCM of the
numbers 7 and 3?
To balance the net ionic equation for this redox reaction, you can
combine the two half-reactions in such a way that the number of electrons
lost through oxidation equals the number of electrons gained through
reduction. In other words, you can model the transfer of a certain number
of electrons from the reducing agent to the oxidizing agent.
For the reaction of magnesium metal with aluminum ions, the two
balanced half-reactions include different numbers of electrons, 2 and 3.
The least common multiple of 2 and 3 is 6. To combine the half-reactions
and give a balanced net ionic equation, multiply the balanced half-
reactions by different numbers so that the results both include six
electrons, as shown below.
• Multiply the oxidation half-reaction by 3. Multiply the reduction
half-reaction by 2.
3Mg → 3Mg2+ + 6e−
2Al3+ + 6e− → 2Al
• Add the results.
3Mg + 2Al3+ + 6e− → 3Mg2+ + 2Al + 6e−
• Remove 6e− from each side to obtain the balanced net ionic equation.
3Mg + 2Al3+ → 3Mg2+ + 2Al
To produce the balanced chemical equation, you can include the
spectator ions, which are nitrate ions in this example. Include the states,
if necessary. The balanced chemical equation is:
3Mg(s) + 2Al(NO3)3(aq) → 3Mg(NO3)2(aq) + 2Al(s)
Steps for Balancing by the Half-Reaction Method
You could balance the chemical equation for the reaction of magnesium
with aluminum nitrate by inspection, instead of writing half-reactions.
However, many redox equations are difﬁcult to balance by the inspection
method. In general, you can balance the net ionic equation for a redox
reaction by a process known as the half-reaction method. The preceding
example of the reaction of magnesium with aluminum nitrate illustrates
this method. Speciﬁc steps for following the half-reaction method are
given below.
Step 1 Write an unbalanced net ionic equation, if it is not already
given.
Step 2 Divide the unbalanced net ionic equation into an oxidation
half-reaction and a reduction half-reaction. To do this, you
may need to assign oxidation numbers to all the elements in
the net ionic equation to determine what is oxidized and what
is reduced.
Step 3 Balance the oxidation half-reaction and the reduction
half-reaction independently.
Step 4 Determine the least common multiple (LCM) of the numbers
of electrons in the oxidation half-reaction and the reduction
half-reaction.
Continued on the next page
Chapter 10  Oxidation-Reduction Reactions • MHR 487
Step 5 Use coefﬁcients to write each half-reaction so that it includes
the LCM of the numbers of electrons.
Step 6 Add the balanced half-reactions that include the equal num-
bers of electrons.
Step 7 Remove the electrons from both sides of the equation.
Step 8 Remove any identical molecules or ions that are present on
both sides of the equation.
Step 9 If you require a balanced chemical equation, include any
spectator ions in the chemical formulas.
Step 10 If necessary, include the states.
When using the half-reaction method, keep in mind that, in a redox
reaction, the number of electrons lost through oxidation must equal the
number of electrons gained through reduction. Figure 10.11 provides
another example.
2Li(s)
0
Lithium
+
2H2O((cid:2))
+1 −2
Water
2LiOH(aq)
+1 −2 +1
+
H2(g)
0
Lithium hydroxide
Hydrogen
Balancing Redox Reactions in Acidic and Basic Solutions
The half-reaction method of balancing equations can be more complicated
for reactions that take place under acidic or basic conditions. The overall
approach, however, is the same. You need to balance the two half-reactions,
ﬁnd the LCM of the numbers of electrons, and then multiply by coefﬁcients
to equate the number of electrons lost and gained. Finally, add the half-
reactions and simplify to give a balanced net ionic equation for the
reaction. The ten steps listed above show this process in more detail.
The Sample Problem on the next page illustrates the use of these
steps for an acidic solution. To balance a net ionic equation for basic
conditions by the half-reaction method, balance each half-reaction for
acidic conditions, adjust for basic conditions, and then combine the
half-reactions to obtain the balanced net ionic equation. The following
Concept Organizer summarizes how to use the half-reaction method in
both acidic and basic conditions.
Lithium displaces
Figure 10.11
hydrogen from water to form lithium
hydroxide.
Oxidation half-reaction:
Li → Li+ + e−
Reduction half-reaction:
2H2O + 2e− → H2 + 2OH−
Multiply the oxidation half-reaction
by 2, add the half-reactions, and
simplify the result to obtain the
balanced net ionic equation.
2Li + 2H2O → 2Li+ + 2OH− + H2
Explain why a balanced
chemical equation or net ionic
equation for a redox reaction
does not include any electrons.
488 MHR • Unit 5  Electrochemistry
Concept Organizer
The Half-Reaction Method for Balancing Redox Equations
Basic Conditions
Balance assuming
acidic conditions
−
Add OH
”neutralize” H
ions to
+
ions
+
Combine H
OH
and
ions into H2O
−
Remove H2O
molecules present
on both sides
Acidic Conditions
Balance atoms other
than O or H
Balance O atoms by
adding H2O
Balance H atoms by
adding H+ ions
Write unbalanced net ionic equation
Write two half-reactions
and balance independently
Neutral Conditions
Balance atoms
Balance charges by
adding electrons
Write half-reactions with
LCM number of electrons.
Remove electrons, ions, or molecules
present on both sides of the equation
Add half-reactions
Sample Problem
Balancing a Redox Equation in Acidic Solution
Problem
Write a balanced net ionic equation to show the reaction of perchlorate
−, and nitrogen dioxide in acidic solution to produce chloride
ions, ClO4
ions and nitrate ions.
What Is Required?
You need to write a balanced net ionic equation for the given reaction.
What Is Given?
You know the identities of two reactants and two products, and that the
reaction takes place in acidic solution.
Plan Your Strategy
• Write an unbalanced ionic equation.
• Determine whether the reaction is a redox reaction.
• If it is not a redox reaction, balance by inspection.
• If it is a redox reaction, follow the steps for balancing by the
half-reaction method.
Act on Your Strategy
• The unbalanced ionic equation is: ClO4
• Assign oxidation numbers to all the elements to determine which
−
− + NO2 → Cl− + NO3
reactant, if any, is oxidized or reduced.
ClO4
+7 −2
−
− + NO2 → Cl− + NO3
+5 −2
+4 −2
−1
Continued ...
Chapter 10  Oxidation-Reduction Reactions • MHR 489
Continued ...
The oxidation number of chlorine decreases, so perchlorate ions are
reduced to chloride ions.
The oxidation number of nitrogen increases, so nitrogen dioxide
is oxidized to nitrate ions.
• This is a redox reaction. Use the half-reaction method to balance
the equation.
Step 1 The unbalanced net ionic equation is already written.
ClO4
−
− + NO2 → Cl− + NO3
Step 2 Write two unbalanced half-reactions.
−
Oxidation: NO2 → NO3
− → Cl−
Reduction: ClO4
Step 3 Balance the two half-reactions for acidic conditions.
Oxidation
−
NO2 → NO3
−
NO2 + H2O → NO3
+
− + 2H
NO2 + H2O → NO3
−
+ + e
− + 2H
NO2 + H2O → NO3
Step 4 The LCM of 1 and 8 is 8.
Reduction
ClO4
ClO4
− + 8H
+ + 8e
−
− → Cl
− → Cl
+ → Cl
− → Cl
− + 4H2O
− + 4H2O
− + 4H2O
ClO4
− + 8H
ClO4
Step 5 Multiply the oxidation half-reaction by 8, so that equal numbers of
electrons are lost and gained.
8NO2 + 8H2O → 8NO3
Step 6 Add the half reactions.
− + 16H+ + 8e−
8NO2 + 8H2O → 8NO3
− + 8H+ + 8e− → Cl− + 4H2O
− + 8H+ + 8e− → 8NO3
ClO4
8NO2 + 8H2O + ClO4
Step 7 Simplify by removing 8 electrons from both sides.
− + 16H+ + 8e−
− + 16H+ + 8e− + Cl− + 4H2O
8NO2 + 8H2O + ClO4
− + 8H+ → 8NO3
Step 8 Simplify by removing 4 water molecules, and 8 hydrogen ions
− + 16H+ + Cl− + 4H2O
from each side.
8NO2 + ClO4
− + 4H2O → 8NO3
− + 8H+ + Cl−
(Steps 9 and 10 are not required for this problem.)
Check Your Solution
• The atoms are balanced.
• The charges are balanced.
Practice Problems
25. Balance each of the following redox equations by inspection. Write
the balanced half-reactions in each case.
(a) Na + F2 → NaF
(b) Mg + N2 → Mg3N2
(c) HgO → Hg + O2
26. Balance the following equation by the half-reaction method.
−
Cu2+ + I− → CuI + I3
490 MHR • Unit 5  Electrochemistry
27. Balance each of the following ionic equations for acidic conditions.
Identify the oxidizing agent and the reducing agent in each case.
− + Ag → Mn2+ + Ag+
− + Cl− → HgCl4
(a) MnO4
(b) Hg + NO3
(c) AsH3 + Zn2+ → H3AsO4 + Zn
−
− → I− + IO3
(d) I3
2− + NO2
28. Balance each of the following ionic equations for basic conditions.
Identify the oxidizing agent and the reducing agent in each case.
(a) CN− + MnO4
(b) H2O2 + ClO2 → ClO2
− → CrO4
2− + Cl2
−
− → NH3 + AlO2
(c) ClO− + CrO2
(d) Al + NO2
− → CNO− + MnO2
− + O2
In the next investigation, you will carry out several redox reactions,
including reactions of acids with metals, and the combustion of
hydrocarbons.
Tools
& Techniques
The Breathalyzer Test:
A Redox Reaction
The police may pull over a driver weaving
erratically on the highway on suspicion of drunk
driving. A police ofﬁcer must conﬁrm this suspicion
by assessing whether the driver has a blood
alcohol concentration over the “legal limit.” The
“Breathalyzer” test checks a person’s breath
using a redox reaction to determine blood alcohol
concentration. This test was invented in 1953 by
Robert Borkenstein, a former member of the Indiana
State Police, and a professor of forensic studies.
What does a person’s breath have to do with
the alcohol in his or her blood? In fact, there is a
direct correlation between the concentration of
alcohol in an exhaled breath and the concentration
of alcohol in the blood.
As blood moves through the lungs, it comes
in close contact with inhaled gases. If the blood
contains alcohol, the concentration of alcohol in
the blood quickly reaches equilibrium with the
concentration of alcohol in each inhaled breath.
Thus, the alcohol content in an exhaled breath is a
measure of the alcohol concentration in the blood
itself. For example, if a person has been drinking
alcohol, every 2100 mL of air exhaled contains
about the same amount of alcohol as 1 mL of blood.
In the Breathalyzer test, the subject blows into a
tube connected to a vial. The exhaled air collects in
the vial, which already contains a mixture of sulfuric
acid, potassium dichromate, water, and the catalyst
silver nitrate. The alcohol reacts with the dichromate
ion in the following redox reaction.
16H+
(aq) + 2Cr2O7
(orange)
(green)
2−
(aq) + 3C2H5OH((cid:2)) →
4Cr3+
(aq) + 3C2H4O2(aq) + 11H2O((cid:2))
This reaction is accompanied by a visible colour
change, as orange dichromate ions become green
chromium(III) ions. The concentration of alcohol in
the blood is determined by measuring the intensity
of the ﬁnal colour.
A recent modiﬁcation of the Breathalyzer test
prevents drivers from starting their cars if they have
been drinking. Alcohol ignition locks involve a type
of Breathalyzer test that is linked to the car’s ignition
system. Until the driver passes the test, the car will
not start. This test is useful in regulating the driving
habits of people who have been previously convicted
of drinking and driving.
Chapter 10  Oxidation-Reduction Reactions • MHR 491
S K I L L   F O C U S
MICROSCALE
Predicting
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
Redox Reactions
and Balanced Equations
A redox reaction involves the transfer of
electrons between reactants. A reactant that
loses electrons is oxidized and acts as a reducing
agent. A reactant that gains electrons is reduced
and acts as an oxidizing agent. Redox reactions
can be represented by balanced equations.
Questions
How can you tell if a redox reaction occurs when
reactants are mixed? Can you observe the transfer
of electrons in the mixture?
Predictions
• Predict which of the metals magnesium,
zinc, copper, and aluminum can be oxidized
by aqueous hydrogen ions. Explain your
reasoning.
• Predict whether metals that cannot be oxidized
by hydrogen ions can dissolve in acids.
Explain your reasoning.
• Predict whether the combustion of a hydro-
carbon is a redox reaction. What assumptions
have you made about the products?
Materials
well plate
4 small test tubes
test tube rack
small pieces of each of the metals magnesium,
zinc, copper, and aluminum
dilute hydrochloric acid (1 mol/L)
dilute sulfuric acid (1 mol/L)
Bunsen burner
candle
Safety Precautions
• The acid solutions are corrosive. Handle them
with care.
• If you accidentally spill a solution on your
skin, wash the area immediately with copious
amounts of cool water. If you get any acid in
your eyes, wash at the eye wash station. Inform
your teacher.
• Before lighting a Bunsen burner or candle,
make sure that there are no ﬂammable liquids
nearby. Also, tie back long hair, and conﬁne
any loose clothing.
Procedure
Part 1 Reactions of Acids
1. Place a small piece of each metal on the
well plate. Add a few drops of hydrochloric
acid to each metal. Record your observations.
If you are unsure of your observations, repeat
the procedure on a larger scale in a small
test tube.
2. Place another small piece of each metal on
clean sections of the well plate. Add a few
drops of sulfuric acid to each metal. Record
your observations. If you are unsure of your
observations, repeat the procedure on a larger
scale in a small test tube.
3. Dispose of the mixtures in the beaker
supplied by your teacher.
Part 2 Combustion of Hydrocarbons
4. Observe the combustion of natural gas in a
Bunsen burner. Adjust the colour of the ﬂame
by varying the quantity of oxygen admitted to
the burner. How does the colour depend on
the quantity of oxygen?
5. Observe the combustion of a candle. Compare
the colour of the ﬂame with the colour of the
Bunsen burner ﬂame. Which adjustment of
the burner makes the colours of the two
ﬂames most similar?
492 MHR • Unit 5  Electrochemistry
Analysis
Part 1 Reactions of Acids
1. Write a balanced chemical equation for each
of the reactions of an acid with a metal.
2. Write each equation from question 1 in net
ionic form.
3. Determine which of the reactions from
question 1 are redox reactions.
4. Write each redox reaction from question 3 as
two half-reactions.
5. Explain any similarities in your answers to
question 4.
11. A yellow or orange ﬂame from a Bunsen
burner indicates incomplete combustion and
the presence of carbon in the ﬂame. Write a
balanced chemical equation for this reaction.
12. Name another possible carbon-containing
product from the incomplete combustion of
methane. Write a balanced chemical equation
for this reaction.
13. The fuel in a burning candle is parafﬁn wax,
C25H52 . Write a balanced chemical equation
for the complete combustion of parafﬁn wax.
14. Write two balanced equations that represent
the incomplete combustion of parafﬁn wax.
6. In the reactions you observed, are the
hydrogen ions acting as an oxidizing agent,
a reducing agent, or neither?
15. How do you know that at least one of the
incomplete combustion reactions is taking
place when a candle burns?
7. In the neutralization reaction of hydrochloric
acid and sodium hydroxide, do the hydrogen
ions behave in the same way as you found in
question 6? Explain.
16. Are combustion reactions also redox
reactions? Does your answer depend on
whether the combustion is complete or
incomplete? Explain.
8. Your teacher may demonstrate the reaction
of copper with concentrated nitric acid to
produce copper(II) ions and brown, toxic
nitrogen dioxide gas. Write a balanced net
ionic equation for this reaction. Do the
hydrogen ions behave in the same way
as you found in question 6? Identify the
oxidizing agent and the reducing agent in
this reaction.
9. From your observations of copper with
hydrochloric acid and nitric acid, can you
tell whether hydrogen ions or nitrate ions
are the better oxidizing agent? Explain.
Part 2 Combustion of Hydrocarbons
10. The main component of natural gas is
methane, CH4. The products of the combus-
tion of this gas in a Bunsen burner depend
on how the burner is adjusted. A blue ﬂame
indicates complete combustion. What are
the products in this case? Write a balanced
chemical equation for this reaction.
Conclusion
17. How could you tell if a redox reaction
occurred when reactants were mixed?
Could you observe the transfer of electrons
in the mixture?
Applications
18. Gold is very unreactive and does not dissolve
in most acids. However, it does dissolve in
aqua regia (Latin for “royal water”), which is
a mixture of concentrated hydrochloric and
nitric acids. The unbalanced ionic equation
for the reaction is as follows.
Au + NO3
− + Cl− → AuCl4
− + NO2
Balance the equation, and identify the
oxidizing agent and reducing agent.
19. Natural gas is burned in gas furnaces. Give
at least three reasons why this combustion
reaction should be as complete as possible.
How would you try to ensure complete
combustion?
Chapter 10  Oxidation-Reduction Reactions • MHR 493
Section Summary
In this section, you learned the half-reaction method for balancing
equations for redox reactions. You investigated the redox reactions
of metals with acids, and the combustion of two hydrocarbons. After
applying the half-reaction method in the following review problems,
you will learn a different method in section 10.4. This method will
make greater use of oxidation numbers.
Section Review
1
K/U
Balance each half-reaction. Identify it as an oxidation or
reduction half-reaction.
2−
(a) C → C2
(b) S2O3
2− → S4O6
2−
(c) AsO4
(d) Br2 → BrO3
3− → As4O6 (acidic conditions)
− (basic conditions)
2
Balance each equation.
K/U
(a) Co3+ + Au → Co2+ + Au3+
(b) Cu + NO3
(c) NO3
− + Al → NH3 + AlO2
− → Cu2+ + NO (acidic conditions)
− (basic conditions)
3
MC
This section began with a description of the use of a redox
reaction to make the master disc in the production of CDs. Write a bal-
anced net ionic equation for the reaction of silver ions with methanal
under acidic conditions to form metallic silver and methanoic acid.
4
I
In basic solution, ammonia, NH3, can be oxidized to dinitrogen
monoxide, N2O.
(a) Try to balance the half-reaction by adding water molecules,
hydroxide ions, and electrons, without ﬁrst assuming acidic
conditions. Describe any difﬁculties you encounter.
(b) Balance the half-reaction by ﬁrst assuming acidic conditions and
then adjusting to introduce the hydroxide ions. Compare your
ﬁndings with those from part (a).
5
MC
A mixture of liquid hydrazine, N2H4, and liquid dinitrogen
tetroxide can be used as a rocket fuel. The products of the reaction
are nitrogen gas and water vapour.
(a) Write a balanced chemical equation for the reaction by inspection.
(b) Identify the oxidizing agent and the reducing agent.
(c) Hydrazine is made in the Raschig Process. In this process, ammonia
reacts with hypochlorite ions in a basic solution to form hydrazine
and chloride ions. Write the balanced net ionic equation.
6
C
Ben and Larissa were working together to balance the following
2− + H+ → Zn2+ + S + H2O
equation for a redox reaction.
Zn + SO4
Ben suggested balancing by inspection, with the following result.
Zn + SO4
Larissa said: “That’s not balanced.”
2− + 8H+ → Zn2+ + S + 4H2O
(a) Was Larissa right? Explain.
(b) How would you balance the equation, and what would the result be?
494 MHR • Unit 5  Electrochemistry
The Oxidation Number Method
for Balancing Equations
10.4
In section 10.2, you learned that a redox reaction involves changes in
oxidation numbers. If an element undergoes oxidation, its oxidation
number increases. If an element undergoes reduction, its oxidation
number decreases. When balancing equations by the half-reaction method
in section 10.3, you sometimes used oxidation numbers to determine the
reactant(s) and product(s) in each half-reaction.
In fact, you can use oxidation numbers to balance a chemical
equation by a new method. The oxidation number method is a method
of balancing redox equations by ensuring that the total increase in the
oxidation numbers of the oxidized element(s) equals the total decrease
in the oxidation numbers of the reduced element(s).
For example, the combustion of ammonia in oxygen produces nitrogen
dioxide and water.
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
(cid:2) write balanced equations for
redox reactions using the
oxidation number method
NH3 + O2 → NO2 + H2O
+1 −2
−3 +1
+4 −2
0
The oxidation number of nitrogen increases from −3 to +4, an increase
of 7. The oxidation number of oxygen decreases from 0 to −2, a decrease
of 2. The least common multiple of 7 and 2 is 14. In this case, two
nitrogen atoms must react for every seven oxygen atoms so that the total
increase and decrease in oxidation numbers both equal 14.
2NH3 + 7
2
O2 → NO2 + H2O
Complete the equation by inspection. If necessary, eliminate the fraction.
2NH3 + 7
O2 → 2NO2 + 3H2O
2
4NH3 + 7O2 → 4NO2 + 6H2O
A summary of the steps of the oxidation number method is given below.
The following Sample Problem shows how these steps are applied.
Step 1 Write an unbalanced equation, if it is not given.
Step 2 Determine whether the reaction is a redox reaction by
assigning an oxidation number to each element wherever it
appears in the equation.
Step 3 If the reaction is a redox reaction, identify the element(s) that
undergo an increase in oxidation number and the element(s)
that undergo a decrease in oxidation number.
Step 4 Find the numerical values of the increase and the decrease in
oxidation numbers.
Step 5 Determine the smallest whole-number ratio of the oxidized and
reduced elements so that the total increase in oxidation num-
bers equals the total decrease in oxidation numbers.
Step 6 Use the smallest whole-number ratio to balance the numbers of
atoms of the element(s) oxidized and the element(s) reduced.
continued on the next page
Chapter 10  Oxidation-Reduction Reactions • MHR 495
Step 7 Balance the other elements by inspection, if possible.
Step 8 For reactions that occur in acidic or basic solutions, include
water molecules, hydrogen ions, or hydroxide ions as needed to
balance the equation.
Sample Problem
Balancing a Redox Equation in Basic Solution
Problem
Write a balanced net ionic equation to show the formation of iodine by
bubbling oxygen gas through a basic solution that contains iodide ions.
Solution
Step 1 Write an unbalanced equation from the given information.
O2 + I− → I2
Step 2 Assign oxidation numbers to see if it is a redox reaction.
O2 + I− → I2
−1
0
0
Because iodide is oxidized to iodine, the reaction is a redox
reaction. Though the product that contains oxygen is unknown
at this stage, oxygen must be reduced.
Step 3 Iodine is the element that undergoes an increase in oxidation
number. Oxygen is the element that undergoes a decrease in
oxidation number.
Step 4 Iodine undergoes an increase in its oxidation number from
−1 to 0, an increase of 1. Assume that the oxidation number of
oxygen after reduction is its normal value, that is, −2. Thus,
oxygen undergoes a decrease in its oxidation number from
0 to −2, a decrease of 2.
Step 5 A 2:1 ratio of iodine atoms to oxygen atoms ensures that the total
increase in oxidation numbers and the total decrease in
oxidation numbers are both equal to 2. This is the smallest
whole-number ratio.
Step 6 Use the ratio to balance the numbers of atoms of iodine and oxy-
gen. Make sure there are two iodine atoms for every oxygen atom.
O2 + 4I− → 2I2
Step 7 No other reactants or products can be balanced by inspection.
Step 8 The reaction occurs in basic solution. As you learned in section
10.3, for basic conditions, start by assuming that the conditions
are acidic. Add water molecules and hydrogen ions as necessary
to balance the atoms.
O2 + 4I− → 2I2 + 2H2O
O2 + 4I− + 4H+ → 2I2 + 2H2O
Add hydroxide ions to adjust for basic conditions. Simplify the
resulting equation.
O2 + 4I− + 4H+ + 4OH− → 2I2 + 2H2O + 4OH−
O2 + 4I− + 4H2O → 2I2 + 2H2O + 4OH−
O2 + 4I− + 2H2O → 2I2 + 4OH−
Explain why none of the
steps in the oxidation number
method result in equations
that include electrons, e−.
496 MHR • Unit 5  Electrochemistry
Practice Problems
29. Use the oxidation number method to balance the following equation
for the combustion of carbon disulﬁde.
CS2 + O2 → CO2 + SO2
30. Use the oxidation number method to balance the following equations.
(a) B2O3 + Mg → MgO + Mg3B2
(b) H2S + H2O2 → S8 + H2O
31. Use the oxidation number method to balance each ionic equation in
acidic solution.
2− + Fe2+ → Cr3+ + Fe3+
(a) Cr2O7
− → IO3
(b) I2 + NO3
(c) PbSO4 → Pb + PbO2 + SO4
− + NO2
2−
32. Use the oxidation number method to balance each ionic equation in
basic solution.
(a) Cl− + CrO4
(b) Ni + MnO4
(c) I− + Ce4+ → IO3
−
2− → ClO− + CrO2
− → NiO + MnO2
− + Ce3+
Concept Organizer
The Oxidation Number Method for Balancing Redox Equations
Write unbalanced net ionic equation
Assign oxidation numbers to
identify redox reaction
Identify element oxidized and
element reduced
Find increase and decrease in
oxidation numbers
Find smallest whole-number ratio
of oxidized and reduced elements
Balance atoms of oxidized and
reduced elements
Neutral
Conditions
Balance other
elements by inspection
Acidic Conditions
Include H2O and H+, as
necessary
Basic Conditions
Balance assuming
acidic conditions
−
to ”neutralize”
Add OH
H
+
ions present
Simplify resulting
equation, if possible
Chapter 10  Oxidation-Reduction Reactions • MHR 497
Section Summary
In this section, you learned how to use the oxidation number method
to balance redox equations. You now know various techniques for
recognizing and representing redox reactions. In Chapter 11, you will
use these techniques to examine speciﬁc applications of redox reactions
in the business world and in your daily life.
Section Review
1
K/U
Is it possible to use the half-reaction method or the oxidation
number method to balance the following equation? Explain your
answer.
Al2S3 + H2O → Al(OH)3 + H2S
2
I
Balance each equation by the method of your choice. Explain your
choice of method in each case.
(a) CH3COOH + O2 → CO2 + H2O
(b) O2 + H2SO3 → HSO4
− (acidic conditions)
3
K/U
Use the oxidation number method to balance the following
equations.
(a) NH3 + Cl2 → NH4Cl + N2
(b) Mn3O4 + Al → Al2O3 + Mn
4
5
C
Explain why, in redox reactions, the total increase in the
oxidation numbers of the oxidized elements must equal the total
decrease in the oxidation numbers of the reduced elements.
I
The combustion of ammonia in oxygen to form nitrogen dioxide
and water vapour involves covalent molecules in the gas phase. The
oxidation number method for balancing the equation was shown in an
example in this section. Devise a half-reaction method for balancing
the equation. Describe the assumptions you made in order to balance
the equation. Also, describe why these assumptions did not affect the
ﬁnal result.
498 MHR • Unit 5  Electrochemistry
Review
Reﬂecting on Chapter 10
Summarize this chapter in the format of your
choice. Here are a few ideas to use as guidelines:
• Give two different deﬁnitions for the term
oxidation.
• Give two different deﬁnitions for the term
reduction.
• Deﬁne a half-reaction. Give an example of
an oxidation half-reaction and a reduction
half-reaction.
• Compare the half-reaction and oxidation number
methods of balancing equations.
• Practise balancing equations using both methods.
• Write an example of a balanced chemical
equation for a redox reaction. Assign oxidation
numbers to each element in the equation, then
explain how you know it is a redox reaction.
Reviewing Key Terms
For each of the following terms, write a sentence
that shows your understanding of its meaning.
ore
reduction
redox reaction
oxidizing agent
half-reaction
oxidation numbers
reaction
reducing agent
disproportionation
oxidation
oxidation-reduction
Knowledge/Understanding
1. For each reaction below, write a balanced
chemical equation by inspection.
(a) zinc metal with aqueous silver nitrate
(b) aqueous cobalt(II) bromide with aluminum
metal
(c) metallic cadmium with aqueous tin(II)
chloride
2. For each reaction in question 1, write the total
ionic and net ionic equations.
3. For each reaction in question 1, identify the
oxidizing agent and reducing agent.
4. For each reaction in question 1, write the two
half-reactions.
5. When a metallic element reacts with a
non-metallic element, which reactant is
(a) oxidized?
(b) reduced?
(c) the oxidizing agent?
(d) the reducing agent?
6. Use a Lewis structure to assign an oxidation
number to each element in the following
compounds.
(a) BaCl2
(b) CS2
(c) XeF4
7. Determine the oxidation number of each
element present in the following substances.
(a) BaH2
(b) Al4C3
(c) KCN
(d) LiNO2
(e) (NH4)2C2O4
(f) S8
(g) AsO3
+
(h) VO2
(i) XeO3F−
2−
(j) S4O6
3−
8. Identify a polyatomic ion in which chlorine has
an oxidation number of +3.
9. Determine which of the following balanced
chemical equations represent redox reactions.
For each redox reaction, identify the oxidizing
agent and the reducing agent.
(a) 2C6H6 + 15O2 → 12CO2 + 6H2O
(b) CaO + SO2 → CaSO3
(c) H2 + I2 → 2HI
(d) KMnO4 + 5CuCl + 8HCl →
KCl + MnCl2 + 5CuCl2 + 4H2O
10. Determine which of the following balanced net
ionic equations represent redox reactions. For
each redox reaction, identify the reactant that
undergoes oxidation and the reactant that
undergoes reduction.
(a) 2Ag+
(b) Pb2+
(c) 2Mn2+ + 5BiO3
(aq) + Cu(s) → 2Ag(s) + Cu2+
(aq) + S2−
(aq) → PbS(s)
− + 14H+ →
(aq)
2MnO4
− + 5Bi3+ + 7H2O
Chapter 10  Oxidation-Reduction Reactions • MHR 499
11. (a) Examples of molecules and ions composed
16. Use the oxidation number method to balance
each of the following equations.
(a) SiCl4 + Al → Si + AlCl3
(b) PH3 + O2 → P4O10 + H2O
(c) I2O5 + CO → I2 + CO2
(d) SO3
2− + O2 → SO4
2−
17. Complete and balance a net ionic equation
for each of the following disproportionation
reactions.
(a) NO2 → NO2
− (acidic conditions),
which is one of the reactions involved in
acid rain formation
− + NO3
(b) Cl2 → ClO− + Cl− (basic conditions), which
is one of the reactions involved in the
bleaching action of chlorine in basic solution
18. Balance each of the following net ionic
equations. Then include the named spectator
ions to write a balanced chemical equation.
Include the states.
(a) Co3+ + Cd → Co2+ + Cd2+ (spectator ions
NO3
−)
(b) Ag+ + SO2 → Ag + SO4
spectator ions NO3
−)
2− (acidic conditions;
(c) Al + CrO4
2− → Al(OH)3 + Cr(OH)3 (basic
conditions; spectator ions Na+)
19. If possible, give an example for each.
(a) a synthesis reaction that is a redox reaction
(b) a synthesis reaction that is not a redox
reaction
(c) a decomposition reaction that is a redox
reaction
(d) a decomposition reaction that is not a redox
reaction
(e) a double displacement reaction that is a
redox reaction
(f) a double displacement reaction that is not a
redox reaction
20. Give an example of a reaction in which sulfur
behaves as
(a) an oxidizing agent
(b) a reducing agent
21. Write a balanced equation for a synthesis
reaction in which elemental oxygen acts as
a reducing agent.
only of vanadium and oxygen are listed
below. In this list, identify molecules and
ions in which the oxidation number of
vanadium is the same.
V2O5
V2O3
VO2
VO
+
VO2
VO2+
−
VO3
VO4
V3O9
3−
3−
(b) Is the following reaction a redox reaction?
2NH4VO3 → V2O5 + 2NH3 + H2O
12. The method used to manufacture nitric acid
involves the following three steps.
Step 1 4NH3(g) + 5O2(g) → 4NO(g) + 6H2O(g)
Step 2 2NO(g) + O2(g) → 2NO2(g)
Step 3 3NO2(g) + H2O((cid:2)) → 2HNO3(aq) + NO(g)
(a) Which of these steps are redox reactions?
(b) Identify the oxidizing agent and the reducing
agent in each redox reaction.
13. In a synthesis reaction involving elements A
and B, the oxidation number of element A
increases. What happens to the oxidation
number of element B? How do you know?
14. Balance each of the following half-reactions.
(a) The reduction of iodine to iodide ions
(b) The oxidation of lead to lead(IV) ions
(c) The reduction of tetrachlorogold(III) ions,
−, to chloride ions and metallic gold
(d) C2H5OH → CH3COOH (acidic conditions)
(e) S8 → H2S (acidic conditions)
(f) AsO2
3− (basic conditions)
− → AsO4
AuCl4
15. Use the half-reaction method to balance each of
the following equations.
(a) MnO2 + Cl− → Mn2+ + Cl2 (acidic
conditions)
(b) NO + Sn → NH2OH + Sn2+ (acidic
conditions)
(c) Cd2+ + V2+ → Cd + VO3
− (acidic
conditions)
(d) Cr → Cr(OH)4
(e) S2O3
− + H2 (basic conditions)
2− + NiO2 → Ni(OH)2 + SO3
2− (basic
conditions)
(f) Sn2+ + O2 → Sn4+ (basic conditions)
500 MHR • Unit 5  Electrochemistry
22. Phosphorus, P4(s), reacts with hot water to
form phosphine, PH3(g), and phosphoric acid.
(a) Write a balanced chemical equation for this
reaction.
(b) Is the phosphorus oxidized or reduced?
Explain your answer.
23. The thermite reaction, which is highly
exothermic, can be used to weld metals. In
the thermite reaction, aluminum reacts with
iron(III) oxide to form iron and aluminum
oxide. The temperature becomes so high that
the iron is formed as a liquid.
(a) Write a balanced chemical equation for the
reaction.
(b) Is the reaction a redox reaction? If so, identify
the oxidizing agent and the reducing agent.
Inquiry
24. Iodine reacts with concentrated nitric acid
to form iodic acid, gaseous nitrogen dioxide,
and water.
(a) Write the balanced chemical equation.
(b) Calculate the mass of iodine needed to
produce 28.0 L of nitrogen dioxide at STP.
25. Describe a laboratory investigation you could
perform to decide whether tin or nickel is the
better reducing agent. Include in your descrip-
tion all the materials and equipment you would
need, and the procedure you would follow.
26. The following table shows the average
composition, by volume, of the air we inhale
and exhale, as part of a biochemical process
called respiration. (The values are rounded.)
Gas
Oxygen
Carbon dioxide
Nitrogen and other gases
Inhaled Air
(% by volume)
Exhaled Air
(% by volume)
21
0.04
79
16
4
80
How do the data indicate that at least one
redox reaction is involved in respiration?
27. Highly toxic phosphine gas, PH3, is used in
industry to produce ﬂame retardants. One
way to make phosphine on a large scale is
by heating elemental phosphorus with a
strong base.
(a) Balance the following net ionic equation
for the reaction under basic conditions.
P4 → H2PO2
− + PH3
(b) Show that the reaction in part (a) is a
disproportionation reaction.
(c) Calculate the mass of phosphine that can
theoretically be made from 10.0 kg of
phosphorus by this method.
Communication
28. Explain why, in a redox reaction, the reducing
agent undergoes oxidation.
29. Explain why you would not expect sulﬁde ions
to act as an oxidizing agent.
30. Why can’t the oxidation number of an element
in a compound be greater than the number of
valence electrons in one atom of that element?
31. Explain why the historical use of the word
“reduction,” that is, the production of a metal
from its ore, is consistent with the modern
deﬁnitions of reduction.
32. Organic chemists sometimes describe redox
reactions in terms of the loss or gain of pairs of
hydrogen atoms. Examples include the addition
of hydrogen to ethene to form ethane, and the
elimination of hydrogen from ethanol to form
ethanal.
(a) Write a balanced equation for each reaction.
(b) Determine whether the organic reactant is
oxidized or reduced in each reaction.
(c) Write a deﬁnition of oxidation and a
deﬁnition of reduction based on an organic
reactant losing or gaining hydrogen.
(d) Would your deﬁnitions be valid for the
synthesis and decomposition of a metal
hydride? Explain your answer.
Chapter 10  Oxidation-Reduction Reactions • MHR 501
Making Connections
33. The compound NaAl(OH)2CO3 is a component
of some common stomach acid remedies.
(a) Determine the oxidation number of each
element in the compound.
(b) Predict the products of the reaction of the
compound with stomach acid (hydrochloric
acid), and write a balanced chemical equa-
tion for the reaction.
(c) Were the oxidation numbers from part (a)
useful in part (b)? Explain your answer.
(d) What type of reaction is this?
(e) Check your medicine cabinet at home for
stomach acid remedies. If possible, identify
the active ingredient in each remedy.
34. Two of the substances on the head of a safety
match are potassium chlorate and sulfur. When
the match is struck, the potassium chlorate
decomposes to give potassium chloride and
oxygen. The sulfur then burns in the oxygen
and ignites the wood of the match.
(a) Write balanced chemical equations for the
decomposition of potassium chlorate and for
the burning of sulfur in oxygen.
(b) Identify the oxidizing agent and the reducing
agent in each reaction in part (a).
(c) Does any element in potassium chlorate
undergo disproportionation in the reaction?
Explain your answer.
(d) Research the history of the safety match to
determine when it was invented, why it was
invented, and what it replaced.
35. Ammonium ions, from fertilizers or animal
waste, are oxidized by atmospheric oxygen.
The reaction results in the acidiﬁcation of soil
on farms and the pollution of ground water
with nitrate ions.
(a) Write a balanced net ionic equation for this
reaction.
(b) Why do farmers use fertilizers? What
alternative farming methods have you heard
of? Which farming method(s) do you
support, and why?
502 MHR • Unit 5  Electrochemistry
36. One of the most important discoveries in the
history of the chemical industry in Ontario was
accidental. Thomas “Carbide” Willson
(1860 – 1915) was trying to make the element
calcium from lime, CaO, by heating the lime
with coal tar. Instead, he made the compound
calcium carbide, CaC2. This compound reacts
with water to form a precipitate of calcium
hydroxide and gaseous ethyne (acetylene).
Willson’s discovery led to the large-scale use
of ethyne in numerous applications.
(a) Was Willson trying to perform a redox
reaction? How do you know? Why do you
not need to know the substances in coal tar
to answer this question?
(b) Write a balanced chemical equation for the
reaction of calcium carbide with water. Is
this reaction a redox reaction?
(c) An early use of Willson’s discovery was in
car headlights. Inside a headlight, the
reaction of calcium carbide and water
produced ethyne, which was burned to
produce light and heat. Write a balanced
chemical equation for the complete combus-
tion of ethyne. Is this reaction a redox
reaction?
(d) Research the impact of Willson’s discovery
on society, from his lifetime to the present
day.
Answers to Practice Problems and Short Answers to
(aq) + Fe(s)
(aq)
(aq) + 2Al(s)
(aq) → Zn2+
(aq) → 3Mg2+
(aq) + Cd(s) → 2Ag(s) + Cd2+
Section Review Questions
Practice Problems:  1. Zn(s) + Fe2+
2.(a) 3Mg(s) + 2Al3+
(b) 2Ag+
3.(a) Mg oxidized, Al3+ reduced
(b) Cd oxidized, Ag+ reduced
4.(a) Al3+ oxidizing agent, Mg reducing agent
(b) Ag+ oxidizing agent, Cd reducing agent
5. Al(s) → Al3+
(aq) + 3e− → Fe(s)
(aq) + 3e−, Fe3+
6.(a) Fe(s) → Fe2+
(b) Cd(s) → Cd2+
7.(a) Sn(s) → Sn2+
(b) Ag(s) → Ag+ + e−, Au3+
(c) Zn(s) → Zn2+
2+
8. Hg2
2+
(aq) → 2Hg2+
Hg2
9.(a) +3 (b) 0 (c) +6 (d) +5 (e) 0 (f) +2
(aq) + 2e−, Cu2+
(aq) + 2e−, Ag+
(aq) + 2e− , Pb2+
(aq) → Hg((cid:2)) + Hg2+
(aq) + 2e−
(aq) + 3e− → Au(s)
(aq) + 2e− → Cu(s)
(aq) + 1e− → Ag(s)
(aq) + 2e− → Pb(s)
(aq) + 3e− → Fe(s)
(aq) + 2e−, Fe3+
(aq), Hg2
2+
(aq) + 2e− → 2Hg((cid:2)),
−
reducing agent
− + 4H+ + 3e−
18. 2Br− → Br2 + 2e−
oxidized, Br2 reduced  16. yes
− + 2H2O + 4e− → Cl− + 4OH−
2− + 8H+ + 3e− → Fe3+ + 4H2O
− + 12H+ + 10e− → N2 + 6H2O
− + 6H+ + 6e− → Cl− + 3H2O
2−− + 14H+ + 6e− → 2Cr3+ + 7H2O
22. O2 + 4e− → 2O2−
− + 3e−
− + 2H2O + 3e− → MnO2 + 4OH−
2− + 4H2O + 3e− → Cr(OH)3 + 5OH−
2− + 4OH−
2− + 2H2O + 2e− → C2O4
10.(a) H, +1; S, +4; O, −2
(b) H, +1; O, −2 (c) H, +1; P, +5; O, −2
11.(a) +2 (b) −1 12.(a) Al, +3; H, +1; C, +4; O, −2
(b) N, −3; H, +1; P, +5; O, −2 (c) K, +1; H, +1; I, +7; O, −2
13.(a) yes (b) no
14.(a) H2O2 oxidizing agent, Fe2+
15. ClO2
17. Ce4+ + e− → Ce3+
19.(a) O2 + 2H+ + 2e− → H2O2 (b) 2H2O → O2 + 4H+ + 4e−
(c) 2NO3
20.(a) ClO3
(b) NO + 2H2O → NO3
(c) Cr2O7
21. Cr2+ → Cr3+ + e−
23.(a) Al + 4OH− → Al(OH)4
(b) CN− + 2OH− → CNO− + H2O + 2e−
(c) MnO4
(d) CrO4
(e) 2CO3
24.(a) FeO4
(b) ClO2
25.(a) 2Na + F2 → 2NaF
ox: Na → Na+ + e−
red: F2 + 2e− → 2F−
(b) 3Mg + N2 → Mg3N2
ox: Mg → Mg2+ + 2e−
red: N2 + 6e− → 2N3−
(c) 2HgO → 2Hg + O2
ox: 2O2− → O2 + 4e−
red: Hg2+ + 2e− → Hg
26. 2Cu2+ + 5I− → 2CuI + I3
27.(a) MnO4
oxidizing agent, MnO4
(b) Hg + 2NO3
oxidizing agent, NO3
(c) AsH3 + 4Zn2+ + 4H2O → H3AsO4 + 4Zn + 8H+
oxidizing agent, Zn2+
(d) 3I3
−
oxidizing agent, I3
28.(a) 3CN− + 2MnO4
oxidizing agent, MnO4
(b) H2O2 + 2ClO2 + 2OH− → 2ClO2
oxidizing agent, ClO2; reducing agent, H2O2
− + 2H2O → 3Cl2 + 2CrO4
2− + 4OH−
(c) 6ClO− + 2CrO2
−
oxidizing agent, ClO−
; reducing agent, CrO2
− + H2O + OH− → NH3 + 2AlO2
(d) 2Al + NO2
oxidizing agent, NO2
−
; reducing agent, I3
− + H2O → 3CNO− + 2MnO2 + 2OH−
− + 5Ag + 8H+ → Mn2+ + 5Ag+ + 4H2O
; reducing agent, AsH3
− + 6H+
− + 4Cl− + 4H+ → HgCl4
− + 3H2O → 8I− + IO3
; reducing agent, CN−
2− + 2NO2 + 2H2O
− + O2 + 2H2O
; reducing agent, Al
; reducing agent, Ag
; reducing agent, Hg
−
−
−
−
−
−
− + 2OH−
(aq) + 2e−
; reducing agent, Na((cid:2))
− + 6Ce3+ + 3H2O
2− + H2O → 3ClO− + 2CrO2
(aq) → 2Al3+
; Hg2+
(aq) + 3e−
− + H2O → 3NiO + 2MnO2 + 2OH−
− + 10NO2 + 4H2O
2− + 4H+
2− + 6Fe2+ + 14H+ → 2Cr3+ + 6Fe3+ + 7H2O
(aq) + Cd(s) → 2Ag(s) + Cd2+
(aq) ;
(aq) + e− → Ag(s) ; Cd(s) → Cd2+
29. CS2 + 3O2 → CO2 + 2SO2
30.(a) B2O3 + 6Mg → 3MgO + Mg3B2
(b) 8H2S + 8H2O2 → S8 + 16H2O
31.(a) Cr2O7
− + 8H+ → 2IO3
(b) I2 + 10NO3
(c) 2PbSO4 + 2H2O → Pb + PbO2 + 2SO4
32.(a) 3Cl− + 2CrO4
(b) 3Ni + 2MnO4
(c) I− + 6Ce4+ + 6OH− → IO3
Section Review 10.1: 1.(a) yes;
2AgNO3(aq) + Cd(s) → 2Ag(s) + Cd(NO3)2(aq);
2Ag+
Ag+
(b) no (c) yes; 2Al(s) + 3HgCl2(aq) → 2AlCl3(aq) + 3Hg((cid:2)) ;
2Al(s) + 3Hg2+
(aq) + 3Hg((cid:2)) ;
(aq) + 2e− → Hg((cid:2))
Al(s) → Al3+
2.(a) right side (b) left side  4. reducing agent
6.(a) K+ + Na((cid:2)) → Na+ + K((cid:2))
(b) oxidizing agent, K+
10.2:  2.(a) yes (b) no (c) no (d) yes
6.(a) +2 (b) +5 and −1
7.(a) N2 + 3H2 → 2NH3 (0, 0, −3, +1); N2 is oxidizing agent,
H2 is reducing agent (b) no
8.(a) 2C + O2 → 2CO, Fe2O3 + 3CO → 2Fe + 3CO2
(b) carbon—reducing agent, oxygen—oxidizing agent;
carbon monoxide—reducing agent,
iron(III) oxide—oxidizing agent
10.3: 1.(a) 2C + 2e− → C2
(b) 2S2O3
(c) 4AsO4
(d) Br2 + 12OH− → 2BrO3
2.(a) 3Co3+ + Au → 3Co2+ + Au3+
(b) 3Cu + 2NO3
− + 8Al + 5OH− + 2H2O → 3NH3 + 8AlO2
(c) 3NO3
3. 2Ag+ + HCHO + H2O → 2Ag + HCOOH + 2H+
4.(b) 2NH3 + 8OH− → N2O + 7H2O + 8e−
5.(a) 2N2H4 + N2O4 → 3N2 + 4H2O
(b) N2O4 is oxidizing agent, N2H4 is reducing agent
(c) 2NH3 + ClO− → N2H4 + Cl− + H2O
6.(a) Larissa was right
(b) 3Zn + SO4
10.4: 1. no, not a redox reaction
2.(a) CH3COOH + 2O2 → 2CO2 + 2H2O
− + 2H+
(b) O2 + 2H2SO3 → 2HSO4
3.(a) 8NH3 + 3Cl2 → 6NH4Cl + N2
(b) 3Mn3O4 + 8Al → 4Al2O3 + 9Mn
, reduction
2− → S4O6
, oxidation
3− + 20H+ + 8e− → As4O6 + 10H2O, reduction
− + 6H2O + 10e−
, oxidation
− + 8H+ → 3Cu2+ + 2NO + 4H2O
2− + 8H+ → 3Zn2+ + S + 4H2O
2−
2− + 2e−
−
Chapter 10  Oxidation-Reduction Reactions • MHR 503
Cells and Batteries
Batteries come in a wide range of sizes and shapes, from the tiny
button battery in a watch, to a large and heavy car battery. Although
you probably use batteries every day, they may still surprise you. For
example, did you know that you could make a battery from a lemon
and two pieces of metal? To make a lemon battery, you could insert
two different electrodes, such as copper and zinc strips, into a lemon.
The battery can provide electricity for a practical use. For example,
the battery can power a small light bulb, or turn a small motor.
For obvious reasons, lemon batteries are not a convenient way to
power a portable device, such as a cell phone. Scientists and inventors
have worked to develop a variety of batteries that are inexpensive,
compact, and easy to store and to carry. Our society uses vast numbers
of batteries.
What exactly is a battery, and how does it work? What is the
relationship between batteries and the redox reactions studied in
Chapter 10? You will ﬁnd out the answers to these questions in
this chapter.
Can other fruits or vegetables
be used to make batteries?
C h a p t e r   P r e v i e w
11.1 Galvanic Cells
11.2 Standard Cell
Potentials
11.3 Electrolytic Cells
11.4 Faraday’s Law
11.5 Issues Involving
Electrochemistry
P r e r e q u i s i t e
C o n c e p t s   a n d   S k i l l s
Before you begin this chapter,
review the following concepts
and skills:
(cid:2) recognizing oxidation,
reduction, and redox
reactions (Chapter 10,
sections 10.1, 10.2)
(cid:2) writing balanced
half-reactions (Chapter 10,
section 10.3)
(cid:2) using half-reactions to
write balanced net ionic
equations (Chapter 10,
section 10.3)
(cid:2) using stoichiometry to
calculate quantities of
reactants and products
in a chemical reaction
(Concepts and Skills
Review)
(cid:2) spontaneous and
non-spontaneous
reactions (Chapter 7,
section 7.2)
504 MHR • Unit 5  Electrochemistry
Galvanic Cells
You know that redox reactions involve the transfer of electrons from
one reactant to another. You may also recall that an electric current is
a ﬂow of electrons in a circuit. These two concepts form the basis of
electrochemistry, which is the study of the processes involved in
converting chemical energy to electrical energy, and in converting
electrical energy to chemical energy.
As you learned in Chapter 10, a zinc strip reacts with a solution
containing copper(II) ions, forming zinc ions and metallic copper. The
reaction is spontaneous. It releases energy in the form of heat; in other
words, this reaction is exothermic.
Zn(s) + Cu2+
(aq) → Zn2+
This reaction occurs on the surface of the zinc strip, where electrons
are transferred from zinc atoms to copper(II) ions when these atoms and
ions are in direct contact. A common technological invention called a
galvanic cell uses redox reactions, such as the one described above, to
release energy in the form of electricity.
(aq) + Cu(s)
The Galvanic Cell
A galvanic cell, also called a voltaic cell, is a device that converts
chemical energy to electrical energy. The key to this invention is to
prevent the reactants in a redox reaction from coming into direct contact
with each other. Instead, electrons ﬂow from one reactant to the other
through an external circuit, which is a circuit outside the reaction vessel.
This ﬂow of electrons through the external circuit is an electric current.
An Example of a Galvanic Cell: The Daniell Cell
Figure 11.1 shows one example of a galvanic cell, called the Daniell cell.
One half of the cell consists of a piece of zinc placed in a zinc sulfate
solution. The other half of the cell consists of a piece of copper placed
in a copper(II) sulfate solution. A porous barrier, sometimes called a
semi-permeable membrane, separates these two half-cells. It stops the
copper(II) ions from coming into direct contact with the zinc electrode.
11.1
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
(cid:2) identify the components in
galvanic cells and describe
how they work
(cid:2) describe the oxidation and
reduction half-cells for some
galvanic cells
(cid:2) determine half-cell
reactions, the direction
of current ﬂow, electrode
polarity, cell potential,
and ion movement in some
galvanic cells
(cid:2) build galvanic cells in the
laboratory and investigate
galvanic cell potentials
(cid:2) communicate your under-
standing of the following
terms: electric current,
electrochemistry, galvanic
cell, voltaic cell, external
circuit, electrodes,
electrolytes, anode, cathode,
salt bridge, inert electrode,
electric potential, cell
voltage, cell potential, dry
cell, battery, primary battery,
secondary battery
The Daniell cell
Figure 11.1
is named after its inventor, the
English chemist John Frederic
Daniell (1790–1845). In the photo-
graph shown here, the zinc sulfate
solution is placed inside a porous
cup, which is placed in a larger
container of copper sulfate
solution. The cup acts as the
porous barrier.
Chapter 11  Cells and Batteries • MHR 505
Web
L I N K
www.mcgrawhill.ca/links/
chemistry12
Galvanic cells are named after
the Italian doctor Luigi Galvani
(1737–1798), who generated
electricity using two metals.
These cells are also called
voltaic cells, after the Italian
physicist Count Alessandro
Volta (1745–1827), who built
the ﬁrst chemical batteries.
To learn more about scientists
who made important disco-
veries in electrochemistry,
such as Galvani, Volta, and
Faraday, go to the web site
above. Click on Web Links
to ﬁnd out where to go next.
A typical galvanic
Figure 11.2
cell, such as the Daniell cell shown
here, includes two electrodes,
electrolyte solutions, a porous
barrier, and an external circuit.
Electrons ﬂow through the external
circuit from the negative anode to
the positive cathode.
Batteries contain
Figure 11.3
galvanic cells. The + mark labels
the positive cathode. If there is a −
mark, it labels the negative anode.
In a Daniell cell, the pieces of metallic zinc and copper act as electrical
conductors. The conductors that carry electrons into and out of a cell
are named electrodes. The zinc sulfate and copper(II) sulfate act as
electrolytes. Electrolytes are substances that conduct electricity when
dissolved in water. (The fact that a solution of an electrolyte conducts
electricity does not mean that free electrons travel through the solution.
An electrolyte solution conducts electricity because of ion movements,
and the loss and gain of electrons at the electrodes.) The terms electrode
and electrolyte were invented by the leading pioneer of electrochemistry,
Michael Faraday (1791–1867).
The redox reaction takes place in a galvanic cell when an external
circuit, such as a metal wire, connects the electrodes. The oxidation
half-reaction occurs in one half-cell, and the reduction half-reaction
occurs in the other half-cell. For the Daniell cell:
Oxidation (loss of electrons): Zn(s) → Zn2+
Reduction (gain of electrons): Cu2+
(aq) + 2e−
(aq) + 2e− → Cu(s)
The electrode at which oxidation occurs is named the anode. In this
example, zinc atoms undergo oxidation at the zinc electrode. Thus, the
zinc electrode is the anode of the Daniell cell. The electrode at which
reduction occurs is named the cathode. Here, copper(II) ions undergo
reduction at the copper electrode. Thus, the copper electrode is the
cathode of the Daniell cell.
Free electrons cannot travel through the solution. Instead, the external
circuit conducts electrons from the anode to the cathode of a galvanic
cell. Figure 11.2 gives a diagram of a typical galvanic cell.
e−
voltmeter
e−
anode
porous barrier
cathode
−
Zn
+
Cu
ZnSO4(aq)
CuSO4(aq)
At the anode of a galvanic cell, electrons are released by oxidation.
For example, at the zinc anode of the Daniell cell, zinc atoms release
electrons to become positive zinc ions. Thus, the anode of a galvanic
cell is negatively charged. Relative to the anode, the cathode of a galvanic
cell is positively charged. In galvanic cells, electrons ﬂow through the
external circuit from the negative electrode to the positive electrode.
These electrode polarities may already be familiar to you. An example
is shown in Figure 11.3.
Each half-cell contains a solution of a neutral compound. In a
Daniell cell, these solutions are aqueous zinc sulfate and aqueous
copper(II) sulfate. How can these electrolyte solutions remain neutral
when electrons are leaving the anode of one half-cell and arriving at the
cathode of the other half-cell? To maintain electrical neutrality in each
half-cell, some ions migrate through the porous barrier, as shown in
Figure 11.4, on the next page. Negative ions (anions) migrate toward
the anode, and positive ions (cations) migrate toward the cathode.
506 MHR • Unit 5  Electrochemistry
e−
anode
porous barrier
cathode
Zn
Cu
Zn2+
Cu2+
2−
SO4
2−
SO4
Zn2+
Cu2+
2−
SO4
2−
SO4
Ion migration in
Figure 11.4
a Daniell cell. Some sulfate ions
migrate from the copper(II) sulfate
solution into the zinc sulfate
solution. Some zinc ions migrate
from the zinc sulfate solution into
the copper(II) sulfate solution.
The separator between the half-cells does not need to be a porous barrier.
Figure 11.5 shows an alternative device. This device, called a salt bridge,
contains an electrolyte solution that does not interfere in the reaction.
The open ends of the salt bridge are plugged with a porous material, such
as glass wool, to stop the electrolyte from leaking out quickly. The plugs
allow ion migration to maintain electrical neutrality.
e−
voltmeter
e−
cathode
+
NH4
Cl−
anode
Cu
salt
bridge
porous
plug
Zn
This Daniell cell
Figure 11.5
includes a salt bridge instead of
a porous barrier. In a diagram, the
anode may appear on the left or on
the right.
CuSO4(aq)
ZnSO4(aq)
Suppose the salt bridge of a Daniell cell contains ammonium chloride
solution, NH4Cl(aq). As positive zinc ions are produced at the anode,
negative chloride ions migrate from the salt bridge into the half-cell that
contains the anode. As positive copper(II) ions are removed from solution
at the cathode, positive ammonium ions migrate from the salt bridge into
the half-cell that contains the cathode.
Other electrolytes, such as sodium sulfate or potassium nitrate, could
be chosen for the salt bridge. Neither of these electrolytes interferes in the
cell reaction. Silver nitrate, AgNO3(aq), would be a poor choice for the salt
bridge, however. Positive silver ions would migrate into the half-cell that
contains the cathode. Zinc displaces both copper and silver from solution,
so both copper(II) ions and silver ions would be reduced at the cathode.
The copper produced would be contaminated with silver.
Chapter 11  Cells and Batteries • MHR 507
Galvanic Cell Notation
A convenient shorthand method exists for representing galvanic cells. The
shorthand representation of a Daniell cell is as follows.
Zn | Zn2+ || Cu2+ | Cu
The phases or states may be included.
Zn(s)
| Zn2+
(aq)
|| Cu2+
(aq)
| Cu(s)
As you saw in Figure 11.4 and Figure 11.5, the anode may appear on the
left or on the right of a diagram. In the shorthand representation, however,
the anode is always shown on the left and the cathode on the right. Each
single vertical line, |, represents a phase boundary between the electrode
and the solution in a half-cell. For example, the ﬁrst single vertical line
shows that the solid zinc and aqueous zinc ions are in different phases or
states. The double vertical line, ||, represents the porous barrier or salt
bridge between the half-cells. Spectator ions are usually omitted.
Inert Electrodes
The zinc anode and copper cathode of a Daniell cell are both metals, and
can act as electrical conductors. However, some redox reactions involve
substances that cannot act as electrodes, such as gases or dissolved
electrolytes. Galvanic cells that involve such redox reactions use inert
electrodes. An inert electrode is an electrode made from a material that
is neither a reactant nor a product of the cell reaction. Figure 11.6 shows
a cell that contains one inert electrode. The chemical equation, net ionic
equation, and half-reactions for this cell are given below.
Chemical equation: Pb(s) + 2FeCl3(aq) → 2FeCl2(aq) + PbCl2(aq)
Net ionic equation: Pb(s) + 2Fe3+
Oxidation half-reaction: Pb(s) → Pb2+
Reduction half-reaction: Fe3+
(aq) + 2e−
(aq) + e− → Fe2+
(aq) → 2Fe2+
(aq) + Pb2+
(aq)
(aq)
The reduction half-reaction does not include a solid conductor of
electrons, so an inert platinum electrode is used in this half-cell. The
platinum electrode is chemically unchanged, so it does not appear in
the chemical equation or half-reactions. However, it is included in the
shorthand representation of the cell.
Pb | Pb2+ || Fe3+, Fe2+ | Pt
A comma separates the formulas Fe3+ and Fe2+ for the ions involved in the
reduction half-reaction. The formulas are not separated by a vertical line,
because there is no phase boundary between these ions. The Fe3+ and Fe2+
ions exist in the same aqueous solution.
anode
e−
salt
bridge
Pb
Pt
cathode
This cell uses
Figure 11.6
an inert electrode to conduct
electrons. Why do you think that
platinum is often chosen as an inert
electrode? Another common choice
is graphite.
PbCl2(aq)
FeCl2(aq)
FeCl3(aq)
508 MHR • Unit 5  Electrochemistry
Practice Problems
1. (a) If the reaction of zinc with copper(II) ions is carried out in a test
tube, what is the oxidizing agent and what is the reducing agent?
(b) In a Daniell cell, what is the oxidizing agent and what is the
reducing agent? Explain your answer.
2. Write the oxidation half-reaction, the reduction half-reaction, and the
overall cell reaction for each of the following galvanic cells. Identify
the anode and the cathode in each case. In part (b), platinum is
present as an inert electrode.
| Tl(s)
| H2(g)
(a) Sn(s)
(b) Cd(s)
| Sn2+
| Cd2+
|| Tl+
|| H+
| Pt(s)
(aq)
(aq)
(aq)
(aq)
3. A galvanic cell involves the overall reaction of iodide ions with
acidiﬁed permanganate ions to form manganese(II) ions and iodine.
The salt bridge contains potassium nitrate.
(a) Write the half-reactions, and the overall cell reaction.
(b) Identify the oxidizing agent and the reducing agent.
(c) The inert anode and cathode are both made of graphite. Solid
iodine forms on one of them. Which one?
4. As you saw earlier, pushing a zinc electrode and a copper electrode
into a lemon makes a “lemon cell”. In the following representation
of the cell, C6H8O7 is the formula of citric acid. Explain why the
representation does not include a double vertical line.
Zn(s)
| C6H8O7(aq)
| Cu(s)
Introducing Cell Potentials
You know that water spontaneously ﬂows from a higher position to
a lower position. In other words, water ﬂows from a state of higher
gravitational potential energy to a state of lower gravitational potential
energy. As water ﬂows downhill, it can do work, such as turning a water
wheel or a turbine. The chemical changes that take place in galvanic
cells are also accompanied by changes in potential energy. Electrons
spontaneously ﬂow from a position of higher potential energy at the
anode to a position of lower potential energy at the cathode. The moving
electrons can do work, such as lighting a bulb or turning a motor.
The difference between the potential energy at the anode and the
potential energy at the cathode is the electric potential, E, of a cell. The
unit used to measure electric potential is called the volt, with symbol V.
Because of the name of this unit, electric potential is more commonly
known as cell voltage. Another name for it is cell potential. A cell
potential can be measured using an electrical device called a voltmeter.
A cell potential of 0 V means that the cell has no electric potential,
and no electrons will ﬂow. You know that you can generate electricity
by connecting a zinc electrode and a copper electrode that have been
inserted into a lemon. However, you cannot generate electricity by
connecting two copper electrodes that have been inserted into the lemon.
The two copper electrodes are the same and are in contact with the same
electrolyte. There is no potential difference between the two electrodes.
Electric potentials vary from one cell to another, depending on various
factors. You will examine some of these factors in the next investigation.
The cell voltage is sometimes
called the electromotive force,
abbreviated emf. However,
this term can be misleading.
A cell voltage is a potential
difference, not a force. The
unit of cell voltage, the volt,
is not a unit of force.
Chapter 11  Cells and Batteries • MHR 509
S K I L L   F O C U S
Predicting
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
Communicating results
Measuring Cell Potentials
of Galvanic Cells
In this investigation, you will build some gal-
vanic cells and measure their cell potentials.
Question
What factors affect the cell potential of
a galvanic cell?
Prediction
Predict whether the cell potentials of galvanic
cells depend on the electrodes and electrolytes in
the half-cells. Give reasons for your prediction.
Materials
25 cm clear aquarium rubber tubing (Tygon® ),
internal diameter 4–6 mm
1 Styrofoam or clear plastic egg carton
with 12 wells
5 cm strip of Mg ribbon
1 cm × 5 cm strips of Cu, Al, Ni, Zn, Sn,
Fe, and Ag
5 cm of thick graphite pencil lead or a
graphite rod
5 mL of 0.1 mol/L solutions of each of the
following: Mg(NO3)2, Cu(NO3)2, Al(NO3)3 ,
Ni(NO3)2 , Zn(NO3)2, SnSO4 , Fe(NO3)3 ,
AgNO3, HNO3
15 mL of 1.0 mol/L KNO3
5 mL of saturated NaCl solution
disposable pipette
cotton batting
sandpaper
black and red electrical leads with alligator clips
voltmeter set to a scale of 0 V to 20 V
paper towel
Safety Precautions
Handle the nitric acid solution with care. It is an
irritant. Wash any spills on your skin with copi-
ous amounts of water, and inform your teacher.
Procedure
1. Use tape or a permanent marker to label the
outside of nine wells of your egg carton with
the nine different half-cells. Each well should
correspond to one of the eight different
metal/metal ion pairs: Mg/Mg2+, Cu/Cu2+,
Al/Al3+, Ni/Ni2+, Zn/Zn2+, Sn/Sn2+, Fe/Fe3+,
and Ag/Ag+. Label the ninth well H+/H2.
2. Prepare a 9 × 9 grid in your notebook. Label
the nine columns to match the nine half-cells.
Label the nine rows in the same way. You
will use this chart to mark the positive cell
potentials you obtain when you connect two
half-cells to build a galvanic cell. You will
also record the anode and the cathode for
each galvanic cell you build. (You may not
need to ﬁll out the entire chart.)
3. Sand each of the metals to remove any oxides.
4. Pour 5 mL of each metal salt solution into the
appropriate well of the egg carton. Pour 5 mL
of the nitric acid into the well labelled H+/H2.
5. Prepare your salt bridge as follows.
(a) Roll a small piece of cotton batting so that
it forms a plug about the size of a grain
of rice. Place the plug in one end of your
aquarium tubing, but leave a small amount
of the cotton hanging out, so you can
remove the plug later.
(b) Fill a disposable pipette as full as possible
with the 1 mol/L KNO3 electrolyte solution.
Fit the tip of the pipette ﬁrmly into the
open end of the tubing. Slowly inject the
electrolyte solution into the tubing. Fill the
tubing completely, so that the cotton on the
other side becomes wet.
(c) With the tubing completely full, insert
another cotton plug into the other end.
There should be no air bubbles. (You may
have to repeat this step from the beginning
if you have air bubbles.)
510 MHR • Unit 5  Electrochemistry
6. Insert each metal strip into the corresponding
well. Place the graphite rod in the well with
the nitric acid. The metal strips and the
graphite rod are your electrodes.
7. Attach the alligator clip on the red lead to the
red probe of the voltmeter. Attach the black
lead to the black probe.
8. Choose two wells to test. Insert one end of the
salt bridge into the solution in the ﬁrst well.
Insert the other end of the salt bridge into
the solution in the second well. Attach a free
alligator clip to the electrode in each well.
(Note: The graphite electrode is very fragile.
Be gentle when using it.) You have built a
galvanic cell.
9. If you get a negative reading, switch the
alligator clips. Once you obtain a positive
value, record it in your chart. The black lead
should be attached to the anode (electrons
ﬂowing into the voltmeter). Record which
metal is acting as the anode and which is
acting as the cathode in this galvanic cell.
10. Remove the salt bridge and wipe any excess
salt solution off the outside of the tubing.
Remove the alligator clips from the electrodes.
11. Repeat steps 8 to 10 for all other combinations
of electrodes. Record your results.
12. Reattach the leads to the silver and
magnesium electrodes, and insert your salt
bridge back into the two appropriate wells.
While observing the reading on the voltmeter,
slowly add 5 mL of saturated NaCl solution to
the Ag/Ag+ well to precipitate AgCl. Record
any changes in the voltmeter reading. Observe
the Ag/Ag+ well.
13. Rinse off the metals and the graphite rod with
water. Dispose of the salt solutions into the
heavy metal salts container your teacher has
set aside. Rinse out your egg carton. Remove
and discard the plugs of the salt bridge, and
dispose of the KNO3 solution as directed by
your teacher. Return all your materials to their
appropriate locations.
Analysis
1. For each cell in which you measured a cell
potential, identify
(a) the anode and the cathode
(b) the positive and negative electrodes
2. For each cell in which you measured a
cell potential, write a balanced equation
for the reduction half-reaction, the oxidation
half-reaction, and the overall cell reaction.
3. For any one cell in which you measured a cell
potential, describe
(a) the direction in which electrons ﬂow
through the external circuit
(b) the movements of ions in the cell
4. Use your observations to decide which of the
metals used as electrodes is the most effective
reducing agent. Explain your reasoning.
5. List all the reduction half-reactions you wrote
in question 2 so that the metallic elements in
the half-reactions appear in order of their abili-
ty as reducing agents. Put the least effective
reducing agent at the top of the list and the
most effective reducing agent at the bottom.
6. In which part of your list from question 5 are
the metal ions that are the best oxidizing
agents? Explain.
7. (a) When saturated sodium chloride solution
was added to the silver nitrate solution,
what reaction took place? Explain.
(b) Does the concentration of an electrolyte
affect the cell potential of a galvanic cell?
How do you know?
Conclusion
8. Identify factors that affect the cell potential
of a galvanic cell.
Applications
9. Predict any other factors that you think might
affect the voltage of a galvanic cell. Describe
an investigation you could complete to test
your prediction.
Chapter 11  Cells and Batteries • MHR 511
Disposable Batteries
The Daniell cell is fairly large and full of liquid. Realistically, you could
not use this type of cell to power a wristwatch, a remote control, or a
ﬂashlight. Galvanic cells have been modiﬁed, however, to make them
more useful.
The Dry Cell Battery
A dry cell is a galvanic cell with the electrolyte contained in a paste
thickened with starch. This cell is much more portable than the Daniell
cell. The ﬁrst dry cell, invented by the French chemist Georges Leclanché
in 1866, was called the Leclanché cell.
Modern dry cells are closely modelled on the Leclanché cell, and also
contain electrolyte pastes. You have probably used dry cells in all kinds of
applications, such as lighting a ﬂashlight, powering a remote control, or
ringing a doorbell. Dry cells are inexpensive. The cheapest AAA-, AA-, C-,
and D-size 1.5-V batteries are dry cells.
A battery is deﬁned as a set of galvanic cells connected in series. The
negative electrode of one cell is connected to the positive electrode of the
next cell in the set. The voltage of a set of cells connected in series is the
sum of the voltages of the individual cells. Thus, a 9-V battery contains
six 1.5-V dry cells connected in series. Often, the term “battery” is also
used to describe a single cell. For example, a 1.5-V dry cell battery
contains only a single cell.
A dry cell battery stops producing electricity when the reactants
are used up. This type of battery is disposable after it has run down
completely. A disposable battery is known as a primary battery. Some
other batteries are rechargeable. A rechargeable battery is known as
a secondary battery. The rest of this section will deal with primary
batteries. You will learn about secondary batteries in section 11.3.
A dry cell contains a zinc anode and an inert graphite cathode, as
shown in Figure 11.7. The electrolyte is a moist paste of manganese(IV)
oxide, MnO2, zinc chloride, ZnCl2, ammonium chloride, NH4Cl, and
“carbon black,” C(s), also known as soot.
The oxidation half-reaction at the zinc anode is already familiar to you.
Zn(s) → Zn2+
The reduction half-reaction at the cathode is more complicated. An
approximation is given here.
(aq) + 2e−
C O U R S E
C H A L L E N G E
How does electrochemistry
affect your life? In the
Chemistry Course Challenge,
you will examine some of the
roles electrochemistry plays
in the human body. How is
electrochemistry important
in medical applications? Do
research to ﬁnd some speciﬁc
examples.
2MnO2(s) + H2O((cid:2)) + 2e− → Mn2O3(s) + 2OH−
Therefore, an approximation of the overall cell reaction is:
2MnO2(s) + Zn(s) + H2O((cid:2)) → Mn2O3(s) + Zn2+
(aq)
(aq) + 2OH−
(aq)
The D-size dry
Figure 11.7
cell battery is shown whole, and
cut in two. The anode is the zinc
container, located just inside the
outer paper, steel, or plastic case.
The graphite cathode runs through
the centre of the cylinder.
zinc anode
512 MHR • Unit 5  Electrochemistry
electrolyte paste
graphite cathode
The Alkaline Cell Battery
The more expensive alkaline cell, shown in Figure 11.8, is an improved,
longer-lasting version of the dry cell.
positive button
steel case
MnO2 in KOH paste
Zn (anode)
graphite rod (cathode)
absorbent/separator
negative end cap
Figure 11.8
Each type has a voltage of 1.5 V.
The structure of an alkaline cell is similar to the structure of a dry cell.
Billions of alkaline batteries, each containing a single alkaline cell, are
made every year. The ammonium chloride and zinc chloride used in a dry
cell are replaced by strongly alkaline (basic) potassium hydroxide, KOH.
The half-reactions and the overall reaction in an alkaline cell are given here.
Oxidation (at the anode): Zn(s) + 2OH−
Reduction (at the cathode): MnO2(s) + 2H2O((cid:2)) + 2e− → Mn(OH)2(s) + 2OH−
Overall cell reaction: Zn(s) + MnO2(s) + H2O((cid:2)) → ZnO(s) + Mn(OH)2(s)
(aq) → ZnO(s) + H2O((cid:2)) + 2e−
(aq)
The Button Cell Battery
A button battery is much smaller than an alkaline battery. Button batteries
are commonly used in watches, as shown in Figure 11.9. Because of its
small size, the button battery is also used for hearing aids, pacemakers, and
some calculators and cameras. The development of smaller batteries has
had an enormous impact on portable devices, as shown in Figure 11.10.
Two common types of button batteries both use a zinc container,
which acts as the anode, and an inert stainless steel cathode, as shown in
Figure 11.11 on the next page. In the mercury button battery, the alkaline
electrolyte paste contains mercury(II) oxide, HgO. In the silver button
battery, the electrolyte paste contains silver oxide, Ag2O. The batteries
have similar voltages: about 1.3 V for the mercury cell, and about 1.6 V
for the silver cell.
The reaction products in a mercury button battery are solid zinc oxide
and liquid mercury. The two half-reactions and the overall equation are
as follows.
Figure 11.9
small and long-lasting.
Button batteries are
Oxidation half-reaction: Zn(s) + 2OH−
Reduction half-reaction: HgO(s) + H2O((cid:2)) + 2e− → Hg((cid:2)) + 2OH−
Overall reaction: Zn(s) + HgO(s) → ZnO(s) + Hg((cid:2))
(aq) → ZnO(s) + H2O((cid:2)) + 2e−
(aq)
With small,
Figure 11.10
long-lasting batteries, a pacemaker
can now be implanted in a heart
patient’s chest. Early pacemakers,
such as this one developed at the
University of Toronto in the 1950s,
were so big and heavy that patients
had to wheel them around on a cart.
Chapter 11  Cells and Batteries • MHR 513
A common type
Figure 11.11
of button battery, shown here,
contains silver oxide or mercury(II)
oxide. Mercury is cheaper than
silver, but discarded mercury
batteries release toxic mercury
metal into the environment.
steel (cathode)
(+)
zinc container (anode)
(−)
insulation
porous separator
paste of Ag2O or HgO
in KOH and Zn(OH)2 electrolyte
Careers
in Chemistry
Explosives Chemist
Fortunato Villamagna works as the vice-president of
technology for an Australian-owned company with
ofﬁces worldwide, including Canada. Villamagna’s
job has given him the opportunity to invent new
products, build chemical plants, and conduct
projects in Africa and Australia.
Born in Italy, Villamagna moved to Canada
when he was eight. He grew up in Montréal, where
his interest in chemistry was sparked by a Grade 10
teacher.
At university, Villamagna gained a greater
understanding of the value of chemistry research.
“Research creates new technologies and concepts,
results in new products and services, creates jobs
and prosperity, and in the end improves people’s
lives,” he says. Villamagna decided to pursue
graduate studies. He obtained a Masters of Science
in physical chemistry at Concordia University, and
a Ph.D. in physical chemistry at McGill University.
Today, Villamagna leads a team of researchers
responsible for developing new products and
techniques involving explosives.
514 MHR • Unit 5  Electrochemistry
Redox reactions play an important role in
industrial safety. Explosives are used in controlled
ways in the mining, highway, and construction
industries. The use of explosives allows modern
workers to break up bedrock and carry out
necessary demolitions from a safe distance.
Chemists are involved in the development and
production of explosives. They are also involved
in making recommendations for the safe handling
and disposal of explosives.
Many explosives are based on redox reactions.
For example, the decomposition of nitroglycerin
into nitrogen, carbon dioxide, water vapour, and
oxygen is a redox reaction that results in a powerful
explosion. The three nitrate groups of a nitroglycerin
molecule act as powerful oxidizing agents, and the
glycerol portion of the compound acts as a fuel.
Fuels are very easily oxidized.
Nitroglycerin is highly unstable and can
explode very easily. Therefore, it is difﬁcult to
manufacture and transport safely. Ammonium
nitrate, an explosive that can act as both an
oxidizing agent and a reducing agent, is often used
to modify other explosives such as nitroglycerin.
Ammonium nitrate is one of the products made
by Villamagna’s company.
Making Career Connections
• The chemical formula of nitroglycerin is C3O9N3H5 .
Write the balanced chemical equation for the
decomposition of nitroglycerin, as described in
this feature.
• Find out which Canadian companies employ
chemists who specialize in safe applications of
explosives. Contact those companies for more
information.
Section Summary
In this section, you learned how to identify the different components of a
galvanic cell. Also, you found out how galvanic cells convert chemical
energy into electrical energy. You were introduced to several common
primary batteries that contain galvanic cells. In the next section, you will
learn more about the cell potentials of galvanic cells.
P R O B E W A R E
If you have access to
probeware, do Probeware
Investigation 11-A, or a similar
investigation from a probeware
company.
Section Review
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
K/U
Identify the oxidizing agent and the reducing agent in a dry cell.
C
Explain why the top of a commercial 1.5-V dry cell battery is
always marked with a plus sign.
I
The reaction products in a silver button battery are solid zinc oxide
and solid silver.
(a) Write the two half-reactions and the equation for the overall reaction
in the battery.
(b) Name the materials used to make the anode and the cathode.
I
If two 1.5-V D-size batteries power a ﬂashlight, at what voltage is
the ﬂashlight operating? Explain.
I
How many dry cells are needed to make a 6-V dry cell battery?
Explain.
MC
Research the environmental impact of mercury pollution. Describe
the main sources of mercury in the environment, the effects of mercury
on human health, and at least one incident in which humans were
harmed by mercury pollution.
K/U
When a dry cell produces electricity, what happens to the
container? Explain.
C
Use the following shorthand representation to sketch a possible
design of the cell. Include as much information as you can. Identify
the anode and cathode, and write the half-reactions and the overall
cell reaction.
Fe(s)
| Fe2+
(aq)
|| Ag+
(aq)
| Ag(s)
Chapter 11  Cells and Batteries • MHR 515
11.2
Standard Cell Potentials
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
(cid:2) describe the use of the
hydrogen half-cell as a
reference
(cid:2) calculate overall cell
potentials under standard
conditions
(cid:2) communicate your under-
standing of the following
terms: reduction potential,
oxidation potential
In section 11.1, you learned that a cell potential is the difference between
the potential energies at the anode and the cathode of a cell. In other
words, a cell potential is the difference between the potentials of two
half-cells. You cannot measure the potential of one half-cell, because a
single half-reaction cannot occur alone. However, you can use measured
cell potentials to construct tables of half-cell potentials. A table of
standard half-cell potentials allows you to calculate cell potentials, rather
than building the cells and measuring their potentials. Table 11.1 includes
a few standard half-cell potentials. A larger table of standard half-cell
potentials is given in Appendix E.
Table 11.1 Standard Half-Cell Potentials (298 K)
(aq)
(aq)
Half-reaction
F2(g) + 2e−   (cid:3)(cid:4)  2F−
Br2((cid:2)) + 2e−   (cid:3)    (cid:4)  2Br−
I2(s) + 2e−   (cid:3)    (cid:4)  2I−
Cu2+
(aq)
(aq) + 2e−   (cid:3)(cid:4)  Cu(s)
(aq) + 2e−   (cid:3)(cid:4)  H2(g)
(aq) + 2e−   (cid:3)(cid:4)  Fe(s)
(aq) + 2e−   (cid:3)(cid:4)  Zn(s)
(aq) + 3e−   (cid:3)(cid:4)  Al(s)
(aq) + e−   (cid:3)(cid:4)  Na(s)
2H+
Fe2+
Zn2+
Al3+
Na+
E  (V)
2.866
1.066
0.536
0.342
0.000
−0.447
−0.762
−1.662
−2.711
Table 11.1 and the larger table in Appendix E are based on the following
conventions.
• Each half-reaction is written as a reduction. The half-cell potential
for a reduction half-reaction is called a reduction potential. Look at
the molecules and ions on the left side of each half-reaction. The most
easily reduced molecules and ions (best oxidizing agents), such as F2 ,
− , and O2, are near the top of the list. The least easily reduced
MnO4
molecules and ions (worst oxidizing agents), such as Na+, Ca2+, and
H2O, are near the bottom of the list.
• The numerical values of cell potentials and half-cell potentials depend
on various conditions, so tables of standard reduction potentials are true
when ions and molecules are in their standard states. These standard
states are the same as for tables of standard enthalpy changes. Aqueous
molecules and ions have a standard concentration of 1 mol/L. Gases have
a standard pressure of 101.3 kPa or 1 atm. The standard temperature
is 25˚C or 298 K. Standard reduction potentials are designated by the
symbol E ˚, where the superscript ˚ indicates standard states.
• Because you can measure potential differences, but not individual
reduction potentials, all values in the table are relative. Each half-cell
reduction potential is given relative to the reduction potential of the
standard hydrogen electrode, which has been assigned a value of zero.
The design of this electrode is shown in Figure 11.12.
516 MHR • Unit 5  Electrochemistry
H2(g) at 1 atm
1 mol/L HCl(aq)
Pt electrode
In a standard hydrogen electrode, which is open to the atmosphere, hydrogen
Figure 11.12
gas at 1 atm pressure bubbles over an inert platinum electrode. The electrode is immersed in
a solution containing 1 mol/L H+ ions.
Calculating Standard Cell Potentials
You can use Table 11.1 to calculate the standard cell potential of the
familiar Daniell cell. This cell has its standard potential when the
solution concentrations are 1 mol/L, as shown in the shorthand
representation below.
Zn | Zn2+
(1 mol/L) || Cu2+
One method to calculate the standard cell potential is to subtract the
standard reduction potential of the anode from the standard reduction
potential of the cathode.
(1 mol/L) | Cu
Method 1: E˚cell = E˚cathode − E˚anode
For a Daniell cell, you know that copper is the cathode and zinc is the
anode. The relevant half-reactions and standard reduction potentials from
Table 11.1 are as follows.
Cu2+
Zn2+
(aq) + 2e− (cid:3)(cid:4) Cu(s) E˚ = 0.342 V
(aq) + 2e− (cid:3)(cid:4) Zn(s) E˚ = −0.762 V
Use these values to calculate the cell potential.
E˚cell = E˚cathode − E˚anode
= 0.342 V − (−0.762 V)
= 0.342 V + 0.762 V
= 1.104 V
Thus, the standard cell potential for a Daniell cell is 1.104 V.
The standard cell potentials of all galvanic cells have positive values,
as explained in Figure 11.13, on the following page. Figure 11.13 shows
a “potential ladder” diagram. A “potential ladder” diagram models the
potential difference. The rungs on the ladder correspond to the values
of the reduction potentials.
Chapter 11  Cells and Batteries • MHR 517
more positive
)
V
(
˚
E
,
l
a
i
t
n
e
t
o
p
n
o
i
t
c
u
d
e
r
d
r
a
d
n
a
t
s
cathode (reduction)
E˚cathode
E˚cell = E˚cathode − E˚anode
anode (oxidation)
E˚anode
For a galvanic cell,
Figure 11.13
E ˚cathode is more positive (or less
negative) than E ˚anode. Thus, E ˚cell is
always positive.
This calculation of the standard cell potential for the Daniell cell used
the mathematical concept that the subtraction of a negative number is
equivalent to the addition of its positive value. You saw that
0.342 V − (−0.762 V) = 0.342 V + 0.762 V
In other words, the subtraction of the reduction potential for a
half-reaction is equivalent to the addition of the potential for the reverse
half-reaction. The reverse half-reaction of a reduction is an oxidation.
The half-cell potential for an oxidation half-reaction is called an oxidation
potential. If the reduction half-reaction is as follows,
Zn2+
(aq) + 2e− (cid:3)(cid:4) Zn(s) E˚ = −0.762 V
then the oxidation half-reaction is
Zn(s)
(cid:3)(cid:4) Zn2+
(aq) + 2e− E˚ox = +0.762 V
To summarize, the standard cell potential can also be calculated as the
sum of a standard reduction potential and a standard oxidation potential.
Method 2: E˚cell = E˚red + E˚ox
As shown above, you can obtain the standard oxidation potential from
a table of standard reduction potentials by reversing the reduction half-
reaction, and changing the sign of the relevant potential. The reduction
and oxidation half-reactions for the previous example are as follows.
Cu2+
Zn(s)
(aq) + 2e− (cid:3)(cid:4) Cu(s) E˚red = 0.342 V
(cid:3)(cid:4) Zn2+
(aq) + 2e− E˚ox = + 0.762 V
The calculation of the standard cell potential using these standard
half-reaction potentials is as follows.
E˚cell = E˚red + E˚ox
= 0.342 V + 0.762 V
= 1.104 V
Electronic Learning Partner
Your Chemistry 12 Electronic
Learning Partner has a movie
describing the operation of
a galvanic cell, and the
calculation of its cell potential.
Finding the difference between two reduction potentials, and ﬁnding
the sum of a reduction potential and an oxidation potential are exactly
equivalent methods for ﬁnding a cell potential. Use whichever method
you prefer. The ﬁrst Sample Problem includes both methods for ﬁnding
cell potentials. The second Sample Problem uses only the subtraction of
two reduction potentials. Practice problems are included after the second
Sample Problem.
518 MHR • Unit 5  Electrochemistry
Sample Problem
Calculating a Standard Cell
Potential, Given a Net Ionic Equation
Problem
Calculate the standard cell potential for the galvanic cell in which the
following reaction occurs.
(aq) + Br2((cid:2)) → I2(s) + 2Br−
2I−
(aq)
What Is Required?
You need to ﬁnd the standard cell potential for the given reaction.
What Is Given?
You have the balanced net ionic equation and a table of standard
reduction potentials.
Plan Your Strategy
Method 1: Subtracting Two Reduction Potentials
Step 1 Write the oxidation and reduction half-reactions.
Step 2 Locate the relevant reduction potentials in a table of standard
reduction potentials.
Step 3 Subtract the reduction potentials to ﬁnd the cell potential, using
E˚cell = E˚cathode − E˚anode
Method 2: Adding an Oxidation Potential and a Reduction Potential
Step 1 Write the oxidation and reduction half-reactions.
Step 2 Locate the relevant reduction potentials in a table of standard
reduction potentials.
Step 3 Change the sign of the reduction potential for the oxidation
half-reaction to ﬁnd the oxidation potential.
Step 4 Add the reduction potential and the oxidation potential, using
E˚cell = E˚red + E˚ox
Act on Your Strategy
Method 1: Subtracting Two Reduction Potentials
Step 1 The oxidation and reduction half-reactions are as follows.
Oxidation half-reaction (occurs at the anode): 2I−
(aq) → I2(s) + 2e−
Reduction half-reaction (occurs at the cathode): Br2((cid:2)) + 2e− → 2Br−
Step 2 The relevant reduction potentials in the table of standard
(aq)
PROBLEM TIP
Think of a red cat to remember
that reduction occurs at the
cat hode. Think of an ox to
remember that the anode is
where ox idation occurs.
reduction potentials are:
I2(s) + 2e− (cid:3)(cid:4) 2I−
Br2((cid:2)) + 2e− (cid:3)(cid:4) 2Br−
(aq) E˚anode = 0.536 V
(aq) E˚cathode = 1.066 V
Step 3 Calculate the cell potential by subtraction.
E˚cell = E˚cathode − E˚anode
= 1.066 V − 0.536 V
= 0.530 V
Continued ...
Chapter 11  Cells and Batteries • MHR 519
Continued ...
Method 2: Adding an Oxidation Potential and a Reduction Potential
Step 1 The oxidation and reduction half-reactions are as follows.
Oxidation half-reaction (occurs at the anode): 2I−
(aq) → I2(s) + 2e−
Reduction half-reaction (occurs at the cathode): Br2((cid:2)) + 2e− → 2Br−
Step 2 The relevant reduction potentials in the table of standard
(aq)
reduction potentials are:
I2(s) + 2e− (cid:3)(cid:4) 2I−
Br2((cid:2)) + 2e− (cid:3)(cid:4) 2Br−
(aq) E˚anode = 0.536 V
(aq) E˚cathode = 1.066 V
Step 3 The standard electrode potential for the reduction half-reaction is
E˚red = 1.066 V. Changing the sign of the potential for the
oxidation half-reaction gives
2I−
(cid:3)(cid:4) I2(s) + 2e− E˚ox = −0.536 V
(aq)
Step 4 Calculate the cell potential by addition.
E˚cell = E˚red + E˚ox
= 1.066 V + (−0.536 V)
= 0.530 V
Check Your Solution
Both methods give the same answer. The cell potential is positive, as
expected for a galvanic cell.
A standard cell potential depends only on the identities of the reactants
and products in their standard states. As you will see in the next Sample
Problem, you do not need to consider the amounts of reactants or
products present, or the reaction stoichiometry, when calculating a
standard cell potential. Since you have just completed a similar Sample
Problem, only a brief solution using the subtraction method is given here.
Check that you can solve this problem by adding a reduction potential
and an oxidation potential.
Sample Problem
Calculating a Standard Cell
Potential, Given a Chemical Equation
Problem
Calculate the standard cell potential for the galvanic cell in which the
following reaction occurs.
2Na(s) + 2H2O((cid:2)) → 2NaOH(aq) + H2(g)
520 MHR • Unit 5  Electrochemistry
PROBLEM TIP
A “potential ladder” diagram
models the potential difference.
The rungs on the ladder
correspond to the values of
the reduction potentials. For a
galvanic cell, the half-reaction
at the cathode is always on the
upper rung, and the subtraction
E ˚cathode − E ˚anode always gives
a positive cell potential.
more positive
2H2O((cid:2)) + 2e−  H2(g) + 2OH−
(aq)
E˚cell = −0.828 V − (−2.711) V
= 1.883 V
Na(s) + e−  Na+
(aq)
8
2
8
.
0
−
)
V
(
˚
E
1
1
7
.
2
−
Solution
(aq) + H2(g)
Step 1 Write the equation in ionic form to identify the half-reactions.
(aq) + 2OH−
2Na(s) + 2H2O((cid:2)) → 2Na+
Write the oxidation and reduction half-reactions.
Oxidation half-reaction (occurs at the anode): Na(s) → Na+
Reduction half-reaction (occurs at the cathode):
2H2O((cid:2)) + 2e− → 2OH−
(aq) + H2(g)
Step 2 Locate the relevant reduction potentials in a table of standard
(aq) + e−
reduction potentials.
Na(s) + e− (cid:3)(cid:4) Na+
2H2O((cid:2)) + 2e− (cid:3)(cid:4) H2(g) + 2OH−
(aq) E˚anode = −2.711 V
(aq) E˚cathode = −0.828 V
Step 3 Subtract the standard reduction potentials to calculate the cell
potential.
E˚cell = E˚cathode − E˚anode
= −0.828 V − (−2.711 V)
= 1.883 V
The standard cell potential is 1.883 V. The Problem Tip on this page
illustrates this calculation.
Practice Problems
(Note: Obtain the necessary standard reduction potential values from the
table in Appendix E.)
5. Write the two half-reactions for the following redox reaction. Subtract
the two reduction potentials to ﬁnd the standard cell potential for a
galvanic cell in which this reaction occurs.
Cl2(g) + 2Br−
(aq) → 2Cl−
(aq) + Br2((cid:2))
6. Write the two half-reactions for the following redox reaction. Add the
reduction potential and the oxidation potential to ﬁnd the standard
cell potential for a galvanic cell in which this reaction occurs.
2Cu+
(aq) + O2(g) → 2Cu2+
(aq) + H2O2(aq)
(aq) + 2H+
7. Write the two half-reactions for the following redox reaction. Subtract
the two standard reduction potentials to ﬁnd the standard cell
potential for the reaction.
Sn(s) + 2HBr(aq) → SnBr2(aq) + H2(g)
8. Write the two half-reactions for the following redox reaction. Add the
standard reduction potential and the standard oxidation potential to
ﬁnd the standard cell potential for the reaction.
Cr(s) + 3AgCl(s) → CrCl3(aq) + 3Ag(s)
You have learned that the standard hydrogen electrode has an assigned
standard reduction potential of exactly 0 V, and is the reference for all
half-cell standard reduction potentials. What would happen to cell
potentials if a different reference were used? You will address this
question in the following ThoughtLab.
Electronic Learning Partner
Go to the Chemistry 12
Electronic Learning Partner
for more information about
aspects of material covered
in this section of the chapter.
Chapter 11  Cells and Batteries • MHR 521
ThoughtLab
Assigning Reference Values
Many scales of measurement have zero values that
are arbitrary. For example, on Earth, average sea
level is often assigned as the zero of altitude. In this
ThoughtLab, you will investigate what happens to
calculated cell potentials when the reference half-cell
is changed.
Procedure
3. Repeat your calculations using the new, adjusted
reduction potentials.
Analysis
1. Compare your calculations from questions 2 and
3 of the procedure. What effect does changing the
zero on the scale of reduction potentials have on
1. Copy the following table of reduction potentials
into your notebook. Change the zero on the scale
by adding 1.662 V to each value to create new,
adjusted reduction potentials.
(a) reduction potentials?
(b) cell potentials?
Applications
(aq)
Reduction half-reaction
F2(g) + 2e−  (cid:3)(cid:4) 2F−
Fe3+
2H+
Al3+
Li+
(aq) + e−  (cid:3)(cid:4) Fe2+
(aq) + 2e−  (cid:3)(cid:4) H2(g)
(aq)  + 3e−  (cid:3)(cid:4) Al(s)
(aq) + e−  (cid:3)(cid:4) Li(s)
(aq)
E   (V)
2.866
0.771
0.000
−1.662
−3.040
E   + 1.662  (V)
2. Find the difference between the temperatures at
which water boils and freezes on the following
scales. (Assume that a difference is positive,
rather than negative.)
(a) the Celsius temperature scale
(b) the Kelvin temperature scale
3. What do your answers for the previous question
tell you about these two temperature scales?
4. The zero on a scale of masses is not arbitrary.
Why not?
2. Use the given standard reduction potentials to
calculate the standard cell potentials for the
following redox reactions.
(a) 2Li(s) + 2H+
(aq) → 2Li+
(b) 2Al(s) + 3F2(g) → 2Al3+
(c) 2FeCl3(aq) + H2(g) → 2FeCl2(aq) + 2HCl(aq)
(d) Al(NO3)3(aq) + 3Li(s) → 3LiNO3(aq) + Al(s)
(aq) + H2(g)
(aq) + 6F−
(aq)
Section Summary
In this section, you learned that you can calculate cell potentials by
using tables of half-cell potentials. The half-cell potential for a reduction
half-reaction is called a reduction potential. The half-cell potential for an
oxidation half-reaction is called an oxidation potential. Standard half-cell
potentials are written as reduction potentials. The values of standard
reduction potentials for half-reactions are relative to the reduction potential
of the standard hydrogen electrode. You used standard reduction potentials
to calculate standard cell potentials for galvanic cells. You learned two
methods of calculating standard cell potentials. One method is to subtract
the standard reduction potential of the anode from the standard reduction
potential of the cathode. The other method is to add the standard reduction
potential of the cathode and the standard oxidation potential of the anode.
In the next section, you will learn about a different type of cell, called an
electrolytic cell.
522 MHR • Unit 5  Electrochemistry
Section Review
1
I
Determine the standard cell potential for each of the following
redox reactions.
(a) 3Mg(s) + 2Al3+
(b) 2K(s) + F2(g) → 2K+
2−
(aq) + 14H+
(c) Cr2O7
(aq) + 2Al(s)
(aq) → 3Mg2+
(aq) + 2F−
(aq)
(aq) + 6Ag(s) → 2Cr3+
(aq) + 6Ag+
(aq) + 7H2O((cid:2))
2
I
Determine the standard cell potential for each of the following
redox reactions.
(a) CuSO4(aq) + Ni(s) → NiSO4(aq) + Cu(s)
(b) 4Au(OH)3(aq) → 4Au(s) + 6H2O((cid:2)) + 3O2(g)
(c) Fe(s) + 4HNO3(aq) → Fe(NO3)3(aq) + NO(g) + 2H2O((cid:2))
3
4
5
K/U
For which half-cell are the values of the standard reduction
potential and the standard oxidation potential equal?
I
Look at the half-cells in the table of standard reduction potentials
in Appendix E. Could you use two of the standard half-cells to build
a galvanic cell with a standard cell potential of 7 V? Explain your
answer.
C
Compare the positions of metals in the metal activity series with
their positions in the table of standard reduction potentials. Describe
the similarities and differences.
6
I
The cell potential for the following galvanic cell is given.
Zn | Zn2+ (1 mol/L) || Pd2+ (1 mol/L) | Pd E˚cell = 1.750 V
Determine the standard reduction potential for the following
half-reaction.
Pd2+
(aq) + 2e− (cid:3)(cid:4) Pd(s)
Chapter 11  Cells and Batteries • MHR 523
11.3
Electrolytic Cells
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
(cid:2) identify the components
of an electrolytic cell, and
describe how they work
(cid:2) describe electrolytic
cells using oxidation and
reduction half-cells
(cid:2) determine oxidation and
reduction half-cell reactions,
direction of current ﬂow,
electrode polarity, cell
potential, and ion movement
in some electrolytic cells
(cid:2) build and investigate an
electrolytic cell in the
laboratory
(cid:2) predict whether or not redox
reactions are spontaneous,
using standard cell
potentials
(cid:2) describe some common
rechargeable batteries, and
evaluate their impact on the
environment and on society
(cid:2) communicate your under-
standing of the following
terms: electrolytic cell,
electrolysis, overvoltage,
electroplating
For a galvanic cell, you have learned that the overall reaction is
spontaneous, and that the cell potential has a positive value. A galvanic
cell converts chemical energy to electrical energy. Electrons ﬂow from a
higher potential energy to a lower potential energy. As described earlier,
the ﬂow of electrons in the external circuit of a galvanic cell can be
compared to water ﬂowing downhill.
Although water ﬂows downhill spontaneously, you can also pump
water uphill. This process requires energy because it moves water from
a position of lower potential energy to a position of higher potential
energy. You will now learn about a type of cell that uses energy to move
electrons from lower potential energy to higher potential energy. This
type of cell, called an electrolytic cell, is a device that converts electrical
energy to chemical energy. The process that takes place in an electrolytic
cell is called electrolysis. The overall reaction in an electrolytic cell is
non-spontaneous, and requires energy to occur. This type of reaction is
the reverse of a spontaneous reaction, which generates energy when
it occurs.
Like a galvanic cell, an electrolytic cell includes electrodes, at least
one electrolyte, and an external circuit. Unlike galvanic cells, electrolytic
cells require an external source of electricity, sometimes called the
external voltage. This is included in the external circuit. Except for the
external source of electricity, an electrolytic cell may look just like a
galvanic cell. Some electrolytic cells include a porous barrier or salt
bridge. In other electrolytic cells, the two half-reactions are not separated,
and take place in the same container.
Electrolysis of Molten Salts
The electrolytic cell shown in Figure 11.14 decomposes sodium chloride
into its elements. The cell consists of a single container with two inert
electrodes dipping into liquid sodium chloride. To melt the sodium
chloride, the temperature must be above its melting point of about 800˚C.
As in an aqueous solution of sodium chloride, the ions in molten sodium
chloride have some freedom of movement. In other words, molten sodium
chloride is the electrolyte of this cell.
e−
e−
inert anode
(+)
battery
inert cathode
(−)
Molten sodium
Figure 11.14
chloride decomposes into sodium
and chlorine in this electrolytic
cell. The sodium chloride is said
to undergo electrolysis, or to be
electrolyzed.
524 MHR • Unit 5  Electrochemistry
cation
Na+
Cl−
anion
molten NaCl
“Electrochemical cell” is a
common term in electrochem-
istry. Some scientists include
both galvanic cells and
electrolytic cells as types of
electrochemical cells. Other
scientists consider galvanic
cells, but not electrolytic cells,
as electrochemical cells. If
you meet the term “electro-
chemical cell,” always check
its exact meaning.
The large cell
Figure 11.15
used for the electrolysis of sodium
chloride in industry is known as a
Downs cell. To decrease heating
costs, calcium chloride is added to
lower the melting point of sodium
chloride from about 800˚C to about
600˚C. The reaction produces
sodium and calcium by reduction at
the cathode, and chlorine by oxida-
tion at the anode.
The external source of electricity forces electrons onto one electrode. As a
result, this electrode becomes negative relative to the other electrode. The
positive sodium ions move toward the negative electrode, where they gain
electrons and are reduced to the element sodium. At this temperature,
sodium metal is produced as a liquid. The negative chloride ions move
toward the positive electrode, where they lose electrons and are oxidized
to the element chlorine, a gas. As in a galvanic cell, reduction occurs at
the cathode, and oxidation occurs at the anode of an electrolytic cell. The
half-reactions for this electrolytic cell are as follows.
Reduction half-reaction (occurs at the cathode): Na+
Oxidation half-reaction (occurs at the anode): 2Cl−
((cid:2)) + e− → Na((cid:2))
((cid:2)) → Cl2(g) + 2e−
Because of the external voltage of the electrolytic cell, the electrodes
do not have the same polarities in electrolytic and galvanic cells. In a
galvanic cell, the cathode is positive and the anode is negative. In an
electrolytic cell, the anode is positive and the cathode is negative.
The electrolysis of molten sodium chloride is an important industrial
reaction. Figure 11.15 shows the large electrolytic cell used in the
industrial production of sodium and chlorine. You will meet other
industrial electrolytic processes later in this chapter.
inlet for
NaCl, CaCl2
mixture of
Na, Ca
Na(  )
Cl2(g)
molten electrolyte
(NaCl and CaCl2)
molten Na
(+)
(−)
anode (oxidation)
2Cl−
((cid:2)) → Cl2(g) + 2e−
cathode (reduction)
((cid:2)) + e− → Na((cid:2))
Na+
Check your understanding of the introduction to electrolytic cells by
completing the following practice problems.
Practice Problems
9. The electrolysis of molten calcium chloride produces calcium and
chlorine. Write
(a) the half-reaction that occurs at the anode
(b) the half-reaction that occurs at the cathode
(c) the chemical equation for the overall cell reaction
Continued ...
Chapter 11  Cells and Batteries • MHR 525
Continued ...
10. For the electrolysis of molten lithium bromide, write
(a) the half-reaction that occurs at the negative electrode
(b) the half-reaction that occurs at the positive electrode
(c) the net ionic equation for the overall cell reaction
11. A galvanic cell produces direct current, which ﬂows in one direction.
The mains supply at your home is a source of alternating current,
which changes direction every fraction of a second. Explain why the
external electrical supply for an electrolytic cell must be a source of
direct current, rather than alternating current.
12. Suppose a battery is used as the external electrical supply for an
electrolytic cell. Explain why the negative terminal of the battery
must be connected to the cathode of the cell.
Electrolysis of Water
The electrolysis of aqueous solutions may not yield the desired products.
Sir Humphry Davy (1778 –1829) discovered the elements sodium and
potassium by electrolyzing their molten salts. Before this discovery, Davy
had electrolyzed aqueous solutions of sodium and potassium salts. He
had not succeeded in reducing the metal ions to the pure metals at the
cathode. Instead, his ﬁrst experiments had produced hydrogen gas. Where
did the hydrogen gas come from?
When electrolyzing an aqueous solution, there are two compounds
present: water, and the dissolved electrolyte. Water may be electrolyzed
as well as, or instead of, the electrolyte. The electrolysis of water produces
oxygen gas and hydrogen gas, as shown in Figure 11.16.
H2
O2
The electrolysis of water produces hydrogen gas
Figure 11.16
at the cathode and oxygen gas at the anode. Explain why the volume
of hydrogen gas is twice the volume of oxygen gas.
526 MHR • Unit 5  Electrochemistry
Check that you recall how
to combine the two
half-reactions to obtain the
overall cell reaction. You
learned how to do this in
section 10.3.
The half-reactions for the electrolysis of water are given below.
Oxidation half-reaction (occurs at the anode):
2H2O((cid:2)) → O2(g) + 4H+
Reduction half-reaction (occurs at the cathode):
2H2O((cid:2)) + 2e− → H2(g) + 2OH−
(aq) + 4e−
(aq)
Because the number of electrons lost and gained must be equal, multiply
the reduction half-reaction by 2. Then add and simplify to obtain the
overall cell reaction.
Overall cell reaction: 2H2O((cid:2)) → 2H2(g) + O2(g)
The standard reduction potentials are as follows.
(aq) + 4e− (cid:3)(cid:4) 2H2O((cid:2))
O2(g) + 4H+
E˚ = 1.229 V
2H2O((cid:2)) + 2e− (cid:3)(cid:4) H2(g) + 2OH−
(aq) E˚ = −0.828 V
You can use these values to calculate the E˚cell value for the
decomposition of water.
E˚cell = E˚cathode − E˚anode
= −0.828 V − 1.229 V
= −2.057 V
Therefore,
2H2O((cid:2)) → 2H2(g) + O2(g) E˚cell = −2.057 V
The negative cell potential shows that the reaction is not spontaneous.
Electrolytic cells are used for non-spontaneous redox reactions, so all
electrolytic cells have negative cell potentials.
The standard reduction potentials used to calculate E˚cell for the
decomposition of water apply only to reactants and products in their
standard states. However, in pure water at 25˚C, the hydrogen ions and
hydroxide ions each have concentrations of 1 × 10−7 mol/L. This is not
the standard state value of 1 mol/L. The reduction potential values for
the non-standard conditions in pure water are given below. The super-
script zero is now omitted from the E symbol, because the values are no
longer standard.
(aq) + 4e− (cid:3)(cid:4) 2H2O((cid:2))
O2(g) + 4H+
2H2O((cid:2)) + 2e− (cid:3)(cid:4) H2(g) + 2OH−
E = 0.815 V
(aq) E = −0.414 V
Using these new half-cell potentials, E cell for the decomposition of
pure water at 25˚C by electrolysis has a calculated value of −1.229 V.
Therefore, the calculated value of the external voltage needed is 1.229.
In practice, the external voltage needed for an electrolytic cell is
always greater than the calculated value, especially for reactions involving
gases. Therefore, the actual voltage needed to electrolyze pure water is
greater than 1.229 V. The excess voltage required above the calculated
value is called the overvoltage. Overvoltages depend on the gases
involved and on the materials in the electrodes.
When electrolyzing water, there is another practical difﬁculty to
consider. Pure water is a very poor electrical conductor. To increase the
conductivity, an electrolyte that does not interfere in the reaction is added
to the water.
Chapter 11  Cells and Batteries • MHR 527
Electrolysis of Aqueous Solutions
As stated previously, an electrolytic cell may have the same design as a
galvanic cell, except for the external source of electricity. Consider, for
example, the familiar Daniell cell. (This cell was described in section 11.1
and shown in Figure 11.5.) By adding an external electrical supply, with a
voltage greater than the voltage of the Daniell cell, you can push electrons
in the opposite direction. By pushing electrons in the opposite direction,
you reverse the chemical reaction. Figure 11.17 shows both cells, while
their properties are compared in Table 11.2.
e−
salt bridge
e−
battery
e−
salt bridge
anode
cathode
cathode
anode
−
Zn
+
Cu
−
Zn
+
Cu
ZnSO4(aq)
CuSO4(aq)
ZnSO4(aq)
CuSO4(aq)
galvanic cell
electrolytic cell
Figure 11.17
from a galvanic cell into an electrolytic cell. The result is to switch the anode and cathode.
Adding an external voltage to reverse the electron ﬂow converts a Daniell cell
Table 11.2  Cell Comparison
Spontaneous reaction
Non-spontaneous reaction
Galvanic Cell
Electrolytic Cell
Converts chemical energy to electrical energy
Converts electrical energy to chemical energy
Anode (negative): Zinc
Anode (positive): Copper
Cathode (positive): Copper
Oxidation (at anode): Zn(s)  → Zn2+
Reduction (at cathode): Cu2+
Cell reaction: Zn(s) + Cu2+
(aq)  →  Zn2+
(aq)  + 2e−
(aq)  + 2e−  → Cu(s)
(aq) + Cu(s)
Cathode (negative): Zinc
Oxidation (at anode): Cu(s)  → Cu2+
Reduction (at cathode): Zn2+
Cell reaction: Cu(s) + Zn2+
(aq)  + 2e−  → Zn(s)
(aq) + Zn(s)
(aq)  →  Cu2+
(aq)  + 2e−
In the galvanic cell, the zinc anode gradually dissolves. The copper
cathode grows as more copper is deposited onto it. In the electrolytic cell,
the copper anode gradually dissolves. The zinc cathode grows as more
zinc is deposited onto it. The process in which a metal is deposited, or
plated, onto the cathode in an electrolytic cell is known as electroplating.
Electroplating is very important in industry, as you will learn later in
this chapter.
528 MHR • Unit 5  Electrochemistry
Predicting the Products of Electrolysis for an Aqueous Solution
The comparison of the Daniell cell with the electrolytic version of the cell
appears straightforward. One reaction is the reverse of the other. However,
you have just learned that the electrolysis of an aqueous solution may
involve the electrolysis of water. How can you predict the actual products
for this type of electrolysis reaction?
To predict the products of an electrolysis involving an aqueous
solution, you must examine all possible half-reactions and their reduction
potentials. Then, you must ﬁnd the overall reaction that requires the
lowest external voltage. That is, you must ﬁnd the overall cell reaction
with a negative cell potential that is closest to zero. The next Sample
Problem shows you how to predict the products of the electrolysis of
an aqueous solution.
In practice, reaction products are sometimes different from the
products predicted, using the method described here. Predictions are least
reliable when the reduction potentials are close together, especially when
gaseous products are expected. However, there are many cases in which
the predictions are correct.
Sample Problem
Electrolysis of an Aqueous Solution
Problem
Predict the products of the electrolysis of 1 mol/L LiBr(aq).
What Is Required?
You need to predict the products of the electrolysis of 1 mol/L LiBr(aq).
What Is Given?
This is an aqueous solution. You are given the formula and concentra-
tion of the electrolyte. You have a table of standard reduction potentials,
and you know the non-standard reduction potentials for water.
Plan Your Strategy
Step 1 List the four relevant half-reactions and their reduction potentials.
Step 2 Predict the products by ﬁnding the cell reaction that requires the
lowest external voltage.
Act on Your Strategy
Step 1 The Li+ and Br− concentrations are 1 mol/L, so use the standard
reduction potentials for the half-reactions that involve these ions.
Use the non-standard values for water.
Br2((cid:2)) + 2e− (cid:3)(cid:4) 2Br−
(aq) + 4e− (cid:3)(cid:4) 2H2O((cid:2))
O2(g) + 4H+
2H2O((cid:2)) + 2e− (cid:3)(cid:4) H2(g) + 2OH−
Li+
E = 0.815 V
(aq) E = −0.414 V
(aq) + e− (cid:3)(cid:4) Li(s) E˚ = −3.040 V
(aq) E˚ = 1.066 V
Continued ...
Chapter 11  Cells and Batteries • MHR 529
Continued ...
There are two possible oxidation half-reactions at the anode:
the oxidation of bromide ion in the electrolyte, or the oxidation
of water.
2Br−
(aq) → Br2((cid:2)) + 2e−
2H2O((cid:2)) → O2(g) + 4H+
There are two possible reduction half-reactions at the cathode:
the reduction of lithium ions in the electrolyte, or the reduction
of water.
Li+
2H2O((cid:2)) + 2e− → H2(g) + 2OH−
(aq) + e− → Li(s)
(aq) + 4e−
(aq)
Step 2 Combine pairs of half-reactions to produce four possible overall
reactions. (You learned how to do this in Chapter 10.)
Reaction 1: the production of lithium and bromine
(aq) + 2Br−
2Li+
E˚cell = E˚cathode − E˚anode
(aq) → 2Li(s) + Br2((cid:2))
= −3.040 V − 1.066 V
= −4.106 V
Reaction 2: the production of hydrogen and oxygen
2H2O((cid:2)) → 2H2(g) + O2(g)
Ecell = Ecathode − Eanode
= −0.414 V − 0.815 V
= −1.229 V
Reaction 3: the production of lithium and oxygen
(aq) + 2H2O((cid:2)) → 4Li(s) + O2(g) + 4H+
(aq)
4Li+
Ecell = E˚cathode − Eanode
= −3.040 V − 0.815 V
= −3.855 V
Reaction 4: the production of hydrogen and bromine
2H2O((cid:2)) + 2Br−
Ecell = Ecathode − E˚anode
(aq) → H2(g) + 2OH−
(aq) + Br2((cid:2))
= −0.414 V − 1.066 V
= −1.480 V
The electrolysis of water requires the lowest external voltage. Therefore,
the predicted products of this electrolysis are hydrogen and oxygen.
Check Your Solution
Use a potential ladder diagram, such as the one on the next page,
part A, to visualize the cell potentials. For an electrolytic cell, the
half-reaction at the anode is always on the upper rung, and the
subtraction E˚cathode − E˚anode always gives a negative cell potential,
as shown in part B.
PROBLEM TIP
• Remember that spectator
ions do not appear in
net ionic equations. In
Reaction 3, the bromide
ions are spectator ions.
In Reaction 4, lithium ions
are spectator ions.
• As for a galvanic cell, the
cell potential for an elec-
trolytic cell is the sum of
a reduction potential and
an oxidation potential.
Using Ecell = Ered + Eox
gives the same predicted
products as using
Ecell = Ecathode − Eanode
530 MHR • Unit 5  Electrochemistry
more positive
A
1.066
0.815
Br2(aq)  +  2e−
2Br −
(aq)
O2(g)  +  4H+
(aq) + 4e−
2H2O((cid:2))
−0.414
)
(
V
E
2H2O((cid:2)) + 2e−
H2(g) + 2OH −
(aq)
Ecell = −1.229 V
Ecell = −1.480 V
E˚cell = −4.106 V
Ecell = − 3.855 V
−3.040
Li +
(aq) + e−
Li(s)
more positive
B
anode (oxidation)
Eanode
)
(
V
E
Ecell = E˚cathode − Eanode
cathode (reduction)
Ecathode
Practice Problems
13. Predict the products of the electrolysis of a 1 mol/L solution of
sodium chloride.
14. Explain why calcium can be produced by the electrolysis of molten
calcium chloride, but not by the electrolysis of aqueous calcium
chloride.
15. One half-cell of a galvanic cell has a nickel electrode in a 1 mol/L
nickel(II) chloride solution. The other half-cell has a cadmium
electrode in a 1 mol/L cadmium chloride solution.
(a) Find the cell potential.
(b) Identify the anode and the cathode.
(c) Write the oxidation half-reaction, the reduction half-reaction, and
the overall cell reaction.
16. An external voltage is applied to change the galvanic cell in question
15 into an electrolytic cell. Repeat parts (a) to (c) for the electrolytic
cell.
In Investigation 11-B, you will build an electrolytic cell for the
electrolysis of an aqueous solution of potassium iodide. You will
predict the products of the electrolysis, and compare the observed
products with your predictions.
Chapter 11  Cells and Batteries • MHR 531
S K I L L   F O C U S
Predicting
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
Safety Precautions
Make sure your lab bench is dry before carrying
out this investigation.
Procedure
1. Fold a sheet of paper lengthwise. Curl the
folded paper so that it ﬁts inside the 600 mL
beaker. Invert the beaker on your lab bench.
2. Use the elastic to strap the aquarium tubing to
the side of the beaker in a U shape, as shown
in the diagram.
graphite
electrode
wire
electrode
battery
9 V
aquarium tubing
elastic band
KI solution (1 mol/L)
600 mL beaker
rolled-up paper
inside beaker
Electrolysis of Aqueous
Potassium Iodide
When an aqueous solution is electrolyzed, the
electrolyte or water can undergo electrolysis. In
this investigation, you will build an electrolytic
cell, carry out the electrolysis of an aqueous
solution, and identify the products.
Questions
What are the products from the electrolysis of
a 1 mol/L aqueous solution of potassium iodide?
Are the observed products the ones predicted
using reduction potentials?
Predictions
Use the relevant standard reduction
potentials from the table in Appendix E, and
the non-standard reduction potentials you used
previously for water, to predict the electrolysis
products. Predict which product(s) are formed
at the anode and which product(s) are formed
at the cathode.
Materials
25 cm clear aquarium rubber tubing (Tygon®),
internal diameter 4 – 6 mm
1 graphite pencil lead, 2 cm long
2 wire leads (black and red) with alligator clips
600 mL or 400 mL beaker
sheet of white paper
1 elastic band
3 toothpicks
3 disposable pipettes
2 cm piece of copper wire (20 gauge)
1 drop 1% starch solution
10 mL 1 mol/L KI
1 drop 1% phenolphthalein
9-V battery or variable power source set to 9 V
532 MHR • Unit 5  Electrochemistry
3. Fill a pipette as completely as possible with
(b) the anode and the cathode
1 mol/L KI solution. Insert the tip of the
pipette ﬁrmly into one end of the aquarium
tubing. Slowly inject the solution into the
U-tube until the level of the solution is within
1 cm to 2 cm from the top of both ends. If
air bubbles are present, try to remove them
by poking them with a toothpick. You may
need to repeat this step from the beginning.
4. Attach the black lead to the 2 cm piece of
wire. Insert the wire into one end of the
U-tube. Attach the red electrical lead to the
graphite. Insert the graphite into the other end
of the U-tube.
5. Attach the leads to the 9-V battery or to a
variable power source set to 9 V. Attach the
black lead to the negative terminal, and the
red lead to the positive terminal.
6. Let the reaction proceed for three minutes,
while you examine the U-tube. Record your
observations. Shut off the power source and
remove the electrodes. Determine the product
formed around the anode by adding a drop of
starch solution to the end of the U-tube that
contains the anode. Push the starch solution
down with a toothpick if there is an air lock.
Determine one of the products around the
cathode by adding a drop of phenolphthalein
to the appropriate end of the U-tube.
7. Dispose of your reactants and products
as instructed by your teacher. Take your
apparatus apart, rinse out the tubing,
and rinse off the electrodes. Return your
equipment to its appropriate location.
Analysis
1. Sketch the cell you made in this investigation.
On your sketch, show
(a) the direction of the electron ﬂow in the
external circuit
(c) the positive electrode and the negative
electrode
(d) the movement of ions in the cell
2. Use your observations to identify the
product(s) formed at the anode and the
product(s) formed at the cathode.
3. Write a balanced equation for the half-reaction
that occurs at the anode.
4. Write a balanced equation for the half-reaction
that occurs at the cathode.
5. Write a balanced equation for the overall cell
reaction.
6. Calculate the external voltage required to carry
out the electrolysis. Why was the external
voltage used in the investigation signiﬁcantly
higher than the calculated value?
Conclusion
7. What are the products from the electrolysis
of a 1 mol/L aqueous solution of potassium
iodide? Are the observed products the same
as the products predicted using reduction
potentials?
Applications
8. If you repeated the electrolysis using aqueous
sodium iodide instead of aqueous potassium
iodide, would your observations change?
Explain your answer.
9. To make potassium by electrolyzing
potassium iodide, would you need to
modify the procedure? Explain your answer.
Chapter 11  Cells and Batteries • MHR 533
Spontaneity of Reactions
You know that galvanic cells have positive standard cell potentials, and
that these cells use spontaneous chemical reactions to produce electricity.
You also know that electrolytic cells have negative standard cell potentials,
and that these cells use electricity to perform non-spontaneous chemical
reactions. Thus, you can use the sign of the standard cell potential to pre-
dict whether a reaction is spontaneous or not under standard conditions.
Sample Problem
Predicting Spontaneity
Problem
Predict whether each reaction is spontaneous or non-spontaneous under
standard conditions.
(a) Cd(s) + Cu2+
(b) I2(s) + 2Cl−
(aq) → Cd2+
(aq) + Cl2(g)
(aq) + Cu(s)
(aq) → 2I−
Solution
(a) The two half-reactions are as follows.
Oxidation (occurs at the anode): Cd(s) → Cd2+
Reduction (occurs at the cathode): Cu2+
The relevant standard reduction potentials are:
(aq) + 2e−
(aq) + 2e− → Cu(s)
Cu2+
Cd2+
(aq) + 2e− (cid:3)(cid:4) Cu(s)
(aq) + 2e− (cid:3)(cid:4) Cd(s)
E˚cell = E˚cathode − E˚anode
E˚ = 0.342 V
E˚ = −0.403 V
= 0.342 V − (−0.403 V)
= 0.745 V
The standard cell potential is positive, so the reaction is spontaneous
under standard conditions.
(b) The two half-reactions are as follows.
Oxidation (occurs at the anode): 2Cl−
Reduction (occurs at the cathode): I2(s) + 2e− → 2I−
The relevant standard reduction potentials are:
(aq) → Cl2(g) + 2e−
(aq)
Cl2(g) + 2e− (cid:3)(cid:4) 2Cl−
I2(s) + 2e− (cid:3)(cid:4) 2I−
E˚cell = E˚cathode − E˚anode
(aq) E˚ = 1.358 V
(aq) E˚ = 0.536 V
= 0.536 V − 1.358 V
= −0.822 V
The standard cell potential is negative, so the reaction is
non-spontaneous under standard conditions.
Practice Problems
17. Look up the standard reduction potentials of the following
half-reactions. Predict whether acidiﬁed nitrate ions will oxidize
manganese(II) ions to manganese(IV) oxide under standard conditions.
MnO2(s) + 4H+
−
(aq) + 4H+
NO3
(aq) + 2e− → Mn2+
(aq) + 3e− → NO(g) + 2H2O((cid:2))
(aq) + 2H2O((cid:2))
534 MHR • Unit 5  Electrochemistry
18. Predict whether each reaction is spontaneous or non-spontaneous
under standard conditions.
(a) 2Cr(s) + 3Cl2(g) → 2Cr3+
(b) Zn2+
−
(aq) + 8H+
(c) 5Ag(s) + MnO4
(aq) + Fe(s) → Zn(s) + Fe2+
(aq)
(aq) → 5Ag+
(aq) + 6Cl−
(aq)
(aq) + Mn2+
(aq) + 4H2O((cid:2))
19. Explain why an aqueous copper(I) compound disproportionates
to form copper metal and an aqueous copper(II) compound under
standard conditions. (You learned about disproportionation in
Chapter 10.)
20. Predict whether each reaction is spontaneous or non-spontaneous
under standard conditions in an acidic solution.
(a) H2O2(aq) → H2(g) + O2(g)
(b) 3H2(g) + Cr2O7
(aq) → 2Cr3+
(aq) + 8H+
(aq) + 7H2O((cid:2))
2−
Rechargeable Batteries
In section 11.1, you learned about several primary (disposable)
batteries that contain galvanic cells. One of the most common secondary
(rechargeable) batteries is found in car engines. Most cars contain a
lead-acid battery, shown in Figure 11.18. When you turn the ignition,
a surge of electricity from the battery starts the motor.
When in use, a lead-acid battery partially discharges. In other words,
the cells in the battery operate as galvanic cells, and produce electricity.
The reaction in each cell proceeds spontaneously in one direction. To
recharge the battery, a generator driven by the car engine supplies
electricity to the battery. The external voltage of the generator reverses
the reaction in the cells. The reaction in each cell now proceeds non-
spontaneously, and the cells operate as electrolytic cells. All secondary
batteries, including the lead-acid battery, operate some of the time as
galvanic cells, and some of the time as electrolytic cells.
As the name suggests, the materials used in a lead-acid battery
include lead and an acid. Figure 11.19 shows that the electrodes in each
cell are constructed using lead grids. One electrode consists of powdered
lead packed into one grid. The other electrode consists of powdered
lead(IV) oxide packed into the other grid. The electrolyte solution is
fairly concentrated sulfuric acid, at about 4.5 mol/L.
(+)
(−)
A typical car
Figure 11.18
battery consists of six 2-V cells.
The cells are connected in series
to give a total potential of 12 V.
cell connector
cell spacer
Pb
PbO2
cell with electrolyte,
H2SO4(aq)
Each cell of a
Figure 11.19
lead-acid battery is a single
compartment, with no porous
barrier or salt bridge. Fibreglass or
wooden sheets are placed between
the electrodes to prevent them
from touching.
Chapter 11  Cells and Batteries • MHR 535
When the battery supplies electricity, the half-reactions and overall cell
reaction are as follows.
Oxidation (at the Pb anode): Pb(s) + SO4
Reduction (at the PbO2 cathode):
2−
(aq) → PbSO4(s) + 2e−
(aq) + SO4
2−
(aq) + 2e− → PbSO4(s) + 2H2O((cid:2))
PbO2(s) + 4H+
Overall cell reaction:
Pb(s) + PbO2(s) + 4H+
(aq) + 2SO4
2−
(aq) → 2PbSO4(s) + 2H2O((cid:2))
You can see that the reaction consumes some of the lead in the anode,
some of the lead(IV) oxide in the cathode, and some of the sulfuric acid.
A precipitate of lead(II) sulfate forms.
When the battery is recharged, the half-reactions and the overall cell
reaction are reversed. In this reverse reaction, lead and lead(IV) oxide are
redeposited in their original locations, and sulfuric acid is re-formed.
Reduction (at the Pb cathode): PbSO4(s) + 2e− → Pb(s) + SO4
Oxidation (at the PbO2 anode):
(aq)
2−
PbSO4(s) + 2H2O((cid:2)) → PbO2(s) + 4H+
(aq) + SO4
2−
(aq) + 2e−
Overall cell reaction:
2PbSO4(s) + 2H2O((cid:2)) → Pb(s) + PbO2(s) + 4H+
(aq) + 2SO4
2−
(aq)
In practice, this reversibility is not perfect. However, the battery can go
through many charge/discharge cycles before it eventually wears out.
Many types of rechargeable batteries are much more portable than a car
battery. For example, there is now a rechargeable version of the alkaline
battery. Another example, shown in Figure 11.20, is the rechargeable
nickel-cadmium (nicad) battery. Figure 11.21 shows a nickel-cadmium cell,
which has a potential of about 1.4 V. A typical nicad battery contains three
cells in series to produce a suitable voltage for electronic devices. When
the cells in a nicad battery operate as galvanic cells, the half-reactions and
the overall cell reaction are as follows.
Oxidation (at the Cd anode): Cd(s) + 2OH−
Reduction (at the NiO(OH) cathode):
NiO(OH)(s) + H2O((cid:2)) + e− → Ni(OH)2(s) + OH−
(aq)
(aq) → Cd(OH)2(s) + 2e−
Billions of
Figure 11.20
rechargeable nicad batteries
are produced every year. They
are used in portable devices such
as cordless razors and cordless
power tools.
cap
vent ball
cover
seal
core
positive tab
Overall cell reaction:
KOH or
NaOH
electrolyte
NiO(OH)
electrode
pressed
powdered
cadmium
electrode
separators
insulating
washer
can
Cd(s) + 2NiO(OH)(s) + 2H2O((cid:2)) → Cd(OH)2(s) + 2Ni(OH)2(s)
Like many technological innovations, nickel-cadmium batteries carry risks
as well as beneﬁts. After being discharged repeatedly, they eventually
wear out. In theory, worn-out nicad batteries should be recycled. In
practice, however, many end up in garbage dumps. Over time, discarded
nicad batteries release toxic cadmium. The toxicity of this substance
makes it hazardous to the environment, as cadmium can enter the food
chain. Long-term exposure to low levels of cadmium can have serious
medical effects on humans, such as high blood pressure and heart disease.
A nicad cell has a cadmium electrode and
Figure 11.21
another electrode that contains nickel(III) oxyhydroxide, NiO(OH).
When the cell is discharging, cadmium is the anode. When the
cell is recharging, cadmium is the cathode. The electrolyte is a
base, sodium hydroxide or potassium hydroxide.
536 MHR • Unit 5  Electrochemistry
Section Summary
In this section, you learned about electrolytic cells, which convert
electrical energy into chemical energy. You compared the spontaneous
reactions in galvanic cells, which have positive cell potentials, with the
non-spontaneous reactions in electrolytic cells, which have negative cell
potentials. You then considered cells that act as both galvanic cells and
electrolytic cells in some common rechargeable batteries. These batteries
are an important application of electrochemistry. In the next two sections,
you will learn about many more electrochemical applications.
Section Review
1
2
I
Predict the products of the electrolysis of a 1 mol/L aqueous
solution of copper(I) bromide.
I
In this section, you learned that an external electrical supply
reverses the cell reaction in a Daniell cell so that the products are
zinc atoms and copper(II) ions.
(a) What are the predicted products of this electrolysis reaction?
(b) Explain the observed products.
3
I
Predict whether each reaction is spontaneous or non-spontaneous
under standard conditions.
(a) 2FeI3(aq) → 2Fe(s) + 3I2(s)
(b) 2Ag+
(aq) + H2SO3(aq) + H2O((cid:2)) → 2Ag(s) + SO4
2−
(aq) + 4H+
(aq)
4
5
6
K/U
Write the two half-reactions and the overall cell reaction for
the process that occurs when a nicad battery is being recharged.
K/U
What external voltage is required to recharge a lead-acid
car battery?
K/U
The equation for the overall reaction in an electrolytic cell
does not include any electrons. Why is an external source of electrons
needed for the reaction to proceed?
7
(a)
(b)
I
I
Predict whether aluminum will displace hydrogen from water.
Water boiling in an aluminum saucepan does not react with the
aluminum. Give possible reasons why.
8
9
MC
Research the impact of lead pollution on the environment. Do
lead-acid batteries contribute signiﬁcantly to lead pollution?
C
Lithium batteries are increasingly common. The lithium anode
undergoes oxidation when the battery discharges. Various cathodes
and electrolytes are used to make lithium batteries with different
characteristics. Research lithium batteries. Prepare a report describing
the designs, cell reactions, and uses of lithium batteries. Include a
description of the advantages and disadvantages of these batteries.
Chapter 11  Cells and Batteries • MHR 537
11.4
Faraday’s Law
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
(cid:2) describe the relationship
between time, current, and
the amount of substance
produced or consumed in
an electrolytic process
(cid:2) solve problems using
Faraday’s law
(cid:2) investigate Faraday’s law by
performing an electroplating
process in the laboratory
(cid:2) explain how electrolytic
processes are used to
reﬁne metals
(cid:2) research and assess some
environmental, health, and
safety issues involving
electrochemistry
(cid:2) communicate your under-
standing of the following
terms: quantity of electricity,
electric charge, Faraday’s
law, extraction, reﬁning
As mentioned earlier in this chapter, Michael Faraday (1791–1867) was
the leading pioneer of electrochemistry. One of Faraday’s major contribu-
tions was to connect the concepts of stoichiometry and electrochemistry.
Figure 11.22
A depiction of Faraday’s laboratory.
You know that a balanced equation represents relationships between
the quantities of reactants and products. For a reaction that takes place
in a cell, stoichiometric calculations can also include the quantity of
electricity produced or consumed. Stoichiometric calculations in electro-
chemistry make use of a familiar unit— the mole.
As a ﬁrst step, you need information about measurements in
electricity. You know that the ﬂow of electrons through an external circuit
is called the electric current. It is measured in a unit called the ampere
(symbol A), named after the French physicist André Ampère (1775 –1836).
The quantity of electricity, also known as the electric charge, is the
product of the current ﬂowing through a circuit and the time for which it
ﬂows. The quantity of electricity is measured in a unit called the coulomb
(symbol C). This unit is named after another French physicist, Charles
Coulomb (1736–1806). The ampere and the coulomb are related, in that
one coulomb is the quantity of electricity that ﬂows through a circuit in
one second if the current is one ampere. This relationship can be written
mathematically.
charge (in coulombs) = current (in amperes) × time (in seconds)
For example, suppose a current of 2.00 A ﬂows for 5.00 min. You can use
this information to ﬁnd the quantity of electricity, in coulombs.
5.00 min = 300 s
2.00 A × 300 s = 600 C , or 6.00 × 102 C
538 MHR • Unit 5  Electrochemistry
For stoichiometric calculations, you also need to know the electric charge
on a mole of electrons. This charge can be calculated by multiplying
the charge on one electron and the number of electrons in one mole
(Avogadro’s number). The charge on a mole of electrons is known as
one faraday (1 F), named after Michael Faraday.
Charge on one mole of electrons = 1.602 × 10−19 C
× 6.022 × 1023 e−
1 mol
1e−
= 9.647 × 104 C/mol
A rounded value of 96 500 C/mol is often used in calculations. Note that
this rounded value has three signiﬁcant digits.
The information you have just learned permits a very precise
control of electrolysis. For example, suppose you modify a Daniell cell
to operate as an electrolytic cell. You want to plate 0.1 mol of zinc onto
the zinc electrode. The coefﬁcients in the half-reaction for the reduction
represent stoichiometric relationships. Figure 11.23 shows that two
moles of electrons are needed for each mole of zinc deposited. Therefore,
to deposit 0.1 mol of zinc, you need to use 0.2 mol of electrons.
0.1 mol Zn × 2 mol e−
1 mol Zn
= 0.2 mol e−
Zn2+
+
2e−
→
Zn
1 ion
1 × 6.02 × 1023 ions
2 electrons
2 × 6.02 × 1023 electrons
1 atom
1 × 6.02 × 1023 atoms
1 mol of ions
2 mol of electrons
1 mol of atoms
Figure 11.23
reactants and products and the amount of electrons transferred.
A balanced half-reaction shows relationships between the amounts of
In the next Sample Problem, you will learn to apply the relationship
between the amount of electrons and the amount of an electrolysis product.
Sample Problem
Calculating the Mass of an Electrolysis Product
Problem
Calculate the mass of aluminum produced by the electrolysis of molten
aluminum chloride, if a current of 500 mA passes for 1.50 h.
What Is Required?
You need to calculate the mass of aluminum produced.
What Is Given?
You know the name of the electrolyte, the current, and the time.
electrolyte: AlCl3((cid:2))
current: 500 mA
time: 1.50 h
From the previous calculation, you know the charge on one mole
of electrons is 96 500 C/mol.
Continued ...
Chapter 11  Cells and Batteries • MHR 539
Continued ...
Plan Your Strategy
Step 1 Use the current and the time to ﬁnd the quantity of electricity
used.
Step 2 From the quantity of electricity, ﬁnd the amount of electrons
that passed through the circuit.
Step 3 Use the stoichiometry of the relevant half-reaction to relate
the amount of electrons to the amount of aluminum produced.
Step 4 Use the molar mass of aluminum to convert the amount of
aluminum to a mass.
Act on Your Strategy
Step 1 To calculate the quantity of electricity in coulombs, work in
amperes and seconds.
1000 mA = 1 A
500 mA = 500 mA ×
= 0.500 A
1 A
1000 mA
1.50 h = 1.50 h × 60 min
1 h
× 60 s
1 min
= 5400 s, or 5.40 × 103 s
Quantity of electricity = 0.500 A × 5400 s
= 2700 C, or 2.70 × 103 C
Step 2 Find the amount of electrons. One mole of electrons has a charge
of 96 500 C.
Amount of electrons = 2700 C × 1 mol e−
96 500 C
−
= 0.0280 mol e
Step 3 The half-reaction for the reduction of aluminum ions to aluminum
is Al3+ + 3e− → Al .
Amount of aluminum formed = 0.0280 mol e
− × 1 mol Al
3 mol e−
= 0.00933 mol Al
Step 4 Convert the amount of aluminum to a mass.
Mass of Al formed = 0.00933 mol Al × 27.0 g Al
1 mol Al
= 0.252 g
Check Your Solution
The answer is expressed in units of mass. To check your answer, use
estimation. If the current were 1 A, then 1 mol of electrons would pass
in 96 500 s. In this example, the current is less than 1 A, and the time is
much less than 96 500 s. Therefore, much less than 1 mol of electrons
would be used, and much less than 1 mol (27 g) of aluminum would
be formed.
540 MHR • Unit 5  Electrochemistry
Practice Problems
21. Calculate the mass of zinc plated onto the cathode of an electrolytic
cell by a current of 750 mA in 3.25 h.
22. How many minutes does it take to plate 0.925 g of silver onto the
cathode of an electrolytic cell using a current of 1.55 A?
23. The nickel anode in an electrolytic cell decreases in mass by 1.20 g
in 35.5 min. The oxidation half-reaction converts nickel atoms to
nickel(II) ions. What is the constant current?
24. The following two half-reactions take place in an electrolytic cell
with an iron anode and a chromium cathode.
Oxidation: Fe(s) → Fe2+
Reduction: Cr3+
During the process, the mass of the iron anode decreases by 1.75 g.
(aq) + 2e−
(aq) + 3e− → Cr(s)
(a) Find the change in mass of the chromium cathode.
(b) Explain why you do not need to know the electric current or the
time to complete part (a).
The preceding Sample Problem gave an example of the mathematical use
of Faraday’s law. Faraday’s law states that the amount of a substance
produced or consumed in an electrolysis reaction is directly proportional
to the quantity of electricity that ﬂows through the circuit.
To illustrate this statement, think about changing the quantity of
electricity used in the Sample Problem. Suppose this quantity were
doubled by using the same current, 500 mA, for twice the time, 3 h.
As a result, the amount of electrons passing into the cell would also be
doubled.
500 mA = 0.500 A
3h = 2 × 1.5 h
= 2 × 5400 s
Quantity of electricity = 0.500 A × (2 × 5400 s)
= 2 × 2700 C
= 5400 C, or 5.40 × 103 C
Amount of electrons = 5400 C × 1 mol e−
96 500 C
−
= 0.0560 mol e
Then, as you can see from the relevant half-reaction, the mass of
aluminum produced would be doubled. The mass of aluminum produced
is clearly proportional to the quantity of electricity used.
In Investigation 11-C, you will apply Faraday’s law to an electrolytic
cell that you construct.
Chapter 11  Cells and Batteries • MHR 541
Electroplating
You have learned that electroplating is a
process in which a metal is deposited, or plated,
onto the cathode of an electrolytic cell. In this
investigation, you will build an electrolytic cell
and electrolyze a copper(II) sulfate solution to
plate copper onto the cathode. You will use
Faraday’s law to relate the mass of metal
deposited to the quantity of electricity used.
Question
Does the measured mass of copper plated onto
the cathode of an electrolytic cell agree with the
mass calculated from Faraday’s law?
Prediction
Predict whether the measured mass of copper
plated onto the cathode of an electrolytic cell
will be greater than, equal to, or less than the
mass calculated using Faraday’s law.
Materials
150 mL 1.0 mol/L HNO3 in a 250 mL beaker
120 mL acidiﬁed 0.50 mol/L CuSO4 solution
(with 5 mL of 6 mol/L H2SO4 and 3 mL of
0.1 mol/L HCl added)
drying oven, or acetone in a wash bottle
3 cm × 12 cm × 1 mm Cu strip
50 cm 16-gauge bare solid copper wire
250 mL beaker
adjustable D.C. power supply with ammeter
deionized water in a wash bottle
ﬁne sandpaper
2 electrical leads with alligator clips
electronic balance
S K I L L   F O C U S
Predicting
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
Communicating results
Safety Precautions
• Nitric acid is corrosive. Also, note that the
CuSO4 solution contains sulfuric acid and
hydrochloric acid. Wash any spills on your
skin with plenty of cold water. Inform your
teacher immediately.
• Avoid touching the parts of the electrodes
that have been washed with nitric acid.
• Acetone is ﬂammable. Use acetone in the
fume hood.
• Make sure your hands and your lab bench are
dry before handling any electrical equipment.
Procedure
1. Clean off any tarnish on the copper strip
by sanding it gently. Dip the bottom of
the copper strip in the nitric acid for a few
seconds, and then rinse off the strip carefully
with deionized water. Avoid touching the
section that has been cleaned by the acid.
2. Place the copper strip in the beaker, with
the clean part of the strip at the bottom. Bend
the top of the strip over the rim of the beaker
so that the copper strip is secured in a vertical
position. This copper strip will serve as
the anode.
3. Wrap the copper wire around a pencil to
make a closely spaced coil. Leave 10 cm of
the wire unwrapped. Measure and record the
mass of the wire. Dip the coil in the nitric
acid, and rinse the coil with water. Use the
10 cm of uncoiled wire to secure the coil on
the opposite side of the beaker from the
anode, as shown in the diagram. This copper
wire will serve as the cathode.
542 MHR • Unit 5  Electrochemistry
(−)
(+)
D.C.
power source
copper wire
(cathode)
acidified
CuSO4(aq)
copper strip
(anode)
4. Pour 120 mL of the acidiﬁed CuSO4 solution
into the beaker. Attach the lead from the
negative terminal of the power supply to
the cathode. Attach the positive terminal
to the anode.
5. Turn on the power supply and set the current
to 1 A. Maintain this current for 20 min by
adjusting the variable current knob as needed.
6. After 20 min, turn off the power. Remove
the cathode and rinse it very gently with
deionized water. Place the cathode in a
drying oven for 20 min. Alternatively, rinse
the cathode gently with acetone, and let the
acetone evaporate in the fume hood for 5 min.
7. Measure and record the new mass of the
cathode.
8. Dispose of all materials as instructed by
your teacher.
Analysis
1. Write a balanced equation for the half-reaction
that occurs at the cathode.
2. Use the measured current and the time for
which the current passed to calculate the
quantity of electricity used.
3. Use your answers to questions 1 and 2 to
calculate the mass of copper plated onto
the cathode.
4. Compare the calculated mass from question 3
with the measured increase in mass of the
cathode. Give possible reasons for any
difference between the two values.
Conclusion
5. How did the mass of copper electroplated
onto the cathode of the electrolytic cell
compare with the mass calculated using
Faraday’s law? Compare your answer with
your prediction from the beginning of this
investigation.
Applications
6. Suppose you repeated this investigation using
iron electrodes, and 0.5 mol/L iron(II) sulfate
solution as the electrolyte. If you used the
same current for the same time, would you
expect the increase in mass of the cathode
to be greater than, less than, or equal to the
increase in mass that you measured? Explain
your answer.
7. Suppose you repeated the investigation
with the copper(II) sulfate solution, but you
passed the current for only half as long as
before. How would the masses of copper
plated onto the cathode compare in the two
investigations? Explain your answer.
8. Could you build a galvanic cell without
changing the electrodes or the electrolyte
solution you used in this investigation?
Explain your answer.
Chapter 11  Cells and Batteries • MHR 543
The alloy used
Figure 11.24
to make pop cans contains about
97% aluminum, by mass. The other
elements in the alloy are
magnesium, manganese, iron,
silicon, and copper.
Industrial Extraction and Reﬁning of Metals
Many metals, and their alloys, are widely used in modern society. The
enormous variety of metal objects ranges from large vehicles, such as cars
and aircraft, to small items, such as the pop cans shown in Figure 11.24.
Extraction is a process by which a metal is obtained from an ore.
Some metals are extracted in electrolytic cells. In section 11.3, you saw
the extraction of sodium from molten sodium chloride in a Downs cell.
Other reactive metals, including lithium, beryllium, magnesium, calcium,
and radium, are also extracted industrially by the electrolysis of their
molten chlorides.
One of the most important electrolytic processes is the extraction
of aluminum from an ore called bauxite. This ore is mainly composed
of hydrated aluminum oxide, Al2O3 • xH2O. (The “x” in the formula
indicates that the number of water molecules per formula unit is variable.)
In industry, the scale of production of metals is huge. The electrolytic
production of aluminum is over two million tonnes per year in Canada
alone. As you know from Faraday’s law, the amount of a metal produced
by electrolysis is directly proportional to the quantity of electricity used.
Therefore, the industrial extraction of aluminum and other metals by
electrolysis requires vast quantities of electricity. The availability and
cost of electricity greatly inﬂuence the location of industrial plants.
In industry, the process of purifying a material is known as reﬁning.
After the extraction stage, some metals are reﬁned in electrolytic cells.
For example, copper is about 99% pure after extraction. This copper
is pure enough for some uses, such as the manufacture of copper pipes
for plumbing. However, the copper is not pure enough for one of its
principal uses, electrical wiring. Therefore, some of the impure copper is
reﬁned electrolytically, as shown in Figure 11.25. Nickel can be reﬁned
electrolytically in a similar way. You reﬁned copper on a small scale in
Investigation 11-C.
This electrolytic cell is used to reﬁne copper. The anode is impure copper,
Figure 11.25
and the cathode is pure copper. During electrolysis, the impure copper anode dissolves, and
pure copper is plated onto the cathode. The resulting cathode is 99.99% pure metal. Most
impurities that were present in the anode either remain in solution or fall to the bottom of
the cell as a sludge.
544 MHR • Unit 5  Electrochemistry
Section Summary
In this section, you learned how stoichiometry relates the quantities
of reactants and products to the quantity of electricity consumed in an
electrolytic cell. You used Faraday’s law to solve problems relating to
electrolysis. You also learned that the extraction and reﬁning of some
metals are carried out electrolytically. In the next section, you will see
several other important applications of electrochemistry to modern society.
Section Review
1
I
In Section 10.3, you learned about a redox reaction used in the
Unit Investigation Prep
Electroplating is a complex
process. If you wish to work
on your Unit 5 Investigation
now, do some research on
electroplating. What are the
most important factors in
this process? How can you
improve the quality of the
ﬁnal product?
production of compact discs. In another step of this production
process, nickel is electroplated onto the silver-coated master disc.
The nickel layer is removed and used to make pressings of the CD
onto plastic discs. The plastic pressings are then coated with
aluminum to make the ﬁnished CDs.
(a) When nickel is plated onto the silver master disc, is the master
disc the anode or the cathode of the cell? Explain.
(b) Calculate the quantity of electricity needed to plate each gram of
nickel onto the master disc. Assume that the plating process
involves the reduction of nickel(II) ions.
2
3
4
5
6
I
Most industrial reactions take place on a much larger scale than
reactions in a laboratory or classroom. The voltage used in a Downs
cell for the industrial electrolysis of molten sodium chloride is not
very high, about 7 V to 8 V. However, the current used is 25 000 A
to 40 000 A. Assuming a current of 3.0 × 104 A, determine the mass
of sodium and the mass of chlorine made in 24 h in one Downs cell.
Express your answers in kilograms.
An industrial cell that puriﬁes copper by electrolysis operates at
I
2.00 × 102 A. Calculate the mass, in tonnes, of pure copper produced
if the cell is supplied with raw materials whenever necessary, and if
it works continuously for a year that is not a leap year.
MC
Canada is a major producer of aluminum by the electrolysis of
bauxite. However, there are no bauxite mines in Canada, and all the
ore must be imported. Explain why aluminum is produced in Canada.
MC
Research the extraction of aluminum by the electrolysis of
bauxite. Write a report on your ﬁndings. Include a description of the
electrolytic cell and how it operates. Indicate where aluminum is
produced in Canada. Also include any environmental concerns
associated with aluminum production by electrolysis.
MC
Nickel and copper are both very important to the Ontario
economy. Before they can be reﬁned by electrolysis, they must be
extracted from their ores. Both metals can be extracted from a sulﬁde
ore, NiS or Cu2S. The sulﬁde is roasted to form an oxide, and then the
oxide is reduced to the metal. Research the extraction processes for
both nickel and copper, and write balanced equations for the redox
reactions involved. One product of each extraction process is sulfur
dioxide. Research the environmental effects of this compound.
Describe any steps taken to decrease these effects.
Chapter 11  Cells and Batteries • MHR 545
11.5
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
(cid:2) explain corrosion as an
electrochemical process,
and describe some
techniques used to
prevent corrosion
(cid:2) evaluate the environmental
and social impact of some
common cells, including the
hydrogen fuel cell in electric
cars
(cid:2) explain how electrolytic
processes are used in the
industrial production of
chlorine, and how this
element is used in the
puriﬁcation of water
(cid:2) research and assess some
environmental, health, and
safety issues connected to
electrochemistry
(cid:2) communicate your under-
standing of the following
terms: corrosion, galvanizing,
sacriﬁcial anode, cathodic
protection, fuel cell,
chlor-alkali process
Issues Involving Electrochemistry
You have probably seen many examples of rusty objects, such as the one
in Figure 11.26. However, you may not realize that rusting costs many
billions of dollars per year in prevention, maintenance, and replacement
costs. You will now learn more about rusting and about other issues
involving electrochemistry.
Figure 11.26
Rust is a common sight on iron objects.
Corrosion
Rusting is an example of corrosion, which is a spontaneous redox
reaction of materials with substances in their environment. Figure 11.27
shows an example of the hazards that result from corrosion.
Many metals are fairly easily oxidized. The atmosphere contains a
powerful oxidizing agent: oxygen. Because metals are constantly in
contact with oxygen, they are vulnerable to corrosion. In fact, the term
“corrosion” is sometimes deﬁned as the oxidation of metals exposed
to the environment. In North America, about 20% to 25% of iron and
steel production is used to replace objects that have been damaged or
destroyed by corrosion. However, not all corrosion is harmful. For
example, the green layer formed by the corrosion of a copper roof is
considered attractive by many people.
On April 28, 1988,
Figure 11.27
this Aloha Airlines aircraft was
ﬂying at an altitude of 7300 m when
a large part of the upper fuselage
ripped off. This accident was
caused by undetected corrosion
damage. The pilot showed tremen-
dous skill in landing the plane.
546 MHR • Unit 5  Electrochemistry
Rust is a hydrated iron(III) oxide, Fe2O3 • xH2O. The electrochemical
formation of rust occurs in small galvanic cells on the surface of a piece
of iron, as shown in Figure 11.28. In each small cell, iron acts as the
anode. The cathode is inert, and may be an impurity that exists in the iron
or is deposited onto it. For example, the cathode could be a piece of soot
that has been deposited onto the iron surface from the air.
Water, in the form of rain, is needed for rusting to occur. Carbon
dioxide in the air dissolves in water to form carbonic acid, H2CO3(aq) .
This weak acid partially dissociates into ions. Thus, the carbonic acid is
an electrolyte for the corrosion process. Other electrolytes, such as road
salt, may also be involved. The circuit is completed by the iron itself,
which conducts electrons from the anode to the cathode.
water
Fe2+
air
O2
rust
e−
iron
anode
cathode
The rusting of iron involves the reaction of iron, oxygen, and water in a
Figure 11.28
naturally occurring galvanic cell on the exposed surface of the metal. There may be many
of these small cells on the surface of the same piece of iron.
The rusting process is complex, and the equations may be written in
various ways. A simpliﬁed description of the half-reactions and the
overall cell reaction is given here.
Oxidation half-reaction (occurs at the anode):
Fe(s) → Fe2+
(aq) + 2e−
Reduction half-reaction (occurs at the cathode):
O2(g) + 2H2O((cid:2)) + 4e− → 4OH−
Multiply the oxidation half-reaction by two and add the half-reactions
to obtain the overall cell reaction.
(aq)
2Fe(s) + O2(g) + 2H2O((cid:2)) → 2Fe2+
(aq) + 4OH−
(aq)
There is no barrier in the cell, so nothing stops the dissolved Fe2+ and
OH− ions from mixing. The iron(II) ions produced at the anode and the
hydroxide ions produced at the cathode react to form a precipitate of
iron(II) hydroxide, Fe(OH)2. Therefore, the overall cell reaction could
be written as follows.
2Fe(s) + O2(g) + 2H2O((cid:2)) → 2Fe(OH)2(s)
The iron(II) hydroxide undergoes further oxidation by reaction with the
oxygen in the air to form iron(III) hydroxide.
4Fe(OH)2(s) + O2(g) + 2H2O((cid:2)) → 4Fe(OH)3(s)
Chapter 11  Cells and Batteries • MHR 547
Iron(III) hydroxide readily breaks down to form hydrated iron(III) oxide,
Fe2O3 • xH2O, more commonly known as rust. As noted earlier, the “x”
signiﬁes a variable number of water molecules per formula unit.
2Fe(OH)3(s) → Fe2O3 • 3H2O(s)
Both Fe(OH)3 and Fe2O3 • xH2O are reddish-brown, or “rust coloured.”
A rust deposit may contain a mixture of these compounds.
Fortunately, not all metals corrode to the same extent as iron. Many
metals do corrode in air to form a surface coating of metal oxide.
However, in many cases, the oxide layer adheres, or sticks ﬁrmly, to the
metal surface. This layer protects the metal from further corrosion. For
example, aluminum, chromium, and magnesium are readily oxidized in
air to form their oxides, Al2O3, Cr2O3, and MgO. Unless the oxide layer is
broken by a cut or a scratch, the layer prevents further corrosion. In con-
trast, rust easily ﬂakes off from the surface of an iron object and provides
little protection against further corrosion.
Corrosion Prevention
Corrosion, and especially the corrosion of iron, can be very destructive.
For this reason, a great deal of effort goes into corrosion prevention. The
simplest method of preventing corrosion is to paint an iron object. The
protective coating of paint prevents air and water from reaching the metal
surface. Other effective protective layers include grease, oil, plastic, or a
metal that is more resistant to corrosion than iron. For example, a layer
of chromium protects bumpers and metal trim on cars. An enamel coating
is often used to protect metal plates, pots, and pans. Enamel is a shiny,
hard, and very unreactive type of glass that can be melted onto a metal
surface. A protective layer is effective as long as it completely covers the
iron object. If a hole or scratch breaks the layer, the metal underneath
can corrode.
It is also possible to protect iron against corrosion by forming an alloy
with a different metal. Stainless steel is an alloy of iron that contains at
least 10% chromium, by mass, in addition to small quantities of carbon
and occasionally metals such as nickel. Stainless steel is much more
resistant to corrosion than pure iron. Therefore, stainless steel is often
used for cutlery, taps, and various other applications where rust-resistance
is important. However, chromium is much more expensive than iron. As
a result, stainless steel is too expensive for use in large-scale applications,
such as building bridges.
Galvanizing is a process in which iron is covered with a protective
layer of zinc. Galvanized iron is often used to make metal buckets and
chain-link fences. Galvanizing protects iron in two ways. First, the zinc
acts as a protective layer. If this layer is broken, the iron is exposed to
air and water. When this happens, however, the iron is still protected.
Zinc is more easily oxidized than iron. Therefore, zinc, not iron, becomes
the anode in the galvanic cell. The zinc metal is oxidized to zinc ions. In
this situation, zinc is known as a sacriﬁcial anode, because it is destroyed
(sacriﬁced) to protect the iron. Iron acts as the cathode when zinc is pres-
ent. Thus, iron does not undergo oxidation until all the zinc has reacted.
548 MHR • Unit 5  Electrochemistry
Magnesium, zinc,
Figure 11.29
or aluminum blocks are attached to
ships’ hulls, oil and gas pipelines,
underground iron pipes, and
gasoline storage tanks. These
reactive metals provide cathodic
protection by acting as a sacriﬁcial
anode.
Cathodic protection is another method of preventing rusting, as
shown in Figure 11.29. As in galvanizing, a more reactive metal is
attached to the iron object. This reactive metal acts as a sacriﬁcial anode,
and the iron becomes the cathode of a galvanic cell. Unlike galvanizing,
the metal used in cathodic protection does not completely cover the iron.
Because the sacriﬁcial anode is slowly destroyed by oxidation, it must be
replaced periodically.
If iron is covered with a protective layer of a metal that is less reactive
than iron, there can be unfortunate results. A “tin” can is actually a steel
can coated with a thin layer of tin. While the tin layer remains intact, it
provides effective protection against rusting. If the tin layer is broken or
scratched, however, the iron in the steel corrodes faster in contact with
the tin than the iron would on its own. Since tin is less reactive than
iron, tin acts as a cathode in each galvanic cell on the surface of the can.
Therefore, the tin provides a large area of available cathodes for the small
galvanic cells involved in the rusting process. Iron acts as the anode of
each cell, which is its normal role when rusting.
Sometimes, the rusting of iron is promoted accidentally. For example,
by connecting an iron pipe to a copper pipe in a plumbing system, an
inexperienced plumber could accidentally speed up the corrosion of the
iron pipe. Copper is less reactive than iron. Therefore, copper acts as the
cathode and iron as the anode in numerous small galvanic cells at the
intersection of the two pipes.
Build on your understanding of corrosion by completing the following
practice problems.
Practice Problems
25. (a) Use the two half-reactions for the rusting process, and a table
of standard reduction potentials. Determine the standard cell
potential for this reaction.
(b) Do you think that your calculated value is the actual cell potential
for each of the small galvanic cells on the surface of a rusting iron
object? Explain.
26. Explain why aluminum provides cathodic protection to an iron
object.
27. In the year 2000, Transport Canada reported that thousands of cars
sold in the Atlantic Provinces between 1989 and 1999 had corroded
engine cradle mounts. Failure of these mounts can cause the steering
shaft to separate from the car. The manufacturer recalled the cars
so that repairs could be made, where necessary. The same cars
were sold across the country. Why do you think that the corrosion
problems showed up in the Atlantic Provinces?
28. (a) Use a table of standard reduction potentials to determine whether
elemental oxygen, O2(g), is a better oxidizing agent under acidic
conditions or basic conditions.
(b) From your answer to part (a), do you think that acid rain promotes
or helps prevent the rusting of iron?
Chapter 11  Cells and Batteries • MHR 549
Many electric cars
Figure 11.30
are currently under development.
In fact, the idea of electric cars is
not new. In the early days of the
automobile, electric cars were more
common than gasoline-powered
cars. The production of electric cars
peaked in 1912, but then completely
stopped in the 1930s.
Automobile Engines
The internal combustion engine found in most automobiles uses
gasoline as a fuel. Unfortunately, this type of engine produces pollutants,
such as carbon dioxide (CO2), nitrogen oxides (NOx), and volatile
organic compounds (VOCs). These pollutants contribute to health and
environmental problems, such as smog and the greenhouse effect. In
addition, the internal combustion engine is very inefﬁcient. It converts
only about 25% of the chemical energy of the fuel into the kinetic
energy of the car. Electric cars, such as those shown in Figure 11.30,
may provide a more efﬁcient and less harmful alternative.
Manufacturers and researchers have attempted to power
electric cars with rechargeable batteries, such as modiﬁed lead-acid
and nickel-cadmium batteries. However, rechargeable batteries run
down fairly quickly. The distance driven before recharging a battery
may be 250 km or less. The battery must then be recharged from an
external electrical source. Recharging the lead-acid battery of an electric
car takes several hours. Cars based on a version of the nickel-cadmium
battery can be recharged in only ﬁfteen minutes. However, recharging
the batteries of an electric car is still inconvenient.
A new type of power supply for electric cars eliminates the need for
recharging. A fuel cell is a battery that produces electricity while reactants
are supplied continuously from an external source. Because reactants
continuously ﬂow into the cell, a fuel cell is also known as a ﬂow battery.
Unlike the fuel supply of a more conventional battery, the fuel supply in a
fuel cell is unlimited. As in the combustion of gasoline in a conventional
engine, the overall reaction in a fuel cell is the oxidation of a fuel by oxygen.
The space shuttle uses a fuel cell as a source of energy. This cell
depends on the oxidation of hydrogen by oxygen to form water. The
fuel cell operates under basic conditions, so it is sometimes referred to
as an alkaline fuel cell. Figure 11.31, on the next page, shows the design
of the cell. The half-reactions and the overall reaction are as follows.
Reduction (occurs at the cathode): O2(g) + 2H2O((cid:2)) + 4e− → 4OH−
(aq) → 2H2O((cid:2)) + 2e−
Oxidation (occurs at the anode): H2(g) + 2OH−
(aq)
Multiply the oxidation half-reaction by 2, add the two half-reactions, and
simplify to obtain the overall cell reaction.
2H2(g) + O2(g) → 2H2O((cid:2))
Notice that the overall equation is the same as the equation for the
combustion of hydrogen. The combustion of hydrogen is an exothermic
reaction. In the fuel cell, this reaction produces energy in the form of
electricity, rather than heat.
550 MHR • Unit 5  Electrochemistry
e−
anode
e−
cathode
H2
O2
inert carbon electrode
containing Ni
inert carbon electrode
containing Ni and NiO
hot KOH solution
Figure 11.31
electrons. Therefore, the cell has two inert electrodes.
In an alkaline fuel cell, the half-reactions do not include solid conductors of
The hydrogen fuel cell produces water vapour, which does not contribute
to smog formation or to the greenhouse effect. This product makes the
hydrogen fuel cell an attractive energy source for cars. Also, the hydrogen
fuel cell is much more efﬁcient than the internal combustion engine. A
hydrogen fuel cell converts about 80% of the chemical energy of the fuel
into the kinetic energy of the car.
There is a possible problem with the hydrogen fuel cell. The cell
requires hydrogen fuel. Unfortunately, uncombined hydrogen is not found
naturally on Earth. Most hydrogen is produced from hydrocarbon fuels,
such as petroleum or methane. These manufacturing processes may
contribute signiﬁcantly to pollution problems. However, hydrogen can
also be produced by the electrolysis of water. If a source such as solar
energy or hydroelectricity is used to power the electrolysis, the overall
quantity of pollution is low.
The following practice problems will allow you to test your
understanding of fuel cells.
Practice Problems
29. Calculate E˚cell for a hydrogen fuel cell.
30. In one type of fuel cell, methane is oxidized by oxygen to form
carbon dioxide and water.
(a) Write the equation for the overall cell reaction.
(b) Write the two half-reactions, assuming acidic conditions.
31. Reactions that occur in fuel cells can be thought of as being
“ﬂameless combustion reactions.” Explain why.
32. If a hydrogen fuel cell produces an electric current of 0.600 A for
120 min, what mass of hydrogen is consumed by the cell?
Chapter 11  Cells and Batteries • MHR 551
Canadians
in Chemistry
Dr. Viola Birss
As a science student, Viola Birss decided to focus
on chemistry. “I have always had a concern for
the environment,” she says. “I am particularly
interested in identifying new, non-polluting ways
of converting, storing, and using energy.” Dr. Birss’s
interest in non-polluting energy narrowed her ﬁeld
of interest to electrochemistry.
Today, Dr. Birss is a chemistry professor at the
University of Calgary. Her research focuses on
developing ﬁlms to coat metal surfaces. Among
other uses, these ﬁlms can serve as protective
barriers against corrosion, and as catalysts in
fuel cells.
Magnesium alloys are very lightweight, and are
being used in the aerospace industry. Because they
are very reactive, these alloys need to be protected
from corrosion. Dr. Birss holds a patent on a new
approach to the electrochemical formation of protec-
tive oxide ﬁlms on magnesium alloys. Dr. Birss also
works on developing new catalysts for fuel cells,
and studies the factors that lead to the breakdown
of fuel cells.
After ﬁnishing an undergraduate degree at the
University of Calgary, Dr. Birss went on to complete
her doctoral degree as a Commonwealth Scholar at
the University of Auckland in New Zealand. During
her postdoctoral studies at the University of Ottawa,
she worked with Dr. Brian Conway, a famous
Canadian electrochemist. Dr. Conway’s work in
electrochemistry has led to progress in a range of
electrochemical devices including fuel cells,
advanced batteries, and electrolytic cells.
Dr. Birss takes pride in her team of undergradu-
ate, graduate, and post-doctoral students. She works
hard to provide a creative and inspiring environment
for them. Together, they go on wilderness hiking
and cross country ski trips. In addition to creating
a sense of community within her team, Birss feels
that sports and nature help to recharge her internal
“battery.” Dr. Birss comments, “These activities
seem to provide me with mental and physical rest,
so that my creativity and energy are catalyzed.”
Water Treatment and the Chlor-Alkali Process
In many countries, water is not safe to drink. Untreated water is
sometimes polluted with toxic chemicals. It may also carry numerous
water-borne diseases, including typhoid fever, cholera, and dysentery.
In Canada, the water that comes through your tap has been through an
elaborate puriﬁcation process. This process is designed to remove solid
particles and toxic chemicals, and to reduce the number of bacteria
to safe levels. Adding chlorine to water is the most common way to
destroy bacteria.
You have already seen that chlorine gas can be made by the
electrolysis of molten sodium chloride. In industry, some chlorine is
produced in this way using the Downs cell described earlier. However,
more chlorine is produced in Canada using a different method, called
the chlor-alkali process. In this process, brine is electrolyzed in a cell
like the one shown in Figure 11.32. Brine is a saturated solution of
sodium chloride.
552 MHR • Unit 5  Electrochemistry
battery
e−
e−
asbestos
diaphragm
inert anode
inert cathode
brine
NaOH solution
The chlor-alkali cell in this diagram electrolyzes an aqueous solution of
Figure 11.32
sodium chloride to produce chlorine gas, hydrogen gas, and aqueous sodium hydroxide.
The asbestos diaphragm stops the chlorine gas produced at the anode from mixing with the
hydrogen gas produced at the cathode. Sodium hydroxide solution is removed from the cell
periodically, and fresh brine is added to the cell.
The half-reactions and the overall cell reaction in the chlor-alkali process
are as follows.
(aq) → Cl2(g) + 2e−
Oxidation: 2Cl−
Reduction: 2H2O((cid:2)) + 2e− → H2(g) + 2OH−
Overall: 2Cl−
(aq) + 2H2O((cid:2)) → Cl2(g) + H2(g) + 2OH−
(aq)
(aq)
Note that the sodium ion is a spectator ion, and does not take part in this
reaction. However, it combines with OH− to produce sodium hydroxide,
as shown by the balanced chemical equation below.
2NaCl(aq) + 2H2O((cid:2)) → Cl2(g) + H2(g) + 2NaOH(aq)
The products of the chlor-alkali process are all useful. Sodium hydroxide
is used to make soaps and detergents. It is widely used as a base in many
other industrial chemical reactions, as well. The hydrogen produced by
the chlor-alkali process is used as a fuel. Chlorine has many uses besides
water treatment. For example, chlorine is used as a bleach in the pulp and
paper industry. Chlorine is also used in the manufacture of chlorinated
organic compounds, such as the common plastic polyvinyl chloride (PVC).
The chlorination of water is usually carried out by adding chlorine
gas, sodium hypochlorite, or calcium hypochlorite to the water in low
concentrations. The active antibacterial agent in each case is hypochlorous
acid, HClO(aq). For example, when chlorine gas is added to water,
hypochlorous acid is formed by the following reaction.
Cl2(g) + H2O((cid:2)) → HClO(aq) + HCl(aq)
Some people object to the chlorination of water, and prefer to drink
bottled spring water. There is controversy over the level of risk associated
with chlorination, and over the possible beneﬁts of spring water. For
example, hypochlorous acid reacts with traces of organic materials in
the water supply. These reactions can produce toxic substances, such as
chloroform. Supporters of chlorination believe that these substances are
present at very low, safe levels, but opponents of chlorination disagree.
Complete the following practice problems to help you decide on your
own opinion of chlorination.
Chapter 11  Cells and Batteries • MHR 553
Practice Problems
33. Show that the reaction of chlorine gas with water is a
disproportionation reaction.
34. Would you predict the products of the chlor-alkali process to be
hydrogen and chlorine? Explain.
35. Research and assess the most recent information you can ﬁnd on
the health and safety aspects of the chlorination of water. Are you
in favour of chlorination, or opposed to it? Explain your answer.
36. Some municipalities use ozone gas rather than chlorine to kill
bacteria in water. Research the advantages and disadvantages of
using ozone in place of chlorine.
Electronic Learning Partner
Go to the Chemistry 12
Electronic Learning Partner
for more information about
aspects of material covered
in this section of the chapter.
Section Summary
In this section, you learned about some important electrochemical
processes. You had the opportunity to weigh some positive and negative
effects of electrochemical technologies. The questions that follow in the
section review and chapter review will encourage you to think further
about the science of electrochemistry, and about its impact on society.
Section Review
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
MC
Why does the use of road salt cause cars to rust faster than they
otherwise would?
MC
Aluminum is a more reactive metal than any of the metals
present in steel. However, discarded steel cans disintegrate much
more quickly than discarded aluminum cans when both are left open
to the environment in the same location. Give an explanation.
K/U
Explain why zinc acts as a sacriﬁcial anode in contact with iron.
(a)
C
Identify two metals that do not corrode easily in the presence
of oxygen and water. Explain why they do not corrode.
(b)
C
How are these metals useful? How do the uses of these metals
depend on their resistance to corrosion?
I
A silver utensil is said to tarnish when its surface corrodes to
form a brown or black layer of silver sulﬁde. Research and describe
a chemical procedure that can be used to remove this layer. Write
balanced half-reactions and a chemical equation for the process.
I
In a chlor-alkali cell, the current is very high. A typical current
would be about 100 000 A. Calculate the mass of sodium hydroxide,
in kilograms, that a cell using this current can produce in one minute.
MC
Research the advances made in the development of fuel cells
since this book was written. Describe how any new types of fuel cells
operate. Evaluate their advantages and disadvantages, as compared to
the internal combustion engine and other fuel cells.
554 MHR • Unit 5  Electrochemistry
Review
Reﬂecting on Chapter 11
Summarize this chapter in the format of your
choice. Here are a few ideas to use as guidelines:
• Represent one example of a galvanic cell,
and one example of an electrolytic cell,
using chemical equations, half-reactions,
and diagrams.
• Calculate a standard cell potential using a
table of standard reduction potentials.
• Compare primary and secondary batteries.
• Predict the products of the electrolysis of
molten salts and aqueous solutions.
• Perform a sample stoichiometric calculation
involving the quantity of electricity used in
electrolytic processes.
• Describe some electrolytic processes involved
in extracting and reﬁning metals.
Knowledge/Understanding
1. Explain the function of the following parts of
an electrolytic cell.
(a) electrodes
(b) electrolyte
(c) external voltage
2. In a galvanic cell, one half-cell has a cadmium
electrode in a 1 mol/L solution of cadmium
nitrate. The other half-cell has a magnesium
electrode in a 1 mol/L solution of magnesium
nitrate. Write the shorthand representation.
3. Write the oxidation half-reaction, the reduction
half-reaction, and the overall cell reaction for
the following galvanic cell.
| NO3
Pt | NO(g)
| I2(s), Pt
(aq) , H+
−
4. What is the importance of the hydrogen
|| I−
(aq)
(aq)
electrode?
• Describe the process of corrosion. Explain some
5. Lithium, sodium, beryllium, magnesium,
methods used to prevent it.
• Describe the design of fuel cells, and their
potential use in automobiles.
• Describe the industrial production of chlorine,
and its use in the puriﬁcation of water.
• Give some examples of how electrochemistry
affects the environment, human health, and
safety.
Reviewing Key Terms
For each of the following terms, write a sentence
that shows your understanding of its meaning.
electric current
galvanic cell
external circuit
electrolytes
cathode
inert electrode
cell voltage
dry cell
primary battery
reduction potential
electrolytic cell
overvoltage
quantity of electricity
Faraday’s law
reﬁning
galvanizing
cathodic protection
fuel cell
electrochemistry
voltaic cell
electrodes
anode
salt bridge
electric potential
cell potential
battery
secondary battery
oxidation potential
electrolysis
electroplating
electric charge
extraction
corrosion
sacriﬁcial anode
chlor-alkali process
calcium, and radium are all made industrially
by the electrolysis of their molten chlorides.
These salts are all soluble in water, but aqueous
solutions are not used for the electrolytic
process. Explain why.
6. Use the following two half-reactions to
write balanced net ionic equations for one
spontaneous reaction and one non-spontaneous
reaction. State the standard cell potential for
each reaction.
N2O(g) + 2H+
(aq) + 2e− (cid:3)(cid:4) N2(g) + H2O((cid:2)) E˚ = 1.770 V
CuI(s) + e− (cid:3)(cid:4) Cu(s) + I−
(aq) E˚ = −0.185 V
7. Identify the oxidizing agent and the reducing
agent in a lead-acid battery that is
(a) discharging
(b) recharging
8. Rank the following in order from most
effective to least effective oxidizing agents
under standard conditions.
(aq) , Br2((cid:2)), H+
Zn2+
9. Rank the following in order from most
(aq), Co3+
(aq)
effective to least effective reducing agents
under standard conditions.
H2(g), Cl−
10. The ions Fe2+
(aq), Al(s), Ag(s)
(aq), Ag+
(aq), and Cu2+
(aq) are present
in the half-cell that contains the cathode of an
electrolytic cell. The concentration of each of
these ions is 1 mol/L. If the external voltage is
very slowly increased from zero, in what order
will the three metals Fe, Ag, and Cu be plated
onto the cathode? Explain your answer.
Chapter 11  Cells and Batteries • MHR 555
Inquiry
11. Write the half-reactions and calculate the
standard cell potential for each reaction.
Identify each reaction as spontaneous or
non-spontaneous.
(a) Zn(s) + Fe2+
(b) Cr(s) + AlCl3(aq) → CrCl3(aq) + Al(s)
(c) 2AgNO3(aq) + H2O2(aq) →
(aq) → Zn2+
(aq) + Fe(s)
2Ag(s) + 2HNO3(aq) + O2(g)
12. Calculate the mass of magnesium that can be
plated onto the cathode by the electrolysis of
molten magnesium chloride, using a current of
3.65 A for 55.0 min.
13. (a) Describe a method you could use to measure
the standard cell potential of the following
galvanic cell.
Sn | Sn2+ (1 mol/L) || Pb2+ (1 mol/L) | Pb
(b) Why is this cell unlikely to ﬁnd many
practical uses?
14. The two half-cells in a galvanic cell consist of
one iron electrode in a 1 mol/L iron(II) sulfate
solution, and a silver electrode in a 1 mol/L
silver nitrate solution.
(a) Assume the cell is operating as a galvanic
cell. State the cell potential, the oxidation
half-reaction, the reduction half-reaction,
and the overall cell reaction.
(b) Repeat part (a), but this time assume that
the cell is operating as an electrolytic cell.
(c) For the galvanic cell in part (a), do the mass
of the anode, the mass of the cathode, and
the total mass of the two electrodes increase,
decrease, or stay the same while the cell is
operating?
(d) Repeat part (c) for the electrolytic cell in
part (b).
15. (a) Describe an experiment you could
perform to determine the products from
the electrolysis of aqueous zinc bromide.
How would you identify the electrolysis
products?
(b) Zinc and bromine are the observed products
from the electrolysis of aqueous zinc
bromide solution under standard conditions.
They are also the observed products from the
electrolysis of molten zinc bromide. Explain
why the ﬁrst observation is surprising.
556 MHR • Unit 5  Electrochemistry
16. Use the half-cells shown in a table of standard
reduction potentials. Could you build a battery
with a potential of 8 V? If your answer is yes,
give an example.
17. Suppose you produce a kilogram of sodium
and a kilogram of aluminum by electrolysis.
Compare your electricity costs for these two
processes. Assume that electricity is used for
electrolysis only, and not for heating.
Communication
18. Research the following information. Prepare
a short presentation or booklet on the early
history of electrochemistry.
(a) the contributions of Galvani and Volta to
the development of electrochemistry
(b) how Humphry Davy and Michael Faraday
explained the operation of galvanic and
electrolytic cells. (Note that these scientists
could not describe them in terms of electron
transfers, because the electron was not
discovered until 1897.)
19. How rapidly do you think that iron would
corrode on the surface of the moon? Explain
your answer.
20. Reactions that are the reverse of each other
have standard cell potentials that are equal
in size but opposite in sign. Explain why.
21. Use a labelled diagram to represent each of
the following.
(a) a galvanic cell in which the hydrogen
electrode is the anode
(b) a galvanic cell in which the hydrogen
electrode is the cathode
Making Connections
22. A D-size dry cell ﬂashlight battery is much
bigger than a AAA-size dry cell calculator
battery. However, both have cell potentials
of 1.5 V. Do they supply the same quantity
of electricity? Explain your answer.
23. (a) Would you use aluminum nails to attach an
iron gutter to a house? Explain your answer.
(b) Would you use iron nails to attach
aluminum siding to a house? Explain your
answer
24. Research the aluminum-air battery, and the
sodium-sulfur battery. Both are rechargeable
batteries that have been used to power electric
cars. In each case, describe the design of the
battery, the half-reactions that occur at the
electrodes, and the overall cell reaction. Also,
describe the advantages and disadvantages of
using the battery as a power source for a car.
25. Explain why the recycling of aluminum is more
economically viable than the recycling of many
other metals.
26. Suppose you live in a small town with high
unemployment. A company plans to build a
smelter there to produce copper and nickel by
roasting their sulﬁde ores and reducing the
oxides formed. Would you be in favour of the
plant being built, or opposed to it? Explain and
justify your views.
27. Many metal objects are vulnerable to damage
from corrosion. A famous example is the Statue
of Liberty. Research the history of the effects of
corrosion on the Statue of Liberty. Give a chem-
ical explanation for the processes involved.
Describe the steps taken to solve the problem
and the chemical reasons for these steps.
28. (a) Estimate the number of used batteries
you discard in a year. Survey the class to
determine an average number. Now estimate
the number of used batteries discarded by all
the high school students in Ontario in a year.
(b) Prepare an action plan suggesting ways of
decreasing the number of batteries discarded
each year.
Answers to Practice Problems and Short Answers to
(aq) + e− → Tl(s), overall:
(aq) + +2Tl(s), tin anode, thallium
(aq) + 2e− , red:
(aq) + 2e−, red: Tl+
(aq) → Sn2+
(aq) + 2e− → H2(g), overall:
(aq) → Cd2+
Section Review Questions
Practice Problems: 1.(a) oxidizing agent, Cu(II);
reducing agent, Zn (b) same as previous  2.(a) ox:
Sn(s) → Sn2+
Sn(s) + 2Tl+
cathode (b) ox: Cd(s) → Cd2+
2H+
Cd(s) + 2H+
platinum cathode  3.(a) ox: 2I−
(aq) + 5e− → Mn2+
MnO−
4 (aq) + 16H+
10I−
(b) oxidizing agent, MnO4
4. one electrolyte, no barrier  5. ox: 2Br−
red: Cl2(g) + 2e− → 2Cl−
Cu+
E˚cell = 0.542 V 7. ox: Sn(s) → Sn2+
(aq) → 5I2(s) + 2Mn2+
−, reducing agent, I−
4 (aq) + 8H+
(aq) + 2MnO−
(aq) + e−, red: 2H+
(aq) → Cu2+
(aq) + 2e− , red:
(aq), E˚cell = 0.292 V 6. ox:
(aq) + H2(g), cadmium anode,
(aq) → I2(s) + 2e−, red:
(aq) + 4H2O((cid:2)) , overall:
(aq) → Br2((cid:2)) + 2e−,
(aq) + O2(g) + 2e− → H2O2(aq),
(aq) + 8H2O((cid:2))
(c) the anode
(aq),
(aq) → Cu2+
(b) Ca2+ + 2e− → Ca
(aq) + Cu(s), E˚cell = 0.368 V
(c) 2Li+ + 2Br− → 2Li + Br2 11. direct
(aq) + 3e−, red: AgCl(s) + e− → Ag(s) + Cl−
(aq) + 2e− → H2(g) , E˚cell = 0.138 V 8. ox:
(aq) + 8e− , red:
(aq) + 4e− → 2H2O((cid:2)) ,  31. same equation as
2H+
Cr(s) → Cr3+
E˚cell = 0.966 V 9.(a) 2Cl− → Cl2 + 2e−
(c) CaCl2 → Ca + Cl2 10.(a) cathode: Li+ + e− → Li (b) anode:
2Br− → Br2 + 2e−
current: reaction proceeds steadily in one direction
12. reduction (gain of electrons) at cathode of electrolytic
cell; electrons come from negative electrode (anode) of
battery  13. hydrogen and oxygen  14. hydrogen, not calcium,
produced at cathode  15.(a) 0.146 V (b) Cd anode, Ni cathode
(c) ox: Cd → Cd2+ + 2e−, red: Ni2+ + 2e− → Ni , overall:
Cd + Ni2+ → Cd2+ + Ni 16.(a) −0.146 V (b) Ni anode,
Cd cathode (c) ox: Ni → Ni2+ + 2e− , red: Cd2+ + 2e− → Cd,
overall: Cd2+ + Ni → Cd + Ni2+
17. No  18.(a) spontaneous
(b) non-spontaneous (c) spontaneous
19. 2Cu+
20.(a) non-spontaneous (b) spontaneous  21. 2.97 g  22. 8.90 min
23. 1.85 A  24.(a) increases by 1.09 g (b) You can use the
stoichiometry of the equations. 25.(a) 0.848 V (b) no;
conditions are not standard  26. aluminum is more easily
oxidized than iron  27. higher levels of salt (an electrolyte)
and moisture  28.(a) acidic conditions (b) promotes it
29. 1.229 V  30.(a) overall: CH4(g) + 2O2(g) → CO2(g) + 2H2O((cid:2))
(b) ox: CH4(g) + 2H2O((cid:2)) → CO2(g) + 8H+
O2(g) + 4H+
combustion, but fuel does not burn  32. 0.0451 g
33. oxidation number of Cl increases from 0 to +1 in forming
HClO, decreases from 0 to −1 in forming HCl; chlorine
undergoes both oxidation and reduction  34. hydrogen and
oxygen, but conditions are far from standard
Section Review: 11.1: 1. ox: manganese(IV) oxide, red: zinc
3.(a) ox: Zn(s) + 2OH−
Ag2O(s) + H2O((cid:2)) + 2e− → 2Ag(s) + 2OH−
Zn(s) + Ag2O(s) → ZnO(s) + 2Ag(s) (b) zinc anode, stainless
steel cathode  4. 3 V, two cells connected in series
5. four dry cells (4 × 1.5 V = 6 V) 7. it dissolves; inner
container is zinc anode  8. Fe anode, Ag cathode, ox:
Fe(s) → Fe2+
overall: Fe(s) + 2Ag+
(b) 5.797 V (c) 0.432 V  2.(a) 0.599 V (b) 1.097 V (c) 0.994 V
3. standard hydrogen electrode  4. no; biggest difference in
E˚red is less than 7 V  6. 0.987 V  11.3: 1. copper, oxygen
2.(a) copper(II) ions, hydrogen (b) hydrogen gas production
requires overvoltage, so zinc forms at cathode
3.(a) non-spontaneous (b) spontaneous
4. ox: Ni(OH)2(s) + OH−
red: Cd(OH)2(s) + 2e− → Cd(s) + 2OH−
Cd(OH)2(s) + 2Ni(OH)2(s) → Cd(s) + 2NiO(OH)(s) + 2H2O((cid:2))
5. over 12 V  7.(a) yes  11.4:  1.(a) cathode (b) 3.29 × 103 C
2. 618 kg Na, 952 kg Cl2 3. 2.08 t  4. plentiful and
inexpensive electricity  11.5: 1. salt acts as electrolyte
2. aluminum protected by oxide layer  4.(a) e.g., gold,
platinum  6. 2.49 kg
(aq) + e− → Ag(s),
(aq) + 2Ag(s) 11.2: 1.(a) 0.710 V
(aq) + 2e−, red: Ag+
(aq) → Fe2+
(aq) → ZnO(s) + H2O((cid:2)) + 2e− , red:
(aq) → NiO(OH)(s) + H2O((cid:2)) + e− ,
(aq), overall:
(aq), overall:
Chapter 11  Cells and Batteries • MHR 557
S K I L L   F O C U S
Initiating and planning
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
Communicating results
Pre-Lab Focus
In this investigation, you will design an
electrolytic cell to plate zinc onto a metal object
of your choice. You will repeat your procedure
using three different currents, and then compare
your ﬁnal products. When designing your proce-
dure, consider questions such as the following.
• How will you clean the pieces of metal you
want to plate?
• What concentration of electrolyte will you use?
• What external voltage will you use?
• What three current values will you try?
• What will you use for the anode in your cell?
• What will you use for the cathode in your cell?
• What time limit will you set for the electro-
plating process?
Question
What conditions work best for electroplating zinc
onto a metal object? Does changing the current
affect the quality of the ﬁnished object?
Hypothesis
Predict whether the value of the current used
to carry out the plating affects the quality of the
ﬁnished object.
Materials
beaker or plastic egg carton
adjustable D.C. power supply (9 V max)
ammeter wires with alligator clips
metal objects to electroplate, such as copper
wire, iron nails, nickel objects, paperclips,
bronze objects
anode materials such as a zinc strip
zinc nitrate solution, provided by your
teacher (0.5–1.0 mol)
steel wool
any other materials required for your procedure
Electroplating
Background
The most beautiful metals, such as silver and
gold, can also be the most expensive.
Unfortunately, pure gold is soft, and pure silver
tarnishes quickly.
Electroplating is a common method used to
produce beautiful and durable metal objects.
Jewellery and other metal objects can be made
cheaper, stronger, and more durable by coating a
strong, cheaper metal with a thin layer of a more
expensive metal. For example, cheaper jewellery
can be made from copper or nickel, and then
coated with silver. More expensive jewellery can
be made from silver, and then coated with gold.
Industry also uses electroplating for many
applications. Chromium, an extremely hard
surface metal, is commonly electroplated over
steel cores for heavy duty applications. Worn or
damaged metal machine parts may be restored by
re-plating the worn sections.
The bumper of this car is plated with chromium.
558 MHR • Unit 5  Electrochemistry
Safety Precautions
• Wear gloves, safety goggles, and an apron while
you carry out the investigation.
• If you use an acid or base to clean your
electrodes, treat both the acid or base and the
electrode with caution. Wash any spills on
your skin with plenty of cool water. Inform
your teacher.
• If you use acetone to clean your electrodes,
make sure there are no open ﬂames in the
laboratory. Acetone is ﬂammable.
• Use the power supply and electrical connections
with care.
• Be sure that all materials are properly disposed
of after your experiment.
• Do not use currents greater than 1.0 amp.
• Do not use a voltage greater than 9 V.
Procedure
1. Design a rubric, an assessment checklist,
or some other means of assessing your
experimental design and procedure.
2. Decide on a piece of metal or a metal object
to be plated. You will need three identical
metal objects. You may wish to use the copper
wire to form a piece of jewellery to plate.
3. Design a procedure to electroplate zinc onto
the metal object you have chosen. You will
repeat your procedure three times, using
three different values for the current, and
three different metal objects.
4. Make a list of all the materials you will use.
Check that all are available.
5. Do not start your procedure until you have
shown it to your teacher for approval.
6. When you have ﬁnished your laboratory
procedure, dispose of your materials as
recommended by your teacher. Record
your disposal methods in your report.
Assessment
After you complete this investigation:
(cid:2) Compare your own procedure with procedures
used by your classmates. In what ways did your
procedure work better than others? How could
you improve your procedure?
(cid:2) Evaluate the quality of your resulting electroplated
pieces.
7. Write up a full laboratory report of your
procedure and results. Include:
• a diagram of your experimental set-up
• appropriate balanced redox equations
• answers to the Analysis questions below
Analysis
1. What problems did you encounter when
carrying out your investigation? How did
you solve these problems?
2. Compare the three ﬁnished objects that you
electroplated. What conditions worked best
to electroplate zinc onto a metal object?
3. Were you satisﬁed with your procedure?
What improvements would you make if you
did the experiment again?
4. Could you build a galvanic cell using the
same materials that you used in your
procedure? If your answer is yes, explain
how the galvanic cell would differ from
the electrolytic cell that you made in this
investigation.
Conclusion
5. Write a statement summarizing the results
of your investigation.
Extension
In this investigation, you plated a coating of zinc
onto metal objects. As you learned in Unit 5,
Chapter 11, iron objects are sometimes coated
with zinc, or galvanized, to protect the objects
from corrosion. Research the processes used to
galvanize an iron object. Compare the industrial
processes to the process you carried out in this
investigation.
Unit 5 Design Your Own Investigation • MHR 559
Review
Knowledge/Understanding
Multiple Choice
In your notebook, write the letter for the best
answer to each question.
1. The oxidation number of carbon in a
compound cannot be
(a) +4
(b) +2
(c) 0
(d) +6
(e) −4
2. Rusting is
(a) a decomposition reaction
(b) a combustion reaction
(c) a redox reaction
(d) a neutralization reaction
(e) a double displacement reaction
3. Of the following, the most effective reducing
agent is
(a) Na
(b) Pb
(c) Cl−
(d) H2
(e) H2O
4. Primary batteries contain
(a) rechargeable cells
(b) no cells
(c) fuel cells
(d) electrolytic cells
(e) galvanic cells
5. The following net ionic equation is
unbalanced.
MnO2 + H+ + Cl− → Mn2+ + Cl2 + H2O
The set of coefﬁcients that, used in order,
balances the equation is
(a) 1, 4, 4, 1, 2, 2
(b) 2, 8, 2, 2, 1, 4
(c) 2, 8, 2, 3, 1, 4
(d) 1, 4, 2, 1, 1, 2
(e) 1, 2, 2, 1, 1, 1
6. In an electroplating experiment, the mass of
metal plated onto the cathode
(a) doubles, if the external voltage is doubled
(b) doubles, if the current is doubled
(c) depends on the material used to make the
cathode
(d) depends only on the time for which the
current ﬂows
560 MHR • Unit 5  Electrochemistry
(e) equals the decrease in mass of the electrolyte
7. A fuel cell
(a) does not form any products
(b) has a negative cell potential
(c) uses a spontaneous reaction to generate
electricity
(d) is not very efﬁcient
(e) produces its own fuel
8. A metal anode in a cell always
(a) decreases in mass while the cell is in
operation
(b) conducts electrons out of the cell
(c) has a positive polarity
(d) undergoes oxidation
(e) consists of a different metal than the metal
cathode in the same cell
9. In both a galvanic cell and an electrolytic cell,
(a) reduction occurs at the cathode
(b) the cell potential is positive
(c) the overall reaction is spontaneous
(d) an external voltage is required
(e) chemical energy is converted to electrical
energy
10. A type of reaction that is always a redox
reaction is
(a) synthesis
(b) decomposition
(c) single displacement
(d) double displacement
(e) neutralization
11. The sum of the oxidation numbers of all the
elements in a compound
(a) depends on the formula of the compound
(b) is positive
(c) is negative
(d) is zero
(e) depends on the type(s) of chemical bonds in
the compound
12. While a lead-acid battery is being recharged,
(a) the mass of lead(II) sulfate in the battery
in increasing
(b) the number of electrons in the battery
is increasing
(c) chemical energy is being converted to
electrical energy
(d) no chemical reaction is taking place
(e) the cell potential is increasing
13. The oxidation number of oxygen
(c) Write a balanced chemical equation for the
(a) is always negative
(b) is usually negative
(c) is never zero
(d) is never positive
(e) is never −1
Short Answer
In your notebook, write a sentence or a short
paragraph to answer each question.
14. Determine the oxidation number of
(a) N in N2O3
(b) P in H4P2O7
2−
(c) Si in SiF6
(d) each element in (NH4)2SO4
15. Does the fact that you can assign oxidation
numbers of +1 to hydrogen and −2 to oxygen in
water mean that water is an ionic substance?
Explain.
16. (a) Limewater, Ca(OH)2(aq), turns cloudy in the
presence of carbon dioxide. Write a balanced
chemical equation for the reaction. Include
the states of the substances.
(b) Is this reaction a redox reaction?
17. Balance each of the following half-reactions.
2+ → Hg
(a) Hg2
(b) TiO2 → Ti2+ (acidic conditions)
3− (basic conditions)
(c) I2 → H3IO6
reaction of iron with concentrated nitric acid
to form iron(III) nitrate.
(d) How are the equations in parts (a), (b), and
(c) related?
21. For the following galvanic cell,
(aq) | | Ag+
C(s), I2(s) | I−
(a) identify the anode, the cathode, the positive
| Ag(s)
(aq)
electrode, and the negative electrode
(b) write the two half-reactions and the overall
cell reaction
(c) identify the oxidizing agent and the
reducing agent
(d) determine the standard cell potential
22. State whether the reaction shown in each of
the following unbalanced equations is a redox
reaction. If so, identify the oxidizing agent and
the reducing agent. Balance each equation.
(a) Cl2O7 + H2O → HClO4
(b) I2 + ClO−
→ IO3
3
(c) S2− + Br2 → SO4
(d) HNO3 + H2S → NO + S + H2O
− + Cl− (acidic conditions)
2− + Br− (basic conditions)
23. Determine the standard cell potential for each
of the following reactions. State whether each
reaction is spontaneous or non-spontaneous.
(a) 2Fe2+
(b) Au(NO3)3(aq) + 3Ag(s) → 3AgNO3(aq) + Au(s)
(c) H2O2(aq) + 2HCl(aq) → Cl2(g) + 2H2O((cid:2))
(aq) + I2(s) → 2Fe3+
(aq) + 2I−
(aq)
18. Explain why you cannot use the table of
standard reduction potentials in Appendix E
to calculate the external voltage required to
electrolyze molten sodium chloride.
19. Why is the density of the electrolyte solution
in a lead-acid battery greatest when the battery
is fully recharged?
20. Some metals can have different oxidation
numbers in different compounds. In the
following reactions of iron with concentrated
nitric acid, assume that one of the products in
each case is gaseous nitrogen monoxide.
Include the states of all the reactants and
products in the equations.
(a) Write a balanced chemical equation for the
reaction of iron with concentrated nitric acid
to form iron(II) nitrate.
(b) Write a balanced chemical equation for the
reaction of iron(II) nitrate with concentrated
nitric acid to form iron(III) nitrate.
Inquiry
24. Predict the products from the electrolysis of
a 1 mol/L solution of hydrochloric acid.
25. Suppose you decide to protect a piece of iron
from rusting, by covering it with a layer of lead.
(a) Would the iron rust if the lead layer
completely covered the iron? Explain.
(b) Would the iron rust if the lead layer partially
covered the iron? Explain.
26. When aqueous solutions of potassium
permanganate, KMnO4, and sodium oxalate,
Na2C2O4, react in acidic solution, the intense
purple colour of the permanganate ion fades
and is replaced by the very pale pink colour
of manganese(II) ions. Gas bubbles are observed
as the oxalate ions are converted to carbon
dioxide. If the redox reaction is carried out as
a titration, with the permanganate being added
to the oxalate, the permanganate acts as both
Unit 5 Review • MHR 561
reactant and indicator. The persistence of the
purple colour in the solution with the addition
of one drop of permanganate at the end-point
shows that the reaction is complete.
(a) Complete and balance the equation for acidic
conditions.
MnO4
− + C2O4
2− → Mn2+ + CO2
(b) If 14.28 mL of a 0.1575 mol/L potassium
permanganate solution reacts completely
with 25.00 mL of a sodium oxalate solution,
what is the concentration of the sodium
oxalate solution?
27. Redox titrations can be used for chemical
analysis in industry. For example, the percent
by mass of tin in an alloy can be found by
dissolving a sample of the alloy in an acid
to form aqueous tin(II) ions. Titrating with
cerium(IV) ions produces aqueous tin(IV) and
cerium(III) ions. A 1.475 g sample of an alloy
was dissolved in an acid and reacted complete-
ly with 24.38 mL of a 0.2113 mol/L cerium(IV)
nitrate solution. Calculate the percent by mass
of tin in the alloy.
28. Design and describe a procedure you could use
to galvanize an iron nail. Explain your choice
of materials.
29. Suppose you build four different half-cells
under standard conditions in the laboratory.
(a) What is the greatest number of different
galvanic cells you could make from the
four half-cells?
(b) What  is the smallest number of standard
cell potentials you would need to measure
to rank the half-cells from greatest to least
standard reduction potentials? Explain.
30. In a galvanic cell, the mass of the magnesium
anode decreased by 3.38 g while the cell
produced electricity.
(a) Calculate the quantity of electricity produced
by the cell.
(b) If the constant current ﬂowing through the
external circuit was 100 mA, for how many
hours did the cell produce electricity?
31. Calculate the mass of aluminum plated onto
the cathode by a current of 2.92 A that is
supplied for 71.0 min to an electrolytic cell
containing aqueous aluminum nitrate as the
electrolyte.
562 MHR • Unit 5  Electrochemistry
32. An industrial method for manufacturing
ﬂuorine gas is the electrolysis of liquid
hydrogen ﬂuoride.
2HF((cid:2)) → H2(g) + F2(g)
If the current supplied to the electrolytic cell is
5000 A, what mass of ﬂuorine, in tonnes, is
produced by one cell in one week?
33. Describe how you could build a galvanic
cell and an electrolytic cell in which the two
electrodes are made of lead and silver. Include
a list of the materials you would require.
34. It is possible to use the standard reduction
potentials for the reduction of hydrogen
ions and the reduction of water molecules to
show that the dissociation of water molecules
into hydrogen ions and hydroxide ions is
non-spontaneous under standard conditions.
Describe how you would do this. How is
this result consistent with the observed
concentrations of hydrogen ions and hydroxide
ions in pure water?
Communication
35. List all the information you can obtain from a
balanced half-reaction. Give two examples to
illustrate your answer.
36. (a) If one metal (metal A) displaces another
metal (metal B) in a single displacement
reaction, which metal is the more effective
reducing agent? Explain. Give an example
to illustrate your answer.
(b) If one non-metal (non-metal A) displaces
another non-metal (non-metal B) in a single
displacement reaction, which non-metal is
the more effective oxidizing agent? Explain.
Give an example to illustrate your answer.
37. (a) Sketch a cell that has a standard cell
potential of 0 V.
(b) Can the cell be operated as an electrolytic
cell? Explain.
38. If a redox reaction cannot create or destroy
electrons, how is it possible that the
balanced half-reactions for a redox reaction
may include different numbers of electrons?
39. (a) A friend in your class has difﬁculty
44. The two rocket booster engines used in a
recognizing disproportionation reactions.
Write a clear explanation for your friend
on how to recognize a disproportionation
reaction.
(b) Write a balanced chemical equation that
represents a disproportionation reaction.
40. (a) An electrolytic cell contains a standard
hydrogen electrode as the anode and another
standard half-cell. Is the standard reduction
potential for the half-reaction that occurs in
the second half-cell greater than or less than
0 V? Explain how you know.
(b) Will your answer for part (a) change if the
hydrogen electrode is the cathode of the
electrolytic cell? Explain.
41. Write a descriptive paragraph to compare the
reactions that occur in a Downs cell and a
chlor-alkali cell. Describe the similarities and
differences.
42. One of your classmates is having trouble
understanding some of the main concepts in
this unit. Use your own words to write an
explanation for each of the following concepts.
Include any diagrams or examples that will
help to make the concepts clear to your
classmate.
(a) oxidation and reduction
(b) galvanic and electrolytic cells
Making Connections
43. Black-and-white photographic ﬁlm contains
silver bromide. When exposed to light, silver
bromide decomposes in a redox reaction. Silver
ions are reduced to silver metal, and bromide
ions are oxidized to bromine atoms. The
brighter the light that hits the ﬁlm, the greater
is the decomposition. When the ﬁlm is
developed, the parts of the ﬁlm that contain
the most silver metal produce the darkest
regions on the negative. In other words, the
brightest parts of the photographed scene give
the darkest parts of the image on the negative.
High-speed black-and-white ﬁlm uses silver
iodide in place of silver bromide. Do you think
that silver iodide is more sensitive or less
sensitive to light than silver bromide? Explain.
space shuttle launch contain a solid mixture
of aluminum and ammonium perchlorate.
The products of the reaction after ignition are
aluminum oxide and ammonium chloride.
(a) Write a balanced chemical equation for this
reaction, and identify the oxidizing agent
and reducing agent.
(b) The other four engines used in a space
shuttle launch use the redox reaction of
liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen to form
water vapour. Write a balanced chemical
equation for this reaction.
(c) Which of the reactions described in parts
(a) and (b) do you think is the more
environmentally friendly reaction? Explain.
45. Every year, corrosion is responsible for the
failure of many thousands of water mains.
These are the pipes that transport water to
Canadian homes and businesses. Research and
describe the economic, environmental, health,
and safety issues associated with rupture and
repair of water mains. Describe the methods
that are being used to improve the situation.
46. Since the corrosion of iron is such an
expensive problem, why do you think that
iron is still used for so many purposes?
47. Industrial plants that make use of
electrochemical processes are often located
close to sources of hydroelectricity. Research
and identify an example in Ontario. Write a
brief description of what the plant produces
and how it produces it.
C O U R S E
C H A L L E N G E
The Chemistry of Human Health
Consider the following points as you plan your Chemistry
Course Challenge:
• How have improvements in battery technology
beneﬁtted people with heart problems?
• How can titration be used to monitor a redox
reaction?
Unit 5 Review • MHR 563
C O U R S E   C H A L L E N G E
Assessment
Before beginning this performance task, work with
your class to design a process rubric and a product
rubric. (Alternatively, your teacher may provide you
with rubrics.)
(cid:2) Assess yourself on your ability to transfer the
concepts you learned in this course to the new
contexts of the Course Challenge.
(cid:2) Assess yourself on your ability to apply the skills
and strategies of scientiﬁc inquiry, objective
observation, and research reporting.
(cid:2) Assess yourself on how well you present and
communicate your experimental and research
results to your audience.
(cid:2) Assess your ability to propose practical solutions
to problems, based on science and technology.
The Chemistry of Human Health
It is tempting to think of science as a clearly
deﬁned set of disciplines, such as chemistry,
physics, and biology. This is not wholly accurate,
however. Scientiﬁc disciplines blend and overlap.
Therefore, scientists need to know what is hap-
pening in relevant areas of different disciplines.
For example, if you are studying physics, you
have probably noticed that both chemists and
physicists contributed to the development of
the atomic theory. The physicists built on the
discoveries of the chemists, and vice versa.
The health sciences are a group of disciplines
that draw upon chemistry, physics, and biology.
How does chemistry relate to the health sciences?
Knowing about molecular structure and function
allows biochemists to synthesize medicinal com-
pounds on a large scale, and even to design new
molecules to ﬁght diseases and their symptoms.
Understanding the chemical role of nutrients,
vitamins, and minerals in the body helps
564 MHR • Course Challenge
dieticians develop healthy dietary guidelines.
Knowing the properties of materials helps
researchers develop new materials and devices—
such as titanium joints, plastic heart valves, and
artiﬁcial skin— to repair, maintain, and replace
parts of the human body.
The developments just described, and many
others, are possible because health scientists
and chemists communicate by writing books,
journal articles, and letters. They use the Internet
to post results and hold discussions. They also
communicate face-to-face by giving presentations
and lectures, and by chatting over coffee. A
scientiﬁc conference is the perfect place for such
face-to-face interactions.
In this Course Challenge, you will investigate
different facets of the intersection of chemistry
with the health sciences. Then you will share your
ﬁndings and learn from your peers in a conference
about the chemistry of human health.
Part 1: The Citric Acid Cycle
Metabolism is a complex series of interdependent organic reactions that
power the body by breaking down food molecules to provide energy. An
important part of human metabolism is the breakdown of glucose to pro-
vide energy for the body. First, a metabolic process called glycolysis
breaks down glucose into two molecules of pyruvate, C3H4O3. The
pyruvate molecules then react with a chemical species called coenzyme
A, CoA, to form acetyl CoA. Acetyl CoA reacts with oxaloacetic acid
to begin the metabolic cycle called the citric acid cycle, shown in the
diagram below. The citric acid cycle is also called the Krebs cycle, after its
discoverer, Hans Krebs.
P r e v i e w
Part 1 draws upon the skills and
concepts you learned in Unit 1.
You will use your understanding
of organic molecules and their
reactions to analyze a metabolic
cycle.
acetyl CoA
O
C
CH3
COOH
C
O
NAD+
NADH
CH2
CoA
1
COOH
HO
C
H
CH2
COOH
malic
acid
COOH
oxaloacetic
acid
8
Citric Acid Cycle
7
COOH
CH
HC
fumaric
acid
H2O
COOH
succinyl CoA
FADH2
6
COOH
CH2
CH2
CoA
FAD
COOH
succinic
acid
5
S
CoA
O
C
CH2
CH2
CoA
citric acid
COOH
CH2
HO
C
COOH
CH2
COOH
2
isocitric acid
COOH
CH2
H
HO
C
C
COOH
H
COOH
ketoglutaric
acid
COOH
3
NAD+
CH2
CH2
OC
COOH
CoA
4
NADH
CO2
COOH
NAD+
GTP
CO2
GDP + P
NADH
This diagram shows the citric acid cycle. For simplicity, the molecules in the citric
acid cycle are represented here as acids. In the body, they are actually present as ions.
For example, citric acid is present as citrate ions.
Challenge
Use the diagram of the citric acid cycle to answer the following questions.
1
K/U
Examine the acids that are formed in each step of the citric acid
cycle (do not include succinyl CoA). Redraw the acids. Then circle and
identify the functional groups that are present on each acid.
PROBLEM TIP
You may have learned about
NAD+, GDP, and FAD in a
biology course. For your
purposes, assume that they
represent chemical species
used as electron acceptors,
which are later used by the
body to produce energy.
The Chemistry of Human Health • MHR 565
2
K/U
Identify the steps in the citric acid cycle that ﬁt the following
descriptions.
(a) steps that are oxidations
(b) one step that combines addition, reduction, and condensation
reactions
(c) steps that are elimination reactions
(d) one step that is an isomerism
(e) one step that involves the addition of water
3
4
I
Think about the mechanism of the reaction of acetyl CoA with
oxaloacetate. Which carbons in the citric acid molecule do you think
are likely the carbons that were added from acetyl CoA? Justify your
answer.
K/U
In the citric acid cycle, every step that is an oxidation reaction
also produces energy, until the most oxidized form of carbon leaves
the cycle as carbon dioxide. Which steps in the cycle produce energy?
5
C
Create a large version of the citric acid cycle. You may want to
create a large bulletin-board display or a hanging mobile, using
three-dimensional molecular models. Whatever the format of your cit-
ric acid cycle, make sure that it is completely and accurately labelled.
Think and Research
1
MC
Ketoacidosis is a dangerous condition that is characterized by the
acidiﬁcation of the blood and an acetone odour on the breath. The
condition occurs when levels of oxaloacetic acid for the citric acid
cycle are low. This leads to a buildup of acetyl CoA molecules,
which the liver metabolizes to produce acidic ketone bodies. Since
carbohydrates are the main source of oxaloacetic acid in the body,
high-protein, low-carbohydrate diets have been linked to ketoacidosis.
(a) Why do people follow these diets? Do you think the beneﬁts of these
diets justify the risks?
(b) Research the connections between the citric acid cycle, ketoacidosis,
and high-protein, low-carbohydrate diets. Present your ﬁndings as a
web page or poster.
Part 2: Materials for Replacing Human Body Parts
Science has come a long way since wooden “pegs” were used to replace
lost legs. Prosthetics are now made of lightweight, long-lasting materials.
Engineers have developed replacement joints that function in much the
same way as the original human joints. Understanding the properties of
materials is key to developing prosthetics that function well with living
human bodies, are relatively comfortable, and last a long time.
Challenge
Design a replacement joint or bone, or a prosthetic limb, using the
following questions to guide you.
1
K/U
Titanium is a metal that is often used in joint and bone
replacement.
PROBLEM TIP
Recall, from your previous
courses, that isomers are
molecules that have the
same formula but different
arrangements of atoms. An
isomerism occurs when a
molecule reacts to form one
of its isomers.
P r e v i e w
Part 2 draws upon the skills and
concepts you learned in Unit 2.
You will use your understanding
of molecular structure and
properties to suggest appropriate
materials for human prosthetics
(artiﬁcial body parts).
566 MHR • Course Challenge
(a) Write the electron conﬁguration of titanium.
(b) What are some properties of titanium?
(c) Why is titanium a suitable metal for replacing human joints and
bones?
(d) A titanium alloy, rather than pure titanium, is often used as the
material for replacement joints and bones. Suggest a reason why
an alloy is used.
2
I
Build a replacement joint or bone out of household materials.
Create an information kit that explains why you chose the materials
you did. For example, you will want to describe each material’s
reactivity, strength, and density, as well as other properties. Describe
any problems you foresee with your replacement part. Will it react
with ﬂuids in the body? Will it wear out quickly? (Instead of building a
replacement bone or joint, you may choose to create a prosthetic limb.)
3
I
Conduct some tests on the materials you used for your replacement
part to determine or conﬁrm their physical properties. Relate the
properties of each material to the type of bonding present. Obtain
your teacher’s permission before conducting your tests.
4
MC
Use print and electronic resources to ﬁnd out what kinds of
materials are being used and developed for use as prosthetic limbs.
Be sure to explain what properties make each material suitable for its
use. How does the chemical bonding in each material relate to its prop-
erties? What are the risks and beneﬁts associated with the materials?
Think and Research
1
C
Engineers use the macroscopic properties of matter when they
design prosthetic limbs. Designing instruments for medical diagnosis,
on the other hand, depends on knowing about the structure of matter
at the atomic level. Use print and electronic resources to research the
development, use, underlying theory, and function of the instruments
that are used for medical diagnosis. Use your knowledge of atomic
structure to explain how each instrument works. Choose one of the
following areas of medical diagnosis: infrared spectroscopy, nuclear
magnetic resonance spectroscopy, X-rays, nuclear medicine,
optometrists’ instruments, or magnetic resonance imaging. What
contributions have Canadian scientists made to this area of medical
diagnosis? Present your ﬁndings as a talk, supported by a slide show
or overhead transparencies.
Part 3: The Enzyme Catalase
Enzymes control the rate of nearly every reaction in your body. They are
absolutely essential for the efﬁcient functioning of the chemical processes
that take place continuously and keep the human body alive and healthy.
Challenge
The enzyme catalase is contained in human, animal, and plant tissues.
Investigate catalase, and compare its action with the actions of several
inorganic catalysts.
1
K/U
Catalase is the enzyme that is responsible for the decomposition
of hydrogen peroxide into water and oxygen gas.
This photo shows the components
of an artiﬁcial hip joint.
Technology
L I N K
Use print and electronic
resources to study the histori-
cal use of prosthetic limbs.
Why were certain materials
chosen in the past? What
problems did people have with
materials that were used as
prosthetics? How did they
attempt to overcome these
problems?
P r e v i e w
Part 3 draws upon the skills and
concepts you learned in Unit 3.
You will use your understanding
of catalysis and energy to analyze
a reaction that is catalyzed by an
enzyme.
The Chemistry of Human Health • MHR 567
(a) Write the balanced chemical equation for this reaction.
(b) What is the enthalpy change for this reaction? Write a
thermochemical equation.
(c) How does catalase affect the enthalpy change of this reaction? Use a
diagram to illustrate your answer.
(d) How does catalase affect the activation energy of this reaction? Use a
diagram to illustrate your answer.
2
I
Design an experiment that uses the technique of downward
displacement to test the efﬁciency of enzymes and inorganic catalysts
in the decomposition of 6% hydrogen peroxide, H2O2. (If 6% H2O2
is unavailable, use 3% H2O2). Test the catalytic ability of the following
materials: manganese(IV) oxide, iron(III) chloride, potato, apple,
banana, papaya, and pineapple, as well as uncooked meat, ﬁsh,
and liver. Conduct several trials. For the manganese(IV) oxide and
iron(III) chloride catalysts, determine the rates of reaction and graph
the results. Do both catalyzed reactions have the same rate law?
CAUTION
6% hydrogen peroxide is reactive and can burn your skin.
Outline safety precautions in your procedure, and get your teacher’s
permission before proceeding.
3
I
Perform the investigation a second time, but boil the foods for
10 min before adding the hydrogen peroxide. (Do not boil the inorganic
catalysts or the hydrogen peroxide.) Get your teacher’s approval before
proceeding. Explain your results.
4
C
Prepare a detailed report to share your ﬁndings.
Think and Research
1
MC
Hydrogen peroxide is often used to sterilize wounds. The ﬁzzing
that occurs is caused by catalase in the blood acting on the hydrogen
peroxide. Bacteria that do not have catalase to disable the hydrogen
peroxide are killed by this chemical. Humans are protected by the
presence of catalase. Not all bacteria are killed by hydrogen peroxide,
however, because some bacteria do have catalase.
(a) Suggest a laboratory procedure that a researcher could use to classify
species of bacteria as catalase-positive or catalase-negative.
(b) Use print and electronic resources to ﬁnd three dangerous species of
bacteria that are catalase-positive and three dangerous species that
are catalase-negative. Propose safe ways to guard against both types.
Part 4: Blood and Le Châtelier’s Principle
In Unit 4, you learned that buffers resist changes in pH. Buffer systems are
extremely important to human health, since many of the life-sustaining
reactions in the body depend on a narrow pH range to proceed effectively.
The principal buffer system in blood serum is based on the equilibri-
um between carbonic acid, H2CO3(aq) , and the hydrogen carbonate ion,
−. Carbonic acid is unstable, however. It is also in equilibrium with
HCO3
carbon dioxide. Therefore, a second equilibrium reaction is involved in
the hydrogen carbonate buffer system in the blood: the reaction between
carbon dioxide and water to produce carbonic acid, and its reverse. The
two equilibrium reactions are summarized below.
CO2(aq) + 2H2O((cid:2))
(cid:3)(cid:4) H2CO3(aq) + H2O((cid:2))
(cid:3)(cid:4) HCO3
(aq) + H3O+
−
(aq)
P r e v i e w
Part 4 draws upon the skills and
concepts you learned in Unit 4.
You will use your understanding of
equilibrium to analyze the buffer
system in blood serum.
568 MHR • Course Challenge
Challenge
Refer to the description of the hydrogen carbonate buffer system in blood
serum to answer questions 1 and 2. Then use questions 3 and 4 to design
an investigation to ﬁnd out how a buffer system resists changes in pH.
1
K/U
One of the differences between a buffer system in the body and a
simple buffer system in a lab is that the body can enhance the buffer’s
power to resist pH changes. For example, the lungs regulate the amount
of carbon dioxide that enters and leaves the body. The kidneys help
to regulate the pH of blood in several ways, such as increasing or
decreasing excretion of hydronium ions, H3O+, in urine. Explain how
the kidneys might respond to the following conditions.
(a) The blood pH rises to 7.48.
(b) The blood pH sinks to 7.33.
2
I
Healthy blood has a pH of 7.4. Estimate the ratio of [CO2] to
−] in the blood. Use the following assumptions and information
[HCO3
to help you.
• Assume that carbonic acid and hydrogen carbonate ions are the only
contributors to blood pH.
• Use Ka = 4.3 × 10−7 for H2CO3 .
• To express your answer in terms of CO2, assume that all
undissociated carbonic acid is present as dissolved CO2.
3
I
Because blood is buffered, it resists changes in pH. To model
blood’s resistance to changes in pH, design an investigation that
compares the effects of adding an acid or a base to buffered and
non-buffered systems. Your teacher will tell you what materials you
may use. The following tips and suggestions will help you get started.
• You can prepare a simple buffer system by mixing equal volumes
of 0.1 mol/L acetic acid, CH3COOH, and 0.1 mol/L sodium acetate,
NaCH3COO. Alternatively, you may wish to try more closely
simulating the buffer system in blood. Use soda water, which
contains dissolved CO2, and sodium hydrogen carbonate (baking
soda), NaHCO3. Your teacher may suggest other buffer systems.
• Consider carrying out your investigation on the microscale.
• You will need to decide how to monitor pH changes. You may
choose to use a pH meter or a universal indicator, for example.
• Decide what type and concentration of acid and base you will add to
your systems. Dilute solutions of strong acids and bases work well.
• Include a step in which you determine the initial pH of your buffer
solution and the unbuffered system.
• Include all appropriate safety precautions.
Obtain your teacher’s approval for your procedure, and carry out your
investigation.
4
C
Prepare a detailed report to communicate your ﬁndings. Be sure to
compare and contrast the system you used in your investigation with
the carbonic acid/carbonate buffer system in the blood. How are the
systems similar? How are they different?
C H E M
FA C T
Chemists sometimes simplify
calculations that involve
complex systems in order to
make an estimate. They do
this by making simplifying
assumptions. You will try
this technique for yourself in
Challenge question 2.
Panic attacks or illness can
bring on hyperventilation—
fast and heavy breathing.
• When hyperventilation
occurs, large quantities
of carbon dioxide are
removed from the blood.
What effect does
hyperventilation have on
the pH of the blood?
• Suppose that your friend
is hyperventilating. You
tell your friend to breathe
from a paper bag. Explain
why this technique helps.
The Chemistry of Human Health • MHR 569
Think and Research
1
MC
Respiratory acidosis occurs when someone has difﬁculty
breathing, as in an asthma attack, or when someone is in an area
with insufﬁcient ventilation. Symptoms of acidosis include fainting
and depression of the nervous system.
(a) Based on the name of the condition, what do you think happens to
the pH of the blood in respiratory acidosis?
(b) Explain why insufﬁcient ventilation or breathing difﬁculties lead to
respiratory acidosis. Refer to the carbonic acid/hydrogen carbonate
buffer system in your answer.
(c) To help maintain the pH of the blood, the kidneys can increase
− into the blood. They can also
or decrease reabsorption of HCO3
decrease or increase the excretion of H3O+ ions. How would the
kidneys respond to respiratory acidosis? Explain your answer.
(d) Suggest ways that you could help someone who was suffering from
respiratory acidosis as a result of having been in an area with
insufﬁcient ventilation.
Part 5: Vitamin C—An Important Antioxidant
Oxygen and other oxidizing agents can react harmfully with your body.
Vitamin C acts as an antioxidant. It is very easily oxidized, so it reacts
with oxidizing agents, preventing them from reacting with other
important molecules in the body. Vitamin C is relatively stable when
it is oxidized. Therefore, it does not propagate a harmful series of oxida-
tion reactions. The Chemistry Bulletin in Unit 5 explains the possible
connection between oxidizing agents and aging.
One way to determine the vitamin C content of a sample is to titrate
it with an iodine/iodide solution. The diagram below shows the reaction
involved.
O
O
H
C
C
C
C
CH
OH
HO
OH
−
+  I3
CH2OH
O
O
H
C
C
C
C
CH
O
O
OH
CH2OH
+  2H+ + 3I−
ascorbic acid (vitamin C)
dehydroascorbic acid
In the iodine solution, iodine, I2, and iodide, I−, ions are in equilibrium
with triiodide, as shown below.
I2 + I− (cid:3)(cid:4) I3
Molecular iodine is a deep violet-red colour. Iodine ions are colourless.
Thus, when an antioxidant reduces the iodine molecules in a solution, the
iodine colour disappears completely.
−
Challenge
In this Challenge, you will design a titration to compare the vitamin C
content of various samples. Your teacher will tell you what reactants are
available for you to use in your titration.
P r e v i e w
Part 5 draws upon the skills and
concepts you learned in Unit 5.
You will use your understanding
of redox reactions to design a
titration for vitamin C, an
antioxidant.
C H E M
FA C T
Often, to make the endpoint
of an iodine titration more
obvious, an indicator solution
that contains starch is added
to the solution being titrated.
Starch forms a deep blue com-
−, but it is
plex with triiodide, I3
colourless with I−. As long as
there is unreacted vitamin C in
solution, no triiodide ions will
be present in solution.
Therefore, the blue colour will
appear only at the endpoint.
570 MHR • Course Challenge
1
I
Iodine solutions may be used to titrate solutions that contain
antioxidants, such as vitamin C.
(a) In storage, the concentration of iodine in solution decreases fairly
quickly over time. Why do you think this happens?
(b) Because the iodine solution’s concentration is not stable, it should be
standardized frequently. To standardize an iodine solution, use it to
titrate a solution that contains a known quantity of vitamin C. Then
determine what volume of iodine solution is needed to react with
the known quantity of vitamin C. Explain how you would stand-
ardize a solution of iodine using vitamin C tablets from a pharmacy.
(c) To standardize iodine using vitamin C tablets, you should use fresh
tablets. Explain why.
2
I
Design a titration that uses an iodine solution to determine and
compare the concentration of vitamin C in a variety of fresh fruit
juices. You may ﬁnd it helpful to research appropriate procedures on
the Internet. Include a method for standardizing the iodine solution.
(See Challenge question 1.) Make sure that you list all the safety
precautions you will use in your titration. Check your procedure
with your teacher, and then carry out your titration.
3
4
C
Prepare a detailed report to communicate your results. Include the
half-reaction for iodine in your discussion of the titration.
K/U
If you titrate orange juice that has been exposed to the air for
a week, will the vitamin C concentration be different from the vitamin
C concentration in fresh juice? If so, will it decrease or increase?
Explain your prediction, in terms of redox reactions.
5
I
If time permits, extend your investigation to compare the vitamin C
content of fresh juice and juice that has been left exposed to air for
varying periods of time. Ask your teacher to approve your procedure
before carrying out this extension.
6
C
A chemist adds a few drops of deep violet-red iodine solution to
a vitamin C tablet. The iodine solution quickly becomes colourless.
Then the chemist adds a solution that contains chlorine, Cl2. The
chemist observes that the violet-red colour of the iodine reappears.
Explain the chemist’s observations, in terms of redox reactions.
Think and Research
1
MC
A reliable supply of fresh, nutritious food is essential to human
health. To this end, the food industry has developed different types
of food additives to keep food fresh longer. Numerous reactions are
responsible for food spoilage. For example, a food may become stale
and rancid due to the oxidation of the molecules in the food by oxygen
in the air.
(a) Based on the information above, explain why vitamin C (ascorbic
acid) is often added to foods, such as bread.
(b) Butylated hydroxyl toluene (BHT) is another compound that is added
to food to prevent spoilage. Find out about BHT in a library or on the
Internet. Draw its structure. How does BHT work to preserve food?
What type of spoilage does it prevent? Are there risks or drawbacks
to using BHT? How does adding BHT to products such as bread
affect the cost of the product? Present your ﬁndings as a poster.
Web
L I N K
www.mcgrawhill.ca/links/
chemistry12
Strong oxidizing agents create
chemical species called free
radicals. Researchers suggest
that free radicals are responsi-
ble for reactions that lead to
food spoilage, aging, and can-
cer. Antioxidants work by
“deactivating” free radicals.
Find out more about the
chemical nature of free
radicals and their reactions.
Also ﬁnd out how antioxidants
interact with them. To begin
your research, go to the web
site above and click on Web
Links.
The Chemistry of Human Health • MHR 571
Part 6: Final Presentation
Present your research and laboratory investigation reports for one or more
sections of this Course Challenge at a conference called “The Chemistry of
Human Health.” Use various media to show your audience how chemical
processes affect each aspect of human health that you studied. Make sure
that you understand your topic well, and be prepared to answer questions
about your presentations and displays. As a class, discuss the following
questions before creating your presentations and displays.
• What purposes do professional conferences serve?
• How are conferences run?
• Who is your audience? For example, your audience might include
health professionals, the general public, or science students. Will you
invite other classes, your parents and guardians, and/or the public to
your conference?
• What form should the presentations take? The conference could include
some or all of the following:
– information booths
– posters, pamphlets, and handouts
– models, laboratory reports, and computer simulations
– formal presentations with slides or overhead transparencies
– demonstrations of experiments
– round-table discussions
– formal debates
– a conference web site
– a schedule brochure with presentation summaries
– a post-conference publication to summarize the information presented
Additional Topics
What other health-related challenges has chemistry helped scientists to
understand or solve? You may wish to go beyond the challenges listed in
Parts 1 to 5 of the Course Challenge and investigate other areas of human
health. Some suggestions are listed below.
Unit 1
• Researchers can use computer programs to test the geometry of many
molecular structures and determine their suitability for speciﬁc applica-
tions. For example, a specialized screen saver can check the shape of
hypothetical molecules based on their suitability for cancer treatment.
Anyone can upload the screen saver and use a computer’s idle time
to test molecules. Research this method, and write an article on the
success of computer-assisted research.
• Pyruvate carboxylase (also called PC) is an enzyme that converts
pyruvate to oxaloacetate (shown as oxaloacetic acid in the citric acid
cycle diagram). Pyruvate carboxylase deﬁciency is a genetic disorder
that is characterized by insufﬁcient quantities of pyruvate carboxylate in
the body. How do you think this disorder affects the citric acid cycle?
Use print and electronic resources to research pyruvate carboxylase
deﬁciency. Find out what its symptoms are, and how it affects the body
at the molecular level. Also ﬁnd out what percent of the population is
affected, and how the deﬁciency can be relieved. Present your ﬁndings
as an informative pamphlet. If possible, conduct an e-mail interview
with an expert on the disorder.
572 MHR • Course Challenge
• Use print and electronic resources to study compounds that have been
produced as diet aids, such as aspartame and olestra. How do these
compounds work? Are there drawbacks or risks involved in using these
compounds? Choose one compound, and conduct a risk-beneﬁt analysis.
Unit 2
• Watson and Crick’s discovery of the structure of DNA revolutionized
scientists’ understanding of heredity and genetics. Find out how Watson
and Crick showed that the structure of DNA is a double helix. How did
Rosalind Franklin’s work in X-ray crystallography play a role? Present
your ﬁndings as an annotated, illustrated time line.
• It is relatively straightforward to extract DNA from animal matter.
Research a procedure on the Internet. Obtain your teacher’s approval,
and then carry out the extraction. Use the concept of intermolecular
forces to explain how the extraction works.
Unit 3
• Human disorders and conditions are sometimes caused by the lack
of an enzyme. For example, lactose intolerance is caused by low
concentrations of lactase, an enzyme that breaks down lactose (the
sugar in milk). Find out about lactose intolerance or another condition
that is caused by a missing enzyme. How are the conditions diagnosed?
Have treatments been developed? How effective are the treatments?
Who suffers from the condition? How harmful is it?
• Researchers have used a specially designed calorimeter, called a human
calorimeter, to monitor the heat that is produced by metabolic reactions
in humans. Research the human calorimeters that are used to study
metabolic reactions. What are the design features of these calorimeters?
What factors do researchers need to take into account? Why are the
experiments with human calorimeters important? Design an investiga-
tion that incorporates the results of your research.
−, and hydrogen phosphate, HPO4
Unit 4
• In Part 4 of the Course Challenge, you looked at the carbonic acid/
hydrogen carbonate buffer system in the blood. Another important
buffer system in the body depends on the equilibrium between dihydro-
2−. Use print and
gen phosphate, H2PO4
electronic resources to learn where this buffer system is found in the
− and H2PO4
body and how the body regulates concentrations of H2PO4
• Acid indigestion, also known as “heartburn,” is caused by the excess
production of stomach acid. Eating a large meal may bring on acid
indigestion. Commercial antacids contain basic salts that neutralize the
excess acids. Design a titration experiment to test the effectiveness of
various brands of antacids.
2−.
Unit 5
• Using only materials that are available in your school chemistry
laboratory, design a pacemaker battery. Find out what voltage is appro-
priate for a pacemaker. Be sure to outline all design considerations.
For example, how large will the battery need to be? How long will it
last? Have your teacher approve your design. Then build your battery.
• Using print and electronic resources, research the work of Wilson
Greatbatch, the inventor of the implantable pacemaker. What
chemistry-related technological challenges did he face and overcome
as he perfected his device?
The Chemistry of Human Health • MHR 573
Appendix A
Answers to Selected and Numerical Chapter and Unit Review Questions
UNIT 1
Chapter 1
15. (a) 2-bromopropane
(c) pentanoic acid
(e) 5-ethyl-5,6-dimethyl-3-heptanone
(b) methoxypropane
(c) 3-methyl-1-pentanamine
(d) 5-ethyl-3,7,9-trimethyl-2-decanol
(e) butyl propanoate
(b) cyclopentanol
(d) ethyl propanoate
30. (a) 3-ethyl-4-methyl-1-hexene
16. (a) 3,5,7-trimethylcycloheptene
(b) 3-ethyl-2-hexanol
(c) 1-ethyl-4-methylbenzene
(d) 2-methylpentanoic acid
(e) N-ethyl-N-methyl-1-butanamine
(f) N-butylpropanamide
22. (a) either 2-methylhexanal or pentanal
(b) pentane
(c) 1,2-dimethylbenzene
(d) N-ethyl-N-methylpentanamide
(e) 2-methylpropanoic acid
23. 1-butanol, 2-butanol, 2-methyl-1-propanol,
1,1-dimethylethanol, 1-methoxypropane,
1-ethoxyethane, 2-methoxypropane
24. butanoic acid, 2-methylpropanoic acid,
methyl propanoate, ethyl ethanoate,
1-propyl methanoate, 2-propyl methanoate
(Note: Other isomers are possible that contain
hydroxyl and carbonyl groups, or alkoxy and
carbonyl groups, but these are beyond the scope
of this course.)
Chapter 2
10. (b) 1-bromopropane, 2-bromopropane
(c) 2-bromopropane
13. (a) propene
18. (a) 2,3-dibromobutane
(c) propanoic acid
(e) 3-methyl-2-butanone (f) methyl propanoate +
(b) 1-bromopentane + water
(d) propene + water
(g) pentane
20. (a) ethene
water
(h) ethanoic acid + ethanol
(b) 1-propanol
(d) 3-methyl-2-butanone
(c) bromine
(e) propanoic acid + 1-butanol
(f) butanal
(g) 2-ethyl-1-butanol,
(h) cyclobutanol
(i) 1-butene
2-ethylbutanal
Unit 1 Review
25. ethanoic acid
27. 3-ethyl-4-methylhexanal,
3-ethyl-4-methylhexanoic acid
28. (a) butanoic acid
(c) methyl pentanoate
(e) N-methylethanamine (f) 4,5-dimethylheptanal
(b) methanol
(d) 2-butanone
31. (a) 5-methyloctanoic acid
(b) N-ethyl-1-butanamine
(c) 6-ethyl-5-methyl-2-octyne
(d) butanamide
(e) 6-ethyl-7-methyl-4-decanone
(f) 2-ethyl-3-methylcyclohexanol
(g) 4,4,6,6-tetramethylheptanal
(h) 4-ethyl-3,5-dimethylcyclopentene
(i) N-ethyl-N-methylethanamide
(j) 3,6,7-trimethylcyclononanone
32. (a) 4-methyl-2-heptanone (b) 3,3-dimethylhexane
(c) 2,5-octanediol
36. (d) propyl methanoate + water
(e) 1-heptene + water
37. (b) decanoic acid + 1-propanol
38. (a) ethyne
(b) 1-chloro-2-methylpentane
(c) heptanoic acid + 1-butanol
(d) 2-methylpropanoic acid
(e) 3-ethyl-4,4-dimethyl-2-pentanol
UNIT 2
Chapter 3
7. 3p orbital in third energy level
8. S ground state: 1s22s22p63s23p4;
excited: 1s22s22p63s23p34s1
9. (a) Na, smaller Zeff
(b) K, more energy levels
(c) Sr, more energy levels (d) Ga more energy levels
(f) Br, more energy levels
(e) O, smaller Zeff
10. U, f block, inner transition; Zr, d block, transition;
Se, p block, main group; Dy, f block, inner transition;
Kr, p block, main group; Rb, s block, main group;
Re, d block, transition; Sr, s block, main group
11. Na2O, K2O, MgO, CaO, Al2O3, Ga2O3, SiO2, GeO2
12. (a) 18
15. (a) Mg: 1s22s22p63s2
(c) 4
(b) Cl: 1s22s22p63s23p5
(b) 15
(d) inﬁnite
(c) Mn: 1s22s22p63s23p64s23d5
(d) Y: 1s22s22p63s23p64s23d104p65s24d1
18. 8s2, n = 8, l = 0
19. (a) Sr has greater n but K has a smaller Zeff
(b) both have 4s2 valence energy level
(c) Ca has a greater n but also a greater IE1.
21. (a) Rb
23. (a) Al: 1s22s22p63s23p1; Sc: 1s22s22p63s23p64s23d1
(c) Mg
(d) As
(b) Ti
574 MHR • Appendix A
(b) 3+
Chapter 4
• •
Br•
•
•
•
3. (a)
H
C
• •
• •
Br •
•
• •
(b)
S •
SH
•
• •
39.
−
• •
•
• O
O
• •
• •
•
•
Br •
•
• •
40. dipole;
• •
•
• O
O
• •
• •
−
H
−
H
2+
Ba
O•
•
•
•
• •
• •
•
• F
• •
•
•F
• •
P
•
•
F •
•
• •
6. (a) dipole-dipole and dispersion forces
(b) ionic bonds
(c) metallic bonds
(d) dispersion forces
7. Cs, S, Kr, O2
8. H2O because of large EN difference between atoms
and small size of O
41. tetrahedral; bond dipoles for C(cid:2)H shorter than for
C(cid:2)Cl
42. neither has expanded valence level;
• •
O•
•
•
•
−
• •
O•
•
•
•
• •
• •
• •
•
• O
• •
•
•O
• •
Cl
O •
•
• •
•
•
•
•
S
O •
•
• •
•
•Cl
• •
9.
•
•
13. C3H8 (dispersion forces), C2H5OH (dispersion forces
and hydrogen bonding), K (metallic bonding), SiO2
(network solid)
14. all tetrahedral; CCl4 is non-polar; CH3Cl and CH2Cl2
both polar with dipole-dipole forces.
16. (a) bent
(b) octahedral
(c) trigonal pyramidal
17. (a) Cl2
19. linear with VSEPR notation AX2E3 (e.g., XeF2) or
square planar with notation AX4E2 (e.g., XeF4).
(b) BrCl
20. non-polar
24. no; 7 pairs of electrons in the valence shell
26. SF4: seesaw shape and polar; SiF4: tetrahedral shape
and non-polar
31. N2H4 hydrogen bonding, greater dispersion forces
(18 electrons) higher boiling point; C2H4 lower
dispersion forces (10 electrons)
Unit 2 Review
13. N: 1s22s22p3; P: [Ne]3s23p3; As: [Ar]3d104s24p3
14. Mg, Na, Ca, K
15. AX2E or AX2E2
17. (a) Rb < K < Na < Li
29. titanium
30. group 14 (IVA)
(b) Li < Be < B < C
31. LiBr
32. (a) As
(b) P
(c) Be
36. (a) N more electrongative (b) F more electronegative
(c) Cl more electronegative
37. (a) Cl(cid:2)Cl < Br(cid:2)Cl < Cl(cid:2)F
(b) Si(cid:2)Si < S(cid:2)Cl < P(cid:2)Cl < Si(cid:2)Cl (except for
non-polar Cl(cid:2)Cl and Si(cid:2)Si, left atom in each
bond pair has partial positive charge, and right
atom has partial negative charge)
38. trigonal pyramidal or T-shaped, but not trigonal
planar
43. 1s22s22p63p1
44. (a) n = 2, l = 0, ml = 0, ms = + 1
2
(b) n = 3, l = 1, ml = 1, ms = − 1
2
48. (a) shiny, malleable, conductor of heat and elec-
tricity, fairly high melting (or boiling) point
(b) form cations by giving up electrons, form basic
oxides when dissolved in water
49. (b) K (difference between I.E.1 and I.E.2); can infer the
number of valence electrons because of the size of
the I.E. difference)
UNIT 3
Chapter 5
8. (a) 60.0˚C
9. (a) −2225 kJ/mol
10. −14.5 kJ/g; −869 kJ/mol
11. +336.6 kJ
12. 466 kJ
13. 228 kJ
14. (b) −188 kJ/mol
15. 256 kJ
16. (a) −2657 kJ
(b) 50.0˚C
(c) 4.6 × 102 kJ
(b) −1428.4 kJ/mol; −47.5 kJ/g
21. (b) 2 kJ
(b) 3.40 × 10−2 g
Chapter 6
7. (a) 4.00 × 10−4 mol/(L • s)
8. (a) k = 0.010 s −1; t1/2 = 69 s
10. 14.2 s
11. (b) k = 2.58 × 10 −28 L/(mol • s)
12. (a) rate = k[A]2[B]
(b) third order
(c) k = 625 L2/(s • mol2)
13. (a) rate = k[Hg2Cl2][C2O4
2−]2
(b) k = 1.34 × 10−3 L2/(mol2
• s)
(c) rate = 1.20 × 10−6 mol/(L • s)
Appendix A • MHR 575
(b) 0.20
(b) 0.80
14. (a) 0.80
15. (a) 0.20
16. (a) −12.1 kJ/mol
Unit 3 Review
27. (a) 47 kJ/mol
29. 3.6 L
30. (b) 82.5 kJ
31. −747.6 kJ
38. (b) ~ − 6800 kJ/mol
UNIT 4
Chapter 7
7. decrease in temperature
8. left
10. [H2] = 5.6 × 10−4 mol/L ; [HI] = 1.12 × 10−3 mol/L
11. [SO3] = 0.13 mol/L
12. 37.4 g ethyl propanoate
13. [CO] = [H2O] = 0.013 mol/L;
[H2] = [CO2] = 0.037 mol/L
14. Kc = 2.5 × 10−4
16. (a) O2(g) + 4HCl(g) → 2H2O(g) + 2Cl2(g)
(b) 1.7 × 10−2
17. (a) SO3(g) + 6HF(g) → SF6(g) + 3H2O(g)
19. (a) 4NH3(g) + 5O2(g) → 4NO(g) + 6H2O(g)
(b) 0.26
24. 1.1 × 10−17 mol/L; pollution sources
26. left; right; left; no effect; at constant volume, no effect
Chapter 8
2. (a) weak acid
(c) weak base
3. (a) O2−
(c) H2CO3
(b) weak acid
(d) weak base
(b) NH4
(d) CO3
+
2−
4. (a) F
5. 2.0 mol/L HClO4 < 0.02 mol/L HCl <
(b) T
(c) T
0.20 mol/L CH3COOH < 2.0 mol/L NaCl
6. (a) SO4
2−
(c) HPO4
2−
2−
(b) S2−
(d) CO3
− = 6.5 × 10−8
(aq);
7. (a) HS− = 1.0 × 10−19; HSO3
(b) HS− + H2O((cid:2))
−
(cid:3)(cid:4) H2S(aq) + OH−
HSO3
(aq) + H2O((cid:2))
(cid:3)(cid:4) H2SO3(aq) + OH−
(c) K b for HS− = 1.1 × 10−7; Kb for HSO−
3
(d) HS−
= 7.7 × 10−13
14. (a) pH = 2.10; 0.79% dissociation
(b) pH = 2.60; 2.5% dissociation
(c) pH = 3.12; 7.6% dissociation
(b) OCl−, 3.45 × 10−7
15. (a) pH = 4.36; 0.067%
16. pH = 9.10
17. pH = 8.07
18. Ka = 1.1 × 10−3
19. HBrO < HBrO2 < HBrO3 < HBrO4; opposite order for
conjugate bases
20. H2O < H2S < CH3COOH < HBrO2
22. 4.0 × 10−6
23. (b) 2.6 × 10−10
26. 2.5 × 10−6 mol/L; 12:1
Chapter 9
1. (a) NH4Cl
7. (a) (NH4)2SO4; NH4Br; Cu(NO3)2
(b) KHSO4
(c) NaHPO4 (d) Al(NO3)3
(b) KHS; LiCN; Ca(NO2)2
12. (a) Ksp = [Cu+][Br−]
(c) Ksp = [Ni2+][OH−]2
(e) Ksp = [Mg2+][NH4
(b) Ksp = [Ca2+][CrO4
(d) Ksp = [Mg2+]3[PO4
3−]
+][PO4
(aq) + H2O(l) ↔ H3O+
(aq) + HPO4
(aq)
2−
−
2−]
3−]2
15. H2PO4
18. NaI since [I−]2
20. [Pb2+]:[Ba2+] = 130:1
21. 7.7 × 10−9 mol/L
22. 6.1 × 10−9 mol/L
25. (a) 19.44 mL
(b) 3.29%
(c) steps 1 and 4
26. AgCl, lower Ksp
27. BaSO4
29. (a) CH3COOAg(s)
(cid:3)(cid:4) Ag+
(aq) + CH3COO−
(aq)
(b) 23.3 g
(c) as Cu reacts, solid dissolves to replace the Ag+
30. (a) 41.7 mL
(b) 8.86
(c) phenolphthalein
31. 4.74
Unit 4 Review
15. 6.9 × 10−2
17. 0.16
18.
[N2(g)][H2(g)]3
[NH3(g)]2
19. 6 × 103
20. (a) HCO3
−
(aq) + HPO4
−
2−
(aq) B1 = CO3
(aq)
(cid:3)(cid:4) CO3
2−
(b) A1 = HCO3
−
2−
(aq) A2 = H2PO4
(aq)
(aq) + H2PO4
−
(aq)
B2 = HPO4
−
(aq) > Ka for HCO3
−
(aq)
(aq)
10. (a) number of O atoms bonded to central atom;
(c) reactants since K a for H2PO4
−
number of H
(b) HBrO3, H2SO3, HClO3, HClO4
11. 2
12. 0.300 mol/L
13. 2.52
576 MHR • Appendix A
21. 2.4
22. 12.268
23. [H3O+
24. 0.0008
(aq)] = 1.74 × 10−3 mol/L,
[OH−] = 5.75 × 10−12 mol/L, pH = 2.76, pOH = 11.24
2−
(aq) + CO3
(aq) → Ag2CO3(s)
25. 2Ag+
26. 8.62 × 10−6 mol/L
28. 1.6 × 10−5 g
29. remove CO2, increase temperature
30. (b) [PCl5] = 0.060 mol/L. [PCl3] = 0.38 mol/L,
[Cl2] = 0.16 mol/L
31. (a) 1.6 × 10−5
32. NaOH(s) → Na+
+
(aq) + OH−
NH4
CH3COOH(aq) + OH−
(aq) + H3O+
CH3COO−
(b) 11.14
(aq) + OH−
(aq); CH3COO−
(aq); NH3(aq) + H2O((cid:2)) →
(aq) + H2O((cid:2)) →
(aq); CH3COOH((cid:2)) + H2O((cid:2)) →
(aq)
33. Ksp = [Pb2+][Cl−]2 = 1.6 × 10−5
34. (a) decrease
(b) Qc > Kc, [NH3] decreases
35. 0.091 mol
36. 12.3%
37. (c) [XO2(g)] = 0.00985 mol/L; [O2(g)] = 0.992 mol/L
38. 7.26 × 10−6
39. 50 ppm = 1.4 × 10−3 mol/L ; precipitation occurs
47. (b) 7.74
UNIT 5
Chapter 10
1. (a) Zn(s) + 2AgNO3(aq) → Zn(NO3)2(aq) + 2Ag(s)
(b) 3CoBr2(aq) + 2Al(s) → 3Co(s) + 2AlBr3(aq)
(c) Cd(s) + SnCl2(aq) → CdCl2(aq) + Sn(s)
2. (a) Zn(s) + 2Ag+
(aq) + 2NO3
Zn(s) + 2Ag+
(b) 3Co2+
(aq) → Zn2+
(aq) + 6Br−
(aq) + 2Al(s) →
3Co2+
(c) Cd(s) + Sn2+
(aq) + 2Al(s) → 3Co(s) + 2Al3+
(aq) + 2Cl−
(aq) →
−
(aq) →
Zn2+
(aq) + 2Ag(s)
(aq) + 2NO3
−
(aq) + 2Ag(s)
3Co(s) + 2Al3+
(aq)
(aq) + 6Br−
(aq)
Cd2+
(aq) + 2Cl−
(aq) + Sn(s)
Cd(s) + Sn2+
(aq) → Cd2+
(aq) + Sn(s)
3. (a) oxidizing agent: Ag+; reducing agent: Zn
(b) oxidizing agent: Co2+; reducing agent: Al
(c) oxidizing agent: Sn2+; reducing agent: Cd
4. (a) oxidation half-reaction: Zn → Zn2+ + 2e−
reduction half-reaction: Ag+ + e− → Ag
(b) oxidation half-reaction: Al → Al3+ + 3e−
reduction half-reaction: Co2+ + 2e− → Co
(c) oxidation half-reaction: Cd → Cd2+ + 2e−
reduction half-reaction: Sn2+ + 2e− → Sn
5. (a) metallic element
(b) non-metallic element
(c) non-metallic element
(d) metallic element
6. (a) Ba = +2; Cl = −1
(b) C = +4; S = −2
(c) Xe = +4; F = −1
7. (a) Ba +2; H −1
(b) Al +3; C −4
(c) K +1; C +2; N −3
(d) Li +1; N +3; O −2
(e) N −3; H +1; C +3; O −2 (j) S +2.5; O −2
(f) S 0
(g) As +3; O −2
(h) V +5; O −2
(i) Xe +6; O −2; F −1
−
8. ClO2
9. (a) yes; oxidizing agent: O2; reducing agent: C6H6
(b) no
(c) yes; oxidizing agent: I2; reducing agent: H2
(d) yes; oxidizing agent: KMnO4; reducing agent:
CuCl.
10. (a) yes; Cu undergoes oxidation; Ag+ undergoes
reduction.
(b) no
(c) yes; Mn2+ undergoes oxidation; BiO3
− undergoes
reduction.
11. (a) +5 in V2O5, VO2
VO2, VO2+
(b) no
12. (a) all three steps
+, VO3
−, VO4
3−, V3O9
3− ; +4 in
(b) Step 1: oxidizing agent: O2; reducing agent: NH3
Step 2: oxidizing agent: O2; reducing agent: NO
Step 3: oxidizing agent: NO2; reducing agent: NO2
14. (a) I2 + 2e− → 2I−
− + 3e− → Au + 4Cl−
(b) Pb → Pb4+ + 4e−
(c) AuCl4
(d) C2H5OH + H2O → CH3COOH + 4H+ + 4e−
(e) S8 + 16H+ + 16e− → 8H2S
(f) AsO2
− + 4OH− → AsO4
3− + 2H2O + 2e−
15. (a) MnO2 + 2Cl− + 4H+ → Mn2+ + Cl2 + 2H2O
(b) 2NO + 3Sn + 6H+ → 2NH2OH + 3Sn2+
(c) 3Cd2+ + 2V2+ + 6H2O → 3Cd + 2VO3
(d) 2Cr + 6H2O + 2OH− → 2Cr(OH)4
2− + 2NiO2 + H2O + 2OH− →
(e) S2O3
− + 3H2
− + 12H+
2Ni(OH)2 + 2SO3
2−
(f) 2Sn2+ + O2 + 2H2O → 2Sn4+ + 4OH−
16. (a) 3SiCl4 + 4Al → 3Si + 4AlCl3
(b) 4PH3 + 8O2 → P4O10 + 6H2O
(c) I2O5 + 5CO → I2 + 5CO2
(d) 2SO3
2− + O2 → 2SO4
17. (a) 2NO2 + H2O → NO2
− + NO3
2−
(b) Cl2 + 2OH− → ClO− + Cl− + H2O
− + 2H+
18. (a) 2Co3+ + Cd → 2Co2+ + Cd2+
2Co(NO3)3(aq) + Cd(s) →
(b) 2Ag+ + SO2 + 2H2O → 2Ag + SO4
2AgNO3(aq) + SO2(g) + 2H2O((cid:2)) →
2Co(NO3)2(aq) + Cd(NO3)2(aq)
2− + 4H+
(c) Al + CrO4
2Ag(s) + H2SO4(aq) + 2HNO3(aq)
2− + 4H2O → Al(OH)3 + Cr(OH)3 + 2OH−
Al(s) + Na2CrO4(aq) + 4H2O((cid:2)) →
Al(OH)3(s) + Cr(OH)3(s) + 2NaOH(aq)
21. O2 + 2F2 → 2OF2
22. (a) 2P4 + 12H2O → 5PH3 + 3H3PO4
(b) reduced
Appendix A • MHR 577
Unit 5 Review
14. (a) +3
(b) +5
(c) +4
(d) N −3; H +1; S +6; O −2
15. no
16. (a) Ca(OH)2(aq) + CO2(g) → CaCO3(s) + H2O((cid:2))
17. (a) Hg2
2+ + 2e − → 2Hg
(b) TiO2 + 4H+ + 2e − → Ti2+ + 2H2O
(c) I2 + 18OH− → 2H3IO6
20. (a) 3Fe(s) + 8HNO3(aq) →
3− + 6H2O + 12e −
(b) 3Fe(NO3)2(aq) + 4HNO3(aq) →
3Fe(NO3)2(aq) + 2NO(g) + 4H2O((cid:2))
3Fe(NO3)3(aq) + NO(g) + 2H2O((cid:2))
(c) 3Fe(s) + 12HNO3(aq) →
3Fe(NO3)3(aq) + 3NO(g) + 6H2O((cid:2))
21. (b) oxidation: 2I− → I2 + 2e −
reduction: Ag+ + e − → Ag
overall: 2I− + 2Ag+ → I2 + 2Ag
(d) 0.264 V
22. (a) no
Cl2O7 + H2O → 2HClO4
(b) yes; oxidizing agent: ClO3
3I2 + 5ClO3
− + 3H2O → 6IO−
3
(c) yes; oxidizing agent: Br2; reducing agent: S2
−
S2− + 4Br2 + 8OH− → SO4
2− + 8Br− + 4H2O
−; reducing agent: I2
+ 5Cl− + 6H+
(d) yes; oxidizing agent: HNO3; reducing agent: H2S
2HNO3 + 3H2S → 2NO + 3S + 4H2O
23. (a) −0.235 V; non-spontaneous
(b) 0.698 V; spontaneous
(c) 0.418 V; spontaneous
26. (a) 2MnO4
− + 5C2O4
2− + 16H+ →
2Mn2+ + 10CO2 + 8H2O
(b) 0.2249 mol/L
27. 20.73%
29. (a) 6
(b) 3
30. (a) 2.68 × 104 C
(b) 74.5 h
31. 1.16 g
32. 0.595 t
44. (a) 8Al + 3NH4ClO4 → 4Al2O3 + 3NH4Cl
oxidizing agent: NH4ClO4 ; reducing agent: Al
(b) 2H2((cid:2)) + O2((cid:2)) → 2H2O(g)
23. (a) 2Al + Fe2O3 → 2Fe + Al2O3
(b) yes; oxidizing agent: Fe2O3; reducing agent: Al
24. (a) I2 + 10HNO3 → 2HIO3 + 10NO2 + 4H2O
(b) 31.7 g
27. (a) P4 + 3H2O + 3OH− → 3H2PO2
− + PH3
(c) 2.74 kg
32. (a) C2H4 + H2 → C2H6
C2H5OH → CH3CHO + H2
33. (a) Na +1; Al +3; O −2; H +1; C +4
(b) NaAl(OH)2CO3 + 4HCl →
34. (a) 2KClO3 → 2KCl + 3O2
S + O2 → SO2
NaCl + AlCl3 + 3H2O + CO2
(b) oxidizing agent and reducing agent: KClO3;
oxidizing agent: O2; reducing agent: S
+ + 2O2 → NO3
35. NH4
36. (b) CaC2 + 2H2O → Ca(OH)2 + C2H2 ; not redox
− + H2O + 2H+
(c) 2C2H2 + 5O2 → 4CO2 + 2H2O; redox
Chapter 11
2. Mg(s) | Mg2+
3. oxidation: NO(g) + 2H2O((cid:2)) → NO3
(aq) (1 mol/L) || Cd2+
(aq) (1 mol/L) | Cd(s)
(aq) + 4H+
(aq) + 3e−
−
reduction: I2(s) + 2e− → 2I−
overall: 2NO(g) + 4H2O((cid:2)) + 3I2(s) →
−
(aq) + 8H+
2NO3
(aq) + 2Cu(s) + 2I−
N2(g) + H2O((cid:2)) + 2CuI(s) E˚cell = 1.955 V
6. spontaneous: N2O(g) + 2H +
(aq) + 6I−
(aq) →
(aq)
(aq)
non-spontaneous: N2(g) + H2O((cid:2)) + 2CuI(s) →
N2O(g) + 2H +
(aq) + 2Cu(s) + 2I−
(aq) E˚cell = −1.955V
7. (a) oxidizing agent: PbO2; reducing agent: Pb
(b) oxidizing agent: PbSO4; reducing agent: PbSO4
(aq)
(aq), Zn2+
(aq), Br2(aq), H +
8. Co3+
9. Al(s), H2(g), Ag(s), Cl−
11. (a) oxidation: Zn(s) → Zn2+
reduction: Fe2+
cell potential: 0.315 V; spontaneous
(aq) + 2e −
(aq) + 2e − → Fe(s)
(aq)
(b) oxidation: Cr(s) → Cr3+
(aq) + 3e −
(aq) + 3e − → Al(s)
reduction: Al3+
cell potential: −0.918 V; non-spontaneous
(aq) + O2(g) + 2e −
(c) oxidation: H2O2(aq) → 2H+
reduction: Ag+
cell potential: 0.105 V; spontaneous
+ e − → Ag(s)
(aq)
12. 1.52 g
14. (a) E˚cell = 1.247 V
oxidation: Fe(s) → Fe2+
reduction: Ag+
overall: Fe(s) + 2Ag+
(aq) + 2e −
(aq) + e − → Ag(s)
(aq) → Fe2+
(aq) + 2Ag(s)
(b) E˚cell = −1.247 V
oxidation: Ag(s) → Ag+
reduction: Fe2+
overall: Fe2+
(aq) + e −
(aq) + 2e − → Fe(s)
(aq) + 2Ag(s) → 2Ag+
17. The cost for Al would be 2.56 times the cost for Na.
(aq) + Fe(s)
578 MHR • Appendix A
Appendix B
Supplemental Practice Problems
UNIT 1
Chapter 1
1. Identify the type of organic compound in each
5. Name each compound.
O
(a)
C3H7
OC
C5H11
diagram.
(a)
O
CH3
O
(b)
HC
CH2
CH3
(b)
O
CH3
O
(c)
CH3
Cl
Cl
(c)
(d)
H2C
CH3
2. How are amines structurally different from amides?
3. The following compound has the IUPAC name
3-oxa-1,5-pentanediol.
HO
OH
CH2
H2C
(a) Based on its IUPAC name, is this compound
CH2
CH2
O
classed as an ether or an alcohol?
(b) List the attractive forces between molecules of
this compound, in order of strength.
(c) In which solvent, water or hexane, would this
compound be more soluble?
4. Oxalic acid has the following structural formula.
O
C
O
C
OH
HO
This carboxylic acid is found in the leaves of
rhubarb. Its IUPAC name is ethanedioic acid.
(a) Name the intermolecular forces that occur
between molecules of oxalic acid.
(b) Is this acid soluble in water?
(c) Tartaric acid is a dicarboxylic acid that is used
in baking powder. It has the following structural
formula.
O
C
C
OH
O
CH
CH C
HO
OH
OH
To name a hydroxyl group as a side-chain, use
x-hydroxy- as a preﬁx, where x is the position
number. Follow the example for naming oxalic
acid, as well as the rules for naming the hydroxyl
groups as side chains, to give the IUPAC name for
tartaric acid.
6. Draw a condensed structural diagram for each
molecule.
(a) 1,3-diﬂuoro -4-methyl-1-pentyne
(b) trans-7,7- dimethyl-2-octene
(c) pentanamide
7. What is the IUPAC name for each molecule?
O
CH3
(a)
C2H5
CH2
C(CH3)2
OC
CH
CH3
C2H5
(b)
NH
CH
C2H5
CH3
O
C
C3H7
(c)
C3H7
8. How does a tertiary alcohol differ from a tertiary
amine?
9. Draw and name all possible structural isomers
of trichlorobenzene.
10. (a) Draw and name the carboxylic acid that is a
structural isomer of ethyl pentanoate.
(b) Name the ether that is a structural isomer of
1-propanol.
(c) Name the ketone that is a structural isomer of
propanal.
11. Consider the molecule below.
(a) Write the molecular formula of this molecule.
(b) Draw two structural isomers, one cyclic and one
non-cyclic, for this molecule.
12. The following names are not correct. Identify the
mistake in each name, and write the correct IUPAC
name.
(a) methyl ethanoate, C2H5COOCH3
(b) ethoxymethane
(c) 4 -hexanol
Appendix B • MHR 579
(d) N-pentylethylethanamide
(e) 2-bromobenzene
Chapter 2
13. Name the product(s) formed in each addition
reaction.
(a) CH3(cid:2)C(cid:3)C(cid:2)CH2(cid:2)CH3 + 1Br2 →
(b) 1-methylcyclopentene + H2 →
(c) C5H11(cid:2)CH(cid:4)CH2 + H2O →
(d) 1,3-dimethylcyclobutene + HCl →
14. Identify the alcohol that is oxidized to prepare each
compound.
(a) 2-pentanone
(b) pentanal
15. Complete each substitution reaction.
→
CH3
CH2 + Cl2
(a) 1-butanol + HBr →
(b)
CH
(c) benzene + Br2 →
(d) 2-chloropentane + NaOH →
16. Complete each elimination reaction.
(a) C16H33(cid:2)CH2(cid:2)CH2Br → HBr + ?
(b) 3,3-dimethyl-2-butanol
H2SO4
17. Name the product that is formed in each oxidation.
(a) 3-pentanol to a ketone
(b) ethanal to a carboxylic acid
(c) 2-ethyl-2-methyl-1-butanol to an
aldehyde
(d) cyclooctanol to a ketone
18. Name the product that is formed in each reduction.
(a) propanoic acid to an alcohol
(b) 3-hexanone to an alcohol
(c) ethene to an alkane
(d) formic acid to an alcohol
19. For each reaction, name the ester that forms and
draw its condensed structural diagram.
(a) methanol + heptanoic acid →
(b) octanoic acid + ethanol →
(c) propanoic acid + isopropyl alcohol →
(d) 2-butanol + pentanoic acid →
20. Examine the reaction below, and answer the
questions that follow.
H2C OH
HC
OH   +   3C17H29COOH  →
H2C OH
H2C
O CO C17H29
3H2O   +   HC
O CO C17H29
O CO C17H29
(a) State two names for the reaction as it proceeds
H2C
from left to right.
(b) If this reaction occurs in the reverse direction,
what name is given to the reverse reaction?
(c) Stearic acid, C17H35COOH , is a saturated
carboxylic acid. What does this mean?
580 MHR • Appendix B
(d) The carboxylic acid that is used in this reaction is
called linolenic acid. Compare the formulas of
linolenic acid and stearic acid, and suggest how
the two acids differ in structure.
(e) The ester that is made in this reaction is an oil. If
stearic acid had been used instead, the product
would have been a fat. Which of these two prod-
ucts has the lower melting point?
21. When PCBs burn, polychlorinated dibenzofurans
(PCDFs) are among the products that may form.
Examine the structure shown below, and circle and
name the functional groups.
Cl
Cl
Cl
O
Cl
22. Name three types of molecules that are capable of
forming polymers.
23. Name the alkene that is formed by the elimination
of 2-methyl-2-propanol.
24. Polyurethane can be made by the reaction of a diol,
such as HO(CH2)4OH and toluene 2,4-diisocyanate,
shown below.
CO
CN
N
O
C6H3
CH3
Is this reaction going to be an addition or a conden-
sation polymerization?
25. What two classes of monomers are used to make the
polymer below?
N
H
N C
H
O
C
O
UNIT 2
Chapter 3
26. A sample of a comet has not yet been captured, but
the elemental composition of a comet has been pre-
dicted. How do you think scientists can determine
the composition of a distant celestial body, such as a
comet?
27. Rank the elements Cs, Sr, and Rb in order of increas-
ing IE1. Then give a brief explanation for your order.
28. Compounds of Xe, but not He, have been synthe-
sized. What properties of these two elements help to
explain why?
29. (a) How many electrons must Sn lose to attain the
electron conﬁguration of Kr?
(b) Why does this not happen?
(c) The stable ions of Sn are Sn2+ and Sn4+. Write the
electron conﬁguration for these two ions.
(d) Suggest a reason why these ions are stable.
(e) Which of these two ions has the larger radius?
(f) Sn is closer to the noble gas Xe than to the noble
gas Kr. What charge would ions of Sn acquire if
the electron conﬁguration of Xe was attained?
(g) This negative ion of Sn does not exist. Suggest an
explanation for this observation.
30. According to the order of ﬁlling atomic orbitals
predicted by the aufbau principle, the 3d orbitals are
ﬁlled after the 4s orbital. Explain why the 4s orbital
is ﬁlled ﬁrst, even though it has a higher pincipal
quantum number than the 3d orbitals.
31. What type of atomic orbital is described by the
following pairs of quantum numbers?
(a) n = 3, l = 0
(b) n = 6, l = 3
(c) n = 3, l = 2
32. For each grouping below, arrange the energy sub-
levels in order from lowest energy to highest energy.
(a) 3p, 3d, 4s
(b) 4f, 6s, 6d
(c) 5f, 6s, 7s
33. A road ﬂare contains a salt of strontium to give a red
colour to the ﬂame. Write the electron conﬁguration
of the strontium ion, with an electron in the least
excited energy state.
34. In what ways are the 4d and 5d orbitals in an atom
the same, and in what ways are they different?
35. The energy of an electron in its ground state in a
hydrogen atom is −2.18 × 10−18 J .
(a) What is the signiﬁcance of the negative sign given
to this energy?
(b) How does the energy of the electron change if it is
excited to the 2s orbital?
(c) Would the energy change be larger, smaller, or the
same if the electron is excited to a 2p orbital,
rather than the 2s orbital?
36. Select the largest ion in each grouping.
(a) Sr2+, Ba2+, Ca2+
(b) N−, N2−, N3−
(c) Se2− Rb+, Br−
(d) N1−, O1−, F−
37. (a) Arrange the elements As, Sb, and Sn in order of
decreasing IE1.
(a) C2HCl
(b) CF3Cl
(c) CdI2
(d) SnO2
40. Sodium nitrite is used as a preservative in processed
meats, such as bacon, ham, and sausage. The nitrite
−, may enter the ground water in rural areas
ion, NO2
where manure is stored and be a serious health
threat for infants. Draw a Lewis structure, and
predict the shape of NO2
structures.
−. Indicate any resonance
41. Trisodium phosphate (TSP), Na3PO4, is used as a
paint stripper and grease remover. Disodium hydro-
gen phosphate, Na2HPO4, can be found in some lax-
atives. Draw a Lewis structure for each molecule,
and determine the shape of the phosphate ion,
3−, and the hydrogen phosphate ion, HPO4
PO4
42. For a given atom, what is the maximum number of
2−.
electrons that can have the following quantum num-
bers?
(a) n = 3
(b) n = 2, l = 1, ml = 0, ms = + 1
2
(c) n = 4, l = 2
43. Comment on the validity of the following statement:
“Dispersion forces are weak in comparison to other
intermolecular forces.”
44. Compare the molecules CH3F and NH2F with respect
to their
(a) Lewis structures
(b) dispersion forces
(c) hydrogen bonding
45. From the information in the table, classify each
compound as metallic, network, ionic, or molecular.
Compound
Melting point (˚C)
Solid
Liquid
Electrical conductivity
A
B
C
D
848
2300
1675
182
no
no
yes
no
yes
no
yes
no
(b) Arrange the elements Ba, Mg, and Sr in order of
46. Explain why the melting points of sodium halides
increasing IE2.
(c) Arrange the elements Br, Te, and I in order of
increasing electronegativity.
Chapter 4
38. Use VSEPR theory to determine the shape of each
molecule.
(a) SO2Cl2 (compound used to make some drugs
and polymers)
(b) ClF3 (oxidizing agent, mentioned in Chapter 10)
(c) XeO2F2 (rare stable compound of Xe)
39. Determine whether or not each molecule is polar.
(NaCl, NaBr, and NaI) decrease as the molar masses
increase, whereas the melting points of hydrogen
halides (HCl, HBr, and HI) increase as the molar
masses increase.
47. You have used an iodine solution to test for the
presence of starch in many laboratory activities.
Iodine has a very low solubility in water. When the
iodide ion is present, however, the triiodide ion,
(aq) , forms. Draw the Lewis structure for I3
I3
(aq) ,
and predict the shape of this ion.
−
−
Appendix B • MHR 581
48. Elements from different groups can form ions that
have the same shape. Show that the ions SbCl4
BeCl4
2− have the same shape.
+ and
49. Lead(IV) oxide, PbO2, is used as the cathode in a
lead storage battery. Lead(IV) ﬂuoride, PbF4, is a
strong oxidizing agent (Chapter 10). Determine if
either of these lead compounds is a polar molecule.
50. Ozone, O3, is an essential molecule in the ozone
layer. It ﬁlters out some of the UV radiation that
would otherwise destroy life on Earth. At ground
level, ozone is a component in photochemical smog.
Draw the Lewis structure for ozone, and indicate
whether or not ozone is polar. Can ozone exist in
resonance forms?
UNIT 3
Chapter 5
51. Using the compound ethanol, C2H5OH, write
equations to distinguish between ∆H˚f and ∆Hcomb.
52. Glass has a speciﬁc heat capacity of 0.84 J/g˚C.
A certain metal has a speciﬁc heat capacity of
0.500 J/g˚C. A metal tray and a glass tray have the
same mass. They are placed in an oven at 80˚C.
(a) After 1 h, how does the temperature of the two
trays compare?
(b) How does the quantity of heat absorbed by the
two trays compare?
(c) Does either tray feel hotter to the touch?
53. A 20.00 g sample of metal is warmed to 165˚C in an
oil bath. The sample is then transferred to a coffee-
cup calorimeter that contains 125.0 g of water at
5.0˚C. The ﬁnal temperature of the water is 8.8˚C.
(a) Calculate the speciﬁc heat capacity of the metal.
(b) What are three sources of experimental error that
occur in this experiment?
54. ∆H˚f of HI(g) is + 25.9 kJ.
(a) Write the equation that represents this reaction.
(b) Which has more enthalpy, the elements H2(g) and
I2(g), or the product HI(g)?
(c) What does the positive value of ∆H˚f indicate
about the energy that is needed to break bonds in
H2(g) and I2(g), compared with the energy released
when H(cid:2)I bonds form?
55. Use ∆H˚f data to determine the heat of reaction for
each reaction.
(a) 4NH3(g) + 3O2(g) → 2N2(g) + 6H2O((cid:2))
(b) 2H2O(g) + CS2(g) → 2H2S(g) + CO2(g)
(c) 4NO(g) + 6H2O(g) → 4NH3(g) + 5O2(g)
56. A 120.0 g sample of water at 30.0˚C is placed in the
freezer compartment of a refrigerator. How much
heat has the sample lost when it changes completely
to ice at 0˚C?
57. ∆H˚ is +106.9 kJ for the reaction
C(s) + PbO(s) → Pb(s) + CO(g). How much heat is
needed to convert 50.0 g of PbO(s) to Pb(s)?
582 MHR • Appendix B
58. Use the enthalpies of combustion for the burning
of CO(g), H2(g), and C(s) to determine ∆H˚ for the
reaction C(s) + H2O(g) → H2(g) + CO(g).
CO(g) + 1
O2(g) → CO2(g)
2
H2(g) + 1
O2(g) → H2O(g)
2
C(s) + O2(g) → CO2(g)
∆H˚comb = −238 kJ/mol
∆H˚comb = −241 kJ/mol
∆H˚comb = −393 kJ/mol
59. ∆Hcomb for ethene is −337 kJ/mol.
(a) Write the balanced equation for the complete
combustion of ethene in air. Include the heat term
in your balanced equation.
(b) The heat that is produced by burning 1.00 kg of
ethene warms a quantity of water from 15.0˚C to
85.0˚C. What is the mass of the water if the heat
transfer is 60.0% efﬁcient?
60. Determine ∆H˚ for
(aq) + CO2(g) → CaCO3(s) + H2O((cid:2)) , given
(aq) + 2OH−
Ca2+
the following information.
CaO(s) + H2O((cid:2)) → Ca(OH)2(s)
CaCO3(s) → CaO(s) + CO2(g)
Ca(OH)2(s) → Ca2+
(aq) + 2OH−
∆H˚ = −65.2 kJ/mol
∆H˚ = +178.1 kJ
∆H˚ = −16.2 kJ
(aq)
61. Calculate the enthalpy of formation of
manganese(IV) oxide, based on the following
information.
4Al(s) + 3MnO2(s) → 3Mn(s) + 2Al2O3(s) ∆H˚ = −1790 kJ
2Al(s) + 3
∆H˚f = −1676 kJ
2
O2(g) → Al2O3(s)
62. ∆Hcomb for toluene, C7H8((cid:2)), is −3904 kJ/mol.
(a) Write the equation for the complete combustion
of toluene.
(b) Use the combustion equation and ∆H˚f values to
determine the enthalpy of formation of toluene.
63. An impure sample of zinc has a mass of 7.35 g. The
sample reacts with 150.0 g of dilute hydrochloric
acid solution inside a calorimeter. The calorimeter
has a mass of 520.57 g and a speciﬁc heat capacity
of 0.400 J/g˚C. ∆H˚f for the following reaction is
−153.9 kJ.
Zn(s) + 2HCl(aq) → ZnCl2(aq) + H2(g)
When the reaction occurs, the temperature of the
hydrochloric acid rises from 14.5˚C to 29.7˚C. What
is the percentage purity of the sample? Assume that
the speciﬁc heat capacity of the hydrochloric acid is
4.184 J/g˚C. Also assume that all of the zinc in the
impure sample reacts.
Chapter 6
64. Butane is burned in a lighter at a rate of
0.240 mol/min in the following reaction.
C4H10(g) + 13
O2(g) → 4CO2(g) + 5H2O(g)
2
(a) What is the rate at which O2(g) is consumed and
CO2(g) is produced?
(b) How long does 15.0 g of C4H10(g) take to burn?
65. (a) The rate law equation for a reaction is
rate = k[A]2[B] . How does the rate change if [A] is
halved and [B] is doubled?
(b) A reaction is zero order for one reactant and sec-
ond order for another. What happens to the rate of
the reaction if the concentrations of both reactants
are doubled?
66. At 22˚C, the rate constant is 1.02 × 107 L/mol • s for
the following elementary reaction.
O3(g) + NO(g) → O2(g) + NO2(g)
(a) What is the order of the reaction?
(b) Do you expect the reaction to proceed quickly or
slowly at this temperature?
(c) What is the molecularity of the reaction?
(d) Based on the information that has been given, is it
reasonable to predict that the rate law equation
for this reaction is rate = k[O3][NO]? Explain your
answer.
67. Rate data are collected for the following reaction.
(aq) + H2O((cid:2))
(aq) → ClO3
2ClO2(aq) + 2OH−
(aq) + ClO2
−
−
[ ClO2(aq) ] (mol/L)
[ OH−
(aq) ] (mol/L)
0.060
0.12
0.12
0.060
0.060
0.12
Initial rate (mol/(L • s)
2.60 × 10−2
1.04 × 10−1
2.08 × 10−1
(a) What is the order with respect to each reactant?
(b) What is the overall order of the reaction?
(c) What is the rate law equation for the reaction?
(d) Calculate the rate constant for the reaction.
68. The data below were collected for the following
reaction.
A(aq) + 2B(aq) → 2C(aq) + D(aq)
[A] (mol/L)
[B] (mol/L)
0.050
0.050
0.10
0.040
0.020
0.080
Initial rate (mol/(L • s)
6.2 × 10−3
3.1 × 10−3
1.2 × 10−2
(a) Determine the rate law equation for the reaction.
(b) Determine the rate constant for the reaction.
(c) What is the overall order of the reaction?
69. At a temperature that is suitable for sucrose to be
fermented, the concentration of a solution of sucrose
changes from 0.20 mol/L to 0.10 mol/L in 12 h. After
24 h, the concentration is reduced to 0.050 mol/L.
(a) What is the order of the reaction?
(b) What is the half-life of the reaction?
(c) What is the rate constant for the reaction?
70. The following reaction is involved in the formation
of photochemical smog.
NO(g) + O3(g) → O2(g) + NO2(g)
The rate constant for the reaction is
1.02 × 107 L/(mol • s) at 22˚C. The reaction is ﬁrst
order with respect to O3(g) and NO(g). Calculate the
rate at which NO2(g) forms when
[O3(g)] = 1.0 × 10−8 mol/L and
[NO(g)] = 3.5 × 10−8 mol/L .
71. For reactions in the gaseous phase, a general guide-
line in chemistry is that the rate of reaction doubles
for every 10˚C rise in temperature.
(a) A 10˚C rise in temperature does not double the
kinetic energy of the molecules. Account for the
increase in reaction rate.
(b) If the reaction rate does double for every 10˚C rise
in temperature, how does the rate at 40˚C and at
80˚C compare with the rate at 20˚C?
72. A cube of zinc metal, measuring 1.0 cm on each
side, reacts completely with dilute hydrochloric acid
in 4 min. An identical cube of zinc is cut into four
equal pieces. How long should it take for the pieces
of zinc to react?
73. For the following reaction, a chemist determines
by experiment that the rate law equation is
rate = k[H2(g)][NO(g)]2 .
2H2(g) + 2NO(g) → N2(g) + 2H2O(g)
The chemist proposes three mechanisms for the
reaction. The slow step in each mechanism is listed
below. Which of these steps matches the rate law for
the reaction? Explain your reasoning.
Slow step for mechanism I:
2NO(g) → N2O2(g)
Slow step for mechanism II:
H2(g) + NO(g) → H2O(g) + N(g)
Slow step for mechanism III:
H2(g) + 2NO(g) → H2O(g) + N2O(g)
74. The mechanism for the decomposition of ethenal,
CH3CHO, in the presence of iodine vapour
is written as follows:
Step 1  CH3CHO(g) + I2(g) → CH3I(g) + HI(g) + CO(g)
(slow)
Step 2  CH3I(g) + HI(g) → CH4(g) + I2(g) (fast)
(a) Identify any intermediates in this reaction
mechanism.
(b) Which step has the higher activation energy?
(c) What is the role of I2(g) in this reaction?
(d) What is the overall reaction?
75. A reaction proceeds in three elementary reactions.
Sketch a potential energy diagram (using a reason-
able scale) to show the following activation energies
and enthalpies of reaction:
Step 1 Ea1 = 50 kJ ∆H1 = −30 kJ
Step 2 Ea2 = 30 kJ ∆H2 = +20 kJ
Step 3 Ea3 = 20 kJ ∆H3 = −40 kJ
Mark the positions where activated complexes are
expected. What is ∆Hrxn for the overall reaction?
Appendix B • MHR 583
UNIT 4
Chapter 7
76. Consider the equilibrium below.
(cid:3)(cid:4) 8SO2(g) + heat
S8(s) + 8O2(g)
What is the effect on the concentration of each sub-
stance when the equilibrium is altered as follows.
(a) More S8(s) is added.
(b) The temperature is lowered.
(c) The volume of the container is increased.
(d) More SO2 is injected into the system.
77. At 2000 K, the concentration of the components in
the following equilibrium system are
[CO2(g)] = 0.30mol/L, [H2(g)] = 0.20mol/L, and
[H2O(g)] = [CO(g)] = 0.55mol/L .
(cid:3)(cid:4) H2O(g) + CO(g)
CO2(g) + H2(g)
(a) What is the value of the equilibrium constant?
(b) When the temperature is lowered, 20.0% of the
CO(g) is converted back to CO2(g). Calculate the
equilibrium constant at the lower temperature.
(c) Rewrite the equilibrium equation, and indicate on
which side of the equation the heat term should
be placed.
78. After 5.00 g of SO2Cl2 are placed in a 2.00 L ﬂask,
(cid:3)(cid:4) SO2(g) + Cl2(g)
the following equilibrium is established.
SO2Cl2(g)
Kc for this equilibrium is 0.0410. Determine the mass
of SO2Cl2(g) that is present at equilibrium.
79. For the equilibrium below, Kc = 6.00 × 10−2.
(cid:3)(cid:4) 2NH3(g)
N2(g) + 3H2(g)
Explain why this value of Kc does not apply when
the equation is written as follows.
1
2
N2(g) + 3
2
(cid:3)(cid:4) NH3(g)
H2(g)
80. A 11.5 g sample of I2(g) is sealed in a 250 mL ﬂask.
(cid:3)(cid:4) 2I(g)
An equilibrium, shown below, is established as this
molecular form of I2 dissociates into iodine atoms.
I2(g)
Kc for the equilibrium is 3.80 × 10−5. Calculate the
equilibrium concentration of both forms of the
iodine.
81. The greenhouse effect warms the surface of Earth.
The increase of CO2(g) in the environment is one of
the factors that contributes to this process. Many
older buildings are made of limestone, CaCO3(s).
Consider the following equilibrium.
(cid:3)(cid:4) CaO(s) + CO2(g) ∆H = +175 kJ
CaCO3(s)
(a) In theory, how can the greenhouse effect affect
this equilibrium?
(b) Discuss the likelihood that this equilibrium can
be altered by the greenhouse effect.
82. When iron rusts, is entropy increasing or decreasing?
4Fe(s) + 3O2(g) → 2Fe2O3(s)
Why is the rusting of iron a spontaneous reaction at
room temperature?
584 MHR • Appendix B
Chapter 8
83. A blood sample has a pH of 7.32. What is the hydro-
nium ion concentration, [H3O+]? How can hydroni-
um ions exist in this basic solution?
84. Hydrated metal ions act as weak acids by donating a
proton. For example, Fe2+ becomes hydrated with six
water molecules, [Fe(OH2)6]2+. Write an equation to
illustrate how the hydrated iron(II) ion acts as an
acid in aqueous solution.
85. Imagine that you are asked to design a chemistry kit
for young children to use. In one of the experiments,
the properties of acids and bases are studied. What
chemicals are appropriate for this experiment? What
safety precautions would you include?
86. A toilet bowl cleaner contains NaHSO4 as the active
ingredient.
(a) Write an equation to show how this salt produces
an acidic solution.
(b) What is the pH of a 0.203 mol/L solution of
NaHSO4?
87. A solution is made by combining 200.0 mL of
0.23 mol/L H2SO4, 600.0 mL of 0.16 mol/L KOH,
and 200.0 mL of water. What is the pH of this
solution?
88. Ka for CH3COOH is 1.8 × 10−5, and Ka for
HNO2 is 7.2 × 10−4. When the conjugate bases of
these two acids are compared, which has the larger
Kb?  What is the value of this larger Kb?
89. Ka for hydrazoic acid, HN3, is 2.80 × 10−5.
(a) Write the equation for the ionization of this acid
in water.
(b) What is the Kb for the conjugate base of this acid?
(c) Compare the pH of 0.100 mol/L HN3 with the pH
of a sample of the same volume in which 0.600 g
of sodium azide, NaN3, has been dissolved.
90. A 250.0 mL sample of 0.100 mol/L NaHCO3 contains
3.800 g of Na2CO3 . What is the pH of the sample?
91. 10.0 mL of NH3(aq), with a concentration of
5.70 × 10−2 mol/L, is titrated to the endpoint with
2.85 mL of HBr solution. What is the concentration
of the HBr solution?
92. Name the conjugate base and the conjugate acid of
2− will act as an
2−. What determines if HPO4
HPO4
acid or a base?
Chapter 9
93. Ksp for silver chromate, Ag2CrO4, is 1.12 × 10−12. Ksp
for silver chloride, AgCl, is 1.77 × 10−10. Does this
mean that the molar solubility of Ag2CrO4 is less
than the molar solubility of AgCl? Use a calculation
to illustrate your answer.
94. The solubility of a compound can be affected by the
presence of a common ion.
(a) What does this statement mean?
(b) Compare the effect of dissloved Pb2+ to the effect
of dissolved OH− on the solubility of Pb(OH)2.
95. What mass of NaOH is needed to start the precipita-
tion of Mg(OH)2from 100 mL of a solution that
contains 0.100 g of MgCl2?
96. A warm saturated solution of SrSO4, with a volume
of 850 mL, is evaporated to dryness. The residue that
remains has a mass of 0.160 g.
(a) Use this information to calculate the Ksp for
SrSO4.
(b) A reference book gives a Ksp value of 2.8 × 10−7.
What could account for the difference between
the value in the reference book and the experi-
mental value for this Ksp ?
97. 0.800 L of 2.00 × 10−4 mol/L Ba(NO3)2 is added to
200.0 mL of 5.00 × 10−4 mol/L Li2SO4 . Show, by
calculation, whether or not a precipitate forms.
98. A radioactive form of barium, in the compound
BaSO4, is used to diagnose intestinal ailments. Why
is a more soluble compound, such as BaCl2, not used
in this procedure?
99. A solution has a lead concentration, [Pb2+
(aq)], of
0.100 mol/L. 0.100 mol of NaI are added to 1.00 L
of this solution. How much of the original Pb2+
precipitates?
(aq)
100
. In many parts of Ontario, the water is “hard”
because of the presence of Ca2+ and Mg2+ ions.
(a) Does hardness affect the F− content of a ﬂuoridat-
ed municipal water supply?
(b) What is the maximum Ca2+ concentration that can
be present if the F − concentration is 80 ppm?
UNIT 5
Chapter 10
101
. Identify the redox reactions.
(a) CCl4 + HF → CFCl3 + HCl
(b) Al2O3 + 3H2SO4 → Al2(SO4)3 + 3H2O
(c) CH4 + 2O2 → CO2 + 2H2O
(d) P4 + 3OH− + 3H2O → PH3 + 3H2PO2
. Consider the following reaction.
S8 + 8Na2SO3 → 8Na2S2O3
(a) Assign oxidation numbers to all the elements.
(b) Identify the reactant that undergoes reduction.
(c) Identify the reactant that is the reducing agent.
−
102
103
104
. Find the oxidation number for each element.
2−, and S4O6
2−
(a) sulfur in HS−, S8, SO3
−, B2H6, and B2O3
2−, BO3
(b) boron in B4O7
. List the following oxides of nitrogen in order of
2−, S2O3
−, BO2
decreasing oxidation number of nitrogen:
NO2, N2O5, NO, N2O3, N2O, N2O4.
105
. For the following redox reaction, indicate which
statements, if any, are true.
C + D → E + F
(a) If C is the oxidizing agent, then it loses electrons.
(b) If D is the reducing agent, then it is reduced.
(c) If C is the reducing agent, and if it is an element,
then its oxidation number will increase.
(d) If D is oxidized, then C must be a reducing agent.
(e) If C is reduced, then D must lose electrons.
106
. Consider the following reaction.
3SF4 + 4BCl3 → 4BF3 + 3SCl2 + 3Cl2
(a) Why is this reaction classiﬁed as a redox
reaction?
(b) What is the oxidizing agent in this reaction?
107
. The metals Ga(s), In(s), Mn(s), and Np(s), and their salts,
(aq) + 2Np(s) → 3Mn(s) + 2Np3+
react as follows:
3Mn2+
In3+
(aq) + Ga(s) → In(s) + Ga3+
Mn2+ + Ga(s) → no reaction
Analyze this information, and list the reducing
agents from the worst to the best.
(aq)
(aq)
108
. The following redox reactions occur in basic
solution. Balance the equations using the oxidation
number method.
(a) Ti3+ + RuCl5
(b) ClO2 → ClO2
. The following redox reactions occur in basic
2− → Ru + TiO2+ + Cl−
−
− + ClO3
109
110
111
112
113
−
+ NH3
− + NO3
− + HSnO2
− + HSnO3
− + I2 → IO3
− → SeO2 + NO
2− → Cu2+ + SO2
−
− → CrO2
− + Cl−
− → CO2 + Mn2+
solution. Use the half-reaction method to balance
the equations.
(a) NO2 → NO2
(b) CrO4
− → Al(OH)−
(c) Al + NO3
4
. The following redox reactions occur in acidic solu-
tion. Balance the equations using the half-reaction
method.
(a) ClO3
(b) C2H4 + MnO4
(c) Cu + SO4
. The following redox reactions occur in acidic
solution. Use oxidation numbers to balance the
equations.
(a) Se + NO3
2− → Ag+ + Cr3+
(b) Ag + Cr2O7
. Balance each equation for a redox reaction.
(a) P4 + NO3
− → NO3
(b) MnO2 + NO2
2− + N2O4 → Te + NO3
− (basic)
(c) TeO3
− + N2H4 → MnO2 + N2 (basic)
(d) MnO4
2− + Cl− (basic)
2− + OCl− → SO4
(e) S2O3
2− (acidic)
(f) Br2 + SO2 → Br− + SO4
(g) PbO2 + Cl− → PbCl2 + Cl2 (acidic)
− + H2O2 → Mn2+ + O2 (acidic)
(h) MnO4
. The following reaction takes place in acidic solution.
CH3OH(aq) + MnO4
(a) Balance the equation.
(b) How many electrons are gained by the oxidizing
agent when ten molecules of methanol are
oxidized?
− → H3PO4 + NO (acidic)
(aq) → HCOOH(aq) + Mn2+
− + Mn2+ (acidic)
(aq)
−
(c) What volume of 0.150 mol/L MnO4
− solution is
needed to react completely with 20.0 g of
methanol?
Appendix B • MHR 585
123
. A current of 3.0 A ﬂows for 1.0 h during an electrol-
ysis of copper(II) sulfate. What mass of copper is
deposited?
124
. To recover aluminum metal, Al2O3 is ﬁrst converted
to AlCl3 . Then an electrolysis of molten AlCl3 is
performed using inert carbon electrodes.
(a) Write the half-reaction that occurs at the anode
and at the cathode.
(b) Can the standard reduction potentials be used
to calculate the external voltage needed for this
process? Explain your answer.
125
. Summarize the differences between a hydrogen fuel
cell and a dry cell.
Chapter 11
114
. Consider the galvanic cell represented as
Al|Al3+||Ce4+|Ce3+|Pt.
(a) What is the cathode?
(b) In which direction do electrons ﬂow through the
external circuit?
(c) What is the oxidizing agent?
(d) Will the aluminum electrode increase or decrease
in mass as the cell operates?
115
. (a) Which is a better oxidizing agent in acidic solu-
2−? From what information
− or Cr2O7
tion, MnO4
did you determine your answer?
(b) Suppose that you have the metals Ni, Cu, Fe, and
Ag, as well as 1.0 mol/L aqueous solutions of the
nitrates of these metals. Which metals should be
paired in a galvanic cell to produce the highest
standard cell potential? (Use the most common
ion for each metal.)
116
. E˚cell for the cell No|No3+||Cu2+|Cu is 2.842 V. Use
this information, as well as the standard reduction
potential for the Cu2+/Cu half-reaction given in
tables, to calculate the standard reduction potential
for the No/No3+ half-cell.
117
. A galvanic cell is set up using tin in a 1.0 mol/L Sn2+
solution and iron in a 1.0 mol/L Fe2+ solution.
(a) Write the equation for the overall reaction that
occurs in this cell.
(b) What is the standard cell potential?
(c) Which electrode is positive in this cell?
(d) What change in mass will occur at the anode
when the cathode undergoes a change in mass
of 1.50 g?
118
. Predict the products that would be expected from
the electrolysis of 1.0 mol/L NaI. Use the non-
standard E values for water.
119
120
121
. Given the half reactions below, determine if the
2−, can exist in an acidic
2− + H2O → 2SO2 + 2H+ + 4e− E˚ = 0.40 V
2− + 6H+ + 4e− E˚ = −0.50 V
thiosulfate ion, S2O3
solution under standard conditions.
S2O3
2S + H2O → S2O3
. Refer to the table of half-cell potentials to determine
if MnO2 can oxidize Br− to Br2 in acidic solution
under standard conditions.
. A galvanic cell contains 50.0 mL of 0.150 mol/L
CuSO4. If the Cu2+ ions are completely used up,
what is the maximum quantity of electricity that the
cell can generate?
122
. Determine the standard cell potential for each redox
reaction.
− + 6ClO2
(a) IO3
(b) 2Cu2+ + Hg2
(c) Ba2+ + Pb → Pb2+ + Ba
(d) Ni + I2 → Ni2+ + 2I−
− + 6H+ → I− + 3H2O + 6ClO2
2+ → 2Hg2+ + 2Cu+
586 MHR • Appendix B
Appendix C
Alphabetical List of Elements
Element
Actinium
Aluminum
Americium
Antimony
Argon
Arsenic
Astatine
Barium
Berkelium
Beryllium
Bismuth
Bohrium
Boron
Bromine
Cadmium
Calcium
Californium
Carbon
Cerium
Cesium
Chlorine
Chromium
Cobalt
Copper
Curium
Dubnium
Dysprosium
Einsteinium
Erbium
Europium
Fermium
Fluorine
Francium
Gadolinium
Gallium
Germanium
Gold
Hafnium
Hassium
Helium
Holmium
Hydrogen
Indium
Iodine
Iridium
Iron
Krypton
Lanthanum
Lawrencium
Lead
Lithium
Lutetium
Magnesium
Manganese
Meitnerium
Mendelevium
Mercury
Molybdenum
Symbol
Ac
Al
Am
Sb
Ar
As
At
Ba
Bk
Be
Bi
Bh
B
Br
Cd
Ca
Cf
C
Ce
Cs
Cl
Cr
Co
Cu
Cm
Db
Dy
Es
Er
Eu
Fm
F
Fr
Gd
Ga
Ge
Au
Hf
Hs
He
Ho
H
In
I
Ir
Fe
Kr
La
Lr
Pb
Li
Lu
Mg
Mn
Mt
Md
Hg
Mo
Atomic Number
89
13
95
51
18
33
85
56
97
4
83
107
5
35
48
20
98
6
58
55
17
24
27
29
96
105
66
99
68
63
100
9
87
64
31
32
79
72
108
2
67
1
49
53
77
26
36
57
103
82
3
71
12
25
109
101
80
42
Element
Neodymium
Neon
Neptunium
Nickel
Niobium
Nitrogen
Nobelium
Osmium
Oxygen
Palladium
Phosphorus
Platinum
Plutonium
Polonium
Potassium
Praseodymium
Promethium
Protactinium
Radium
Radon
Rhenium
Rhodium
Rubidium
Ruthenium
Rutherfordium
Samarium
Scandium
Seaborgium
Selenium
Silicon
Silver
Sodium
Strontium
Sulfur
Tantalum
Technetium
Tellurium
Terbium
Thallium
Thorium
Thulium
Tin
Titanium
Tungsten
Ununbium
Ununhexium
Ununnilium
Ununquadium
Unununium
Uranium
Vanadium
Xenon
Ytterbium
Yttrium
Zinc
Zirconium
Symbol
Nd
Ne
Np
Ni
Nb
N
No
Os
O
Pd
P
Pt
Pu
Po
K
Pr
Pm
Pa
Ra
Rn
Re
Rh
Rb
Ru
Rf
Sm
Sc
Sg
Se
Si
Ag
Na
Sr
S
Ta
Tc
Te
Tb
Tl
Th
Tm
Sn
Ti
W
Uub
Uuh
Uun
Uuq
Uuu
U
V
Xe
Yb
Y
Zn
Zr
Atomic Number
60
10
93
28
41
7
102
76
8
46
15
78
94
84
19
59
61
91
88
86
75
45
37
44
104
62
21
106
34
14
47
11
38
16
73
43
52
65
81
90
69
50
22
74
112
116
110**
114
111
92
23
54
70
39
30
40
**The names and symbols for elements 110 through 118 have not yet been chosen
Appendix C • MHR 587
MAIN-GROUP
ELEMENTS
Periodic Table of the Elements
1
(IA)
1
2.20
1312
13.81
20.28
1.01
1+
1-
H
hydrogen
2
(IIA)
3
0.98
520
453.7
1615
6.94
1+
Li
4
1.57
899
1560
2744
9.01
2+
Be
lithium
beryllium
11
0.93
496
371
1156
22.99
1+
Na
sodium
24.31
2+
12
1.31
738
923.2
1363
magnesium
Mg
Atomic number
Electronegativity
First  ionization energy (kJ/mol)
Melting point (K)
Boiling point (K)
6
2.5
1086
4765
4098
12.01
+4
+2
C
carbon
Average atomic mass*
Common ion charge
Other ion charges
Gases
Liquids
Synthetics
metals (main group)
metals (transition)
metals (inner transition)
metalloids
nonmetals
TRANSITION ELEMENTS
3
(IIIB)
4
(IVB)
5
(VB)
6
(VIB)
7
(VIIB)
8
19
0.82
419
336.7
1032
39.10
1+
K
20
1.00
590
1115
1757
40.08
2+
Ca
21
1.36
631
1814
3109
44.96
3+
Sc
22
1.54
658
1941
3560
47.87
4+
2+
3+
Ti
23
1.63
650
2183
3680
50.94
5+
2+
3+
4+
V
24
1.66
653
2180
2944
52.00
3+
2+
6+
Cr
potassium
calcium
scandium
titanium
vanadium
chromium
37
0.82
403
312.5
941.2
85.47
1+
Rb
38
0.95
549
1050
1655
87.62
2+
Sr
39
1.22
616
1795
3618
88.91
3+
Y
40
1.33
660
2128
4682
91.22
4+
Zr
41
1.6
664
2750
5017
92.91
5+
3+
Nb
rubidium
strontium
yttrium
zirconium
niobium
95.94
6+
42
2.16
685
2896
4912
molybdenum
Mo
54.94
25
1.55
4+
717
2+
1519
3+
2334
7+
manganese
Mn
43
2.10
702
2430
4538
(98)
7+
4+
6+
Tc
26
1.83
759
1811
3134
44
2.2
711
2607
4423
55.85
3+
2+
Fe
iron
101.07
3+
Ru
9
(VIIIB)
27
1.88
760
1768
3200
45
2.28
720
2237
3968
58.93
2+
3+
Co
cobalt
102.91
3+
Rh
technetium
ruthenium
rhodium
55
0.79
376
301.7
944
132.91
1+
Cs
56
0.89
503
1000
2170
137.33
2+
Ba
57
1.10
538
1191
3737
138.91
3+
La
72
1.3
642
2506
4876
178.49
4+
Hf
73
1.5
761
3290
5731
180.95
5+
Ta
74
1.7
770
3695
5828
183.84
6+
W
75
1.9
760
3459
5869
186.21
4+
6+
7+
Re
76
2.2
840
3306
5285
190.23
4+
3+
Os
77
2.2
880
2719
4701
192.22
4+
3+
Ir
cesium
barium
lanthanum
hafnium
tantalum
tungsten
rhenium
osmium
iridium
87
0.7
~375
300.2
–
(223)
1+
Fr
88
0.9
509
973.2
–
(226)
2+
Ra
89
1.1
499
1324
3471
(227)
3+
Ac
francium
radium
actinium
Lanthanoids
Actinoids
58
1.12
527
1071
3716
140.12
3+
4+
Ce
cerium
90
1.3
587
2023
5061
232.04
4+
Th
thorium
(262)
–
(261)
4+
104
–
–
–
–
rutherfordium
Rf
105
–
–
–
–
Db
(264)
–
(266)
–
106
–
–
–
–
Sg
107
–
–
–
–
Bh
(268)
–
(269)
–
108
–
–
–
–
Hs
109
–
–
–
–
Mt
dubnium
seaborgium
bohrium
hassium
meitnerium
140.91
3+
INNER TRANSITION ELEMENTS
59
61
1.13
–
523
536
1204
1315
3793
3273
praseodymium
60
1.14
530
1294
3347
neodymium promethium
150.36
3+
2+
63
–
547
1095
1802
62
1.17
543
1347
2067
144.24
3+
(145)
3+
Sm
Pm
Nd
samarium
Pr
Eu
europium
151.96
3+
2+
231.04
5+
4+
91
1.5
568
1845
–
protactinium
Pa
92
1.7
584
1408
4404
238.03
6+
3+
4+
5+
U
93
1.3
597
917
–
237.05
5+
3+
4+
6+
Np
94
1.3
585
913.2
3501
(244)
4+
3+
5+
6+
Pu
uranium
neptunium
plutonium
95
–
578
1449
2284
(243)
3+
4+
5+
6+
americium
Am
64
1.20
593
1586
3546
157.25
3+
Gd
gadolinium
96
–
581
1618
3373
(247)
3+
Cm
curium
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
6
7
588 MHR • Appendix C
*Average atomic mass data in brackets indicate atomic mass of most stable isotope of the element.
MAIN-GROUP
ELEMENTS
13
(IIIA)
14
(IVA)
15
(VA)
16
(VIA)
17
(VIIA)
18
(VIIIA)
2
–
2372
5.19
5.02
4.00
–
He
helium
10.81
–
B
6
2.55
1086
4765
4098
12.01
–
C
7
3.04
1402
63.15
77.36
14.01
3–
N
8
3.44
1314
54.36
90.2
16.00
2–
O
9
3.98
1681
53.48
84.88
19.00
1–
F
10
–
2080
24.56
27.07
Ne
20.18
–
boron
carbon
nitrogen
oxygen
fluorine
neon
26.98
–
Al
14
1.90
786
1687
3538
28.09
–
Si
aluminum
silicon
30.97
–
15
2.19
1012
317.3
553.7
phosphorus
P
31
1.81
579
302.9
2477
69.72
3+
Ga
32
2.01
761
1211
3106
72.61
–
Ge
33
2.18
947
1090
876.2
74.92
–
As
16
2.58
999
392.8
717.8
34
2.55
941
493.7
958.2
32.07
2–
S
17
3.16
1256
171.7
239.1
35.45
1–
Cl
sulfur
chlorine
78.96
2–
Se
35
2.96
1143
266
332
79.90
1–
Br
18
–
1520
83.8
87.3
36
–
1351
115.8
119.9
39.95
–
Ar
argon
83.80
–
Kr
gallium
germanium
arsenic
selenium
bromine
krypton
5
2.04
800
2348
4273
13
1.61
577
933.5
2792
10
11
(IB)
12
(IIB)
58.69
2+
3+
Ni
29
1.90
745
1358
2835
63.55
2+
1+
Cu
nickel
copper
65.39
2+
Zn
zinc
28
1.91
737
1728
3186
46
2.20
805
1828
3236
106.42
2+
3+
Pd
palladium
78
2.2
870
2042
4098
195.08
4+
2+
Pt
110
–
–
–
–
47
1.93
731
1235
2435
79
2.4
890
1337
3129
111
–
–
–
–
30
1.65
906
692.7
1180
48
1.69
868
594.2
1040
112
–
–
–
–
107.87
1+
Ag
silver
112.41
2+
Cd
49
1.78
558
429.8
3345
114.82
3+
In
50
1.96
708
505
2875
118.71
4+
2+
Sn
51
2.05
834
903.8
1860
121.76
–
Sb
52
2.1
869
722.7
1261
127.60
–
Te
53
2.66
1009
386.9
457.4
126.90
1–
I
54
–
1170
161.4
165
131.29
–
Xe
cadmium
indium
tin
antimony
tellurium
iodine
xenon
196.97
3+
1+
Au
80
1.9
1107
234.3
629.9
200.59
2+
1+
Hg
81
1.8
589
577.2
1746
204.38
1+
3+
Tl
82
1.8
715
600.6
2022
207.20
2+
4+
Pb
83
1.9
703
544.6
1837
208.98
3+
5+
Bi
84
2.0
813
527.2
1235
(209)
4+
2+
Po
85
2.2
(926)
575
–
(210)
1–
At
86
–
1037
202.2
211.5
platinum
gold
mercury
thallium
lead
bismuth
polonium
astatine
(271)
–
(272)
–
113
(277)
–
Uun
Uuu
Uub
ununnilium
unununium
ununbium
(285)
–
114
–
–
–
–
ununquadium
Uuq
115
(289)
–
116
–
–
–
–
ununhexium
Uuh
65
–
565
1629
3503
158.93
3+
Tb
terbium
97
–
601
1323
–
(247)
3+
4+
Bk
berkelium
162.50
3+
66
1.22
572
1685
2840
dysprosium
Dy
67
1.23
581
1747
2973
164.93
3+
Ho
68
1.24
589
1802
3141
167.26
3+
Er
69
1.25
597
1818
2223
168.93
3+
Tm
70
–
603
1092
1469
173.04
3+
2+
Yb
71
1.0
524
1936
3675
174.97
3+
Lu
holmium
erbium
thulium
ytterbium
lutetium
(252)
3+
98
–
608
1173
–
(251)
3+
99
–
619
1133
–
californium einsteinium
Es
Cf
100
–
627
1800
–
(257)
3+
(259)
3+
2+
(258)
3+
2+
101
–
635
1100
–
mendelevium
102
–
642
1100
–
No
nobelium
(262)
3+
103
–
–
1900
–
lawrencium
Lr
Fm Md
fermium
(222)
–
Rn
radon
Appendix C • MHR 589
Appendix D
Math and Chemistry
Signiﬁcant Digits
All measurements involve uncertainty. One source
of this uncertainty is the measuring device itself.
Another source is your ability to perceive and interpret
a reading. In fact, you cannot measure anything with
complete certainty. The last (farthest right) digit in
any measurement is always an estimate.
The digits that you record when you measure
something are called signiﬁcant digits. Signiﬁcant
digits include the digits that you are certain about,
and a ﬁnal, uncertain digit that you estimate. Follow
the rules below to identify the number of signiﬁcant
digits in a measurement.
Rules for Determining Signiﬁcant Digits
Rule 1 All non-zero numbers are signiﬁcant.
• 7.886 has four signiﬁcant digits.
• 19.4 has three signiﬁcant digits.
• 527.266 992 has nine signiﬁcant digits.
Rule 2 All zeros that are located between two non-zero
numbers are signiﬁcant.
• 408 has three signiﬁcant digits.
• 25 074 has ﬁve signiﬁcant digits.
Rule 3 Zeros that are located to the left of a measure-
ment are not signiﬁcant.
• 0.0907 has three signiﬁcant digits: the 9, the
third 0 to the right, and the 7.
Rule 4 Zeros that are located to the right of a measure-
ment may or may not be signiﬁcant.
• 22 700 may have three signiﬁcant digits, if the
measurement is approximate.
• 22 700 may have ﬁve signiﬁcant digits, if the
measurement is taken carefully.
When you take measurements and use them to calculate
other quantities, you must be careful to keep track of
which digits in your calculations and results are signiﬁ-
cant. Why? Your results should not imply more certainty
than your measured quantities justify. This is especially
important when you use a calculator. Calculators usually
report results with far more digits than your data warrant.
Always remember that calculators do not make decisions
about certainty. You do. Follow the rules given below to
report signiﬁcant digits in a calculated answer.
Rules for Reporting Signiﬁcant Digits in
Calculations
Rule 1 Multiplying and Dividing
The value with the fewest number of signiﬁcant
digits, going into a calculation, determines the
number of signiﬁcant digits that you should
report in your answer.
590 MHR • Appendix D
Rule 2 Adding and Subtracting
The value with the fewest number of decimal
places, going into a calculation, determines the
number of decimal places that you should report
in your answer.
Rule 3 Rounding
To get the appropriate number of signiﬁcant
digits (rule 1) or decimal places (rule 2), you
may need to round your answer.
• If your answer ends in a number that is greater
than 5, increase the preceding digit by 1. For
example, 2.346 can be rounded to 2.35.
• If your answer ends with a number that is less
than 5, leave the preceding number unchanged.
For example, 5.73 can be rounded to 5.7.
• If your answer ends with 5, increase the
preceding number by 1 if it is odd. Leave the
preceding number unchanged if it is even. For
example, 18.35 can be rounded to 18.4, but
18.25 is rounded to 18.2.
Sample Problem
Using Significant Digits
Problem
Suppose that you measure the masses of four
objects as 12.5 g, 145.67 g, 79.0 g, and 38.438 g.
What is the total mass?
What Is Required?
You need to calculate the total mass of the objects.
What Is Given?
You know the mass of each object.
Plan Your Strategy
• Add the masses together, aligning them at the
decimal point.
• Underline the estimated (farthest right) digit in
each value. This is a technique you can use to
help you keep track of the number of estimated
digits in your ﬁnal answer.
• In the question, two values have the fewest
decimal places: 12.5 and 79.0. You need to
round your answer so that it has only one
decimal place.
Act on Your Strategy
12.5
145.67
79.0
+ 38.438
275.608
Total mass = 275.608 g
Therefore, the total mass of the objects is 275.6 g.
Check Your Solution
• Your answer is in grams. This is a unit of mass.
• Your answer has one decimal place. This is the
same as the values in the question with the
fewest decimal places.
Practice Problems
Signiﬁcant Digits
1. Express each answer using the correct number
of signiﬁcant digits.
a) 55.671 g + 45.78 g
b) 1.9 mm + 0.62 mm
c) 87.9478 L − 86.25 L
d) 0.350 mL + 1.70 mL + 1.019 mL
e) 5.841 cm × 6.03 cm
f)
17.51 g
2.2 cm3
Scientiﬁc Notation
One mole of water, H2O, contains
602 214 199 000 000 000 000 000 molecules.
Each molecule has a mass of
0.000 000 000 000 000 000 000 029 9 g. As you can see,
it would be very awkward to calculate the mass of one
mole of water using these values. To simplify large
numbers when reporting them and doing calculations,
you can use scientiﬁc notation.
Step 1 Move the decimal point so that only one
non-zero digit is in front of the decimal point.
(Note that this number is now between 1.0 and
9.99999999.) Count the number of places that the
decimal point moves to the left or to the right.
Step 2 Multiply the value by a power of 10. Use the
number of places that the decimal point moved
as the exponent for the power of 10. If the deci-
mal point moved to the right, exponent is nega-
tive. If the decimal point moved to the left, the
exponent is positive.
6.02 000 000 000 000 000 000 000.
23 21
6.02 × 1023
Figure D.1
18
15
12
9
6
3
The decimal point moves to the left.
0.000 000 000 000 000 000 000 02.9 9 g
3
6
9
12
15
18
21 23
2.99 × 10−23
Figure D.2
The decimal point moves to the right.
Figure D.3 shows you how to calculate the mass of one
mole of water using a scientiﬁc calculator. When you
enter an exponent on a scientiﬁc calculator, you do not
have to enter (× 10).
Keystrokes
6.02¨23
≠2.99¨23—
=
Display
6.02  23
2.99  −23
17.998
Round to three signiﬁcant
digits and express in scientiﬁc
notation: 1.80 × 101 g/mol
On some scientiﬁc calculators, the ¨ key
Figure D.3
is labelled ´ . Key in negative exponents by entering the
exponent, then striking the — key.
Rules for Scientiﬁc Notation
Rule 1 To multiply two numbers in scientiﬁc notation,
−3) × (8.91 × 10
add the exponents.
(7.32 × 10
= (7.32 × 8.91) × 10(
= 65.2212 × 10
−4
→ 6.52 × 10
−5
−2)
−3 + −2)
Rule 2 To divide two numbers in scientiﬁc notation,
subtract the exponents.
(1.842 × 106 g) ÷ (1.0787 × 102 g/mol)
= (1.842 ÷ 1.0787) × 10(6−2)
= 1.707611 × 104 g
→ 1.708 × 104 g
Rule 3 To add or subtract numbers in scientiﬁc notation,
ﬁrst convert the numbers so they have the same
exponent. Each number should have the same
exponent as the number with the greatest power
of 10. Once the numbers are all expressed to the
same power of 10, the power of 10 is neither
added nor subtracted in the calculation.
(3.42 × 106 cm) + (8.53 × 103 cm)
= (3.42 × 106 cm) + (0.00853 × 106 cm)
= 3.42853 × 106 cm
→ 3.43 × 106 cm
(9.93 × 101 L) − (7.86 × 10
= (9.93 × 101 L) − (0.0786 × 101 L)
= 9.8514 × 101 L
→ 9.85 × 101 L
−1 L)
Practice problems are given on the following page.
Appendix D • MHR 591
Practice Problems
Scientiﬁc Notation
1. Convert each value into correct scientiﬁc
notation.
(a) 0.000 934
(b) 7 983 000 000
(c) 0.000 000 000 820 57
(d) 496 × 106
(e) 0.000 06 × 101
(f) 309 72 × 10−8
2. Add, subtract, multiply, or divide. Round off
your answer, and express it in scientiﬁc notation
to the correct number of signiﬁcant digits.
(a) (3.21 × 10−3) + (9.2 × 102)
(b) (8.1 × 103) + (9.21 × 102)
(c) (1.010 1 × 101) − (4.823 × 10−2)
(d) (1.209 × 106) × (8.4 × 107)
(e) (4.89 × 10−4) ÷ (3.20 × 10−2)
Logarithms
Logarithms are a convenient method for communicating
large and small numbers. The logarithm, or “log,” of a
number is the value of the exponent that 10 would
have to be raised to, in order to equal this number.
Every positive number has a logarithm. Numbers that
are greater than 1 have a positive logarithm. Numbers
that are between 0 and 1 have a negative logarithm.
Table D1 gives some examples of the logarithm values
of numbers.
Table D.1 Some Numbers and Their Logarithms
Number
1 000 000
7 895 900
1
0.000 001
0.004 276
Scientific
notation
1 × 106
7.8590 × 105
1 × 100
1 × 10−6
4.276 × 10−3
As a power of 10
Logarithm
106
105.8954
100
10−6
10−2.3690
6
5.8954
0
−6
−2.3690
Logarithms are especially useful for expressing values
that span a range of powers of 10. The Richter scale for
earthquakes, the decibel scale for sound, and the pH
scale for acids and bases all use logarithmic scales.
Logarithms and pH
The pH of an acid solution is deﬁned as −log[H3O+].
(The square brackets mean “concentration.”) For
example, suppose that the hydronium ion concentration
in a solution is 0.0001 mol/L (10−4 mol/L). The pH is
−log(0.0001). To calculate this, enter 0.0001 into your
calculator. Then press the [LOG] key. Press the [±] key.
The answer in the display is 4. Therefore, the pH of the
solution is 4.
592 MHR • Appendix D
There are logarithms for all numbers, not just whole
multiples of 10. What is the pH of a solution if
[H3O+] = 0.004 76 mol/L ? Enter 0.00476. Press the
[LOG] key and then the [±] key. The answer is 2.322.
This result has three signiﬁcant digits—the same
number of signiﬁcant digits as the concentration.
For logarithmic values, only the digits to the right of the
decimal point count as signiﬁcant digits. The digit to the
left of the decimal point ﬁxes the location of the decimal
point of the original value.
What if you want to ﬁnd [H3O+] from the pH? You
would need to ﬁnd 10−pH. For example, what is [H3O+]
if the pH is 5.78? Enter 5.78, and press the [±] key. Then
use the [10x] function. The answer is 10−5.78. Therefore,
[H3O+] is 1.7 × 10−6 mol/L.
Remember that the pH scale is a negative log scale.
Thus, a decrease in pH from pH 7 to pH 4 is an increase
of 103 , or 1000, in the acidity of a solution. An increase
from pH 3 to pH 6 is a decrease of 103 , or 1000, in
acidity.
Practice Problems
Logarithms
1. Calculate the logarithm of each number. Note
the trend in your answers.
(a) 1
(b) 5
(c) 10
(d) 50
(e) 100
(f) 500
(g) 50 000
(h) 100 000
2. Calculate the antilogarithm of each number.
(a) 0
(b) 1
(c) −1
(d) 2
(e) −2
(f) 3
(g) −3
3. (a) How are your answers for question 2, parts
(b) and (c), related?
(b) How are your answers for question 2, parts
(d) and (e), related?
(c) How are your answers for question 2, parts
(f) and (g), related?
(d) Calculate the antilogarithm of 3.5.
(e) Calculate the antilogarithm of –3.5.
(f) Take the reciprocal of your answer for
part (d).
(g) How are your answers for parts (e) and (f)
related?
4. (a) Calculate log 76 and log 55.
(b) Add your answers for part (a).
(c) Find the antilogarithm of your answer for
part (b).
(d) Multiply 76 and 55.
(e) How are your answers for parts (c) and (d)
related?
The Unit Analysis Method of Problem
Solving
The unit analysis method of problem solving is
extremely versatile. You can use it to convert between
units or to solve some formula problems. If you forget a
formula during a test, you may still be able to solve the
problem using unit analysis.
The unit analysis method involves analyzing the
units and setting up conversion factors. You match
and arrange the units so that they divide out to give
the desired unit in the answer. Then you multiply
and divide the numbers that correspond to the units.
Steps for Solving Problems Using Unit
Analysis
Step 1 Determine which data you have and which
conversion factors you need to use. (A conver-
sion factor is usually a ratio of two numbers
with units, such as 1000 g/1 kg. You multiply
the given data by the conversion factor to get
the desired units for the answer.) It is often
convenient to use the following three categories
to set up your solution: Have, Need, and
Conversion factor.
Sample Problem
Active ASA
Problem
In the past, pharmacists measured the active ingre-
dients in many medications in a unit called grains
(gr). A grain is equal to 64.8 mg. If one headache
tablet contains 5.0 gr of active acetylsalicylic acid
(ASA), how many grams of ASA are in two tablets?
What Is Required?
You need to ﬁnd the mass in grams of ASA in
two tablets.
What Is Given?
There are 5.0 gr of ASA in one tablet. A conversion
factor for grains to milligrams is given.
Plan Your Strategy
Multiply the given quantity by conversion factors
until all the unwanted units cancel out and only
the desired units remain.
Have
Need
Conversion factors
5.0 gr
? g
64.8 mg/1 gr and 1 g/1000 mg
Step 2 Arrange the data and conversion factors so that
Act on Your Strategy
you can cross out the undesired units. Decide
whether you need any additional conversion
factors to get the desired units for the answer.
Step 3 Multiply all the numbers on the top of the ratio.
Then multiply all the numbers on the bottom of
the ratio. Divide the top result by the bottom
result.
Step 4 Check that you have cancelled the units correct-
ly. Also check that the answer seems reasonable,
and that the signiﬁcant digits are correct.
Remember that counting numbers for exact quantities are
considered to have inﬁnite signiﬁcant digits. For example,
if you have 3 apples, the number is exact, and has an
inﬁnite number of signiﬁcant digits. Conversion factors
for unit analysis are a form of counting or record keeping.
Therefore, you do not need to consider the number of
signiﬁcant digits in conversion factors, such as 1000 mL/
1 L, when deciding on the number of signiﬁcant digits in
the answer.
1 g
1000 mg
× 2 tablets
×
× 64.8 mg
1 gr
5.0 gr
1 tablet
= 5.0 × 64.8 × 1 × 2 g
1000
= 0.648 g
= 0.65 g
There are 0.65 g of active ASA in two headache
tablets.
Check Your Solution
There are two signiﬁcant digits in the answer.
This is the least number of signiﬁcant digits in the
given data.
Notice how conversion factors are multiplied
until all the unwanted units are cancelled out,
leaving only the desired unit in the answer.
The sample problem on the next page will show you
how to solve a stoichiometric problem.
Appendix D • MHR 593
Sample Problem
Stoichiometry and Unit Analysis
Problem
What mass of oxygen, O2, can be obtained by the
decomposition of 5.0 g of potassium chlorate,
KClO3? The balanced equation is given below.
2KClO3 → 2KCl + 3O2
What Is Required?
You need to calculate the mass of oxygen, in grams,
that is produced by the decomposition of 5.0 g of
potassium chlorate.
What Is Given?
You know the mass of potassium chlorate that
decomposes.
Mass = 5.0 g
From the balanced equation, you can obtain the
molar ratio of the reactant and the product.
3 mol O2
2 mol KClO3
Plan Your Strategy
Calculate the molar masses of potassium chlorate
and oxygen. Use the molar mass of potassium
chlorate to ﬁnd the number of moles in the sample.
Use the molar ratio to ﬁnd the number of moles of
oxygen produced. Use the molar mass of oxygen to
convert this value to grams.
Act on Your Strategy
The molar mass of potassium chlorate is
1 × MK = 39.10
1 × MCl = 35.45
3 × MO = 48.00
122.55 g/mol
The molar mass of oxygen is
2 × MO = 32.00 g/mol
Find the number of moles of potassium chlorate.
mol KClO3 = 5.0 g ×
(cid:2)
1 mol
122.55 g KClO3
(cid:3)
= 0.0408 mol
Find the number of moles of oxygen produced.
Therefore, 2.0 g of oxygen are produced by the
decomposition of 5.0 g of potassium chlorate.
As you become more familiar with this type of
question, you will be able to complete more than
one step at once. Below, you can see how the con-
version factors we used in each step above can be
combined. Set these conversion ratios so that the
units cancel out correctly.
(cid:2)
mass O2 = 5.0 g KClO3
(cid:2)
×
×
(cid:3)
(cid:3)
1 mol
122.6 g KClO3
(cid:3)
(cid:2) 32.0 g
×
1 mol O2
3 mol O2
2 mol KClO3
= 1.96 g
= 2.0 g
Check Your Solution
The oxygen makes up only part of the potassium
chlorate. Thus, we would expect less than 5.0 g
of oxygen, as was calculated.
The smallest number of signiﬁcant digits in the
question is two. Thus, the answer must also have
two signiﬁcant digits.
Practice Problems
Unit Analysis
Use the unit analysis method to solve each
problem.
1. The molar mass of cupric chloride is
134.45 g/mol. What is the mass, in grams,
of 8.19 × 10−3 mol of this compound?
2. To make a salt solution, 0.82 mol of CaCl2 are
dissolved in 1650 mL of water. What is the
concentration, in g/L, of the solution?
3. The density of solid sulfur is 2.07 g/cm3 . What
is the mass, in kg, of a 1.8 dm3 sample?
4. How many grams of dissolved sodium bromide
are in 689 mL of a 1.32 mol/L solution?
3 mol O2
2 mol KClO3
=
3 mol O2
2 mol KClO3
mol O2
0.0408 mol KClO3
mol O2 = 0.0408 mol KClO3 ×
= 0.0612 mol
Convert this value to grams.
mass O2 = 0.0612 mol × 32.00 g
1 mol O2
= 1.96 g
= 2.0 g
594 MHR • Appendix D
Appendix E
Chemistry Data Tables
Table E.4 Conversion Factors
Quantity
Relationships between units
Table E.1 Useful Math Relationships
D = m
V
P = F
A
π = 3.1416
Volume of sphere V = 4
3
πr3
Volume of cylinder = πr2h
Table E.2 Fundamental Physical Constants (to six
signiﬁcant digits)
)
acceleration due to gravity (g
9.806 65 m/s2
Avogadro constant (Na)
6.022 14 × 1023/mol
charge on one mole of
electrons (Faraday constant)
96 485.3 C/mol
mass of electron (ms)
mass of neutron (mn)
mass of proton (mp)
9.109 38 × 10−31 kg
1.674 93 × 10−27 kg
1.672 62 × 10−27 kg
molar gas constant (R
)
8.314 47 J/mol·K
molar volume of gas at STP
22.414 0 L/mol
volume
)
speed of light in vacuo (c
2.997 92 × 108 m/s
)
unified atomic mass (u
1.660 54 × 10−27 kg
Table E.3 Common SI Preﬁxes
tera (T)
giga (G)
mega (M)
kilo (k)
deci (d)
centi (c)
milli (m)
micro (µ)
nano (n)
pico (p)
1012
109
106
103
10−1
10−2
10−3
10−6
10−9
10−12
length
mass
1 m = 10−3 km
= 103 mm
= 102 cm
1 pm = 10−12 m
1 kg = 103 g
= 10−3 t
1 u = 1.66 × 10−27 kg
temperature
0 K = −273.15˚C
T (K) = T (˚C) + 273.15
T (˚C) = T (K) − 273.15
mp of H2O = 273.15 K (0˚C)
bp of H2O = 373.15 K (100˚C)
1 L = 1 dm3
= 10−3 m3
= 103 mL
1 mL = 1 cm3
101 325 Pa = 101.325 kPa
= 760 mm Hg
= 760 torr
= 1 atm
1 kg/m3 = 103  g/m3
= 10−3 g/mL
= 1 g/L
pressure
density
energy
1 J = 6.24 × 1018 eV
Appendix E • MHR 595
Table E.5 Alphabetical Listing of Common Polyatomic Ions
Table E.6 Summary of Naming Rules for Ions
Type of ion
Polyatomic Ions
if the ion is the most
common oxoanion
if the ion has one O
atom less than the most
common oxoanion
if the ion has two O
atoms less than the most
common oxoanion
if the ion has 1 O
atom more than the
most common oxoanion
Prefix or suffix
Example
-ate
-ite
chlorate, ClO3
−
chlorite, ClO2
−
hypo-___-ite
hypochlorite,
−
ClO
per-___-ate
if the ion has 1 H atom
added to the most
common oxoanion
bi-
if the ion has 1 O atom
less and 1 S atom more
than the most common
oxoanion
thio-
Metallic Ions
if the ion has the higher
possible charge
-ic
if the ion has the lower
possible charge
-ous
perchlorate,
ClO4
−
bicarbonate,
−
HCO3
thiosulphate,
2−
S2O3
titanic, Ti4+
cuprous, Cu
+
Note: According to the
Stock system, metallic
ions are named using
Roman numerals.
The Roman
numeral shows
the charge on
the metal ion
titanium(IV) Ti4+
copper(I),
manganese(VII),
Mn7 +
+
Cu
Table E.7 Summary of Naming Rules for Acids
Modern name
Classical acid name
Example
aqueous
hydrogen ___ide
hydro___ic acid
aqueous
hydrogen ___ate
___ic acid
aqueous
hydrogen ___ite
___ous acid
HCl, aqueous
hydrogen chloride
or hydrochloric acid
H2CO3, aqueous
hydrogen carbonate
or carbonic acid
HNO2, aqueous
hydrogen nitrite
or nitrous acid
Most common ion
Common related ions
arsenite
tetraborate
bicarbonate
(hydrogen
carbonate)
perchlorate
chlorite
hypochlorite
dichromate
cyanate
thiocyanate
peroxide
iodide
nitrite
3−
AsO3
2−
B4O7
−
HCO3
−
ClO4
−
ClO2
−
ClO
Cr2O7
−
OCN
−
SCN
2−
2−
O2
−
I
−
NO2
phosphite
tripolyphosphate
orthosilicate
5−
3−
PO3
P3O10
4−
SiO4
bisulfate
(hydrogen
sulfate)
sulfite
bisulfite
(hydrogen
sulfite)
thiosulfate
bisulfide
(hydrogen
sulfide)
−
HSO4
2−
−
SO3
HSO3
2−
S2O3
−
HS
acetate
ammonium
arsenate
benzoate
borate
bromate
carbonate
chlorate
chromate
cyanide
glutamate
hydroxide
iodate
nitrate
oxalate
permanganate
phosphate
silicate
stearate
sulfate
−
CH3COO
+
NH4
3−
AsO4
−
C6H5COO
3−
BO3
3−
BrO3
2−
CO3
−
ClO3
2−
CrO4
−
CN
−
C5H8NO4
−
OH
−
IO3
−
NO3
OOCCOO2−
−
MnO4
3−
PO4
2−
SiO3
−
C17H35COO
2−
SO4
sulfide
S2−
596 MHR • Appendix E
Table E.8 Standard Molar Enthalpies of Formation
Acid
Formula
Conjugate base
Substance
Al2O3(s)
CaCO3(s)
CaCl2(s)
Ca(OH)2(s)
CCl4((cid:2))
CCl4(g)
CHCl3((cid:2))
CH4(g)
C2H2(g)
C2H4(g)
C2H6(g)
C3H8(g)
C6H6((cid:2))
CH3OH((cid:2))
C2H5OH((cid:2))
CH3COOH((cid:2))
CO(g)
CO2(g)
COCl2(g)
CS2((cid:2))
CS2(g)
CrCl3(s)
Cu(NO3)2(s)
CuO(s)
CuCl(s)
CuCl2(s)
∆H˚f
(kJ/mol)
−1675.7
−1207.6
−795.4
−985.2
−128.2
−95.7
−134.1
−74.6
+227.4
+52.4
−84.0
−103.8
+49.1
−239.2
−277.6
−484.3
−110.5
−393.5
−219.1
+89.0
+116.7
−556.5
−302.9
−157.3
−137.2
−220.1
Substance
∆H˚f
(kJ/mol) Substance
HBr(g)
HCl(g)
HF(g)
HCN(g)
H2O((cid:2))
H2O(g)
H2O2((cid:2))
HNO3((cid:2))
H3PO4(s)
H2S(g)
H2SO4((cid:2))
FeO(s)
Fe2O3(s)
Fe3O4(s)
FeCl2(s)
FeCl3(s)
FeS2(s)
PbCl2(s)
MgCl2(s)
MgO(s)
Mg(OH)2(s)
HgS(s)
NaCl(s)
NaOH(s)
Na2CO3(s)
−36.3
−92.3
−273.3
+135.1
−285.8
−241.8
−187.8
−174.1
−1284.4
−20.6
−814.0
−272.0
−824.2
−1118.4
−341.8
−399.5
−178.2
−359.4
−641.3
−601.6
−924.5
−58.2
−411.2
−425.6
−1130.7
NH3(g)
N2H4((cid:2))
NH4Cl(s)
NH4NO3(s)
NO(g)
NO2(g)
N2O(g)
N2O4(g)
PH3(g)
PCl3(g)
P4O6(s)
P4O10(s)
KBr(s)
KCl(s)
KClO3(s)
KOH(s)
Ag2CO3(s)
AgCl(s)
AgNO3(s)
Ag2S(s)
SF6(g)
SO2(g)
SO3(g)
SnCl2(s)
SnCl4((cid:2))
∆H˚f
(kJ/mol)
−45.9
+50.6
−314.4
−365.6
+91.3
+33.2
+81.6
+11.1
+5.4
−287.0
−2144.3
−2984.0
−393.8
−436.5
−397.7
−424.6
−505.8
−127.0
−124.4
−32.6
−1220.5
−296.8
−395.7
−325.1
−511.3
Note: The enthalpy of formation of an element in its
standard state is deﬁned as zero.
Table E.9 Ionization Constants for Acids
Acid
Formula
Conjugate base
acetic acid
CH3COOH
benzoic acid
C6H5COOH
chlorous acid
cyanic acid
HClO2
HOCN
formic acid
HCHO2
hydrobromic
acid
hydrochloric
acid
hydrocyanic
acid
hydrofluoric
acid
HBr
HCl
HCN
HF
hydrogen oxide
H2O
hypobromous
acid
HOBr
CH3COO
−
−
C6H5COO
−
ClO2
−
OCN
−
CHO2
−
Br
−
Cl
−
CN
−
F
−
OH
−
BrO
Ka
1.8 × 10
6.3 × 10
1.1 × 10
3.5 × 10
1.8 × 10
1.0 × 109
−5
−5
−2
−4
−4
1.3 × 106
6.2 × 10
−10
6.3 × 10
−4
1.0 × 10
2.8 × 10
−14
−9
c o n t i n u e d …
hypochlorous
acid
iodic acid
lactic acid
HClO
HIO3
CH3CHOHCO2H
methanoic acid
HCOOH
nitric acid
nitrous acid
phenol
HNO3
HNO2
C6H5OH
−
ClO
−
IO3
−
CH3CHOHCO2
−
HCOO
−
−
NO3
NO2
−
C6H5O
Ka
4.0 × 10
−8
−1
−4
−4
1.7 × 10
1.4 × 10
1.8 × 10
2.4 × 101
−4
5.6 × 10
1.0 × 10
−10
Table E.10 Ionization Constants for Polyprotic Acids
oxalic acid
HOOCCOOH
−
HOOCCOO
HOOCCOO
2−
OOCCOO
−
Acid
Formula
boric acid
(aqueous
hydrogen borate)
H3BO3
H2BO3
−
carbonic acid
H2CO3
−
HCO3
citric acid
(aqueous
hydrogen citrate)
H3C6H5O7
−
H2C6H5O7
2−
HC6H5O7
phosphoric acid
(aqueous
hydrogen
phosphate)
H3PO4
−
H2PO4
2−
HPO4
hydrosulfuric
acid
sulfuric acid
sulfurous acid
tartaric acid
H2S
−
HS
H2SO4
−
HSO4
H2SO3
−
HSO3
Conjugate base
−
H2BO3
2−
HBO3
Ka
−10
5.4 × 10
<1.0 × 10
−14
−
HCO3
2−
CO3
−
H2C6H5O7
2−
HC6H5O7
3−
C6H5O7
−
H2PO4
2−
HPO4
3−
PO4
−
HS
S2−
−
HSO4
2−
SO4
−
HSO3
2−
SO3
4.5 × 10
4.7 × 10
7.4 × 10
1.7 × 10
4.0 × 10
5.6 × 10
1.5 × 10
6.9 × 10
6.2 × 10
4.8 × 10
8.9 × 10
1.0 × 10
1.0 × 10
1.0 × 10
1.4 × 10
6.3 × 10
9.3 × 10
4.3 × 10
−7
−11
−4
−5
−7
−2
−4
−3
−8
−13
−8
−19
3
−2
−2
−8
−4
−5
H2C4H4O6
−
HC4H4O6
−
HC4H4O6
2−
C4H4O6
Table E.11 Ionization Constants for Nitrogen Bases
Base
Formula
Conjugate
acid
Kb
NH2CH2CH2NH2 NH2CH2
1,2-diaminoethane
(ethylenediamine)
dimethylamine
(N-methylmeth-
anamine)
ethanamine
methanamine
trimethylamine
(N-N-dimethyl-
methanamine)
ammonia
hydrazine
hydroxylamine
pyridine
aniline
urea
(CH3)2NH
C2H5NH2
CH3NH2
(CH3)3N
NH3
N2H4
NH2OH
C5H5N
C6H5NH2
+
CH2NH3
+
(CH3)2NH2
8.4 × 10
5.4 × 10
−5
−4
+
C2H5NH3
+
CH3NH3
(CH3)3NH
+
4.5 × 10
4.6 × 10
6.4 × 10
−4
−4
−5
+
NH4
+
N2H5
NH3OH
+
C5H5NH
+
C6H5NH3
+
1.8 × 10
1.3 × 10
8.8 × 10
1.7 × 10
7.5 × 10
1.3 × 10
−5
−6
−9
−9
−10
−14
Appendix E • MHR 597
NH2CONH2
NH2CONH3
+
+ H2O((cid:2))
Hg2
Fe3+
O2(g)
I2(s)
+
Cu
O2(g)
Cu2+
(aq)
(aq)
(aq)
(aq)
(aq)
(aq)
(aq)
(aq)
+ e
(aq)
2+
(aq)
−       H2O2(aq)
(cid:3)(cid:4)
Reduction half reaction
−       Ag(s)
(cid:3)(cid:4)
−        2Hg((cid:2))
(cid:3)(cid:4)
+ 2e
−        Fe2+
(cid:3)(cid:4)
+ e
(aq)
+
+ 2e
+ 2H
(aq)
−       2I
−
(cid:3)(cid:4)
+ 2e
−        Cu(s)
(cid:3)(cid:4)
+ e
(aq)
−        4OH
−
(cid:3)(cid:4)
+ 4e
+ 2H2O((cid:2))
−        Cu(s)
(cid:3)(cid:4)
+ 2e
−
−
(cid:3)(cid:4)
+ e
+
Cl
Ag(s)
(aq)
−       H2SO3(aq)
2−
(cid:3)(cid:4)
+ SO4
+ 2e
(aq)
−        Cu
+
(cid:3)(cid:4)
+ e
−        H2(g)
(cid:3)(cid:4)
+ 2e
(cid:3)(cid:4)
−        Fe(s)
+ 3e
−
(cid:3)(cid:4)
+ 2e
Pb(s)
−       Sn(s)
(cid:3)(cid:4)
+ 2e
−
(cid:3)(cid:4)
+ 2e
Ni(s)
(cid:3)(cid:4)
−
+ 2e
Cd(s)
−
Cr2+
(cid:3)(cid:4)
+ e
−
(cid:3)(cid:4)
+ 2e
−
(cid:3)(cid:4)
+ 3e
−
(cid:3)(cid:4)
+ 2e
−
(cid:3)(cid:4)
+ 2e
−
(cid:3)(cid:4)
+ 3e
−
(cid:3)(cid:4)
+ 2e
−     La(s)
(cid:3)(cid:4)
+ 3e
−
(cid:3)(cid:4)
+ e
Na(s)
−
(cid:3)(cid:4)
+ 2e
Ca(s)
−     Ba(s)
(cid:3)(cid:4)
+ 2e
−     K(s)
(cid:3)(cid:4)
−     Li(s)
(cid:3)(cid:4)
(aq)
+ e
+ e
−
+ 2OH
Mg(s)
H2(g)
Zn(s)
Cr(s)
Fe(s)
Al(s)
(aq)
(aq)
(aq)
(aq)
(aq)
(aq)
(aq)
(aq)
(aq)
(aq)
(aq)
(aq)
(aq)
(aq)
(aq)
AgCl(s)
+
4H
Cu2+
+
2H
Fe3+
Pb2+
Sn2+
Ni2+
Cd2+
Cr3+
Fe2+
Cr3+
Zn2+
(aq)
2H2O((cid:2))
Al3+
Mg2+
La3+
+
Na
Ca2+
Ba2+
+
K
(aq)
+
Li
(aq)
E ˚(V)
0.800
0.797
0.771
0.695
0.536
0.521
0.401
0.342
0.222
0.172
0.153
0.000
−0.037
−0.126
−0.138
−0.257
−0.403
−0.407
−0.447
−0.744
−0.762
−0.828
−1.662
−2.372
−2.379
−2.711
−2.868
−2.912
−2.931
−3.040
Table E.12 Solubility Product Constants in Water at 25˚C
Bromates
Hydroxides
+
Ag
AgBrO3
TlBrO3
AgBr
CuBr
PbBr2
Ag2CO3
BaCO3
CaCO3
MgCO3
PbCO3
AgCl
CuCl
5.38 × 10
1.10 × 10
−5
−4
Bromides
5.35 × 10
6.27 × 10
6.60 × 10
−13
−9
−6
Carbonates
8.46 × 10
2.58 × 10
3.36 × 10
6.82 × 10
7.40 × 10
−12
−9
−9
−6
−14
Chlorides
1.77 × 10
1.72 × 10
−10
−9
Be(OH)2
Cd(OH)2
Ca(OH)2
Co(OH)2
Eu(OH)3
Fe(OH)2
Fe(OH)3
Pb(OH)2
Mg(OH)2
Ni(OH)2
Sn(OH)2
Zn(OH)2
Ba(IO3)2
Ca(IO3)2
Sr(IO3)2
Y(IO3)3
6.92 × 10
7.2 × 10
5.02 × 10
5.92 × 10
9.38 × 10
4.87 × 10
2.79 × 10
1.43 × 10
5.61 × 10
5.48 × 10
5.45 × 10
3 × 10
−22
−15
−6
−15
−27
−17
−39
−20
−12
−16
−27
−17
Iodates
4.01 × 10
6.47 × 10
1.14 × 10
1.12 × 10
−9
−6
−7
−10
Chromates
Iodides
Ag2CrO4
BaCrO4
PbCrO4
1.12 × 10
1.12 × 10
2.3 × 10
−12
−10
−13
CuI
PbI2
AgI
1.27 × 10
9.8 × 10
8.52 × 10
−12
−9
−17
Cyanides
Phosphates
AgCN
CuCN
BaF2
CdF2
CaF2
FeF2
5.97 × 10
3.47 × 10
−17
−20
Fluorides
1.84 × 10
6.44 × 10
3.45 × 10
2.36 × 10
−7
−3
−11
−6
AlPO4
Ca3(PO4)2
Co3(PO4)2
Cu3(PO4)2
Ni3(PO4)2
BaSO4
CaSO4
Hg2SO4
9.84 × 10
2.07 × 10
2.05 × 10
1.40 × 10
4.74 × 10
−21
−33
−35
−37
−32
Sulfates
1.08 × 10
4.93 × 10
6.5 × 10
−10
−5
−7
Thiocyanates
CuSCN
Pd(SCN)2
1.08 × 10
4.39 × 10
−13
−23
Table E.13 Standard Reduction Potentials
Reduction half reaction
−
(cid:3)(cid:4)
2−
+ 2e
(aq)
−     Mn2+
(cid:3)(cid:4)
(aq)
PbSO4(s)
+ 4H2O((cid:2))
+ H2O((cid:2))
−
(cid:3)(cid:4)
Pb2+
+ 2H2O((cid:2))
(aq)
−       2H2O((cid:2))
(cid:3)(cid:4)
(aq)
+ SO4
+ 5e
F2(g)
Co3+
+ 2e
(aq)
H2O2(aq)
Ce4+
(aq)
−
−
(cid:3)(cid:4)
2F
−
(cid:3)(cid:4)
+ e
+
+ 2H
−
(cid:3)(cid:4)
+ e
+
+ 4H
(aq)
Co2+
(aq)
+ 2e
(aq)
Ce3+
PbO2(s)
−
MnO4
Au3+
(aq)
PbO2(s)
(aq)
(aq)
+
+ 8H
(aq)
(cid:3)(cid:4)
−     Au(s)
+ 3e
+
+ 4H
+ 2e
(aq)
−       2Cl
−
(cid:3)(cid:4)
+
+ 14H
+ 4e
(aq)
+
+ 4H
+
+ 6H
−
(cid:3)(cid:4)
(aq)
(aq)
(aq)
Cl2(g)
Cr2O7
O2(g)
+ 2e
2−
(aq)
+
+ 4H
MnO2(s)
−
IO3
Br2((cid:2))
(aq)
+ 2e
−
AuCl4
−
NO3
2Hg2+
+ 3e
(aq)
+
+ 4H
+ 2e
(aq)
(aq)
−       2Cr3+
(cid:3)(cid:4)
+ 6e
(aq)
−        2H2O((cid:2))
(cid:3)(cid:4)
−     Mn2+
(cid:3)(cid:4)
+ 2e
(cid:3)(cid:4)
−
−     I
+ 6e
−
2Br
−        Au(s)
−
(cid:3)(cid:4)
+ 4Cl
+ 3e
−       NO(g)
(cid:3)(cid:4)
(aq)
2+
−       Hg2
(cid:3)(cid:4)
(aq)
(aq)
(aq)
+ 7H2O((cid:2))
(aq)
+ 2H2O((cid:2))
(aq)
+ 3H2O((cid:2))
(aq)
+ 2H2O((cid:2))
E ˚(V)
2.866
1.92
1.776
1.72
1.691
1.507
1.498
1.455
1.358
1.232
1.229
1.224
1.085
1.066
1.002
0.957
0.920
598 MHR • Appendix E
c o n t i n u e d …
Table E.14 Speciﬁc Heat Capacities of Various
Substances
Substance
Element
aluminum
carbon (graphite)
copper
gold
hydrogen
iron
Compound
ammonia (liquid)
ethanol
water (solid)
water (liquid)
water (gas)
Other material
air
concrete
glass
granite
wood
Specific heat capacity
(J/g ·˚C at 25˚C)
0.900
0.711
0.385
0.129
14.267
0.444
4.70
2.46
2.01
4.184
2.01
1.02
0.88
0.84
0.79
1.76
Table E.15 Average Bond Energies
Energy
(kJ/mol)
Energy
(kJ/mol)
Bond
Energy
(kJ/mol)
Bond
Energy
(kJ/mol)
Bond
Bond
Hydrogen
Carbon
Nitrogen
Phosphorus
and sulfur
C—C
C—N
C—O
C—F
C—Si
C—P
C—S
C—Cl
C—Br
C—I
347
305
358
552
305
264
259
397
280
209
N—N
N—O
N—F
N—Si
N—P
N—S
N—Cl
N—Br
N—I
160
201
272
330
209
464
200
276
159
H—H
H—C
H—N
H—O
H—F
H—Si
H—P
H—S
H—Cl
H—Br
H—I
H—Mg
436
338
339
460
570
299
297
344
432
366
298
126
P—P
P—S
P—F
P—Cl
P—Br
P—I
S—S
S—F
S—Cl
S—Br
S—I
210
444
490
331
272
184
266
343
277
218
170
c o n t i n u e d …
Energy
(kJ/mol)
Bond
Energy
(kJ/mol)
Bond
Energy
(kJ/mol)
Bond
Energy
(kJ/mol)
Bond
Oxygen
Silicon
Halogens
Multiple bonds
O—O
O—F
O—Si
O—P
O—S
O—Cl
O—Br
O—I
204
222
368
351
265
269
235
249
Si—Si
Si—P
Si—S
Si—F
Si—Cl
226
364
226
553
381
Si—I
O
Si
293
640
Si—Br
368
Br—I
F—Cl
F—Br
F—I
256
280
272
Cl—Br
217
Cl—I
F—F
211
179
159
Cl—Cl
243
Br—Br
I—I
193
151
C
C
C
N
N
O
C
C
C
N
C
N
O
N
O
O
C
N
O
N
607
615
745
418
631
498
839
891
1077
945
Note: The values in this table represent average values
for the dissociation of bonds between the pairs of atoms
listed. The true values may vary for different molecules.
Table E.16 Average Bond Lengths
Length
(pm)
Bond
Length
(pm)
Bond
Bond
Length
(pm)
Length
(pm)
Bond
Hydrogen
Carbon
Nitrogen
C—C
C—N
C—O
C—F
C—Si
C—P
C—S
C—Cl
C—Br
C—I
154
147
143
133
186
187
181
177
194
213
N—N
N—O
N—F
N—Si
N—P
N—S
N—Cl
N—Br
N—I
146
144
139
172
177
168
191
214
222
H—H
74
H—C
H—N
H—O
H—F
H—Si
H—P
H—S
H—Cl
H—Br
H—I
109
101
96
92
148
142
134
127
141
161
H—Mg
173
Phosphorus
and sulfur
P—P
P—S
P—F
P—Cl
P—Br
P—I
S—S
S—F
S—Cl
S—Br
S—I
221
210
156
204
222
243
204
158
201
225
234
Oxygen
Silicon
Halogens
Multiple bonds
O—O
O—F
O—Si
O—P
O—S
O—Cl
O—Br
O—I
148
142
161
160
151
164
172
194
Si—Si
Si—P
Si—S
Si—F
Si—Cl
234
227
210
156
204
F—Cl
F—Br
F—I
166
178
187
Cl—Br
214
Cl—I
Si—Br
216
Br—I
Si—I
240
F—F
243
248
143
Cl—Cl
199
Br—Br
228
I—I
266
C
C
C
N
N
O
C
C
C
N
C
N
O
N
O
O
C
N
O
N
134
127
123
122
120
121
121
115
113
110
Note: The values in this table are average values. The
length of a bond may be slightly different in different
molecules, depending on the intramolecular forces
within the molecules.
Appendix E • MHR 599
Appendix F
Titration Guidelines
Rinsing the Pipette
A pipette is used to measure and transfer a precise
volume of liquid. You rinse a pipette with the solu-
tion whose volume you are measuring. This ensures
that the solution will not be diluted or contaminated.
1. Pour a sample of standard solution into a clean,
dry beaker.
2. Place the pipette tip in a beaker of distilled water.
Squeeze the suction bulb. Maintain your grip
while placing it over the stem of the pipette. Do
not insert the stem into the bulb. (If your suction
bulbs have valves, your teacher will show you
how to use them.)
Filling the Pipette
6. Place the tip of the pipette below the surface of
the solution.
7. Hold the suction bulb loosely on the end of the
glass stem. Use the suction bulb to draw liquid
up just past the etched volume mark. (See Figure
F.1.)
8. As quickly and smoothly as you can, slide the
bulb off and place your index ﬁnger over the end
of the glass stem.
Draw a bit
Figure F.1
more liquid than you need
into the pipette. It is easier
to reduce this volume than
it is to add more solution to
the pipette.
The bottom of
Figure F.2
the meniscus must align
exactly with the etched
mark.
TITRATION TIP
Practice removing the bulb and replacing it with
your index ﬁnger (or thumb). You need to be able
to perform this action quickly and smoothly.
600 MHR • Appendix F
3. Relax your grip on the bulb to draw up a small vol-
ume of distilled water.
4. Remove the bulb, and discard the water by letting it
drain out.
5. Rinse the pipette by drawing several millilitres of
solution from the beaker into it. Rotate and rock the
pipette to coat the inner surface with solution.
Discard the rinse. Rinse the pipette twice in this
way. It is now ready to ﬁll with standard solution.
TITRATION TIP
Never use your mouth instead of a suction bulb
to draw a liquid into a pipette. The liquid could be
corrosive or poisonous. As well, you would contami-
nate the glass stem.
9. Gently roll your ﬁnger slightly away from end of
the stem to let solution drain slowly out.
10. When the bottom of the meniscus aligns with the
etched mark, as in Figure F.2, press your ﬁnger
back over the end of the stem. This will prevent
more solution from draining out.
11. Touch the tip of the pipette to the side of the beaker
to remove any clinging drop. See Figure F.3. The
measured volume inside the pipette is now ready
to be transferred to an Erlenmeyer ﬂask or a volu-
metric ﬂask.
You can prevent a
Figure F.3
“stubborn” drop from clinging to
the pipette tip by touching the tip to
the inside of the glass surface.
Transferring the Solution
12. Place the tip of the pipette against the inside
glass wall of the ﬂask. Let the solution drain
slowly, by removing your ﬁnger from the stem.
13. After the solution drains, wait several seconds
and then touch the tip to the inside wall of the
ﬂask to remove any drop on the end. Note: You
may notice a small amount of liquid remaining in
the tip. The pipette was calibrated to retain this
amount. Do not try to remove it.
Adding the Indicator
14. Add two or three drops of indicator to the ﬂask
and its contents. Do not add too much indicator.
Using more does not make the colour change
easier to see. Also, indicators are usually weak
acids. Too much can change the amount of base
needed for neutralization. You are now ready to
prepare the apparatus for the titration.
Rinsing the Burette
A burette is a graduated glass tube with a tap at
one end. It is used to accurately measure the
volume of liquid added during a titration
experiment.
15. To rinse the burette, close the tap and add about
10 mL of distilled water from a wash bottle.
16. Tip the burette to one side, and roll it gently
back and forth so that the water comes in
contact with all inner surfaces.
TITRATION TIP
If you are right-handed, the tap should be on your
right as you face the burette. Use your left hand to
operate the tap. Use your right hand to swirl the
liquid in the Erlenmeyer ﬂask. If you are left-handed,
reverse this arrangement.
Filling the Burette
19. Assemble a retort stand and burette clamp to
hold the burette. Place a funnel in the top of the
burette.
20. With the tap closed, add solution until the liquid
is above the zero mark. Remove the funnel.
Carefully open the tap. Drain the liquid into a
beaker until the bottom of the meniscus is at or
below the zero mark.
21. Touch the tip of the burette against the beaker to
remove any clinging drop. Check that the portion
of the burette that is below the tap is ﬁlled with
liquid and contains no air bubbles.
Reading the Burette
24. A meniscus reader is a small white card with a thick
black line on it. Hold the card behind the burette,
with the black line just under the meniscus, as in
Figure F.4. Record the volume added from the
burette to the nearest 0.01 mL.
TITRATION TIP
Observe the level of solution in the burette so that
your eye is level with the bottom of the meniscus.
17. Hold the burette over a sink. Open the tap, and
let the water drain out. While you do this, check
that the tap does not leak. Make sure that it turns
smoothly and easily.
18. Rinse the burette with 5 mL to 10 mL of the solu-
tion that will be measured. Remember to open
the tap to rinse the lower portion of the burette.
Rinse the burette twice, discarding the liquid
each time.
22. Record the initial burette reading in your note-
book.
23. Replace the beaker with the Erlenmeyer ﬂask that
you prepared earlier. Place a sheet of white paper
under the Erlenmeyer to help you see the indicator
colour change that will occur near the endpoint.
TITRATION TIP
Near the endpoint, when you see the indicator
change colour as liquid enters the ﬂask from the
burette, slow the addition of liquid. The endpoint
can occur very quickly.
A meniscus
Figure F.4
reader helps you read the
volume of liquid more easily
Appendix F • MHR 601
Glossary
Section numbers are provided in parentheses, where
applicable. Terms that appear in the Concepts and Skills
Review are labelled (Review).
alkyl halide (haloalkane): an alkane in which one or
more hydrogen atoms have been replaced with
halogen atoms (1.3)
A
absorption spectrum: the spectrum that is produced
when electrons of atoms absorb photons of certain
wavelengths, causing the electrons to be excited from
lower energy levels to higher energy levels (3.1)
accuracy: the closeness of a measurement to an
accepted value
acid-base titration curve: the graph for an acid-base
titration, in which the pH of an acid (or base) is
plotted versus the volume of the base (or acid) added
(8.4)
acid dissociation constant (Ka): the equilibrium
constant for the ionization of a weak acid in water,
giving the hydronium ion and the conjugate base of
the acid (8.2)
activated complex: a highly unstable species that has
partial bonds and is neither product nor reactant;
shown at the transition state (6.3)
activation energy (Ea): the minimum energy that is
required for a successful reaction between colliding
molecules (6.3)
active site: the small portion of an enzyme that is
involved in a catalyzed reaction (6.4)
addition polymerization: a reaction in which monomers
with double bonds are joined together, through
multiple addition reactions, to form a polymer (2.3)
addition reaction: an organic reaction in which atoms
are added to a multiple carbon-carbon bond (2.1)
alcohol: an organic compound that contains the −OH
functional group (1.3)
aldehyde: an organic compound that has a double-
bonded oxygen and a hydrogen atom bonded to
the ﬁrst carbon of a carbon chain (1.4)
aliphatic hydrocarbon: an organic compound that
contains carbon atoms bonded in chains and/or
non-aromatic rings; alkanes, alkenes, and alkynes
are aliphatic hydrocarbons (1.2)
alkane: a hydrocarbon that contains carbon-carbon
single bonds (1.2)
alkene: a hydrocarbon that contains at least one carbon-
carbon double bond (1.2)
alkoxy group: an −OR group, where O represents an
oxygen atom and R represents an alkyl group (1.3)
alkyl group: an alkane branch that is obtained by
removing one hydrogen atom from an alkane (1.2)
602 MHR • Glossary
alkyne: a hydrocarbon that has at least one carbon-
carbon triple bond (1.2)
allotropes: different forms of the same element that
have different physical and chemical properties (4.3)
amide: an organic compound that has a carbon atom
double-bonded to an oxygen atom and single-bonded
to a nitrogen atom (1.4)
amine: an organic compound that has the functional
group −NR2, where N represents a nitrogen atom and
R represents a hydrogen atom or an alkyl group (1.3)
amino acid: an organic compound that contains both
the amine and carboxylic acid functional groups,
connected by a central carbon atom; the monomer
from which proteins are made (2.3)
amino group: the −NH2 functional group (1.3)
amorphous solids: solids that have indistinct shapes,
because their particle arrangements lack order (4.3)
amphoteric: the ability of a substance to act as a proton
donor (an acid) in one reaction and a proton acceptor
(a base) in a different reaction (8.1)
anion: a negatively charged ion
aromatic hydrocarbon: a hydrocarbon that contains one
or more rings and has electrons shared in a
particularly stable conﬁguration; often drawn with
alternating single and double bonds (1.2)
Arrhenius theory: (1887) the theory stating that acids
and bases are deﬁned in terms of their structure and
the ions produced when they dissolve in water;
deﬁnes an acid as a substance that produces
hydrogen ions in water and a base as a substance
that produces hydroxide ions in water (8.1)
asymmetrical alkene: an alkene that has different
groups on either side of the double bond (2.2)
atom: the basic unit of an element, which still retains
the element’s properties (Review)
atomic mass number (mass number, A): the total
number of protons and neutrons in the nucleus
of an atom (Review)
atomic number (Z): the number of protons in the
nucleus of one atom of a particular element (Review)
atomic symbol: a one-letter or two-letter abbreviation
of the name of an element (Review)
atmosphere (atm): a unit of pressure; equal to
101.325 kPa or 760 mm Hg
aufbau principle: the principle behind an imaginary
process of building up the electronic structure of
the atoms, in order of atomic number (3.3)
average rate: the average change in concentration of a
reactant or product over a given period of time (6.1)
Avogadro constant (NA): the experimentally determined
catalyst: a substance that increases the rate of a reaction
and is regenerated at the end of the reaction, so it can
be re-used (6.1)
number of particles in 1 mol of a substance; the
currently accepted value is 6.022 141 99 × 1023
(Review)
B
bent shape: an angular molecular shape, e.g., around
a central oxygen atom with two lone pairs that has
formed two single bonds (1.1)
bimolecular elementary reaction: a reaction in which
two particles collide and react (6.4)
binary compound: a compound that contains atoms of
two elements (Review)
biochemistry: the study of the organic compounds and
reactions that occur in living things (2.3)
bond dipole: a separation of negative and positive
charge along the length of a bond (1.1)
bond energy: the energy required to break a bond (4.1)
Brønsted-Lowry theory: the theory recognizing acid-
base reactions as a chemical equilibrium; deﬁnes an
acid as a substance from which a proton can be
removed and a base as a substance that can accept a
proton (8.1)
buffer capacity: the amount of acid or base that can be
added to a solution before signiﬁcant change occurs
to the pH of the solution (8.3)
buffer solution: a solution that resists changes in pH
when moderate amounts of acid or base are added
(8.3)
C
calorimeter: a device that is used to measure enthalpy
changes for chemical and physical processes  (5.2)
carbohydrate (saccharide): a biological molecule that,
in its linear form, contains either an aldehyde group
or a ketone group, along with two or more hydroxyl
groups; when present in ring form, it contains an
ether linkage and hydroxyl groups (2.3)
carbonyl group: the functional group of aldehydes and
ketones, composed of a carbon atom double-bonded
to an oxygen atom (1.4)
carboxyl group: the functional group of carboxylic
acids, composed of a carbon atom double-bonded to
an oxygen atom and single-bonded to an −OH group;
written as −COOH (1.4)
carboxylic acid: an organic compound that contains the
carboxyl functional group, composed of a carbon
atom double-bonded to an oxygen atom and single-
bonded to an −OH group (1.4)
cation: a positively charged ion
Le Châtelier’s principle: the principle stating that a
dynamic equilibrium tends to respond so as to
relieve the effect of any change in the conditions that
affect the equilibrium (7.4)
chemical: traditionally, a substance that has been
chemically produced in a laboratory; also deﬁned as
a substance that is composed of atoms (1.1)
chemical bond: the force that holds atoms together in
the form of an ionic compound or molecule (4.1)
cis-isomer: a geometric isomer in which the two largest
groups are on the same side of the double bond
(Review)
cis-trans isomers: two compounds that are identical
except for the arrangement of groups across a
double bond; also see geometric isomers, cis-isomer,
trans-isomer (Review)
coffee-cup calorimeter: a calorimeter that consists of
two nested polystyrene cups (coffee cups) sitting in
a 400 mL beaker (5.2)
collision theory: the theory stating that reacting
particles (atoms, molecules, or ions) must collide
with one another for a reaction to occur (6.3)
combustion reaction: the reaction of a substance with
oxygen, producing oxides, heat, and light; burning
(Review)
common ion effect: the effect on a system at equilibrium
when a surplus of one of the reactant ions is added
to the system; an application of Le Châtelier’s
principle (7.4)
complete combustion: combustion in which a
hydrocarbon fuel is completely reacted in the
presence of sufﬁcient oxygen, producing only carbon
dioxide, CO2(g), and water vapour, H2O(g) (Review)
complete structural diagram: a symbolic representation
of all the atoms in a molecule, showing how they are
bonded (Review, 1.1)
compound: a pure substance that consists of two or
more elements chemically combined in ﬁxed
proportions (Review)
concentration: an expression of the amount of solute
that is present in a given volume of solution (Review)
condensation polymerization: a reaction in which
monomers with two functional groups, usually one at
each end, are joined together by the formation of
ester bonds or amide bonds to produce a polymer
(2.3)
Glossary • MHR 603
condensation reaction: an organic reaction in which
two molecules combine to form a larger molecule,
producing a small molecule (such as water) as a
second product (2.1)
condensed structural diagram: a symbolic
representation of an organic compound, showing the
atoms present and the bonds between carbon atoms
(Review, 1.1)
conjugate acid-base pair: an acid and a base that differ
by one proton (8.1)
constant-pressure calorimeter: a calorimeter (such as a
coffee-cup calorimeter) that is open to the
atmosphere (5.2)
coordinate covalent bond: a covalent bond in which
one atom contributes both electrons to the shared
electron pair bond (4.2)
covalent bond: a chemical bond in which electrons are
shared between two atoms (1.1, 4.1)
crystalline solids: solids that have organized particle
arrangements and, therefore, have distinct shapes
(4.3)
cycloalkane: an alkane in the shape of a ring (1.2)
D
decomposition reaction: a chemical reaction in which a
compound breaks down into elements or simpler
compounds (Review)
derivatives: organic compounds that are structurally
based on, or derived from, other organic compounds
(1.4)
dilution: the addition of water or another appropriate
solvent to a solution in order to reduce the
concentration of solute
dipole: a separation of negative and positive charge by
a short distance; called a bond dipole if the charge is
separated along the length of a bond; called a dipole
or molecular dipole if the charge is separated across
a molecule (4.2)
dipole-dipole force: an intermolecular attraction
between opposite charges of polar molecules
(1.1, 4.3)
dipole-induced dipole force: an intermolecular force in
which a polar molecule distorts the electron density
of a non-polar molecule to produce a temporary
dipole; similar to an ion-induced dipole force; non-
polar gases (such as oxygen and nitrogen) dissolve,
sparingly, in water because of dipole-induced dipole
forces (4.3)
disaccharide: a biological molecule (carbohydrate) that
is composed of two saccharide units; sucrose (table
sugar) is a disaccharide (2.3)
604 MHR • Glossary
dispersion force: a weak intermolecular attractive force
that is present between all molecules, due to
temporary dipoles (4.3)
disproportionation: a reaction in which a single
substance undergoes both oxidation and reduction
(10.1)
dissociation: the separation of a compound into
oppositely charged ions when dissolved in water
(Review)
DNA (2-deoxyribonucleic acid): essential genetic
material that is found in the nucleus of every cell; a
double helix with two polymeric strands, each strand
composed of repeating units called nucleotides (2.3)
double bond: a covalent bond in which two pairs of
electrons are shared between two atoms (1.1)
double displacement reaction: a chemical reaction in
which the cations of two ionic compounds exchange
places, resulting in the formation of two new
compounds (Review)
E
electrolyte: a solute that conducts a current in an
aqueous solution (11.1)
electromagnetic spectrum: the entire range of
wavelengths of electromagnetic waves, including
visible light waves
electron: a negatively charged particle with a mass of
0.000 545 u
electron afﬁnity: the change in energy that accompanies
the addition of an electron to an atom in the gaseous
state
electron conﬁguration: a shorthand notation that shows
the number and arrangement of electrons in an
atom’s orbitals (3.3)
electronegativity: a relative measure of an atom’s ability
to attract shared electrons in a chemical bond
(Review, 1.1)
element: a pure substance that cannot be separated
chemically into any simpler substances (Review)
elementary reaction: a reaction that involves a single
molecular event, such as a simple collision between
atoms, molecules, or ions; can involve the formation
of different molecules or ions; may involve a change
in the energy or geometry of the starting molecules;
cannot be broken down into simpler steps (6.4)
elimination reaction: a reaction in which atoms are
removed from a compound and a multiple bond is
formed (2.1)
emission spectrum: a characteristic spectrum of distinct,
coloured lines that results when excited atoms emit
light; can be observed through a spectroscope or a
diffraction grating when a high voltage is passed
through a gas in a glass tube (3.1)
empirical formula: a formula that is reduced to the
F
smallest ratio of atoms present
endothermic reaction: a reaction that results in a net
absorption of energy (5.1)
endpoint: the point in a reaction when an indicator
changes colour; occurs over a range of about 2 pH
units (8.4, 9.1)
enthalpy: the total kinetic energy and potential energy
of a substance (5.1)
enthalpy change: the difference between the enthalpy of
the reactants and the enthalpy of the products in a
reaction (5.1)
entropy: randomness or disorder in a system (7.2)
enzyme: an enormous protein molecule that acts as a
biological catalyst (6.4)
equilibrium constant (Keq): the ratio of the forward rate
constant, kf, divided by the reverse rate constant, kr;
also a ratio of products over reactants (7.3)
equilibrium (dynamic): an equilibrium in which
opposing changes to a closed chemical system occur
simultaneously at the same rate (7.1)
equivalence point: the point in a titration when just
enough acid and base have been mixed so that a
complete reaction occurs and there is no excess of
either reactant (8.4, 9.1)
ester: an organic compound that contains a carbon atom
double-bonded to an oxygen atom and single-bonded
to an alkoxy group; the product of a reaction between
a carboxylic acid and an alcohol (1.4)
esteriﬁcation reaction: the reaction of a carboxylic acid
with an alcohol to form an ester; a speciﬁc type of
condensation reaction (2.2)
ether: an organic compound that has the general
formula ROR; consists of two alkyl groups joined by
an oxygen atom (1.3)
evidence of reaction: proof that a reaction has occurred;
may be a change in colour, the formation of a new
substance, or the evolution of heat
exclusion principle: the principle stating that a
maximum of two electrons of opposite spin can
occupy an orbital (3.3)
exothermic reaction: a reaction that results in a net
release of energy (5.1)
expanded molecular formula: a symbolic representation
that shows the arrangement of atoms in a molecule;
an example is CH3CH2CH3 for propane, C3H8
(Review)
expanded valence energy level: the valence energy level
of a central atom, where the valence energy level has
more than eight electrons (4.2)
fat: a lipid that contains a glycerol molecule bonded by
ester linkages to three long-chain carboxylic acids
(2.3)
favourable change: a change that has a tendency to
occur naturally under certain conditions (7.2)
ﬁrst-order reaction: a reaction with an overall reaction
order of 1 (6.2)
formation reaction: a reaction in which a substance is
formed from elements in their standard states (5.3)
fractional precipitation: a process by which ions are
selectively precipitated from solution, leaving other
ions still dissolved (9.3)
free-electron model: a model in which a metal is
thought of as a densely packed core of metallic
kernels (nuclei and inner electrons) within a
delocalized region of shared, mobile valence
electrons (4.1)
free energy: available energy; a measure of the useful
work that can be obtained from a reaction (7.2)
functional group: a group of bonded atoms in an
organic compound, which reacts in a characteristic
way; if only one functional group is present, it
determines the reactivity of the compound in which
it occurs (1.2)
G
general formula: a formula that represents a family of
simple organic compounds; written as R + functional
group, where R represents an alkyl group (1.3)
geometric isomers: two compounds that are identical
except for the arrangement of groups across a double
bond; also see cis-trans isomers, cis-isomer, trans-
isomer (Review)
global warming: a gradual increase in the average
temperature of Earth’s atmosphere (2.4)
greenhouse gas: a gas that prevents some of the heat
produced by solar radiation from leaving the
atmosphere (2.4)
ground state: the most stable energy state (3.2)
H
half-life (t 1
): the time that is needed for the mass or
2
concentration of a reactant to decrease by one-half
of its initial value (6.2)
half-reaction: a balanced equation that shows the
number of electrons involved in either oxidation
or reduction (10.1)
Glossary • MHR 605
half-reaction method: a method for balancing a redox
reaction; the oxidation and reduction half-reactions
are balanced separately, multiplied to have the same
number of electrons, and then combined (10.3)
haloalkane (alkyl halide): an alkane in which one or
more hydrogen atoms have been replaced with
halogen atoms (1.3)
heat: the transfer of thermal energy (5.1)
heat capacity: the amount of energy that is needed to
raise the temperature of an object 1˚C or 1 K (5.2)
heat of solution (∆Hsoln): the enthalpy change that
occurs when a solution forms from a solute and a
solvent (5.1)
Hess’s law of heat summation: the scientiﬁc law stating
that the enthalpy change of a physical or chemical
process depends only on the beginning conditions
(reactants) and the end conditions (products) and is
independent of the pathway of the reaction or the
number of intermediate steps in the reaction (5.3)
heterogeneous catalyst: a catalyst that exists in a phase
that is different from the phase of the catalyzed
reaction (6.4)
heterogeneous equilibrium: an equilibrium in which
reactants and products in the chemical system are in
different phases; an example is a solution containing
a crystal of solute (7.1)
heterogeneous mixture: a mixture in which the different
components can be seen distinctly (Review)
homogeneous catalyst: a catalyst that exists in the same
phase as the reactants (6.4)
homogeneous equilibrium: an equilibrium in which all
the reactants and the products in the system are in
the same phase (7.1)
homogeneous mixture: a mixture in which the different
components are mixed so that they appear to be a
single substance; a solution (Review)
Hund’s rule: the rule stating that the lowest energy state
for an atom has the maximum number of unpaired
electrons allowed by the Pauli exclusion principle in
a given energy sublevel. (3.3)
hydrocarbon: a molecular compound that contains only
hydrogen and carbon atoms (1.2)
hydrogen bonding: the strong intermolecular attraction
between molecules that contain a hydrogen atom
bonded to an atom of a highly electronegative
element, especially oxygen (1.3, 4.3)
hydroﬂuorocarbons (HFCs): organic compounds that are
composed of hydrogen, carbon, and ﬂuorine; can be
used to replace chloroﬂuorocarbons (2.4)
hydrolysis reaction: a reaction in which a molecule is
split in two by the addition of a water molecule (2.1)
hydronium ion: an aqueous hydrated proton, H3O+(8.1)
606 MHR • Glossary
hydroxyl group: the functional group of the alcohol
family of organic compounds; a non-basic −OH group
(1.3)
I
ICE table: a problem-solving table that shows the initial
conditions, the change, and the equilibrium
conditions (7.3)
ideal gas equation: the equation that relates the
pressure, volume, number of moles, and temperature
of an ideal gas; PV = nRT (Review)
incomplete combustion: combustion in which
insufﬁcient oxygen prevents a hydrocarbon fuel from
reacting completely, resulting in a combination of
products that may include carbon dioxide, CO2(g),
water vapour, H2O(g), carbon monoxide, CO(g), and
solid carbon, C(s) (Review)
initial rates method: a method for measuring and
comparing the initial rates of reactions (6.2)
instantaneous rate: the rate of a reaction at a particular
time; can be determined by drawing a tangent to a
concentration-time curve at the given time and
ﬁnding the slope of the tangent (6.1)
intermolecular forces: forces that act between molecules
or ions to inﬂuence the physical properties of
compounds (1.3, 4.3)
intramolecular forces: forces that are exerted within a
molecule or polyatomic ion; an example is covalent
bonds (4.3)
ion: a positively or negatively charged particle that
results from a neutral atom or group of atoms giving
up or gaining electrons (Review)
ion-dipole force: the attraction between an ion and a
polar molecule (4.3)
ionic bond: a bond between oppositely charged ions
that arises from electron transfer; usually involves
metal atoms and non-metal atoms (4.1)
ionic equation (total ionic equation): a form of chemical
equation that shows dissociated ions of soluble ionic
compounds (Review)
ion-induced dipole force: an intermolecular force in
which an ion distorts the electron density of a non-
polar molecule to produce a temporary dipole (4.3)
ion product (Qsp): an expression that is identical to
the solubility product constant, but its value is
calculated using concentrations that are not
necessarily those at equilibrium (9.3)
ion product constant for water (Kw ): the product of
the concentration of the hydronium ions and the
hydroxide ions in a solution ([H3O+][OH−]); always
equal to 1.0 × 10−14 at 25˚C (8.2)
isomers: compounds that have the same chemical
formula but different molecular arrangements and
properties (Review)
IUPAC: the acronym for International Union of Pure
and Applied Chemistry, an organization that speciﬁes
rules for chemical names and symbols (1.2)
K
Kelvin scale: a temperature scale that begins at the
theoretical point of absolute zero kinetic energy, or
−273.15˚C; each unit (a kelvin) is equal to 1˚C
ketone: an organic compound that has an oxygen atom
double-bonded to a carbon within a carbon chain (1.4)
L
lattice energy: the energy that is given off as an ionic
crystal forms from the gaseous ions of its elements
(4.1)
law of chemical equilibrium: the law stating that there
is a constant ratio, at equilibrium, between the
concentrations of products and reactants (7.3)
law of conservation of energy: the law stating that the
total energy of the universe is constant (5.1)
Le Châtelier’s principle: the principle stating that a
dynamic equilibrium tends to respond so as to
relieve the effect of any change in the conditions that
affect the equilibrium (7.4)
Lewis structure: a symbolic representation of the
arrangement of the valence electrons of an element or
compound (1.1, 4.1)
limiting reactant: the reactant that is completely
consumed during a chemical reaction, limiting the
amount of product (Review)
linear shape: the molecular shape that occurs when a
central atom is bonded to only two other atoms,
when either zero or three lone pairs are present
(1.1, 4.2)
line structural diagram: a graphical representation of
the bonds between carbon atoms in an organic
compound, usually omitting hydrogen atoms and
carbon-hydrogen bonds (Review, 1.1)
lipid: a biological molecule that is not soluble in water
but is soluble in a non-polar solvent, such as benzene
or hexanes (2.3)
lone pairs: pairs of electrons in an atom’s valence shell
that are not involved in covalent bonding (1.1, 4.1)
M
magnetic quantum number (ml): an integer that
indicates the orientation of an orbital in the space
around the nucleus; values range from −l to +l,
including 0 (3.2)
Markovnikov’s rule: the rule stating that, in an addition
reaction of two asymmetrical reactants, the halogen
atom or −OH group is usually added to the more
substituted carbon atom (the carbon atom that is
bonded to the largest number of other carbon atoms);
the hydrogen atom is added to the carbon atom that
is bonded to the largest number of hydrogen atoms
(2.2)
mass defect: the difference in mass between a nucleus
and its nucleons (5.1)
mass number (atomic mass number): the number of
protons plus the number of neutrons in the nucleus
of an atom of a particular element (Review)
matter: anything that has mass and takes up space
(Review)
metallic bond: the force of attraction between positively
charged metal ions, and the pool of valence electrons
that moves among them (4.1)
millimetre of mercury (mm Hg): a unit of pressure that
is based on the height of a column of mercury in a
barometer or manometer; equal to 1 torr
miscible: a term used to describe substances that are
able to mix with each other in any proportion (1.3)
mixture: a physical combination of two or more kinds
of matter, in which each component retains its own
characteristics (Review)
mole (mol): the SI base unit for amount of substance;
contains the same number of atoms, molecules, or
formula units as exactly 12 g of carbon-12 (Review)
molecular compound: a non-conducting compound
whose intramolecular bonds are not broken when the
compound changes state
molecular formula: a chemical formula that gives the
actual number of atoms of each element in a
molecule or formula unit (Review)
molecular polarity: the distribution of charge on a
molecule; if a molecule is polar, it has some
molecular polarity (1.1)
molecularity: the number of reactant particles
(molecules, atoms, or ions) that are involved in an
elementary reaction (6.4)
mole ratio: a ratio that compares the number of moles of
different substances in a balanced chemical equation
(Review)
monomers: small molecules that are combined in long
chains to produce very large molecules called
polymers (2.3)
monosaccharide: the smallest molecule possible for a
carbohydrate; composed of one saccharide unit (2.3)
Montréal Protocol: an international agreement that
limits the global use of CFCs and other ozone-
destroying chemicals (2.4)
Glossary • MHR 607
N
natural: a substance that occurs in nature and is not
artiﬁcial (1.1)
net ionic equation: a representation of a chemical
reaction that shows only the ions and precipitate(s)
involved in the chemical change (Review)
network solids: solids in which atoms are bonded
covalently into continuous two-dimensional or three-
dimensional arrays with a wide range of properties
(4.3)
neutralization reaction: a double displacement reaction
in which an acid and a base combine to form water
and a salt
neutron: an uncharged subatomic particle in the
nucleus of an atom; has a mass of 1 u
non-renewable resources: resources that will run out;
once the supply is used up, there will be no more
(5.4)
nuclear binding energy: the energy that is associated
with the strong force holding a nucleus together;
accounts for the mass defect (5.1)
nuclear ﬁssion: a reaction in which a heavy nucleus
splits into lighter nuclei (5.1)
nuclear fusion: a reaction in which two smaller nuclei
fuse to form a larger nucleus (5.1)
nuclear model of the atom: a model in which the
electrons move around the nucleus; also called a
planetary model (3.1)
nucleotide: the monomer from which DNA and RNA
are composed; consists of three parts: a sugar, a
phosphate group, and a base; a strand of DNA may
be made of more than one million nucleotides (2.3)
nucleus: the central, heavy region of an atom that
contains the protons and neutrons
nylon (polyamide): a condensation polymer that
contains amide bonds (2.3)
O
octahedral shape: a molecular shape in which six atoms
are bonded to a central atom at 90˚ angles (4.2)
ore: a solid, naturally occurring compound, or mixture
of compounds, from which a metal can be extracted
(10.1)
organic chemistry: the study of carbon-based
compounds (1.1)
organic compound: a molecular compound that is based
on carbon; usually contains carbon-carbon and
carbon-hydrogen bonds (1.1)
overall reaction order: the sum of the exponents in the
rate law equation (6.2)
oxidation: deﬁned as the loss of electrons (10.1); in
organic chemistry, a reaction in which an organic
compound is oxidized by forming more C(cid:2)O bonds
or fewer C(cid:2)H bonds (2.1)
oxidation number method: a method for balancing
redox equations; based on the fact that the total
increase in the oxidation number(s) of the oxidized
element(s) equals the total decrease in the oxidation
number(s) of the reduced element(s) (10.4)
oxidation numbers: actual or hypothetical charges that
are used to describe redox reactions with covalent
reactants or products; assigned using a set of rules
(10.2)
oxidation-reduction reaction (redox reaction): a
reaction in which one reactant loses electrons
(oxidation) and another reactant gains electrons
(reduction) (10.1)
oxidizing agent: a reactant that oxidizes another
reactant and gains electrons itself (is reduced) in
the process (10.1)
oxoacid: an acid that contains oxygen atoms (8.1)
P
parent alkane: an alkane that contains the same number
of carbons and the same basic structure as a more
complex organic compound; a concept used
primarily for nomenclature (1.3)
periodic table: a system for organizing the elements, by
atomic number, into groups (columns) and periods
(rows) (Review)
pH: the logarithm of the hydronium ion concentration
octet rule: the rule stating that atoms bond in such a
(8.2)
way as to attain eight electrons in their valence shells
(Review, 4.1)
photons: a quantum of electromagnetic energy that has
particle-like properties (3.1)
oil: a fat that is liquid at room temperature (2.3)
orbital diagram: a diagram that uses a box for each
orbital in any given principal energy level (3.3)
orbital-shape quantum number (l): the second quantum
number; refers to the energy sublevels within each
principal energy level (3.2)
orbitals: solved wave functions that describe a region of
probable location of electrons (3.2)
plastic: a synthetic polymer that can be heated and
moulded into speciﬁc shapes and forms (2.3)
pOH: the logarithm of the hydroxide ion concentration
(8.2)
polar: having an uneven distribution of charge (1.1)
polar covalent bond: a bond in which electrons are
unequally shared between two atoms (Review, 1.1,
4.1)
608 MHR • Glossary
polyamide (nylon): a condensation polymer that
contains amide bonds (2.3)
polyatomic ion: an ion, usually negatively charged, that
quantitative analysis: the branch of analytical chemistry
that involves determining how much of a compound,
element, or ion is in a sample (9.3)
contains more than one atom
quantum: the discrete quantity of energy that an atom
polyester: a condensation polymer that contains ester
can absorb or emit (3.1)
bonds (2.3)
polymer: a large long-chain molecule with repeating
units; made by linking many small molecules called
monomers (2.3)
quantum mechanical model of the atom: a model that
describes atoms as having certain allowed quantities
of energy because of the wave-like properties of their
electrons (3.2)
polymerization reaction: a reaction in which monomers
are joined into a long chain called a polymer (2.1)
R
polyprotic acid: an acid that has more than one
hydrogen atom that dissociates in water (8.1)
rate constant (k): a proportionality constant; different
for each reaction at any given temperature (6.2)
polysaccharide: a carbohydrate that consists of ten or
rate-determining step: the slowest reaction step;
more saccharide units (2.3)
determines the rate of the reaction (6.4)
potential energy diagram: a diagram that charts the
potential energy of a reaction against the progress of
the reaction; can represent the increase in potential
energy during a chemical reaction (6.3)
precipitate: an insoluble solid that is formed by a
chemical reaction between two soluble compounds
rate law equation: an equation that describes the rate of
a reaction by the concentration of the reactants raised
to an exponent, e.g. Rate = k[A]m[B]n (6.2)
rate of reaction: the rate at which a reaction occurs;
measured in terms of reactant used or product
formed per unit time (6.1)
precision: the closeness of a measurement to other
reactant: a starting substance in a chemical reaction
measurements of the same object or phenomenon
primary alcohol: an alcohol that has the −OH group
bonded to a carbon atom, which is bonded to one
carbon atom and two hydrogen atoms (1.3)
primary amide: an amide that has only hydrogen atoms,
and no alkyl groups, attached to the nitrogen atom
(1.4)
primary amine: an amine that has one alkyl group and
two hydrogen atoms attached to the nitrogen atom
(1.3)
principal quantum number (n): a positive whole
number (integer) that indicates the energy level
and relative size of an atomic orbital (3.2)
product: a new substance that is formed in a chemical
reaction (Review)
protein: a natural polymer that is present in plants and
animals; composed of monomers called amino acids
(2.3)
proton: a positive subatomic particle that has an
approximate mass of 1 u; exists in the nucleus
of the atom
pure substance: a material that consists of only one type
of particle; a substance that has a deﬁnite chemical
composition (Review)
Q
qualitative analysis: the branch of analytical chemistry
that involves identifying elements, compounds,
and ions in samples of unknown or uncertain
composition (9.3)
(Review)
reaction intermediates: molecules, atoms, or ions that
appear in the elementary reactions but not in the
overall reaction (6.4)
reaction mechanism: a series of steps that make up an
overall reaction (6.4)
reaction quotient (Q): an expression that is identical to
the equilibrium constant expression but is calculated
using concentration values that are not necessarily
those at equilibrium (7.4)
redox reaction (oxidation-reduction reaction): a
reaction in which one reactant loses electrons
(oxidation) and another reactant gains electrons
(reduction) (10.1)
reducing agent: a reactant that reduces another reactant
and loses electrons (is oxidized) in the process (10.1)
reduction: deﬁned as the gain of electrons (10.1); in
organic chemistry, a reaction in which an organic
compound is reduced by forming more C(cid:2)H bonds
or fewer C(cid:2)O bonds (2.1)
renewable resources: resources that exist in inﬁnite
supply (5.4)
resonance structures: two or more Lewis structures
that show the same relative position of atoms but
different positions of electron pairs (4.2)
RNA (ribonucleic acid): a nucleic acid that is present in
the body’s cells; works closely with DNA to produce
proteins in the body (2.3)
Glossary • MHR 609
S
salt: any ionic compound that is formed in a
neutralization reaction from the anion of an acid
and the cation of a base
saturated: containing only single bonds (1.1)
secondary alcohol: an alcohol that has the −OH group
bonded to a carbon atom, which is bonded to two
other carbon atoms and one hydrogen atom (1.3)
secondary amide: an amide that has one alkyl group
attached to the nitrogen atom (1.4)
secondary amine: an amine that has two alkyl groups
and one hydrogen atom attached to the nitrogen
atom (1.3)
second law of thermodynamics: the law stating that
the total entropy of the universe is increasing (7.2)
stoichiometry: the study of the mass-mole-number
relationships in chemical reactions and formulas
(Review)
structural diagram: a two-dimensional representation
of the structure of a compound; can be a complete
diagram, a condensed diagram, or a line diagram
(Review)
structural isomers: two compounds that contain
the same number of each atom but in a different
arrangement; bonds would have to be broken to
rearrange one isomer into another (Review)
substitution reaction: a reaction in which a hydrogen
atom or a functional group is replaced by a different
functional group (2.1)
substrate: the reactant molecule (6.4)
surroundings: everything in the universe outside the
second order reaction: a reaction in which the overall
system (5.1)
reaction order is 2 (6.2)
symmetrical alkene: an alkene that has identical groups
SI: the international system of measurement units,
on either side of the double bond (2.2)
including units such as the metre, the kilogram, and
the mole; from the French Système internationale
d’unités (Review)
single bond: a covalent bond in which one pair of
electrons is shared between two atoms (1.1)
single displacement reaction: a chemical reaction in
which one element in a compound is replaced
(displaced) by another element (Review)
solubility: the amount of solute that dissolves in a given
quantity of solvent at a speciﬁc temperature
solubility product constant (Ksp): the product of the
concentrations of the ions of an ionic compound
in aqueous solution at 25˚C (9.2)
solute: a substance that is dissolved in a solution
(Review)
solvent: a substance that has other substances (solutes)
dissolved in it
speciﬁc heat capacity: a measure of the amount of heat
that is needed to raise the temperature of 1 g of a
substance 1˚C or 1 K (5.2)
spectator ions: ions that are present in a solution but do
not participate in the chemical reaction taking place
(Review)
spin quantum number (ms): the quantum number that
speciﬁes the direction in which the electron is
spinning with values of + 1
2 and − 1
2 (3.3)
standard enthalpy of formation: the quantity of energy
that is absorbed or released when 1 mol of a
compound is formed directly from its elements in
their standard states (5.3)
standard enthalpy of reaction: the enthalpy change
associated with a reaction that occurs at SATP (5.1)
starch: a glucose polysaccharide that is used by plants
to store energy; humans can digest starch (2.3)
610 MHR • Glossary
synthesis reaction: a chemical reaction in which two or
more reactants combine to produce a single, different
substance (Review)
system: the part of the universe that is being studied
and observed  (5.1)
T
temperature: a measure of the average kinetic energy of
the particles that make up a substance or system (5.1)
termolecular: a term that describes a reaction involving
three particles colliding (6.4)
tertiary alcohol: an alcohol that has the −OH group
bonded to a carbon atom, which is bonded to three
other carbon atoms (1.3)
tertiary amide: an amide that has two alkyl groups
attached to the nitrogen atom (1.4)
tertiary amine: an amine that has three alkyl groups
attached to the nitrogen atom (1.3)
tetrahedral shape: the most stable shape for a
compound that contains four atoms bonded to
a central atom with no lone pairs; the atoms are
positioned at the four corners of an imaginary
tetrahedron, and the angles between the bonds
are approximately 109.5˚ (1.1, 4.2)
thermochemical equation: a balanced chemical
equation that indicates the amount of energy
absorbed or released by the reaction it represents
(5.1)
thermochemistry: the study of the energy that is
involved in chemical reactions (5.1)
thermodynamics: the study of energy and energy
transfer (5.1)
torr: a unit of pressure; equal to 1 mm of mercury in
the column of a barometer or manometer
total ionic equation: a form of chemical equation that
shows dissociated ions of soluble ionic compounds
(Review)
trans-isomer: a geometric isomer in which the two
largest groups are on different sides of the double
bond (Review)
transition state: the top of the Ea barrier (the “hill”) in a
potential energy diagram (6.3)
transition state theory: the theory explaining what
happens when molecules collide in a reaction (6.3)
trigonal bipyramidal: a molecular shape in which ﬁve
atoms surround a central atom; three atoms are on a
horizontal plane at 120˚ angles to each other, and two
more atoms point straight up and straight down from
the plane (4.2)
trigonal planar: a molecular shape in which three
bonding groups surround a central atom; the three
bonded atoms are all in the same plane as the central
atom, at the corners of an invisible triangle (1.1, 4.2)
triple bond: a covalent bond in which three pairs of
electrons are shared between two atoms to create
a strong, inﬂexible bond (1.1)
U
unimolecular elementary reaction: a reaction in which
one molecule or ion reacts (6.4)
unsaturated: having one or more double or triple bonds
(1.2)
V
valence electrons: electrons that occupy the outer
occupied energy level of an atom in its ground state
(Review)
valence shell: the outermost shell of electrons
W
wax: a biological molecule that is an ester of a long-
chain alcohol or a long-chain carboxylic acid (2.3)
Z
zero sum rule: the rule stating that, for chemical
formulas of neutral compounds involving ions,
the sum of the positive charges and the negative
charges must equal zero (Review)
Glossary • MHR 611
Index
The page numbers in boldface type indicate the pages where the terms are defined. Terms that occur in Sample Problems
(SP), Investigations (inv), ExpressLabs (EL), and Thoughtlabs (TL) are also indicated.
1,1,2,2-tetrabromopropane, 68
1,1-difluoroethane, 101
1,1-dimethyl ethanol, 102
1,2,2,2-tetrafluoroethane, 101
1,2-dibromobutene, 58
1,2-dibromopropene, 68
1,2-dichlorobutane, 66
1,2-dimethylbenzene. See Ortho-xylene
1,3-butadiene, 6EL
1,3-dibromo-4-methylcyclohexane,
28SP
1,3-dimethylbenzene meta-dimethyl-
benzene. See Meta-xylene
1,4-dimethylbenzene para-dimethyl-
benzene. See Para-xylene
1,6-diaminohexane, 83
1,6-hexamethylenediamine, 205
1-bromo-1-butene, 68
1-bromobutane, 66
1-bromoethanol, 7
1-butene, 6EL, 66
1-butyne, 68
1-ethoxypropane, 30SP
1-ethylcyclopentane, 15SP
1-methoxypropane, 29
1-propanol, boiling point, 37
10-deacetylbaccatin III, 56
2,2-dimethylpropanal, 36SP
2,4,6-trinitromethylbenzene
(Also TNT), 18
2-bromo-1-butene, 68
2-bromopropane, 72SP
2-butanamide, 58
2-butanone, 72SP
2-butene, 66
2-butyne, 6EL
2-chloro-2-methylpentane, 67SP
2-deoxyribose, 93
2-hexyne, 12
2-methoxy-2-methyl propane, 102
2-methylbutanal, 36SP
2-methyl-pentene, 67SP
2-methylpropane, 15SP
2-pentanone, 36SP
2-propanol, 21
addition reaction product, 66
addition reaction, 66
boiling point, 25
elimination reactions, 59
predicting reaction, 72SP
reduction product, 61, 77SP
substitution reaction, 58
612 MHR • Index
3-chloro-2-methylpentane, 67SP
3-ethyl-2,2-dimethyl-3-heptene, 15SP
3-ethyl-2-methylhexane, 16SP
3-methyl-1-hexanol, 26SP
3-methyl-2-butanone, 36SP
3-methylbutanal, 36SP
3-methylpentanoic acid, 39
3-pentanone, 36SP
Absorption spectrum, 128
Acetaldehyde. See Ethanal
Acetaminophen, 48, 98
Acetic acid, 39, 421
acid dissociation constant, 393,
394–395inv, 396
buffers, 410
dissociation reaction, 380–381
properties, 377
Acetyl CoA, structure, 565
Acetyl salicylic acid, 377
Acid,
Arrhenius definition, 378, 380
Brønsted-Lowry definition, 380
ionization constants, 597
naming rules, 596
properties, 377
strength, 383–384
Acid-base indicator, 412, 425
Acid-base titration curves, 412–413,
425
Acid dissociation constant (Also Acid
ionization constant) (Ka), 393
Acidic hydrolysis, 76
Acidic solution
balancing half reactions, 484
balancing redox equation,
489–490SP
ion concentration, 385–386SP
oxidation number method, 497
salts in, 421
Acrylonitrile, 83
Activated complex, 292
Activation energy (Ea), 290
catalysts’ effect, 302
Active site, enzyme, 304
Addition polymerization, 82
Addition reaction, 57
alkenes, 57, 66
alkynes, 57, 68
identifying, 62SP
polymers, 82
Adhesive forces, 196TL
Adrenaline, 33
Adenine, 93
Adipic acid, 83
Adsorption, 69
Airy, George, 362
Alcohol, 25–26
condensation reaction, 61
elimination reactions, 59, 70
functional group, 22
oxidation, 60, 71, 74inv
physical properties, 27
predicting reaction, 72SP
substitution reaction, 58, 70
Aldehyde, 35, 36SP
functional group, 22
oxidation, 60, 71, 75
physical properties, 37
reduction, 60, 61, 75
Aldehyde group, carbohydrate
component, 90
Aliphatic hydrocarbon, 12
Alizarin, 425
Alkaline cell battery, 513
Alkaline fuel cell. See Fuel cell
Alkane, 12, 15SP, 16SP
functional group, 22
Alkene, 12, 14, 15SP
addition reaction, 57, 66
functional group, 22
reaction, 65–67
reduction, 60, 61
Alkoxy group, 29
Alkyl group, 14
general formula, 21
Alkyl halide (haloalkane), 28
elimination reactions, 59
substitution reactions, 58
Alkyne, 12, 14
addition reaction, 57, 68
functional group, 22
reactions 65, 68
reduction, 60
Allotropes, 197
Aluminum, 234, 449
Amide, 46–48
functional group, 22
Amide bonds, 83
Amine, 31–33
amides with, 46
functional group, 22
Amino acid, 90
Amino group
amino acids component, 90
Ammonia, 421
bond angles, 181
combustion, 495
dissociation, 381
in amides, 46
pH at equivalence, 426–428SP
production, 355SP, 357, 367–369
properties, 377
substitution reaction, 58
Ammonia nitrate, 514
Ammonium chloride
electrolysis, 539–540SP
formation, 379
salt bridge, 507
Ammonium cyanate, 5
Ammonium ion,
Lewis structure, 175–176SP
Amorphous solids, 196, 204–205
Ampere (A), 538
Ampère, André, 538
Amphoteric, 381
Amylopectin, 91
Amylose, 91
Anesthesiology, 371
Angular molecular shape, 182
Aniline, 33, 377, 404
Anode, 506
Antioxidants, 469
Aqueous solutions, 528, 529–531SP
Aromatic chemicals, 17
Aromatic compounds, 18–19
reactions of, 70
substitution reactions, 58
Aromatic hydrocarbon, 12
Arrhenius theory, 378–379
Ascorbic acid, structure, 570
Asymmetrical alkene, 66
Atmosphere, 456
Atomic model
Bohr’s, 126–129
Dalton’s, 119–120
quantum mechanical, 132–133
Rutherford’s, 120–122
Thomson’s, 120
Atomic radius
ionization energy and, 154
periodic trends, 152–153
Atomic solids, 197
properties of, 201
Battery, 512
Bauxite, 544
Becquerel, Henri, 120
Bent shape, 7
Benzene, 18–19
addition reaction, 70
standard molar enthalpy of
formation, 250–251
substitution reaction, 58
Benzoic acid, 39
Bernstein, Dr. Richard, 200
Beta-damascone, 37
Beta-ionone, 37
Bimolecular elementary
reaction, 297–298
Binary acids, 383
Biochemistry, 88
Biodegradable plastics, 89
Biofuel, 110
Biological catalysts, 304
Biosphere, 456
Birss, Dr. Viola, 552
Blood, 371, 568
pH 411
phosphate ions, 418
Blue Bottle™, 69
Bohr, Niels, 126
Bohr’s atomic model, 126–129
Boiling point
alcohols, 27
aldehydes and ketones, 37
amides, 48
amines, 33
carbon atoms, 24
carboxylic acids, 40
esters, 46
ethers, 31
metals, 171
molecular polarity, 23
organic compounds, 41
Atomic spectra, 122–123, 124–125inv
Atoms in Molecules (AIM) theory, 186
Aufbau principle, 142
Aurora borealis, 118
Avogadro constant (Na), 539
Bader, Richard, 186
Balancing equations
Body-centred cubic structure, 199
Bond angles, 179
Bond dipole, 8, 187
Bond energy, 168
Bonding pair-bonding pair
repulsion, 181
Bond strength, periodic trends
of binary acids, 383
oxidation number method, 495–497
Bonding
Ball-and-stick-model, 7
Base, 377– 378, 380
strength, 383–384
Base dissociation constant (Kb), 404,
405–406SP
Bases, nucleotides, 92–93
Basic hydrolysis, 76
Basic solutions
balancing redox equations, 496–497SP
balancing half reactions, 485–486
ion concentration, 385–386SP
salts in, 421
solids, 196
Bonding pair
bond representation, 163
covalent bond, 167
VSEPR theory, 179
Borkenstein, Robert, 491
Borosilicate glass, 204
Bosch, Carl, 368–369
Breathalyzer test, 491
Bromine
addition reaction, 58, 68, 70
test for alkanes, 68
Bromobenzene, 70
Bromochloromethane, 7
Bromocresol green, 412–413
Bromoethane, 58, 59
Brønsted, Johannes, 380
Brønsted-Lowry theory, 380
Buckminster Fuller, R., 198
Buckminsterfullerene, 198
structure, 197
Buckyballs. See Fullerenes
Buffers, 409–411
common ion effect, 440
Butane, 6EL, 12
CFC substitute, 101
Butanoic acid, 39, 44
Button cell battery, 513–514
Butyl group, 14
Butyne, addition reaction, 58
Cadavarine, 33
Cadmium precipitate, 449
Calcium oxalate, 418
Calorimeter, 236
Carbohydrate (saccharide), 90–91
Carbon, 5
allotropic forms, 197
average bond energy, 168
electron configuration, 144–145
nuclear binding energy, 229
Carbon-based network solids, 197
Carbon-carbon bonds, 5
Carbon-hydrogen bonds, 5
Carbon dioxide, 8, 9
citric acid cycle, 565
formation, 243
Carbon tetrachloride, 8, 9
Carbonyl group, 35
Carboxyl group
amino acids component, 90
Carboxylic acid, 39–41
aldehyde oxidation product, 75
amides with, 46
condensation reaction, 61
esters with, 44
derivatives, 42–43inv, 44–48
functional group, 22
hydrolysis reaction product, 61
oxidation product, 71
physical properties, 40
reactions, 76
reduction, 60
Catalase, 565
Catalysts, 276, 302–304, 305TL,
306–307inv, 314, 364
equilibrium effects, 364
fuel cells, 522
Haber process, 369
Cathode, 506
electroplating, 542–543inv
Cathodic protection, 549
Index • MHR 613
Cell Potential (Also Electric
potential), 509
measuring, 510–511SP
Cell voltage. See Electric potential
Cellular respiration, 91
Cellulose, 88, 91
Celsius degrees (˚C), 222
Central atoms, expanded
valence level, 177
Cesium chloride, 199
Chemical, 5
Chemical bond, 163
energy in, 223
Chemical vapour deposition, 198
Chlor-alkali process, 552–553
Chloric acid, structure, 384
Chlorination, 553
Chlorine
addition reaction, 66
Lewis structure, 474
oxidation number, 474
Chloroform, 9
Chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), 101
Chlorous acid, structure, 384
Chromium, 558
Chromomorphic groups, 89
Cinnamaldehyde, 37
Citric acid, 39, 565
Citric acid cycle, 565
Closed system, 456
Coffee-cup calorimeter, 236, 238SP,
240–241inv
Cold packs, 228
Collision theory, 289–290
Cohesive forces, 196TL
Common ion effect, 436–437
buffers 440
Le Châtelier’s principle, 363
solubility, 437–438SP
Complete structural diagram, 6
Concentration-time curve, 269
Condensation
polymerization, 83
Condensation reaction, 61
polymers, 82
Condensed electron configuration, 145
Condensed structural diagram, 6
Conductivity, metals, 170
Conjugate acid-base pair, 380
identifying, 381–382SP
dissociation constant relationship,
407, 408–409SP
Constant-pressure calorimeter. See
Coffee-cup calorimeter
Continuous spectrum, 123
Conversion factors, 595
Co-ordinate covalent bond, 175
Copper, refining, 544
Copper(I) solution, 468
Copper(II) sulfate solution
cell conversion, 528
614 MHR • Index
cell electrolyte, 505
electroplating, 542–543inv
redox reaction, 465–466, 478, 486
Corrosion, 546
prevention, 548–549
Coulomb (C), 538
Coulomb, Charles, 538
Covalent bond, 167, 195
diamond, 198
in organic molecules, 5
predicting, 168
Covalent network solid,
properties of, 201
Crowfoot Hodgkin, Dorothy, 199
Crystal lattice, 199
Crystalline solids, 196–199
Curie, Pierre, 120
Curie, Marie, 120
Cyanide ion, 475
Cyclic compound, 18
Cycloalkane, 12
Cyclopentane, 12
Cytosine, 93
d block elements, 148–149
d orbital, 137
Dacron™, 84
Dalton, John, 118
Dalton’s atomic model, 119–120
Damascenone, 37
Daniell cell, 505–508
conversion to electrolytic cell, 528
standard cell potentials, 517–518
Daniell, John Frederic, 505
Davy, Sir Humphry, 526
de Broglie, Louis, 131
Degradable plastics, 88–89
Dehydration reaction, 70
Dehydroascorbic acid, 570
Deuterium, 231
Dichlorodiphenyltrichloro-ethane
(DDT), 102
Diamond, 212
covalent bonds, 198
enthalpy of formation, 250–251
structure, 197
Diethyl ether
enthalpies, 228
See also Ethoxyethane
Dissolution, 228
DNA (2-deoxyribonucleic acid), 92–94
hydrogen bonds, 193
Downs cell, 525
Double bond, 5, 167
Dry cell, 512
Ductility, metals, 170
Earth, 456
Ecosystems, 362
Effective nuclear charge (Zeff ), 153
Einstein, Albert, 126, 229
Electric cars, 550
Electric charge, 538
Electric current, 505, 538
Electric potential (E), 509
Electrochemical cell, 525
Electrochemistry, 505
Electrodes, 506
Electrolysis, 524–527
aqueous solutions, 528, 529–531SP
calculating mass of product,
539–540SP
potassium iodide, 532–533inv
Electrolytes, 506
Electrolytic cell, 524
electroplating, 542–543inv
refining copper, 544
Electromagnetic spectrum
properties, 123
Electromotive force (emf), 509
Electron
mass, 120
probability density maps, 133
spin, 140
Electron affinity, 156–157
Electron density maps, 186
Electron configuration, 142–147
Electron sharing, 167
Electronegativity (EN), 8
bonding character
determination, 168
ionic bonding, 165
oxidation numbers, 473
periodic trend of binary acids, 383
values, 474
Electronegativity difference (∆EN)
bond character determination,
168–169
Dinitrogen peroxide, reaction rate
Electron-group arrangement, 179,
determination, 270, 271SP, 273,
281–282, 285
Dinitrogen tetroxide, 335
Dioxin, 88
Dipole-dipole force, 22, 190–191, 195
Dipole-induced dipole force, 191, 195
Disaccharide, 91
Dispersion force, 22, 24, 192, 195
graphite, 198
Disposable batteries, 512–514
Disproportionation reaction, 468
182–183
Electroplating, 528, 542–543inv, 558
Elementary reactions, 297–298
Elimination reaction, 59, 70
identifying, 62SP
Emission spectrum, 127
Enamel, 548
Endothermic reaction, 223–224,
328, 363
potential energy diagram, 292
End-point, 425
Energy
atom ground state, 133
atomic levels, 128, 131
bonding systems, 163
changes, 232
chemical bonds, 223
efficiency, 256–257
Einstein’s equation, 229
fat storage, 94
non-renewable, 258
processes, 231–232
quanta, 126
renewable, 258
sources in Canada, 256
Sun, 231
technologies, 257
Enthalpy (H), 222
favourable changes, 328
Gibbs free energy, 331
temperature, 329
Enthalpy change, (∆H), 223–229
algebraic determination, 244–245
Hess’s law, 245–246SP
calculating, 252–253
of a neutralization reaction,
240–241inv
transition state theory, 291
Enthalpy of combustion (∆Hcomb), 223
magnesium, 248–249inv
Enthalpy of condensation (∆Hcond), 227
Enthalpy of formation, 253–254SP
Enthalpy of freezing (∆Hfre), 227
Enthalpy of fusion, 227
Enthalpy of melting (∆Hmelt), 227
Enthalpy of reaction (∆Hrxn), 223, 236,
237–238SP
Enthalpy of solution (∆Hsoln), 228
Enthalpy of vaporization (∆Hvap), 227
Entropy, 329
favourable changes, 329–331
Gibbs free energy, 331
Enzymes, 304, 308, 314
Equilibrium, 323
catalyst, 364
changing conditions, 365
common ion effect, 363
conditions that apply, 326–327
free energy, 331
heterogeneous, 326
homogeneous, 326
modelling, 325EL
perturbing, 358–361inv
pressure changes, 364
temperature change effect, 363
volume change, 364
Equilibrium concentrations
approximation method, 350–352SP
calculating, 339, 344–345SP
Equilibrium constant (Keq), 335
calculating, 337–338SP, 340–343SP
qualitative interpretation, 348
reaction quotient, 354
small values of, 350
temperature, 337
Equilibrium expression
quadratic equation solution,
345–347SP
writing, 336SP
Equilibrium shift, 355SP
Equivalence point, 412, 425
Ester, 44–46
bonds in condensation
polymerization, 83
esterification product, 76
functional group, 22
hydrolysis reaction, 61, 76
Esterification reaction, 76
Ethanal, 35, 60
Ethanamide, 46
Ethane, 303
Ethanoic acid
esterification, 77SP
See also Acetic acid
Ethanol, 21, 44, 76
elimination reaction, 71
enthalpies, 228
esterification, 77SP
fuel catalyst, 102
oxidation, 60
substitution reaction, 58, 70
Ethene
addition polymerization, 82, 83
addition reaction, 58
elimination reactions
product, 59, 71
symmetry, 66
Ether, 29–31
Ethoxyethane, 29
See also Diethyl ether
Ethyl alcohol, 25
See also Ethanol
Ethyl butanoate, 44, 76
Ethyl ethanoate, 45SP, 77SP
Ethyl group, 14
Ethylene glycol, 25, 100
Ethylene hydrogenation, 303
Exothermic reaction, 223–224,
328, 332, 363
potential energy diagram, 292
Expanded valence energy level,
177–178
Explosives, 514
External circuit, 505
Extraction, 544
f block elements, 148–149
Face-centred cubic structure, 199
Faraday (F), 539
Faraday, Michael, 506, 538–539
Faraday’s law, 541, 542–543inv
Fat, 94
Fatty acids, 94
Fatty tissues, 95
Favourable change, 328–329
signs of ∆H and ∆S, 332
Filipovic, Dusanka, 69
First ionization energy, 154
First-order reactions, 279
half-life, 285, 286–287SP
Flint glass, 204
Flow battery. See Fuel cell
Fluorine,
electron affinity, 156
electron configuration, 144–145
hydrogen bonded, 193
Fluoroapatite, 423
Ford, Henry, 102
Formaldehyde. See Methanal
Formation reactions, 250
Fractional precipitation, 448
Franklin, Rosalind, 199
Free-electron model, 170
Free radical, 469
Freezing point, 227
Freon®, 101
Fructose, structure, 90
Fuel cell, 550
Fulhame, Elizabeth, 314
Fullerenes, 198
Fumaric acid, structure, 565
Functional group, 12
carbonyl groups, 35–41
single bonds, 21–33
Fusion, phase change, 227
Galvani, Luigi, 506
Galvanic cell, 505–508
measuring cell potentials,
510–511SP
rusting, 547–548
Galvanizing, 548
Gas
collision theory, 290
entropy, 330
phase change with heat, 227
Geiger, Hans, 121
Geosphere, 456
Gibbs free energy, 331–332, 430
Gibbs, Josiah Willard, 331
Gillespie, Ronald, 178
Glass, 204, 234
Glucose, structure, 90
Glycerol, lipid, 94
Glyceryl trioleate, 94
Glycogen, 91
Gold, 116
Goulenchyn, Dr. Karen, 129
Grain alcohol, 25
See also Ethanol
Graphite, 212
enthalpy of formation, 250–251
dispersion forces in, 198
structure, 197
Index • MHR 615
Greenhouse gas, 101
Ground state, 133
Guanine, 93
Guillet, Dr. James, 89
Guldberg, Cato, 334–335
Haber, Fritz, 367–369
Haber process, 355SP, 367–369
Haber-Bosch process, 369
Half-life (t1/2) of a reaction, 285
Half-reaction, 467
balancing, 483–485
Half-reaction method, 486–489
Haloalkane. See Alkyl halide
Halozite™, 69
Heat, 222, 226–228
Heat capacity (C), 235
Heat transfer
measuring, 236
specific heat capacity, 235
Heisenberg, Werner, 132
Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle, 132
Helium atom,
emission spectrum, 131
electron configuration, 144–145
quantum numbers, 140
Henri, Victor, 308
Hess’s law of heat summation, 243,
248–249inv
Heterogeneous catalyst, 303
Heterogeneous equilibrium, 326
Homeostasis, 362
Homogeneous catalyst, 303
Homogeneous equilibrium, 326
Hund’s rule, 143–144
Hydrobromic acid
addition reaction product, 70
addition reaction, 58, 66, 68
elimination reaction product, 59
substitution reaction product, 58
Hydrocarbon, 12
naming, 14
drawing, 16
Hydrochloric acid, 67SP
Hydrofluoric acid, 376
Hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), 101
Hydrogen atom,
absorption spectrum, 128
electron probability
density map, 133
electron configuration, 144–145
emission spectrum, 131
line spectrum, 123
orbital energy, 139
spectrum and Bohr’s atomic
model, 126–127
quantum numbers, 140
Hydrogen bonding, 22, 192–193, 195
alcohols, 27
aldehydes and ketones, 37
amides, 48
616 MHR • Index
amines, 33
boiling point effect, 23
carboxylic acids, 40
ethers, 31
esters, 46
solubility in water effect, 23
Hydrogen chloride gas, 377
Hydrogen fuel cell, 552
Hydrogenation, 303
Hydrohalic acids, 383
Hydroiodic acid, 58
Hydrolysis reaction, 61, 421
carbohydrates, 91
esters, 61, 76
fatty acids, 94
Hydronium ion, 379
concentration, 388, 389SP, 392
molecular shape, 184–185SP
polyprotic acids, 402
Hydrosphere, 456
Hydroxide ion
concentration, 389, 392
collision geometry, 293
Hydroxyapatite, 422
Hydroxyl group, 21
carboxylic acids, 41
carbohydrate component, 90
Hypochlorous acid, 384
ICE table, 339, 344, 345SP, 346SP,
351SP
Induced fit-model, enzyme, 304
Inert electrodes, 508
Inert gases, 364
Infrared spectroscopy, 38
Initial rates method, 280
Inner transition elements, 149
Integrated rate law, 285
Intermolecular forces, 22, 190
comparing, 24TL
physical properties, 22–24
International Union of Pure and
Applied Chemistry (IUPAC), 13
Intramolecular forces, 190
Iodoethane, 58
Iodine titration, 570
Ion, naming rules, 596
Ion product constant (Qsp), 443–444
Ion product constant of water (Kw), 388
Ion-dipole forces, 191, 195
Ionic bonding, 165–166, 195
lattice energy, 166
predicting, 168
Ionic crystal, 199
Ion-induced dipole force, 191, 195
Ionic liquids, 203
Ionic solids, 166, 201
Ionization constants, 597
Ionization energy, 153–155
Iron, galvanizing, 548
Iron(III) nitrate, 339
Iron(III) oxide, 547
Iron(III) thiocyanate ion, 339,
340–343SP
Isobutane, 101
Iso-butyl group, 14
Isocitric acid, structure, 565
Isomers, 19
Isopropanol (Isopropyl alcohol), 25
See also 2-propanol
Isopropyl group, 14
Isostacy, 362
Isotropic materials, 204
Joules (J), 222
Kamerlingh Onnes, Heike, 206
Karwa, Dr. Laila Rafik, 371
Kelvin (K), 222
Ketoglutaric acid, 565
Ketone, 35
functional group, 22, 90
oxidation, 71, 75
physical properties, 37
reduction, 60, 61, 75
Kettering, Charles, 102
KEVLAR®, 205–206
Kinetic energy
collision theory, 290
heat definition, 222
transition state theory, 291
Krebs cycle. See Citric acid cycle
Krebs, Hans, 565
Kwolek, Stephanie, 205–206
Lattice energy, 166
Law of chemical equilibrium, 334
Law of conservation of energy, 221
Law of mass action, 335
Lead-acid battery, 535
Lead(II) chromate, common
ion effect, 436, 437–438SP
Leaded fuels, 102
Le Châtelier, Henri, 357
Le Châtelier’s principle, 356–357,
358–361inv, 418
applying, 365–366SP
blood, 568
buffers, 410
gas equilibrium, 439
Haber process, 367–369
non-chemistry applications, 362
water dissociation, 388
Leclanché cell. See Dry cell
Leclanché, Georges, 512
Le Roy radius, 200
Le Roy-Bernstein theory, 200
Lenz, Heinrich, 362
Lenz’s law, 362
Leroy, Dr. R.J., 200
Lewis structure
molecules, 173–176
oxidation numbers from, 473–475
representing chemical bonds, 163
Light, 126
Linear electron-group
arrangement, 179, 182
Linear shape, 7
Linear molecular shape, 182
Lipid, 94–95
Liquid
entropy, 330
phase change with heat, 227
Liquidmetal™ alloy, 205
Lithium
electron configuration, 144–145
orbital energy, 139
quantum numbers, 142
Lithium hydroxide, 488
Lock-and-key model, 304
Logarithm, 592
London forces. See Dispersion force
London, Fritz, 192
Lone pair, 163
covalent bonds, 167
VSEPR theory, 179
resonance structures, 176
Lone pair-bonding pair repulsion, 181
Lonsdale, Kathleen Yardley, 19
Lowry, Thomas, 380
MacInnes, Dr. Joseph, 439
Magnetic quantum number (ml), 135
Magnesium
alloys, 552
enthalpy of combustion, 248–249inv
Magnesium fluoride
crystal structure, 165
lattice energy, 166
Lewis structure, 165
orbital diagram, 165
Magnetite, 476
Main group elements, 147, 148
atomic radii, 152–153
electron affinity, 157
Malic acid, structure, 565
Malleability, metals, 170
Markovnikov’s rule, 66, 67SP, 68
Marsden, Ernest, 121
Mass defect, 229
Matter waves, 131–132
Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution, 290
Melting points, 227
alcohols, 27
aldehydes and ketones, 37
amides, 48
amines, 33
carboxylic acids, 40
esters, 46
ethers, 31
metals, 171
organic compounds, 41
Menten, Dr. Maud L., 308
Menthol, 97, 99
Metabolism, 565
Metallic bonding, 170, 195
Metal activity series, 470
Metals, 170
extraction, 544
properties, 170–171, 201
reactivity and periodic trends, 155
stress, 170
Meta-xylene, 19
Methanal (formaldehyde), 35
Lewis structure, 174–175SP
oxidation, 77SP
Methanamide, 46
Methanamine, 76
Methane
bond angles, 181
energy efficiency, 257
enthalpies, 228
enthalpy changes from
combustion, 252
greenhouse gas, 260
hydrates, 260
Lewis structure, 5
Methanoic acid, 39, 77SP
See also Formic acid
Methanol (Also Methyl
alcohol), 25, 293
Methyl benzene, 18
Methyl bromide, 293
Methyl group, 14
Methyl red, 412–413, 425
Michaelis, Leonor, 308
Michaelis-Menten equation, 308
Molar absorption coefficient, 200
Molar solubility, calculating
from Ksp, 435–436SP
Molecular geometry, 181
Molecular polarity, 8
boiling point effect, 23
molecular shape
relationship, 187–188
predicting, 8–9, 10SP
solubility effect, 10
Molecular shape, 7, 8, 179,
182–183, 184SP
modelling, 180EL
molecular polarity, 187–188
Molecular solids, 197
properties of, 201
Molecularity, 297
Molecule, 173
Lewis structures, 173–175
polarity, 178
shapes, 178
Monomers, 81
Monoprotic acids, 384
Monosaccharide, 91
Montréal Protocol, 101
Mueller, Paul, 102
Multi-electron atoms,
orbital energy, 139
N-methylpropanamide, 46
acid hydrolysis, 76
Nagaoka, Hantaro, 122
Nanotubes, 198
structure, 197
superconductors, 207
Natural essential oils, 17
Natural gas, 257
Haber process, 369
Natural polymers, 88
Natural substance, 5
Net ionic equation, 487
Network solids, 197
Neutral solutions, salts in, 420–421
Niacin, 393
Nickel-cadmium (nicad) cell, 536
Nickel tetracarbonyl, 150
Nitrates, 322
Nitrobenzene, 58
Nitrogen, 364
average bond energy, 168
cycle, 322
electron configuration, 144–145
hydrogen bonded, 193
in amines, 31
Nitrogen dioxide, 334
Nitroglycerin, 218, 514
Nitrous acid, 58
Nobel, Alfred B., 218
Noble gases, 364
Non-polar molecule, 9, 12, 187
dispersion forces, 192
Non-renewable energy, 258
Non-spontaneous change.
See Unfavourable change
Noronha, Jennifer, 259
Nuclear binding energy, 229
Nuclear fission, 230
Nuclear fusion, 231
energy source, 261
Nuclear medicine, 129
Nuclear model of the atom.
See Rutherford’s atomic model
Nuclear safety, 259
Nucleotide, 92–94
Nyholm, Ronald, 178
Nylon (polyamide), 83, 84
Octrahedral electron-group
arrangement, 179, 183
Octahedral molecular shape, 183
Octane numbers, 102
Octyl ethanoate, 46
Oil, 94
Index • MHR 617
One-electron systems, 129
Orbital diagram, 143
Orbitals, 132–137
covalent bonds, 167
filling guidelines, 143
relative energies of, 142
Orbital-shape quantum
number, 134–135
Organic chemistry, 4
Organic compounds, 5, 78
boiling points of 41
general formula, 21
general rules for naming, 13
melting points of, 41
organic shapes of, 7
reactions, 56
risk-benefit analysis, 97–98
predicting products of, 77SP
three-dimensional
structural diagrams, 7
Ortho-xylene, 19
Overvoltage, 527
Oxaloacetic acid, 565
Oxidants, 469
Oxidation, 465–466, 479
alcohols, 60, 71, 74inv
aldehydes, 60, 75
identifying, 62SP
ketones, 75
organic chemistry definition, 60
Oxidation half-reaction, 506
Oxidation number method, 495–497
Oxidation numbers, 473–475
assigning, 477SP
redox reactions, 478
rules for finding, 476
Oxidation potential, 518
Oxidation-reduction reaction.
See Redox reactions
Oxidizing agent, 60, 466
Oxoacids, 383
Oxygen
corrosion agent, 546
electron configuration, 144–145
enthalpy of formation, 250–251
hydrogen bonded, 193
ionization energy, 154–155
Ozone, 101
enthalpy of formation, 250–251
p block elements, 147, 149
ionic bonding, 165
p orbital, 137
Palladium catalyst, 303
Para-xylene, 19
Parent alkane, 25
Partition coefficient, 371
Pauli, Wolfgang, 140
Pauli’s exclusion principle, 140
Pentoic acid,  76
Perchloric acid, 384
618 MHR • Index
Periodic table, 118
arrangement, 151TL
atomic radius, 152–153
electron affinity, 156–157
electron configurations, 147–148
electronegativity values, 474
ionization energy trends, 153–155
pH, 390
blood, 411
buffers, 410
calculation at equivalence, 425,
426–428SP
common ion effect, 440–441SP
logarithm, 592
scale, 341
Polyvinylchloride (PVC, vinyl), 83, 88
Positron emission
tomography (PET), 129
Potassium chloride, 483
Potassium iodide,
electrolysis, 532–533inv
Potassium permanganate,
oxidizing agent, 74inv
Potassium thiocyanate, 339
Potential energy, 509
Potential energy diagram,
291–293, 293–294SP
catalyst effect on, 302
transition state theory and, 291–292
Potential ladder diagram, 517–518,
Phase changes, 227
Phenolphthalein, 412–413
Phenylethene, 18
Phosphate group, 92–93
Phosphate ions, blood, 418
Phospholipids, 95
Phosphoric acid,
pH calculation, 400–402SP
Phosphorous pentachloride,
expanded valence level, 177
Photochromic lenses, 320
Photodegradable plastics, 89
Photons, 126
Physical constants, 595
Planck, Max, 126
Plastic, 81, 89
Plastic sulfur, 204
Platinum catalyst, 303
pOH, 390
Polar covalent bond, 8, 169
Polar molecule, 8, 187
Polarity of functional group
amines, 33
alcohols, 27
aldehydes and ketones, 37
amides, 48
carboxylic acids, 40
esters, 46
ethers, 31
Polyacrylonitrile, uses, 83
Polyamide (nylon), 83
Polyatomic ion, 596
Lewis structures, 173–175
Polyester, 83
Polyethene, 82, 83
Polyethylene terephthalate (PET), 81
Polymer, 81–88
Polymeric sulfur. See Plastic sulfur
Polymerization reaction,
classifying, 84SP
Polyprotic acids, 384
hydronium ion concentration, 402
ionization constants, 597
pH calculation, 400–402SP
Polysaccharide, 91
Polystyrene, uses, 83
531SP
Pratt, John, 362
Precipitation, predicting,
445SP, 446–447SP
Pressure, effecting equilibrium, 363
Primary alcohol, 25, 26SP
aldehyde reduction product, 75
oxidation, 71
Primary amide, 47
Primary amine, 31, 33
Primary battery, 512
Principle quantum number (n),
134–135
See also Quantum numbers
Product, 270–271
Propanal, boiling point, 37
Propanamide, 46
Propane, 101, 24TL
Propanoic acid, 76, 397–380SP
Propanol, 24TL
Propanone, 61, 77SP
Propene, 12, 72SP
asymmetry, 66
elimination reaction product, 59
Propyl group, 14
Propyne, 68
Protein, 90
Pyrex™. See Borosilicate glass
Pyridine, 404, 406SP
Pyruvate carboxylase, 572
Qualitative analysis, 449, 450TL
Quantitative analysis, 449
Quantum energy, 126
Quantum mechanical model, 132–133
Quantum mechanics, 132
Quantum number, 127
See also Principle quantum
numbers
determining, 135–136SP, 149–150SP
orbitals, 133–136
Pauli’s exclusion principle, 140–142
periodic table arrangement, 151TL
Quartz, structure, 198
Quigg, Jeff, 17
Quinine, 33
pH calculation, 404–405SP
Radioactive particles, 120
Rate constant (k), 278–279
determining, 282, 299–300
Rate law
See also 2-propanol
Rutherford, Ernest, 120
Rutherford’s atomic model, 120–123
Rutherford’s gold-foil experiment, 121
Rusting, 547–549
determination, 299, 306–307inv
elementary reactions, 298
s block elements, 147, 149
ionic bonding, 165
Rate law equation, 278
calculation, 282–283SP
Reactant, 270–271
Reaction intermediates, 297
Reaction mechanism, 297
evaluating, 300–301SP
Reaction quotient (Qc), 354
Reaction rate, 267
average, 268, 270TL
calculating, 271SP
colour changes, 273
conductivity changes, 273
experiments, 281
factors affecting, 276
instantaneous, 268, 270TL
mass changes, 272
pH changes, 272
pressure changes, 273
reactant concentrations, 278–279
studying, 274–275SP
temperature dependence, 295
volume changes, 273
Reactions
enthalpy changes in, 223–224
half-life, 285
first-order, 279
initial rates method, 280
rate determining step, 299–300
second order, 279
spontaneity, 534SP
temperature effect, 349SP
Rechargeable battery, 512, 535–536
Redox reactions (oxidation-reduction
reaction), 466, 492–493inv
half-reaction method, 486–488
identifying, 479–480SP
oxidation numbers applied, 478
Reducing agent, 60, 466
Reduction, 465–466, 479
hydrocarbons, 60 , 61, 75
identifying, 62SP
organic chemistry definition, 60
Reduction half-reaction, 506
Reduction potential, 516
Reference values, 522TL
Refining, 544
Reflux, 295
Renewable energy, 258
Resonance structures, 176–177
Ribose, 93
RNA (ribonucleic acid), 92–93
Rose ketones, 37
Rubbing alcohol, 25
s orbital, 137
Saccharide. See Carbohydrates
Sacrificial anode, 548–549
Salt solutions, pH, 429EL
Salt bridge, 507
Salts
acid-base properties, 419, 422
neutral solutions, 420
predicting acidity/basicity,
423–424SP
Saturated carbon bonds, 5
Schrödinger, Erwin, 132
Scientific notation, 591
Sec-butyl group, 14
Secondary alcohol, 25
ketone reduction product, 75
oxidation, 71
Secondary amide, 47
Secondary amine, 31, 33
naming 32SP
Secondary battery, 512
Second law of thermodynamics, 330
Second-order reactions, 279–280
Seesaw molecular shape, 182
Semi-permeable membrane, 505
Significant digits, 590
SI prefixes, 595
Silica, 198
Silver chloride
photochromic lenses, 320
precipitation, 445SP
Silver halides, 448
Silver mirror test, 65
Silver nitrate test, 445SP
Silver precipitate, 449
Simple cubic crystal, 199
Single bond carbon bonds, 5
Single displacement reactions,
470–471inv
Soda-lime glass, 204
Sodium acetate, 324
conjugate acid-base dissociation
constants, 408–409SP
Sodium butanoate, 76
Sodium chloride, 422, 423–424SP
crystal cubic structure, 199
electrolysis, 524–525
enthalpies, 228
Sodium fluoride, 422–423
Sodium hydroxide, 377
Solids
bonding, 196
entropy, 330
phase change with heat, 227
properties of, 201
Solubility
general guidelines, 444
molecular polarity, 10
Solubility in water
alcohols, 27
aldehydes and ketones, 37
amides, 48
amines, 33
carboxylic acids, 40
esters, 46
ethers, 31
hydrogen bonds, 23
hydrogen bonds in polar
covalent compounds, 194
molecular polarity, 23
strong bases, 384
Solubility product
constant (Ksp), 431, 598
determining, 432–433SP, 434inv
ion product constant
relationship, 443–444
Specific heat capacity (c), 234–235
Spectrophotometer, 273
Spin quantum number (ms), 140
Spontaneous change.
See Favourable change
Square planar molecular shape, 183
Square pyramidal molecular
shape, 183
Stainless steel, 548
Standard cell potential, 519–521SP
Standard enthalpy of
reaction (∆H˚rxn), 223
Standard half-cell potentials, 516–518
Standard hydrogen electrode, 517
Standard molar enthalpy of formation
(∆H˚f), 250–251, 597
Standard reduction potentials, 598
Starch, 91
Steady state systems, 362
Stoichiometry
thermochemical equations, 224,
225SP
unit analysis method, 594SP
Stress, metals, 170
Strong acids, 383, 421
Strong base, 421
Styrene, 83
See also Phenylethene
Substitution reaction, 58
alcohols, 58, 70
alkyl halides, 58
aromatic compounds, 58
identifying, 62SP
Substrate, enzyme, 304
Succinic acid, structure, 565
Succinyl CoA, structure, 565
Sucrose, 90
Sugar, nucleotides, 92–93
Index • MHR 619
Zinc, galvanizing, 548
Zinc chloride, catalyst, 303
Zinc sulfate
cell conversion, 528
cell electrolyte, 505
Sulfur dioxide, 176–177
Sulfuryl chloride, 286–287SP
Superconductors, 206–207
Surface area, collision theory, 289
Surroundings, 221
Symmetrical alkene, 66
Synthetic polymers, 82
System, 221
T-shaped molecular shape, 183
TAXOL™, 56
Teflon™, 84SP
Temperature change, 222
collision theory, 290–291
enthalpy, 329
equilibrium constant, 337
equilibrium effect, 363
favourable changes, 329
Gibbs free energy, 331
reaction extent, 349SP
reaction rates, 276, 295
Terephthalic acid, 205
Termolecular elementary reaction, 298
Tert-butyl group, 14
Tertiary alcohol, 25, 71
Tertiary amide, 47
Tertiary amines, 31, 33
Tetra-ethyl lead, 102
Tetrahedral
electron-group arrangement,
179, 182
molecular shape, 7, 182
Thermochemical equation, 223–224,
225SP
adding algebraically, 244–245
Thermochemistry, 221
Thermodynamics, 221
Thomson, Joseph John, 120
Thomson’s atomic model, 120
Three-dimensional structural diagrams
of organic molecules, 7
Thymol blue, 425
Thymine, 93
Tin, cathodic protection, 549
Toluene. See Methylbenzene
Transition elements, 148–149
atomic radii, 152
Transition state, 292
Transition state theory, 291–292
Trigonal bipyramidal
electron-group arrangement,
179, 182
molecular shape, 182
Trigonal planar
electron-group arrangement,
179, 182
molecular shape, 7, 182
Trigonal pyramidal molecular
shape, 182
Triple bonds
carbon bonds, 5
620 MHR • Index
covalent molecules, 167
Tritium, nuclear fusion, 231
Tungsten, as a catalyst, 280
Unfavourable change, 328
Unimolecular elementary reaction, 298
Unit analysis method, 593, 594SP
Unit cell, 199
Universe, energy of, 221
Unleaded fuels, 102
Unsaturated carbon bonds, 5
Uracil, 93
Uranium, 230–231
Urea, 5, 48, 314
Valence electrons, 148
Valence-Shell Electron-Pair Repulsion
(VSEPR) theory, 178–179
predicting molecular shape,
184–185SP
van der Waals, Johannes, 190
Vectors, 8
Villamagna, Fortunato, 514
Vinegar, 39
Vinyl chloride, 83, 88
Vitamins, 95
Volume changes
equilibrium effect, 364
Volt (V), 509
Voltaic cell. See Galvanic cell
Waage, Peter, 334–335
Warm packs, 228
Water, 9, 23
amphoteric character, 381
bond angles, 181
dissociation, 388
electrolysis, 526–527
enthalpies, 228
hydrogen bonds, 194
hydrolysis reaction, 61
ion product constant (Kw), 388
measuring heat of reaction, 235
physical changes with heat, 226–227
properties, 194
solubility constants, 598
treatment, 552–553
Wax, 94
Weak acid
acid dissociation constant, 396,
397–380SP
percent dissociation, 397
pH calculation, 398–399SP
salts of, 421–422
Weak base, salts of, 421–422
Wohler, Friedrich, 5, 314
Wood alcohol, 25. See also Methanol
X-ray diffraction, 199
Zeolites, 69
Photo Credits
iv (top right), © Wally Eberhart/Visuals Unlimited, Inc.; v (top right), © Daryl Benson/Masterfile; v (bottom right),
Artbase Inc.; vi (centre left), © Leonard Rue III/Visuals Unlimited, Inc.; vii (top right), © 1997 Brownie Harris/The Stock
Market/Firstlight.ca; xii (top left), Paul McCormick/Image Bank; xii (centre right), Artbase Inc.; xii (center left), Minnesota
Historical Society/CORBIS/MAGMA; xii (bottom right), Malcolm Hanes/Bruce Coleman Inc.; xiii (top left), Artbase Inc.;
xiii (centre right), Jose L. Pelaez/The Stock Market/Firstlight.ca; 4 (bottom right), Stephen Saks/Photo Researchers Inc.;
9 (top right), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, © 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.;
9 (centre right), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, © 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.;
13 (top), From Chemistry 11, © 2001, McGraw-Hill Ryerson, a subsidiary of The McGraw-Hill Companies; 2–3 (centre), Paul
McCormick/Image Bank; 35 (bottom right), Artbase Inc.; 37 (bottom centre), Dick Keen/Visuals Unlimited; 37 (centre right),
Paul Eekhoff/Masterfile; 39 (top right), © Wally Eberhart/Visuals Unlimited; 46 (centre left), Artbase Inc.; 56 (bottom centre),
Visuals Unlimited; 57 (centre left), Artbase Inc.; 65 (centre), © E.R. Degginger/Color-Pic, Inc.; 68 (centre left), © Chris
Sorensen; 69 (top left), Blue-Zone Technologies; 82 (top centre), Lynn Goldsmith/CORBIS/MAGMA; 82 (top right), Jacqui
Hurst/CORBIS/MAGMA; 89 (top right), Herb Segars/Animals Animals; 91 (top left), © Gunther/Explorer/Photo Researchers
Inc.; 91 (bottom left), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, © 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies,
Inc.; 92 (top centre), Photo Courtesy Vince Satira; 92 (top right), © Science Pictures Ltd/Science Photo Library/Photo
Researchers Inc.; 92 (centre), Artbase Inc.; 92 (centre right), © Studio/Science Photo Library/Photo Researchers Inc.;
94 (top left), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, © 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.;
97 (top centre), © Jerome Wexler/Visuals Unlimited; 110 (top right), Photo Researchers Inc.; 116–117 (centre), Artbase Inc.;
118 (bottom left), © Daryl Benson/Masterfile; 119 (bottom right), From Chemistry 11, © 2001, McGraw-Hill Ryerson, a
subsidiary of The McGraw-Hill Companies; 121 (centre), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change.
© 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.; 123 (top right), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change.
© 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.; 123 (centre), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change.
© 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.; 123 (centre right), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change.
© 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.; 123 (bottom), © John Talbot; 125 (bottom), © John Talbot; 128 (top), From
Chemistry 11, © 2001 McGraw-Hill Ryerson Limited, a subsidiary of The McGraw-Hill Companies; 128 (bottom), From
Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change. © 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.; 129 (centre left),
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory/PhotoDisc; 131 (centre), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and
Change. © 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.; 132 (top left), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and
Change. © 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.; 133 (centre), From Chemistry 11, © 2001, McGraw-Hill Ryerson, a
subsidiary of The McGraw-Hill Companies; 137 (bottom), From Physics 12. © 2002, McGraw-Hill Ryerson, a subsidiary of
The McGraw-Hill Companies; 145 (top), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change. © 2000, The McGraw-
Hill Companies, Inc.; 148 (top), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change. © 2000, The McGraw-Hill
Companies, Inc.; 148 (centre left), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change. © 2000, The McGraw-Hill
Companies, Inc.; 152 (bottom), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change. © 2000, The McGraw-Hill
Companies, Inc.; 154 (centre), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change. © 2000, The McGraw-Hill
Companies, Inc.; 155 (bottom left), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, © 2000, The McGraw-Hill
Companies, Inc.; 155 (bottom), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, © 2000, The McGraw-Hill
Companies, Inc.; 155 (bottom right), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, © 2000, The McGraw-Hill
Companies, Inc.; 156 (centre), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, © 2000, The McGraw-Hill
Companies, Inc.; 167 (top right), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change. © 2000, The McGraw-Hill
Companies, Inc.; 168 (bottom left), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change. © 2000, The McGraw-Hill
Companies, Inc.; 169 (top), Stephen Frisch; 169 (bottom), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change.
© 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.; 170 (top left), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change.
© 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.; 170 (bottom left), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change.
© 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.; 172 (top), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change. © 2000,
The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.; 179 (bottom), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change. © 2000,
The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.; 186 (bottom left), Photo Courtesy of Dr. Richard Bader; 186 (centre left), Photo Courtesy of
Dr. Richard Bader; 190 (bottom), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change. © 2000, The McGraw-Hill
Companies, Inc.; 191 (centre), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change. © 2000, The McGraw-Hill
Companies, Inc.; 192 (centre), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change. © 2000, The McGraw-Hill
Companies, Inc.; 193 (centre left), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change. © 2000, The McGraw-Hill
Companies, Inc.; 193 (centre right), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change. © 2000, The McGraw-Hill
Companies, Inc.; 194 (bottom), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change. © 2000, The McGraw-Hill
Companies, Inc.; 195 (top), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, © 2000, The McGraw-Hill
Companies, Inc.; 195 (top), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, © 2000, The McGraw-Hill
Companies, Inc.; 195 (centre), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, © 2000, The McGraw-Hill
Companies, Inc.; 195 (centre), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, © 2000, The McGraw-Hill
Companies, Inc.; 195 (centre), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, © 2000, The McGraw-Hill
Companies, Inc.; 195 (centre), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, © 2000, The McGraw-Hill
Companies, Inc.; 195 (bottom), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, © 2000, The McGraw-Hill
Companies, Inc.; 195 (bottom), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, © 2000, The McGraw-Hill
Companies, Inc.; 195 (bottom), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, © 2000, The McGraw-Hill
Companies, Inc.; 197 (bottom left), From Chemistry 11, © 2001, McGraw-Hill Ryerson, a subsidiary of The McGraw-Hill
Companies; 197 (bottom centre), From Chemistry 11, © 2001, McGraw-Hill Ryerson, a subsidiary of The McGraw-Hill
Companies; 197 (bottom right), From Chemistry 11, © 2001, McGraw-Hill Ryerson, a subsidiary of The McGraw-Hill
Companies; 199 (top right), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change. © 2000, The McGraw-Hill
Companies, Inc.; 199 (centre right), © Rosalind Franklin/Science Photo Library/Photo Researchers Inc.; 199 (bottom right),
Hulton Archive/STONE; 200 (top right), Photo courtesy the Photo Imaging Department at the University of Waterloo;
Credits • MHR 621
206 (bottom right), AT&T Bell Labs/Science Photo Library/Photo Researchers Inc.; 212 (bottom left), David Parker/Science
Photo Library/Photo Researchers Inc.; 216 (bottom right), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change,
© 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.; 218–219 (centre), Minnesota Historical Society/CORBIS/MAGMA; 220 (bottom
right), Artbase Inc.; 222 (centre), From Physics 11. © 2001, McGraw-Hill Ryerson Limited, a subsidiary of The McGraw-Hill
Companies; 230 (top left), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, © 2000, The McGraw-Hill
Companies, Inc.; 231 (bottom left), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, © 2000, The McGraw-Hill
Companies, Inc.; 234 (centre left), © Trevor Bonderud/Firstlight.ca; 243 (bottom right), From Chemistry 11, © 2001,
McGraw-Hill Ryerson Limited, a subsidiary of The McGraw-Hill Companies; 251 (top centre), © Thom Lang/The Stock
Market/Firstlight.ca; 251 (top left), Artbase Inc.; 257 (bottom left), Artbase Inc.; 259 (top left), Courtesy of OPG; 260 (bottom
right), Tom Pantages; 266 (bottom right), VCL-TCL/Masterfile; 267 (bottom right), Stu Forster/Allsport; 273 (centre left),
Courtesy of Thermo Spectronic, Rochester, NY A Thermo Electron Business; 285 (centre), From Chemistry: The Molecular
Nature of Matter and Change, © 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.; 289 (bottom right), Paul A.
Souders/CORBIS/MAGMA; 290 (top left), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, © 2000, The
McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.; 291 (top), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, © 2000, The
McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.; 293 (top), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, © 2000, The
McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.; 297 (bottom left), Mike Clemmer/The Stock Market/Firstlight.ca; 302 (centre), From Chemistry:
The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, © 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.; 303 (bottom left), From Chemistry:
The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, © 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.; 304 (centre), From Chemistry:
The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, © 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.; 308 (top left), With Permission
of The Canadian Medical Hall of Fame and artist Irma Coucill; 314 (top left), Cover of Mrs. Fulhame’s Book from,
http://bip.cnrs-mrs.fr/bip10/jbiosci.htm; 314 (centre right), From Chemistry 11, © 2001, McGraw-Hill Ryerson, a subsidiary
of The McGraw-Hill Companies; 320–321 (centre), Malcolm Hanes/Bruce Coleman Inc.; 322 (bottom), © Marcos
Welsh/Firstlight.ca; 323 (bottom left), © Pat Ivy/Ivy Images; 329 (centre), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter
and Change, © 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.; 330 (top left), From Chemistry 11, ©  2001 McGraw-Hill Ryerson
Limited, a subsidiary of The McGraw-Hill Companies; 330 (top centre), From Chemistry 11, ©  2001 McGraw-Hill Ryerson
Limited, a subsidiary of The McGraw-Hill Companies; 330 (top right), From Chemistry 11, ©  2001 McGraw-Hill Ryerson
Limited, a subsidiary of The McGraw-Hill Companies; 334 (centre left), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter
and Change, © 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.; 334 (centre), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and
Change, © 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.; 334 (centre), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and
Change, © 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.; 334 (centre right), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and
Change, © 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.; 354 (bottom), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and
Change, © 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.; 357 (centre right), Science Photo Library/Photo Researchers Inc.; 362 (top
left), © Leonard Rue III/Visuals Unlimited Inc.; 369 (top), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, ©
2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.; 371 (top left), Adrian Holmes Photography Ltd.; 376 (bottom centre), Carl & Anne
Purcell/CORBIS/MAGMA; 379 (centre left), E.F. Smith Collection/University of Pennsylvania Library; 391 (centre left), From
Chemistry 11, © 2001, McGraw-Hill Ryerson, a subsidiary of The McGraw-Hill Companies; 391 (centre), From Chemistry 11,
© 2001 McGraw-Hill Ryerson Limited, a subsidiary of The McGraw-Hill Companies; 410 (bottom left), From Chemistry: The
Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, © 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.; 412 (bottom left), From Chemistry: The
Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, © 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.; 413 (centre), From Chemistry: The
Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, © 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.; 413 (centre), From Chemistry: The
Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, © 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.; 418 (bottom right), © Stephen J.
Krasemann/Photo Researchers, Inc.; 425 (centre), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, © 2000, The
McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.; 430 (bottom left), CNRI/Science Photo Library/Photo Researchers Inc.; 437 (top left), Stephen
Frisch; 437 (top centre), Stephen Frisch; 439 (centre left), AP/Wide World Photos; 448 (bottom right), Jeff Greenberg/Photo Edit;
456 (centre left), Photo Courtesy NASA; 456 (top right), Mangelsen/Firstlight.ca; 462–463 (centre), Artbase Inc. 464 (bottom cen-
tre), Artbase Inc.; 465 (bottom left), Stephen Frisch; 465 (bottom centre), Stephen Frisch; 469 (top right), Josh Mitchell/Index
Stock Imagery/Picture Quest; 473 (top left), © Jeff Daly/Stock Boston; 474 (centre right), From Chemistry 11, © 2001,
McGraw-Hill Ryerson, a subsidiary of The McGraw-Hill Companies; 482 (centre right), © 1997 Brownie Harris/The Stock
Market/Firstlight.ca; 483 (centre left), Stephen Frisch; 483 (centre), Stephen Frisch; 483 (centre right), From Chemistry:
The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, © 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.; 488 (centre left), Stephen Frisch;
488 (centre), Stephen Frisch; 488 (centre right), Stephen Frisch; 491 (bottom right), © Phil Martin/Photo Edit; 506 (bottom left),
From Chemistry Concepts and Applications © The McGraw-Hill Companies Inc.; 512 (bottom centre), StudiOhio; 513 (top
left), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, © 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.; 513 (centre
right), The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc/ Photographer Pat Watson; 513 (bottom right), The Bakken Library and Museum
Minneapolis; 514 (top centre), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, © 2000, The McGraw-Hill
Companies, Inc.; 514 (centre left), Photo courtesy of Fortunato Villamagna; 517 (top left), From Chang’s Chemistry. © 1998,
The McGraw-Hill Companies Inc, 6th edition; 524 (bottom centre), From Chemistry Concepts and Applications © The
McGraw-Hill Companies Inc.; 525 (centre), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, © 2000, The
McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.; 526 (bottom centre), Stephen Frisch; 535 (centre right), © Charles D. Winters/ Photo
Researchers Inc.; 535 (bottom left), From Chemistry Concepts and Applications © The McGraw-Hill Companies Inc.;
536 (top left), Myrleen Ferguson Cate/Photo Edit; 536 (bottom left), From Chemistry Concepts and Applications © The
McGraw-Hill Companies Inc.; 538 (top right), Hulton/Archive by Getty Images; 544 (top left), Artbase Inc.; 544 (bottom right),
© Chris Sharp/Photo Researchers Inc.; 546 (top right), Bill Lisenby/CORBIS/MAGMA; 546 (bottom right), AP Wide World;
547 (top left), From Chang’s Chemistry. © 1998, The McGraw-Hill Companies Inc, 6th edition; 549 (top right), RC Hall
Photography; 550 (centre), Artbase Inc.; 551 (top left), From Chang’s Chemistry. © 1998, The McGraw-Hill Companies Inc, 6th
edition; 552 (top left), Chipperfield Photography/ Photographed By Jennifer Chipperfield; 553 (top left), From Chang’s
Chemistry. © 1998, The McGraw-Hill Companies Inc, 6th edition; 558 (bottom left), Ken Stepnell/Bruce Coleman; 564 (top),
Jose L. Pelaez/The Stock Market/Firstlight.ca; 564 (centre right), Christel Gerstenberg/CORBIS/MAGMA; 567 (top right),
Artbase Inc.; 568 (bottom left), Steve Callahan/Visuals Unlimited
622 MHR • Credits
8
1
)
A
I
I
I
V
(
–
0
0
.
4
e
H
2
7
3
– 2
9
1
.
5
2
0
.
5
2
m
u
i
l
e
h
7
1
)
A
I
I
V
(
6
1
)
A
V
I
(
5
1
)
A
V
(
4
1
)
A
V
I
(
3
1
)
A
I
I
I
(
S
T
N
E
M
E
L
E
P
U
O
R
G
N
A
M
-
I
8
1
.
0
2
0
1
0
0
.
9
1
9
0
0
.
6
1
8
1
0
.
4
1
7
1
0
.
2
1
6
1
8
.
0
1
–
e
N
6
5
.
4
2
7
0
.
7
2
0
8
0
– 2
–
1
8
9
.
3
–
2
4
4
.
3
–
3
4
0
.
3
–
5
5
.
2
–
F
1
8
6
1
8
4
.
3
5
8
8
.
4
8
O
4
1
3
1
6
3
.
4
5
2
.
0
9
N
2
0
4
1
5
1
.
3
6
6
3
.
7
7
C
6
8
0
1
5
6
7
4
8
9
0
4
B
n
o
e
n
e
n
i
r
o
u
l
f
n
e
g
y
x
o
n
e
g
o
r
t
i
n
n
o
b
r
a
c
n
o
r
o
b
5
9
.
9
3
8
1
5
4
.
5
3
–
r
A
n
o
g
r
a
0
2
5
– 1
8
.
3
8
3
.
7
8
–
1
l
C
7
1
6
1
.
3
6
5
2
1
7
.
1
7
1
1
.
9
3
2
–
2
7
0
.
2
3
S
6
1
8
5
.
2
9
9
9
8
.
2
9
3
8
.
7
1
7
–
7
9
.
0
3
P
5
1
9
1
.
2
2
1
0
1
3
.
7
1
3
7
.
3
5
5
–
9
0
.
8
2
i
S
4
1
0
9
.
1
6
8
7
7
8
6
1
8
3
5
3
–
8
9
.
6
2
l
A
e
n
i
r
o
l
h
c
r
u
f
l
u
s
s
u
r
o
h
p
s
o
h
p
n
o
c
i
l
i
s
m
u
n
i
m
u
l
a
4
0
2
.
0
0
8
8
4
3
2
3
7
2
4
5
3
1
1
6
1
.
7
7
5
.
5
3
3
9
2
9
7
2
0
8
.
3
8
6
3
0
9
.
9
7
–
r
K
1
5
3
– 1
8
.
5
1
1
9
.
9
1
1
–
1
r
B
5
3
6
9
.
2
3
4
1
1
6
6
2
2
3
3
–
2
6
9
.
8
7
e
S
4
3
5
5
.
2
1
4
9
7
.
3
9
4
2
.
8
5
9
–
2
9
.
4
7
s
A
3
3
8
1
.
2
7
4
9
0
9
0
1
2
.
6
7
8
–
1
6
.
2
7
e
G
2
3
1
0
.
2
1
6
7
1
1
2
1
6
0
1
3
+
3
2
7
.
9
6
a
G
1
3
1
8
1
.
9
7
5
.
9
2
0
3
7
7
4
2
n
o
t
p
y
r
k
e
n
i
m
o
r
b
m
u
i
n
e
l
e
s
c
i
n
e
s
r
a
m
u
i
n
a
m
r
e
g
m
u
i
l
l
a
g
+
2
9
3
5
6
.
n
Z
c
n
i
z
9
2
.
1
3
1
4
5
0
9
.
6
2
1
–
e
X
0
7
1
– 1
4
.
1
6
1
5
6
1
–
1
I
3
5
6
6
.
2
9
0
0
1
9
.
6
8
3
4
.
7
5
4
0
6
.
7
2
1
2
5
6
7
.
1
2
1
–
e
T
1
.
2
9
6
8
7
.
2
2
7
1
6
2
1
–
b
S
1
5
5
0
.
2
4
3
8
8
.
3
0
9
0
6
8
1
n
o
n
e
x
e
n
i
d
o
i
m
u
i
r
u
l
l
e
t
y
n
o
m
i
t
n
a
1
7
.
8
1
1
+
4
+
2
n
S
n
i
t
0
5
6
9
.
1
8
0
7
5
0
5
5
7
8
2
+
3
2
8
.
4
1
1
n
I
9
4
8
7
1
.
8
5
5
.
8
9
2
4
5
4
3
3
+
2
.
1
4
2
1
1
d
C
+
1
.
7
8
7
0
1
g
A
r
e
v
l
i
s
7
4
3
9
1
.
1
3
7
5
3
2
1
5
3
4
2
.
2
4
6
0
1
+
2
+
3
d
P
0
3
5
6
1
.
6
0
9
.
7
2
9
6
0
8
1
1
8
4
9
6
1
.
8
6
8
.
2
4
9
5
0
4
0
1
8
2
1
9
1
.
7
3
7
8
2
7
1
6
8
1
3
6
4
0
2
2
.
5
0
8
8
2
8
1
6
3
2
3
3
9
8
5
.
+
2
+
3
o
C
t
l
a
b
o
c
+
3
.
1
9
2
0
1
h
R
7
2
8
8
1
.
0
6
7
8
6
7
1
0
0
2
3
5
4
8
2
2
.
0
2
7
7
3
2
2
8
6
9
3
5
5
3
6
.
1
1
)
B
I
(
+
2
+
1
u
C
9
2
0
9
1
.
5
4
7
8
5
3
1
5
3
8
2
r
e
p
p
o
c
9
6
8
5
.
+
2
+
3
i
N
l
e
k
c
i
n
2
1
)
B
I
I
(
0
1
9
)
B
I
I
I
V
(
5
8
.
5
5
8
+
3
+
2
e
F
n
o
r
i
6
2
3
8
1
.
9
5
7
1
1
8
1
4
3
1
3
)
B
7
I
I
V
(
6
)
B
V
I
4
9
4
5
.
+
4
+
2
+
3
+
7
n
M
5
2
5
5
1
.
7
1
7
9
1
5
1
4
3
3
2
0
0
2
5
.
+
3
+
2
+
6
r
C
(
4
2
6
6
1
.
3
5
6
0
8
1
2
4
4
9
2
)
2
2
2
(
6
8
)
0
1
2
(
5
8
)
9
0
2
(
4
8
8
9
.
8
0
2
3
8
0
2
.
7
0
2
2
8
8
3
.
4
0
2
1
8
.
9
5
0
0
2
0
8
.
7
9
6
9
1
9
7
.
8
0
5
9
1
8
7
.
2
2
2
9
1
7
7
.
3
2
0
9
1
6
7
1
2
.
6
8
1
5
7
.
4
8
3
8
1
4
7
.
5
9
0
8
1
3
7
9
4
.
8
7
1
2
7
1
9
.
8
3
1
–
n
R
n
o
d
a
r
7
3
0
– 1
2
.
2
0
2
5
.
1
1
2
–
1
t
A
)
6
2
9
(
5
7
5
2
.
2
–
+
4
+
2
o
P
2
.
7
2
5
5
3
2
1
0
.
2
3
1
8
+
3
+
5
i
B
6
.
4
4
5
7
3
8
1
9
.
1
3
0
7
+
2
+
4
e
n
i
t
a
t
s
a
m
u
i
n
o
l
o
p
h
t
u
m
s
i
b
b
P
d
a
e
l
6
.
0
0
6
2
2
0
2
8
.
1
5
1
7
+
1
+
3
l
T
.
2
7
7
5
6
4
7
1
8
1
.
9
8
5
+
2
+
1
g
H
7
0
1
1
.
3
4
3
2
.
9
9
2
6
9
1
.
+
3
+
1
m
u
i
l
l
a
h
t
y
r
u
c
r
e
m
u
A
d
l
o
g
4
2
.
0
9
8
7
3
3
1
9
2
1
3
+
4
+
2
t
P
2
2
.
0
7
8
2
4
0
2
8
9
0
4
+
4
+
3
r
I
2
2
.
0
8
8
9
1
7
2
1
0
7
4
+
4
+
3
s
O
2
2
.
0
4
8
6
0
3
3
5
8
2
5
+
4
+
6
+
7
e
R
9
1
.
0
6
7
9
5
4
3
9
6
8
5
+
6
W
7
1
.
0
7
7
5
9
6
3
8
2
8
5
+
5
a
T
5
.
1
1
6
7
0
9
2
3
1
3
7
5
+
4
f
H
3
.
1
2
4
6
6
0
5
2
6
7
8
4
+
3
a
L
7
5
0
1
.
1
8
3
5
1
9
1
1
7
3
7
3
+
2
3
3
.
7
3
1
a
B
6
5
9
8
.
0
3
0
5
0
0
0
1
0
7
1
2
+
1
1
9
.
2
3
1
s
C
5
5
9
7
.
0
6
7
3
7
.
1
0
3
4
4
9
m
u
n
i
t
a
l
p
m
u
i
d
i
r
i
m
u
i
m
s
o
m
u
i
n
e
h
r
n
e
t
s
g
n
u
t
m
u
l
a
t
n
a
t
m
u
i
n
f
a
h
m
u
n
a
h
t
n
a
l
m
u
i
r
a
b
m
u
i
s
e
c
m
u
i
c
n
e
r
w
a
l
m
u
i
l
e
b
o
n
m
u
i
v
e
l
e
d
n
e
m
m
u
i
m
r
e
f
m
u
i
n
i
e
t
s
n
i
e
m
u
i
n
r
o
f
i
l
a
c
m
u
i
l
e
k
r
e
b
m
u
i
r
u
c
m
u
i
c
i
r
e
m
a
m
u
i
n
o
t
u
l
p
m
u
i
n
u
t
p
e
n
m
u
i
n
a
r
u
m
u
i
n
i
t
c
a
t
o
r
p
m
u
i
r
o
h
t
.
t
n
e
m
e
l
e
e
h
t
f
o
e
p
o
t
o
s
i
e
l
b
a
t
s
t
s
o
m
f
o
s
s
a
m
c
i
m
o
t
a
e
t
a
c
i
d
n
i
s
t
e
k
c
a
r
b
n
i
a
t
a
d
s
s
a
m
c
i
m
o
t
a
e
g
a
r
e
v
A
*
)
9
8
2
(
6
1
1
5
1
1
)
5
8
2
(
4
1
1
3
1
1
)
7
7
2
(
2
1
1
)
2
7
2
(
1
1
1
)
1
7
2
(
0
1
1
)
8
6
2
(
9
0
1
)
9
6
2
(
8
0
1
)
4
6
2
(
7
0
1
)
6
6
2
(
6
0
1
)
2
6
2
(
5
0
1
)
1
6
2
(
4
0
1
)
7
2
2
(
9
8
)
6
2
2
(
8
8
)
3
2
2
(
–
h
u
U
– – – –
–
q
u
U
– – – –
–
b
u
U
– – – –
–
u
u
U
– – – –
–
n
u
U
– – – –
–
t
M
– – – –
–
s
H
– – – –
–
h
B
– – – –
–
g
S
– – – –
–
b
D
– – – –
+
4
f
R
– – – –
+
3
c
A
1
.
1
9
9
4
4
2
3
1
1
7
4
3
+
2
a
R
9
.
0
9
0
5
2
.
3
7
9
–
+
1
r
F
7
8
7
.
0
5
7
3
~
2
.
0
0
3
–
m
u
i
x
e
h
n
u
n
u
m
u
i
d
a
u
q
n
u
n
u
m
u
i
b
n
u
n
u
m
u
i
n
u
n
u
n
u
m
u
i
l
i
n
n
u
n
u
m
u
i
r
e
n
t
i
e
m
m
u
i
s
s
a
h
m
u
i
r
h
o
b
m
u
i
g
r
o
b
a
e
s
m
u
i
n
b
u
d
m
u
i
d
r
o
f
r
e
h
t
u
r
m
u
i
n
i
t
c
a
m
u
i
d
a
r
m
u
i
c
n
a
r
f
7
9
.
4
7
1
1
7
4
0
.
3
7
1
0
7
3
9
.
8
6
1
+
3
u
L
0
.
1
4
2
5
6
3
9
1
5
7
6
3
+
3
+
2
b
Y
3
0
– 6
2
9
0
1
9
6
4
1
+
3
m
T
9
6
5
2
.
1
7
9
5
8
1
8
1
3
2
2
2
+
3
6
2
.
7
6
1
r
E
8
6
4
2
1
.
9
8
5
2
0
8
1
1
4
1
3
+
3
.
3
9
4
6
1
o
H
7
6
3
2
1
.
1
8
5
7
4
7
1
3
7
9
2
+
3
.
0
5
2
6
1
y
D
6
6
2
2
1
.
2
7
5
5
8
6
1
0
4
8
2
.
3
9
8
5
1
5
6
.
5
2
7
5
1
+
3
b
T
5
6
– 5
9
2
6
1
3
0
5
3
+
3
d
G
4
6
0
2
1
.
3
9
5
6
8
5
1
6
4
5
3
.
6
9
1
5
1
3
6
6
3
.
0
5
1
+
3
+
2
u
E
7
4
– 5
5
9
0
1
2
0
8
1
+
3
+
2
m
S
2
6
7
1
1
.
3
4
5
7
4
3
1
7
6
0
2
)
5
4
1
(
1
6
.
4
2
4
4
1
+
3
m
P
6
3
– 5
5
1
3
1
3
7
2
3
+
3
d
N
0
6
4
1
.
1
0
3
5
4
9
2
1
7
4
3
3
+
3
1
9
.
0
4
1
r
P
9
5
3
1
.
1
3
2
5
4
0
2
1
3
9
7
3
2
1
.
0
4
1
+
3
+
4
e
C
8
5
2
1
.
1
7
2
5
1
7
0
1
6
1
7
3
m
u
i
t
e
t
u
l
m
u
i
b
r
e
t
t
y
m
u
i
l
u
h
t
m
u
i
b
r
e
m
u
i
m
l
o
h
m
u
i
s
o
r
p
s
y
d
m
u
i
b
r
e
t
m
u
i
n
i
l
o
d
a
g
m
u
i
p
o
r
u
e
m
u
i
r
a
m
a
s
m
u
i
h
t
e
m
o
r
p
m
u
i
m
y
d
o
e
n
m
u
i
m
y
d
o
e
s
a
r
p
m
u
i
r
e
c
i
s
d
o
n
a
h
t
n
a
L
I
S
T
N
E
M
E
L
E
N
O
T
S
N
A
R
T
R
E
N
N
I
I
)
2
6
2
(
3
0
1
)
9
5
2
(
2
0
1
)
8
5
2
(
1
0
1
)
7
5
2
(
0
0
1
)
2
5
2
(
9
9
)
1
5
2
(
8
9
)
7
4
2
(
7
9
)
7
4
2
(
6
9
)
3
4
2
(
5
9
)
4
4
2
(
4
9
.
5
0
7
3
2
3
9
.
3
0
8
3
2
2
9
4
0
.
1
3
2
1
9
4
0
.
2
3
2
+
3
r
L
0
0
9
– – 1
–
+
3
+
2
o
N
2
4
– 6
0
0
1
1
–
+
3
+
2
d
M
0
0
1
1
–
5
3
– 6
+
3
m
F
7
2
– 6
0
0
8
1
–
+
3
s
E
9
1
– 6
3
3
1
1
–
+
3
f
C
8
0
– 6
3
7
1
1
–
+
3
+
4
k
B
1
0
– 6
3
2
3
1
–
+
3
m
C
1
8
– 5
8
1
6
1
3
7
3
3
+
3
+
4
+
5
+
6
m
A
9
4
4
1
4
8
2
2
8
7
– 5
+
4
+
3
+
5
+
6
u
P
3
1
.
5
8
5
.
2
3
1
9
1
0
5
3
+
5
+
3
+
4
+
6
p
N
3
1
.
7
9
5
7
1
9
–
+
6
+
3
+
4
+
5
U
7
.
1
4
8
5
8
0
4
1
4
0
4
4
+
5
+
4
a
P
5
.
1
8
6
5
5
4
8
1
–
+
4
h
T
0
9
3
.
1
7
8
5
3
2
0
2
1
6
0
5
i
s
d
o
n
i
t
c
A
m
u
i
d
n
i
m
u
i
m
d
a
c
m
u
i
d
a
l
l
a
p
m
u
i
d
o
h
r
m
u
i
n
e
h
t
u
r
m
u
i
t
e
n
h
c
e
t
m
u
n
e
d
b
y
l
o
m
m
u
i
b
o
i
n
m
u
i
n
o
c
r
i
z
m
u
i
r
t
t
y
m
u
i
t
n
o
r
t
s
m
u
i
d
i
b
u
r
s
t
n
e
m
e
l
E
e
h
t
f
o
e
l
b
a
T
c
i
d
o
i
r
e
P
*
s
s
a
m
c
i
m
o
t
a
e
g
a
r
e
v
A
1
0
2
1
.
e
g
r
a
h
c
n
o
i
n
o
m
m
o
C
s
e
g
r
a
h
c
n
o
i
r
e
h
t
O
4
+
2
+
C
n
o
b
r
a
c
6
5
2
.
6
8
0
1
5
6
7
4
8
9
0
4
)
K
(
i
t
n
o
p
g
n
i
t
l
e
M
)
K
(
i
t
n
o
p
g
n
i
l
i
o
B
r
e
b
m
u
n
c
i
m
o
t
A
y
t
i
v
i
t
a
g
e
n
o
r
t
c
e
l
E
)
l
o
m
/
J
k
(
y
g
r
e
n
e
n
o
i
t
a
z
i
n
o
i
t
s
r
i
F
)
n
o
i
t
i
s
n
a
r
t
r
e
n
n
i
(
s
l
a
t
e
m
)
p
u
o
r
g
n
i
a
m
(
s
l
a
t
e
m
)
n
o
i
t
i
s
n
a
r
t
(
s
l
a
t
e
m
s
d
o
i
l
l
a
t
e
m
s
l
a
t
e
m
n
o
n
s
c
i
t
e
h
t
n
y
S
i
s
d
u
q
i
L
s
e
s
a
G
2
)
A
I
I
(
1
)
A
I
(
1
0
.
1
+
1
-
1
H
0
2
.
2
2
1
3
1
1
8
.
3
1
8
2
.
0
2
1
n
e
g
o
r
d
y
h
+
2
1
0
.
9
e
B
4
4
9
.
6
7
5
.
1
9
9
8
0
6
5
1
4
4
7
2
+
1
i
L
8
9
.
0
0
2
5
3
7
.
3
5
4
5
1
6
1
m
u
i
l
l
y
r
e
b
m
u
i
h
t
i
l
S
T
N
E
M
E
L
E
P
U
O
R
G
N
A
M
-
I
S
T
N
E
M
E
L
E
N
O
T
S
N
A
R
T
I
I
+
2
1
3
.
4
2
5
)
B
V
(
4
)
B
V
I
(
3
)
B
I
I
I
(
4
9
.
0
5
+
5
+
2
+
3
+
4
V
3
2
3
6
.
1
0
5
6
3
8
1
2
0
8
6
3
7
8
.
7
4
+
4
+
2
+
3
i
T
2
2
4
5
.
1
8
5
6
1
4
9
1
0
6
5
3
+
3
6
9
.
4
4
c
S
1
2
6
3
.
1
1
3
6
4
1
8
1
9
0
1
3
+
2
8
0
.
0
4
a
C
0
2
0
0
.
1
0
9
5
5
1
1
1
7
5
7
1
+
1
0
1
.
9
3
K
9
1
2
8
.
0
9
1
4
7
.
6
3
3
2
3
0
1
m
u
i
s
e
n
g
a
m
m
u
i
d
o
s
g
M
2
.
3
2
9
3
6
3
1
2
1
1
3
.
1
8
3
7
+
1
9
9
.
2
2
a
N
1
1
3
9
.
0
6
9
4
1
7
3
6
5
1
1
.
7
0
1
0
1
4
4
)
8
9
(
+
3
u
R
2
2
.
1
1
7
7
0
6
2
3
2
4
4
+
7
+
4
+
6
c
T
3
4
0
1
2
.
2
0
7
0
3
4
2
8
3
5
4
+
6
4
9
5
9
.
o
M
2
4
6
1
2
.
5
8
6
6
9
8
2
2
1
9
4
1
9
2
9
.
1
4
2
2
.
1
9
+
5
+
3
b
N
6
.
1
4
6
6
0
5
7
2
7
1
0
5
+
4
r
Z
0
4
3
3
.
1
0
6
6
8
2
1
2
2
8
6
4
+
3
1
9
.
8
8
Y
9
3
2
2
.
1
6
1
6
5
9
7
1
8
1
6
3
+
2
2
6
.
7
8
r
S
8
3
5
9
.
0
9
4
5
0
5
0
1
5
5
6
1
+
1
7
4
.
5
8
b
R
7
3
2
8
.
0
3
0
4
5
.
2
1
3
2
.
1
4
9
e
s
e
n
a
g
n
a
m
m
u
i
m
o
r
h
c
m
u
i
d
a
n
a
v
m
u
i
n
a
t
i
t
m
u
i
d
n
a
c
s
m
u
i
c
l
a
c
m
u
i
s
s
a
t
o
p
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
6
7
Ripped by Jack Truong, if you bought this, you got ripped off.
Matter and
Chemical Bonding
U N I T   1   C O N T E N T S
CHAPTER  1
Observing Matter
CHAPTER  2
Elements and the Periodic Table
CHAPTER  3
Chemical Compounds and Bonding
CHAPTER  4
Classifying Reactions:
Chemicals in Balance
UNIT  PROJECT
Developing a Chemistry Newsletter
UNIT 1 OVERALL  EXPECTATIONS
What are the relationships
among periodic trends, types
of chemical bonds, and
properties of compounds?
How can laboratory investiga-
tions help you represent the
structures and interactions
of chemicals in chemical
reactions, and classify
these reactions?
How can understanding the
properties and behaviour of
matter lead to the develop-
ment of useful substances
and new technologies?
Unit Project Prep
Begin collecting ideas and
resources for the project at the
end of Unit 1.
2
Name ten things in your life
that do not, in some way, involve
the products and processes of
chemistry. Take your time.
Are you having trouble? Can
you name ﬁve things that do not
involve chemistry?
Are you still thinking? Consider
each room in your home. Think
about the bathroom, for example.
Does soap involve chemistry? Do
toothpaste, cosmetics, and shampoo
involve chemistry? Think about
the light in the bathroom. Without
chemistry, there is no glass to
make lightbulbs.
Move to another room. Walk
quickly. The ﬂoor is disappearing
beneath your feet. Pause brieﬂy to
watch the paint fade away from the
walls. In a moment, the walls will
be gone, too.
The story is the same if you step
outdoors. There are no sidewalks,
vehicles, people, trees, or animals.
A world without chemistry is a
world without anything! Everything
in the world, including you, is made
up of matter. Chemistry is the study
of matter: its composition, its prop-
erties, and the changes it undergoes
when it interacts with other matter.
In this unit, you will explore matter.
You will learn how to predict the
kinds of bonds (the chemical
combinations) and the reactions
that occur during these interactions.
Observing Matter
C h a p t e r   P r e v i e w
1.1 The Study of Chemistry
1.2 Describing and
Measuring Matter
1.3 Classifying Matter and
Its Changes
Imagine a chemical that
• is a key ingredient in most pesticides
• contributes to environmental hazards, such as acid rain, the greenhouse
effect, and soil erosion
• helps to spread pollutants that are present in all contaminated rivers,
lakes, and oceans
• is used in vast quantities by every industry on Earth
• can produce painful burns to exposed skin
• causes severe illness or death in either very low or very high
concentrations in the body
• is legally discarded as waste by individuals, businesses, and industries
• has been studied extensively by scientists throughout the world
In 1996, a high school student wrote a report about this chemical,
dihydrogen monoxide, for a science fair project. The information in the
student’s report was completely factual. As a result, 86% of those who
read the report — 43 out of 50 students — voted in favour of banning the
chemical. What they did not realize was that “dihydrogen monoxide” is
simply another name for water.
What if you did not know that water and dihydrogen monoxide are
the same thing? What knowledge and skills can help you distinguish
genuine environmental issues from pranks like this one? What other
strategies can help you interpret all the facts, opinions, half-truths, and
falsehoods that you encounter every day?
This chapter will reacquaint you with the science of chemistry. You
will revisit important concepts and skills from previous grades. You will
also prepare to extend your knowledge and skills in new directions.
What mistake in measuring
matter nearly resulted in an
airplane disaster in 1983?
Read on to ﬁnd the answer
to this question later in this
chapter.
Chapter 1  Observing Matter • MHR
5
1.1
The Study of Chemistry
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
identify examples of
chemistry and chemical
processes in everyday use
communicate ideas related
to chemistry and its relation-
ship to technology, society,
and the environment, using
appropriate scientiﬁc
vocabulary
communicate your
understanding of the
following terms:
chemistry, STSE
Many people, when they hear the word “chemistry,” think of scientists in
white lab coats. They picture bubbling liquids, frothing and churning
inside mazes of laboratory glassware.
Is this a fair portrayal of chemistry and chemists? Certainly, chemistry
happens in laboratories. Laboratory chemists often do wear white lab
coats, and they do use lots of glassware! Chemistry also happens every-
where around you, however. It happens in your home, your school, your
community, and the environment. Chemistry is happening right now,
inside every cell in your body. You are alive because of chemical changes
and processes.
Chemistry is the study of matter and its composition. Chemistry is
also the study of what happens when matter interacts with other matter.
When you mix ingredients for a cake and put the batter in the oven, that
is chemistry. When you pour soda water on a stain to remove it from your
favourite T-shirt, that is chemistry. When a scientist puts a chunk of an
ice-like solid into a beaker, causing white mist to ooze over the rim, that
is chemistry, too. Figure 1.1 illustrates this interaction, as well as several
other examples of chemistry in everyday life.
A
Figure 1.1
A Frozen (solid) carbon dioxide is also known as
“dry ice.” It changes to a gas at temperatures higher
than −78˚C. In this photograph, warm water has
been used to speed up the process, and food
colouring has been added.
B Dry ice is also used to create special effects for rock
concerts, stage plays, and movies.
C Nitrogen gas becomes a liquid at –196˚C. Liquid
nitrogen is used to freeze delicate materials, such
as food, instantly.
B
C
6
MHR • Unit 1  Matter and Chemical Bonding
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
Chemistry: A Blend of Science and Technology
Like all scientists, chemists try to describe and explain the world.
Chemists start by asking questions such as these:
• Why is natural gas such an effective fuel?
• How can we separate a mixture of crude oil and water?
• Which materials dissolve in water?
• What is rust and why does it form?
To answer these questions, chemists develop models, conduct
experiments, and seek patterns. They observe various types of chemical
reactions, and they perform calculations based on known data. They build
continuously on the work and the discoveries of other scientists.
Long before humans developed a scientiﬁc understanding of the
world, they invented chemical techniques and processes. These tech-
niques and processes included smelting and shaping metals, growing
crops, and making medicines. Early chemists invented technological
instruments, such as glassware and distillation equipment.
Present-day chemical technologists continue to invent new equipment.
They also invent new or better ways to provide products and services that
people want. Chemical technologists ask questions such as the following:
• How can we redesign this motor to run on natural gas?
• How can we contain and clean up an oil spill?
• What methods can we use, or develop, to make water safe to drink?
• How can we prevent iron objects from rusting?
D
F
E
D Green plants use a chemical process, called photo-
synthesis, to convert water and carbon dioxide into
the food substances they need to survive. All the
foods that you eat depend on this process.
E Your body uses chemical processes to break down
food and to release energy.
F Your home is full of products that are manufactured
by chemical industries. The products that are shown
here are often used for cleaning. Some of these
products, such as bleach and drain cleaner, can be
dangerous if handled improperly.
Chapter 1  Observing Matter • MHR
7
Chemistry, Technology, Society, and the Environment
Today we beneﬁt in many ways from chemical understanding and tech-
nologies. Each beneﬁt, however, has risks associated with it. The risks and
beneﬁts of chemical processes and technologies affect us either directly or
indirectly. Many people — either on their own, in groups, or through their
elected government ofﬁcials — assess these risks and beneﬁts. They ask
questions such as the following:
• Is it dangerous to use natural gas to heat my home?
• Why is the cost of gasoline so high?
• Is my water really clean enough to drink and use safely?
• How does rust degrade machinery over time?
During your chemistry course this year, you will study the interactions
among science, technology, society, and the environment. These interac-
tions are abbreviated as STSE. Throughout the textbook — in examples,
practice problems, activities, investigations, and features — STSE interac-
tions are discussed. The issues that appear at the end of some units are
especially rich sources for considering STSE interactions. In these simula-
tions, you are encouraged to assess and make decisions about important
issues that affect society and the environment.
STSE Issue: Are Phosphates Helpful or Harmful?
Phosphorus is an essential nutrient for life on Earth. Plants need
phosphorus, along with other nutrients, in order to grow. Phosphorus is
a component of bones and teeth. In addition, phosphorus is excreted as
waste from the body. Thus, it is present in human sewage.
Since phosphorus promotes plant growth, phosphates are excellent
fertilizers for crops. (Phosphates are chemicals containing phosphorus.
You will learn more about phosphates later in this unit.) Phosphates are
also used as food additives, and as components in some medicines. In
addition, they are an important part of dishwasher and laundry deter-
gents. For example, sodium tripolyphosphate (STPP) acts to soften water,
and keep dirt suspended in the water. Before the 1970s, STPP was a major
ingredient in most detergents.
Phosphates Causing Trouble
In the 1960s, residents around Lake Erie began to notice problems. Thick
growths of algae carpeted the surface of the water. Large amounts of the
algae washed onto beaches, making the beaches unﬁt for swimming. The
water in the lake looked green, and had an unpleasant odour. As time
passed, certain ﬁsh species in Lake Erie began to decrease.
In 1969, a joint Canadian and American task force pinpointed the
source of the problem. Phosphates and other nutrients were entering the
lake, causing algae to grow rapidly. The algae then began to die and rot,
using up dissolved oxygen in the water. As a result, ﬁsh and other water
species that needed high levels of oxygen were dying off.
The phosphate pollution arrived in the lake from three main sources:
wastewater containing detergents, sewage, and run-off from farms carrying
phosphate fertilizers. The task force recommended reducing the amount
of phosphate in detergents. They also suggested removing phosphorus at
wastewater treatment plants before the treated water entered the lake.
Detergent manufacturers were upset by the proposed reduction in
phosphates. Without this chemical, their detergents would be less effec-
Language
LINK
Eutrophication is the process
in which excess nutrients in a
lake or river cause algae to
grow rapidly. Look up this term
in a reference book or on the
Internet. Is eutrophication
always caused by human
action?
8
MHR • Unit 1  Matter and Chemical Bonding
tive. Also, it would be expensive to develop other chemicals to do the
same job. After pressure from the government, detergent companies
reduced the amount of phosphate in their products by about 90%. Cities
on Lake Erie spent millions of dollars adding phosphorus removal to their
waste treatment. Today, Lake Erie has almost completely recovered.
The connection between technology (human-made chemical
products) and the environment (Lake Erie) is an obvious STSE
connection in this issue. What other connections do you see?
Canadians
in Chemistry
it is emitted in the infrared range of energy. It can
be detected, however, with the right instruments.
Dr. Polanyi’s work led to the invention of the laser.
As well, his research helped to explain what
happens to energy during a chemical reaction.
Dr. Polanyi believes that people must accept
the responsibility that comes with scientiﬁc
understanding and technological progress. He
believes, as well, that a vital element of hope
lies at the heart of modern science. To Dr. Polanyi,
human rights are integral to scientiﬁc success.
“Science must breathe the oxygen of freedom,”
he stated in 1999.
This is why Dr. Polanyi says that scientists
must take part in the debate on technological,
social, and political affairs. Dr. Polanyi points
to the political role played by scientists such
as Andrei Sakharov in the former Soviet Union,
Linus Pauling in the United States, and Fang Lizhi
in China.
Make Connections
1. Research the scientists whom Dr. Polanyi
mentioned: Andrei Sakharov, Linus Pauling,
and Fang Lizhi. What work distinguished them
as scientists? What work distinguished them
as members of society?
2. Throughout history, chemists have laboured to
present the truth as they know it to their fellow
scientists and to society. Some of them, such
as Linus Pauling, have been scorned and
ridiculed by the scientiﬁc community. Do fur-
ther research to discover two other chemists
who have struggled to communicate their
ideas, and have succeeded.
Chapter 1  Observing Matter • MHR
9
John Charles Polanyi was born in Berlin,
Germany, into a family of Hungarian origin.
Polanyi was born on the eve of the Great
Depression, shortly before the Nazi takeover. His
father moved to England to become a chemistry
professor at Manchester University. Polanyi was
sent to Canada for safety during the darkest years
of World War II.
John Polanyi went back to England to earn a
doctorate in chemistry at Manchester University
in 1952. He returned to Canada a few years later.
Soon after, he took up a position at the University
of Toronto. There Dr. Polanyi pursued the
research that earned him a share of the Nobel
Prize for chemistry in 1986. He pioneered the ﬁeld
of reaction dynamics, which addresses one of the
most basic questions in chemistry: What happens
when two substances interact to produce another
substance? Polanyi’s father had once investigated
the same question.
Dr. Polanyi tried to provide some answers by
studying the very faint light that is given off by
molecules as they undergo chemical changes.
This light is invisible to the unaided eye, because
C O U R S E
C H A L L E N G E
At the end of this course, you
will have a chance to use what
you have learned to help you in
the Course Challenge: Planet
Unknown. In this challenge,
you are a member of a science
team sent to a new planet. It is
your task to analyze the plan-
et’s resources. You will design
and carry out hands-on investi-
gations and analyze your
results. Then you will prepare
a presentation to persuade the
Canadian government to invest
in the establishment of a com-
munity on the planet. As you
work through this book, keep a
research portfolio of notes and
ideas that may help you in the
Course Challenge.
Section Wrap-up
During this chemistry course, your skills of scientiﬁc inquiry will be
assessed using the same speciﬁc set of criteria (Table 1.1). You will
notice that all review questions are coded according to this chart.
Table 1.1 Achievement Chart Criteria, Ontario Science Curriculum
Knowledge and
Understanding (K/U)
Inquiry
(I)
Communication
(C)
Making Connections
(MC)
• application of
the skills and
strategies of
scientific
inquiry
• application of
technical skills
and procedures
• use of tools,
equipment, and
materials
• understanding
of concepts,
principles,
laws, and
theories
• knowledge of
facts and terms
• transfer of
concepts to
new contexts
• understanding
of relationships
between
concepts
• communication
of information
and ideas
• use of scientific
terminology,
symbols,
conventions,
and standard
(SI) units
• communication
for different
audiences and
purposes
• use of various
forms of
communication
• use of
information
technology for
scientific
purposes
• understanding
of connections
among science,
technology,
society, and the
environment
• analysis of
social and
economic
issues involving
science and
technology
• assessment of
impacts of
science and
technology on
the environment
• proposing of
courses of
practical action
in relation to
science-and
technology-
based problems
Section Review
1
2
3
4
K/U
Based on your current understanding of chemistry, list ﬁve ways
in which chemistry and chemical processes affect your life.
I
Earlier in this section, you learned that fertilizers containing
phosphorus can cause algae to grow faster. Design an investigation on
paper to determine the effect of phosphorus-containing detergents on
algae growth.
C
Design a graphic organizer that clearly shows the connections
among science, technology, society, and the environment.
MC
For each situation, identify which STSE interaction is most
important.
(a) Research leads to the development of agricultural pesticides.
(b) The pesticides prevent insects and weeds from destroying crops.
(c) Rain soaks the excess pesticides on farm land into the ground. It
ends up in groundwater systems.
(d) Wells obtain water from groundwater systems. Well-water in the
area is polluted by the pesticides. It is no longer safe to drink.
10 MHR • Unit 1  Matter and Chemical Bonding
Describing and Measuring Matter
1.2
As you can see in the photograph at the beginning of this chapter, water
is the most striking feature of our planet. It is visible from space, giving
Earth a vivid blue colour. You can observe water above, below, and at
Earth’s surface. Water is a component of every living thing, from the
smallest bacterium to the largest mammal and the oldest tree. You drink
it, cook with it, wash with it, skate on it, and swim in it. Legends and
stories involving water have been a part of every culture in human
history. No other kind of matter is as essential to life as water.
As refreshing as it may be, water straight from the tap seems rather
ordinary. Try this: Describe a glass of water to someone who has never
seen or experienced water before. Be as detailed as possible. See how
well you can distinguish water from other kinds of matter.
In addition to water, there are millions of different kinds of matter in the
universe. The dust specks suspended in the air, the air itself, your chair,
this textbook, your pen, your classmates, your teacher, and you — all these
are examples of matter. In the language of science, matter is anything that
has mass and volume (takes up space). In the rest of this chapter, you will
examine some key concepts related to matter. You have encountered these
concepts in previous studies. Before you continue, complete the Checkpoint
activity to see what you recall and how well you recall it. As you proceed
through this chapter, assess and modify your answers.
Describing Matter
You must observe matter carefully to describe it well. When describing
water, for example, you may have used statements like these:
• Water is a liquid.
• It has no smell.
• Water is clear and colourless.
• It changes to ice when it freezes.
• Water freezes at 0˚C.
• Sugar dissolves in water.
• Oil ﬂoats on water.
Characteristics that help you describe and identify matter are called
properties. Figure 1.2 on the next page shows some properties of water
and hydrogen peroxide. Examples of properties include physical state,
colour, odour, texture, boiling temperature, density, and ﬂammability
(combustibility). Table 1.2 on the next page lists some common properties
of matter. You will have direct experience with most of these properties
during this chemistry course.
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
select and use measuring
instruments to collect and
record data
express the results of calcu-
lations to the appropriate
number of decimal places
and signiﬁcant digits
select and use appropriate
SI units
communicate your under-
standing of the following
terms: matter, properties,
physical property, chemical
property, signiﬁcant digits,
accuracy, precision
From memory, explain and
deﬁne each of the following
concepts. Use descriptions,
examples, labelled sketches,
graphic organizers, a computer
FAQs ﬁle or Help ﬁle, or any
combination of these. Return to
your answers frequently during
this chapter. Modify them as
necessary.
• states of matter
• properties of matter
• physical properties
• chemical properties
• physical change
• chemical change
• mixture
• pure substance
• element
• compound
Chapter 1  Observing Matter • MHR
11
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
Liquid water is
Figure 1.2
clear, colourless, odourless, and
transparent. Hydrogen peroxide
(an antiseptic liquid that many
people use to clean wounds) has
the same properties. It differs
from water, however, in other
properties, such as boiling point,
density, and reactivity with acids.
Table 1.2 Common Properties of Matter
Physical Properties
Chemical Properties
Qualitative
Quantitative
physical state
melting point
reactivity with water
colour
odour
crystal shape
malleability
ductility
hardness
brittleness
boiling point
reactivity with air
density
solubility
reactivity with pure oxygen
reactivity with acids
electrical conductivity
reactivity with pure substances
thermal conductivity
combustibility (flammability)
toxicity
decomposition
Properties may be physical or chemical. A physical property is a property
that you can observe without changing one kind of matter into something
new. For example, iron is a strong metal with a shiny surface. It is solid at
room temperature, but it can be heated and formed into different shapes.
These properties can all be observed without changing iron into some-
thing new.
A chemical property is a property that you can observe when one
kind of matter is converted into a different kind of matter. For example, a
chemical property of iron is that it reacts with oxygen to form a different
kind of matter: rust. Rust and iron have completely different physical and
chemical properties.
Figure 1.3 shows another example of a chemical property. Glucose
test paper changes colour in the presence of glucose. Thus, a chemical
property of glucose test paper is that it changes colour in response to
glucose. Similarly, a chemical property of glucose is that it changes the
colour of glucose test paper.
Recall that some properties of matter, such as colour, and ﬂammabili-
ty, are qualitative. You can describe them in words, but you cannot
measure them or express them numerically. Other properties, such as
density and boiling point, can be measured and expressed numerically.
Such properties are quantitative. In Investigation 1-A you will use both
qualitative and quantitative properties to examine a familiar item.
Figure 1.3
amount of glucose (a simple sugar) in their blood.
People with diabetes rely on a chemical property to help them monitor the
12 MHR • Unit 1  Matter and Chemical Bonding
Observing Aluminum Foil
S K I L L   F O C U S
Initiating and Planning
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
You can easily determine the length and width
of a piece of aluminum foil. You can use a ruler
to measure these values directly. What about its
thickness? In this investigation, you will design
a method for calculating the thickness of
aluminum foil.
Problem
How can you determine the thickness of a piece
of aluminum foil, in centimetres?
Safety Precautions
Materials
10 cm × 10 cm square of aluminum foil
ruler
electronic balance
calculator
chemical reference handbook
Procedure
1. Work together in small groups. Brainstorm
possible methods for calculating the thickness
of aluminum foil.
2. Observe and record as many physical
properties of aluminum foil as you can.
CAUTION
Do not use the property of taste.
Never taste anything in a laboratory.
3. As a group, review the properties you have
recorded. Reﬂect on the possible methods
you brainstormed. Decide on one method,
and try it. (If you are stuck, ask your teacher
for a clue.)
Analysis
1. Consider your value for the thickness of the
aluminum foil. Is it reasonable? Why or why
not?
2. Compare your value with the values obtained
by other groups.
(a) In what ways are the values similar?
(b) In what ways are the values different?
Conclusion
3. (a) Explain how you decided on the method
you used.
(b) How much conﬁdence do you have in your
method? Explain why you have this level
of conﬁdence.
(c) How much conﬁdence do you have in
the value you calculated? Give reasons to
justify your answer.
Applications
4. Pure aluminum has a chemical property in
common with copper and iron. It reacts with
oxygen in air to form a different substance
with different properties. This substance is
called aluminum oxide. Copper has the same
chemical property. The substance that results
when copper reacts with oxygen is called a
patina. Similarly, iron reacts with oxygen to
form rust. Do research to compare the proper-
ties and uses (if any) of aluminum oxide,
copper patina, and rust. What technologies
are available to prevent their formation? What
technologies make use of their formation?
Chapter 1  Observing Matter • MHR
13
Using Measurements to Describe Matter
In the investigation, you measured the size and mass of a piece of alu-
minum foil. You have probably performed these types of measurement
many times before. Measurements are so much a part of your daily life
that you can easily take them for granted. The clothes you wear come in
different sizes. Much of the food you eat is sold by the gram, kilogram,
millilitre, or litre. When you follow a recipe, you measure amounts. The
dimensions of paper and coins are made to exact speciﬁcations. The value
of money is itself a measurement.
Measurements such as clothing size, amounts of food, and currency
are not standard, however. Clothing sizes in Europe are different from
those in North America. European chefs tend to measure liquids and
powdered solids by mass, rather than by volume. Currencies, of course,
differ widely from country to country.
To communicate effectively, scientists rely on a standard system of
measurement. As you have learned in previous studies, this system is
called the International System of Units (Le système international
d’unités, SI ). It allows scientists anywhere in the world to describe
matter in the same quantitative language. There are seven base SI units,
and many more units that are derived from them. The metre (m), the
kilogram (kg), and the second (s) are three of the base SI units. You will
learn about two more base units, the mole (mol) and the kelvin (K), later
in this book.
When you describe matter, you use terms such as mass, volume, and
temperature. When you measure matter, you use units such as grams,
cubic centimetres, and degrees Celsius. Table 1.3 lists some quantities and
units that you will use often in this course. You are familiar with all of
them except, perhaps, for the mole and the kelvin. The mole is one of the
most important units for describing amounts of matter. You will be intro-
duced to the mole in Unit 2. The kelvin is used to measure temperature.
You will learn more about the kelvin scale in Unit 5. Consult Appendix E
if you would like to review other SI quantities and units.
Quantity
mass
length
Table 1.3 Important SI Quantities and Their Units
Definition
SI units or their derived equivalents
Equipment use to measure the quantity
the amount of
matter in an object
the distance
between two points
kilogram (kg)
gram (g)
milligram (mg)
metre (m)
centimetre (cm)
millimetre (mm)
balance
ruler
temperature
the hotness or coldness
of a substance
kelvin (K)
degrees Celsius (˚C)
thermometer
volume
the amount of space
that an object occupies
cubic metre (m3)
cubic centimetre (cm3)
litre (L)
millilitre (mL)
beaker, graduated cylinder, or
pipette; may also be calculated
mole
density
energy
the amount of a substance
mole (mol)
the mass per unit of
volume of a substance
kilograms per cubic metre (kg/m3)
grams per cubic centimetre (g/cm3)
the capacity to do
work (to move matter)
joule (J)
calculated not measured
calculated or measured
calculated not measured
14 MHR • Unit 1  Matter and Chemical Bonding
Give ﬁve examples of exact
numbers that you have person-
ally experienced today or over
the past few days.
Measurement and Uncertainty
Before you look more closely at matter, you need to know how much you
can depend on measurements. How can you recognize when a measure-
ment is trustworthy? How can you tell if it is only an approximation? For
example, there are ﬁve Great Lakes. Are you sure there are ﬁve? Is there
any uncertainty associated with the value “ﬁve” in this case? What about
the number of millilitres in 1 L, or the number of seconds in 1 min?
Numbers such as these — numbers that you can count or numbers that are
true by deﬁnition — are called exact numbers. You are certain that there
are ﬁve Great Lakes (or nine books on the shelf, or ten students in the
classroom) because you can count them. Likewise, you are certain that
there are 1000 mL in 1 L, and 60 s in 1 min. These relationships are true
by deﬁnition.
Now consider the numbers you used and the calculations you did in
Investigation 1-A. They are listed in Figure 1.4.
(cid:2) The area of the aluminum
square measured 100 cm2
(10 cm × 10 cm).
Did you verify these dimensions?
Are you certain that each side
measured exactly 10 cm? Could
it have been 9.9 cm or 10.1 cm?
(cid:2) The mass of the aluminum
square, as measured by an
electronic balance, may
have been about 0.33 g.
(cid:2) The density of aluminum
is 2.70 g/cm3 at a given
temperature.
(cid:2) The thickness of the
aluminum square, calculated
using a calculator, may have
been about 0.001 222 cm.
If you used an electronic
balance, are you certain that the
digital read-out was accurate?
Did the last digit fluctuate at
all? If you used a triple-beam
balance, are you certain that you
read the correct value? Could
it have been 0.34 g or 0.32 g?
What reference did you use to find
the density? Did you consult more
than one reference? Suppose
that the density was actually
2.699 g/cm3. Would this make a
difference in your calculations?
Would this make a difference in
the certainty of your answer?
Are you certain that this value
is fair, given the other values
that you worked with? Is it fair to
have such a precise value, with
so many digits, when there are
so few digits (just two: the 1 and
the 0) in your dimensions of the
aluminum square?
Figure 1.4
Numbers and calculations from Investigation 1-A
Chapter 1  Observing Matter • MHR
15
During the investigations in this textbook, you will use equipment
such as rulers, balances, graduated cylinders, and thermometers to
measure matter. You will calculate values with a calculator or with
specially programmed software. How exact can your measurements and
calculations be? How exact should they be?
Two main factors affect your ability to record and communicate meas-
urements and calculations. One factor is the instruments you use. The
other factor is your ability to read and interpret what the instruments tell
you. Examine Figures 1.5 and 1.6. They will help you understand which
digits you can know with certainty, and which digits are uncertain.
What is the length measured by ruler A? Is it 4.2 cm, or is it 4.3 cm? You
cannot be certain. The 2 of 4.2 is an estimate. The 3 of 4.3 is also an
estimate. In both cases, therefore, you are uncertain about the last
(farthest right) digit.
cm
0
0
cm
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
ruler A
ruler B
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
What is the length measured by ruler B? Is it 4.27 cm or 4.28 cm? Again, you
cannot be certain. Ruler B lets you make more precise measurements than
ruler A. Despite ruler B’s higher precision, however, you must still estimate
the last digit. The 7 of 4.27 is an estimate. The 8 of 4.28 is also an estimate.
These two rulers
Figure 1.5
measure the same length of the
blue square. Ruler A is calibrated
into divisions of 1 cm. Ruler B
is calibrated into divisions
of 0.1 cm. Which ruler can
help you make more precise
measurements?
A
B
These two thermometers measure the same temperature.
Figure 1.6
Thermometer A is calibrated into divisions of 0.1˚C. Thermometer B is
calibrated into divisions of 1˚C. Which thermometer lets you make more
precise measurements? Which digits in each thermometer reading are
you certain about? Which digits are you uncertain about?
16 MHR • Unit 1  Matter and Chemical Bonding
Signiﬁcant Digits, Certainty, and Measurements
All measurements involve uncertainty. One source of this uncertainty
is the measuring device itself. Another source is your ability to perceive
and interpret a reading. In fact, you cannot measure anything with
complete certainty. The last (farthest right) digit in any measurement is
always an estimate.
The digits that you record when you measure something are called
signiﬁcant digits. Signiﬁcant digits include the digits that you are certain
about and a ﬁnal, uncertain digit that you estimate. For example, 4.28 g
has three signiﬁcant digits. The ﬁrst two digits, the 4 and the 2, are
certain. The last digit, the 8, is an estimate. Therefore, it is uncertain.
The value 4.3 has two signiﬁcant digits. The 4 is certain, and the 3 is
uncertain.
How Can You Tell Which Digits Are Signiﬁcant?
You can identify the number of signiﬁcant digits in any value. Table 1.4
lists some rules to help you do this.
Table 1.4 Rules for Determining Signiﬁcant Digits
Rules
Examples
1. All non-zero numbers
are significant.
2. All zeros that are located
between two non-zero numbers
are significant.
3. Zeros that are located to the
left of a value are not significant.
7.886 has four significant digits.
19.4 has three significant digits.
527.266 992 has nine significant digits.
408 has three significant digits.
25 074 has five significant digits.
0.0907 has three significant digits.
They are the 9, the third 0 to the right,
and the 7. The function of the 0.0 at the
begining is only to locate the decimal.
0.000 000 000 06 has one significant digit.
4. Zeros that are located to the
right of a value may or may not
be significant.
22 700 may have three significant digits,
or it may have five significant digits.
See the box below to find out why.
Explaining Three Signiﬁcant Digits
The Great Lakes contain 22 700 km3 of water. Is there exactly that amount
of water in the Great Lakes? No, 22 700 km3 is an approximate value. The
actual volume could be anywhere from 22 651 km3 to 22 749 km3. You can
use scientiﬁc notation to rewrite 22 700 km3 as 2.27 × 104 km. This shows
that only three digits are signiﬁcant. (See Appendix E at the back of the
book, if you would like to review scientiﬁc notation.)
Explaining Five Signiﬁcant Digits
What if you were able to measure the volume of water in the Great Lakes?
You could verify the value of 22 700 km3. Then all ﬁve digits (including the
zeros) would be signiﬁcant. Here again, scientiﬁc notation lets you show
clearly the ﬁve signiﬁcant digits: 2.2700 × 104 km3 .
Chapter 1  Observing Matter • MHR
17
Practice Problems
1. Write the following quantities in your notebook. Beside each
quantity, record the number of signiﬁcant digits.
(a) 24.7 kg
(b) 247.7 mL
(c) 247.701 mg
(d) 0.247 01 L
(e) 8.930 × 105 km
(f) 2.5 g
(g) 0.0003 mL
(h) 923.2 g
2. Consider the quantity 2400 g.
(a) Assume that you measured this quantity. How many signiﬁcant
digits does it have?
(b) Now assume that you have no knowledge of how it was obtained.
How many signiﬁcant digits does it have?
Accuracy and Precision
In everyday speech, you might use the terms “accuracy” and “precision”
to mean the same thing. In science, however, these terms are related to
certainty. Each, then, has a speciﬁc meaning.
Accuracy refers to how close a given quantity is to an accepted or
expected value. (See Figure 1.7.) Precision may refer to the exactness of a
measurement. For example, ruler B in Figure 1.5 lets you measure length
with greater precision than ruler A. Precision may also refer to the close-
ness of a series of data points. Data that are very close to one another are
said to be precise. Examine Figure 1.8. Notice that a set of data can be
precise but not accurate.
Figure 1.7
mass of 5 g. Why does the reading on this balance show a different value?
Under standard conditions of temperature and pressure, 5 mL of water has a
18 MHR • Unit 1  Matter and Chemical Bonding
Student A
Student B
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
)
g
(
r
e
t
a
w
f
o
s
s
a
M
A
high precision
high accuracy
1
2
3
4
Trial number
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
)
g
(
r
e
t
a
w
f
o
s
s
a
M
B
high precision
low accuracy
1
2
3
4
Trial number
Figure 1.8
Compare student A’s results with results obtained by student B.
Two students conducted four trials each to measure the volumes and
masses of 5 mL of water. The graphs in Figure 1.8 show their results. The
expected value for the mass of water is 5 g. Student A’s results show high
precision and high accuracy. Student B’s results show high precision but
low accuracy.
In the following Express Lab, you will see how the equipment you use
affects the precision of your measurements.
ExpressLab
Significant Digits
You know that the precision of a measuring
device affects the number of signiﬁcant digits that
you should report. In this activity, each group will
use different glassware and a different balance to
collect data.
Materials
glassware for measuring volume: for example,
graduated cylinders, Erlenmeyer ﬂasks,
pipettes or beakers
balance
water
Procedure
1. Obtain the glassware and balance assigned to
your group.
2. Determine the mass and volume of a quantity
of water. (The quantity you use is up to you
to decide.)
3. From the data you collect, calculate the
density of water.
4. Enter your values for mass, volume, and
density in the class table.
Analysis
1. Examine each group’s data and calculated
value for density. Note how the number of
signiﬁcant digits in each value for density
compares with the number of signiﬁcant
digits in the measured quantities.
2. Propose a rule or guideline for properly
handling signiﬁcant digits when you multiply
and divide measured quantities.
Chapter 1  Observing Matter • MHR
19
Calculating with Signiﬁcant Digits
In this course, you will often take measurements and use them to calcu-
late other quantities. You must be careful to keep track of which digits
in your calculations and results are signiﬁcant. Why? Your results
should not imply more certainty than your measured quantities justify.
This is especially important when you use a calculator. Calculators
usually report results with far more ﬁgures — greater certainty — than
your data warrant. Always remember that calculators do not make
decisions about certainty. You do.
There are three rules for reporting signiﬁcant digits in calculated
answers. These rules are summarized in Table 1.5. Reﬂect on how they
apply to your previous experiences. Then examine the Sample
Problems that follow.
Table 1.5 Rules for Reporting Signiﬁcant Digits in Calculations
Rule 1: Multiplying and Dividing
The value with the fewest number of signiﬁcant digits, going into the
calculation, determines the number of signiﬁcant digits that you should
report in your answer.
Rule 2: Adding and Subtracting
The value with the fewest number of decimal places, going into the
calculation, determines the number of decimal places that you should
report in your answer.
Rule 3: Rounding
To get the appropriate number of signiﬁcant digits (rule 1) or decimal
places (rule 2), you may need to round your answer.
If your answer ends in a number that is greater than 5, increase the
preceding digit by 1. For example, 2.346 can be rounded to 2.35.
If your answer ends with a number that is less than 5, leave the preceding
number unchanged. For example, 5.73 can be rounded to 5.7.
If your answer ends with 5, increase the preceding number by 1 if it is odd.
Leave the preceding number unchanged if it is even. For example, 18.35
can be rounded to 18.4, but 18.25 is rounded to 18.2.
Sample Problem
Reporting Volume Using Significant Digits
Problem
A student measured a regularly shaped sample of iron and found it
to be 6.78 cm long, 3.906 cm wide, and 11 cm tall. Determine its
volume to the correct number of signiﬁcant digits.
What Is Required?
You need to calculate the volume of the iron sample. Then you need
to write this volume using the correct number of signiﬁcant digits.
20 MHR • Unit 1  Matter and Chemical Bonding
Continued ...
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 20
What Is Given?
You know the three dimensions of the iron sample.
Length = 6.78 cm (three signiﬁcant digits)
Width = 3.906 cm (four signiﬁcant digits)
Height = 11 cm (two signiﬁcant digits)
Plan Your Strategy
To calculate the volume, use the formula
Volume = Length × Width × Height
V = l × w × h
Find the value with the smallest number of signiﬁcant digits. Your
answer can have only this number of signiﬁcant digits.
Act on Your Strategy
V = l × w × h
= 6.78 cm × 3.906 cm × 11 cm
= 291.309 48 cm3
The value 11 cm has the smallest number of signiﬁcant digits: two.
Thus, your answer can have only two signiﬁcant digits. In order to
have only two signiﬁcant digits, you need to put your answer into
scientiﬁc notation.
V = 2.9 × 102 cm3
Therefore, the volume is 2.9 × 102 cm3, to two signiﬁcant digits.
Check Your Solution
• Your answer is in cm3. This is a unit of volume.
• Your answer has two signiﬁcant digits. The least number of
signiﬁcant digits in the question is also two.
Sample Problem
Reporting Mass Using Significant Digits
Problem
Suppose that you measure the masses of four objects as 12.5 g,
145.67 g, 79.0 g, and 38.438 g. What is the total mass of the objects?
What Is Required?
You need to calculate the total mass of the objects.
What Is Given?
You know the mass of each object.
Continued ...
Chapter 1  Observing Matter • MHR
21
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 21
Plan Your Strategy
• Add the masses together, aligning them at the decimal point.
• Underline the estimated (farthest right) digit in each value. This
is a technique you can use to help you keep track of the number
of estimated digits in your ﬁnal answer.
• In the question, two values have the fewest decimal places: 12.5
and 79.0. You need to round your answer so that it has only one
decimal place.
PROBLEM TIP
Notice that adding the values
results in an answer that has
three decimal places. Using
the underlining technique
mentioned in “Plan Your
Strategy” helps you count
them quickly.
Act on Your Strategy
12.5
145.67
79.0
+ 38.438
275.608
Total mass = 275.608 g
Therefore, the total mass of the objects is 275.6 g.
Check Your Solution
• Your answer is in grams. This is a unit of mass.
• Your answer has one decimal place. This is the same as the values
in the question with the fewest decimal places.
Practice Problems
3. Do the following calculations. Express each answer using the
correct number of signiﬁcant digits.
(a) 55.671 g + 45.78 g
(b) 1.9 mm + 0.62 mm
(c) 87.9478 L − 86.25 L
(d) 0.350 mL + 1.70 mL + 1.019 mL
(e) 5.841 g × 6.03 g
(f)
(g)
0.6 kg
15 L
17.51 g
2.2 cm3
Chemistry, Calculations, and Communication
Mathematical calculations are an important part of chemistry. You will
need your calculation skills to help you investigate many of the topics in
this textbook. You will also need calculation skills to communicate your
measurements and results clearly when you do activities and investiga-
tions. Chemistry, however, is more than measurements and calculations.
Chemistry also involves ﬁnding and interpreting patterns. This is the
focus of the next section.
22 MHR • Unit 1  Matter and Chemical Bonding
Chemistry Bulletin
Air Canada Flight 143
Air Canada Flight 143 was en route from
Montréal to Edmonton on July 23, 1983. The
airplane was one of Air Canada’s ﬁrst Boeing
767s, and its systems were almost completely
computerized.
While on the ground in Montréal, Captain
Robert Pearson found that the airplane’s fuel
processor was malfunctioning. As well, all
three fuel gauges were not operating. Pearson
believed, however, that it was safe to ﬂy the
airplane using manual fuel measurements.
Partway into the ﬂight, as the airplane
passed over Red Lake, Ontario, one of two fuel
pumps in the left wing failed. Soon the other
fuel pump failed and the left engine ﬂamed
out. Pearson decided to head to the closest
major airport, in Winnipeg. He began the
airplane’s descent. At 8400 m, and more than
160 km from the Winnipeg Airport, the right
engine also failed. The airplane had run out
of fuel.
In Montréal, the ground crew had deter-
mined that the airplane had 7682 L of fuel in
its fuel tank. Captain Pearson had calculated
that the mass of fuel needed for the trip from
Montréal to Edmonton was 22 300 kg. Since
fuel is measured in litres, Pearson asked a
mechanic how to convert litres into kilograms.
He was told to multiply the amount in litres
by 1.77.
By multiplying 7682 L by 1.77, Pearson
calculated that the airplane had 13 597 kg of
fuel on board. He subtracted this value from
the total amount of fuel for the trip, 22 300 kg,
and found that 8703 kg more fuel was needed.
To convert kilograms back into litres,
Pearson divided the mass, 8703 kg, by 1.77.
The result was 4916 L. The crew added 4916 L
of fuel to the airplane’s tanks.
This conversion number, 1.77, had been
used in the past because the density of jet fuel
is 1.77 pounds per litre. Unfortunately, the
number that should have been used to convert
litres into kilograms was 0.803. The crew
should have added 20 088 L of fuel, not 4916 L.
First ofﬁcer Maurice Quintal calculated
their rate of descent. He determined that they
would never make Winnipeg. Pearson turned
north and headed toward Gimli, an abandoned
Air Force base. Gimli’s left runway was being
used for drag-car and go-kart races.
Surrounding the runway were families and
campers. It was into this situation that Pearson
and Quintal landed the airplane.
Tires blew upon impact. The airplane skid-
ded down the runway as racers and spectators
scrambled to get out of the way. Flight 143
ﬁnally came to rest 1200 m later, a mere 30 m
from the dazed onlookers.
Miraculously no one was seriously injured.
As news spread around the world, the airplane
became known as “The Gimli Glider.”
Making Connections
1. You read that the airplane should have
received 20 088 L of fuel. Show how this
amount was calculated.
2. Use print or electronic resources to ﬁnd out
what caused the loss of the Mars Climate
Orbiter spacecraft in September 1999. How
is this incident related to the “Gimli Glider”
story? Could a similar incident happen
again? Why or why not?
Chapter 1  Observing Matter • MHR
23
Section Wrap-up
In this section, you learned how to judge the accuracy and precision of
your measurement. You learned how to recognize signiﬁcant digits. You
also learned how to give answers to calculations using the correct number
of signiﬁcant digits.
In the next section, you will learn about the properties and classiﬁca-
tion of matter.
Section Review
1
2
K/U
Explain the difference between accuracy and precision in your
own words.
C
What SI or SI-derived unit of measurement would you use to
describe:
(a) the mass of a person
(b) the mass of a mouse
(c) the volume of a glass of juice
(d) the length of your desk
(e) the length of your classroom
3
K/U
Record the number of signiﬁcant digits in each of the following
values:
(a) 3.545
(b) 308
(c) 0.000876
4
K/U
Complete the following calculations and give your answer to the
correct number of signiﬁcant digits.
(a) 5.672 g + 92.21 g
(b) 32.34 km × 93.1 km
(c) 66.0 mL × 0.031 mL
(d) 11.2 g ÷ 92 mL
5
I
What lab equipment would you use in each situation? Why?
(a) You need 2.00 mL of hydrogen peroxide for a chemical reaction.
(b) You want approximately 1 L of water to wash your equipment.
(c) You are measuring 250 mL of water to heat on a hot plate.
(d) You need 10.2 mL of alcohol to make up a solution.
6
I
Review the graphs in Figure 1.8. Draw two more graphs to show
(a) data that have high accuracy but low precision
(b) data that have low accuracy and low precision
24 MHR • Unit 1  Matter and Chemical Bonding
Classifying Matter
and Its Changes
Matter is constantly changing. Plants grow by converting matter from
the soil and air into matter they can use. Water falls from the sky, evapo-
rates, and condenses again to form liquid water in a never-ending cycle.
You can probably suggest many more examples of matter changing.
Matter changes in response to changes in energy. Adding energy to
matter or removing energy from matter results in a change. Figure 1.9
shows a familiar example of a change involving matter and energy.
removing energy
1.3
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
identify chemical sub-
stances and chemical
changes in everyday life
demonstrate an under-
standing of the need to
use chemicals safely in
everyday life
communicate your under-
standing of the following
terms: physical changes,
chemical changes, mixture,
pure substance, element,
compound
solid state
liquid state
gas state
adding energy
Figure 1.9
Like all matter, water can change its state when energy is added or removed.
Physical and Chemical Changes in Matter
A change of state alters the appearance of matter. The composition of
matter remains the same, however, regardless of its state. For example, ice,
liquid water, and water vapour are all the same kind of matter: water.
Melting and boiling other kinds of matter have the same result. The
appearance and some other physical properties change, but the matter
retains its identity — its composition. Changes that affect the physical
appearance of matter, but not its composition, are physical changes.
Figure 1.10 shows a different kind of change involving water.
Electrical energy is passed through water, causing it to decompose. Two
completely different kinds of matter result from this process: hydrogen gas
and oxygen gas. These gases have physical and chemical properties that
are different from the properties of water and from each other’s properties.
Therefore, decomposing water is a change that affects the composition of
water. Changes that alter the composition of matter are called chemical
changes. Iron rusting, wood burning, and bread baking are three examples
of chemical changes.
You learned about physical and chemical properties earlier in this
chapter. A physical change results in a change of physical properties
only. A chemical change results in a change of both physical and
chemical properties.
An electrical
Figure 1.10
current is used to decompose
water. This process is known
as electrolysis.
Chapter 1  Observing Matter • MHR
25
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
Before adopting the metric
system, Canadians measured
temperature in units called
Fahrenheit degrees (˚F). Based
on the Fahrenheit scale, water
boils at 212˚F and freezes at
32˚F. A few countries, including
the United States, still use
the Fahrenheit scale. Without
checking any reference
materials, design a method
for converting Fahrenheit
temperatures to Celsius
temperatures, and back again.
Show your work, and explain
your reasoning.
Practice Problems
4. Classify each situation as either a physical change or a chemical
change. Explain your reasoning.
(a) A rose bush grows from a seed that you have planted and
nourished.
(b) A green coating forms on a copper statue when the statue is
exposed to air.
(c) Your sweat evaporates to help balance your body temperature.
(d) Frost forms on the inside of a freezer.
(e) Salt is added to clear chicken broth.
(f) Your body breaks down the food you eat to provide energy for your
body’s cells.
(g) Juice crystals dissolve in water.
(h) An ice-cream cone melts on a hot day.
Classifying Matter
All matter can be classiﬁed into two groups: mixtures and pure sub-
stances. A mixture is a physical combination of two or more kinds of
matter. For example, soil is a mixture of sand, clay, silt, and decom-
posed leaves and animal bodies. If you look at soil under a magnifying
glass, you can see these different components. Figure 1.11 shows
another way to see the components of soil.
The components in a mixture can occur in different proportions
(relative quantities). Each individual component retains its identity.
Mixtures in which the different components are clearly visible are
called heterogeneous mixtures. The preﬁx “hetero-” comes from the
Greek word heteros, meaning “different.”
Mixtures in which the components are blended together so well
that the mixture looks like just one substance are called homogeneous
mixtures. The preﬁx “homo- ” comes from the Greek word homos,
meaning “the same.” Saltwater, clean air, and grape juice are common
examples. Homogeneous mixtures are also called solutions. You will
investigate solutions in Unit 3.
A pure substance has a deﬁnite composition, which stays the same
in response to physical changes. A lump of copper is a pure substance.
Water (with nothing dissolved in it) is also a pure substance. Diamond,
carbon dioxide, gold, oxygen, and aluminum are pure substances, too.
Pure substances are further classiﬁed into elements and com-
pounds. An element is a pure substance that cannot be separated
chemically into any simpler substances. Copper, zinc, hydrogen,
oxygen, and carbon are examples of elements.
A compound is a pure substance that results when two or more
elements combine chemically to form a different substance.
Compounds can be broken down into elements using chemical process-
es. For example, carbon dioxide is a compound. It can be separated into
the elements carbon and oxygen. The Concept Organizer on the next
page outlines the classiﬁcation of matter at a glance. The ThoughtLab
reinforces your understanding of properties, mixtures, and separation
of substances.
To see the
Figure 1.11
components of soil, add some
soil to a glass of water. What
property is responsible for
separating the components?
Word
LINK
The word “pure” can be used
to mean different things. In
ordinary conversation, you
might say that orange juice is
“pure” if no other materials
have been added to it. How is
this meaning of pure different
from the scientiﬁc meaning in
the term “pure substance?”
26 MHR • Unit 1  Matter and Chemical Bonding
Concept Organizer
The Classification System for Matter.
Matter
(cid:2) anything that has mass and volume
found in three physical states:
solid, liquid, gas
Mixtures
(cid:2) physical combinations of matter in which each
component retains its identity
Heterogenous Mixtures
(Mechanical Mixtures)
(cid:2) all components
are visible
Homogeneous
Mixtures (Solutions)
(cid:2) components are
blended so that
it looks like a
single substance.
Pure Substances
(cid:2) matter that has a definite
composition
Elements
(cid:2) matter that cannot be
decomposed into simpler
substances
Chemical
Changes
Compounds
(cid:2) matter in which two or
more elements are
chemically combined
Physical
Changes
ThoughtLab
Mixtures, Pure Substances, and Changes
You frequently use your knowledge of properties
to make and separate mixtures and substances.
You probably do this most often in the kitchen.
Even the act of sorting clean laundry, however,
depends on your ability to recognize and make
use of physical properties. This activity is a
“thought experiment.” You will use your under-
standing of properties to mix and separate a
variety of chemicals, all on paper. Afterward,
your teacher may ask you to test your ideas,
either in the laboratory or at home in the kitchen.
Procedure
1. Consider the following chemicals: table salt,
water, baking soda, sugar, iron ﬁlings, sand,
vegetable oil, milk, and vinegar. Identify each
chemical as a mixture or a pure substance.
2. Which of these chemicals can you mix
together without producing a chemical
change? In your notebook, record as many
of these physical combinations as you can.
3. Which of these chemicals can you mix
together to produce a chemical change?
Record as many of these chemical
combinations as you can.
4. Record a mixture that is made with four of
the chemicals. Then suggest one or more
techniques that you can use to separate the
four chemicals from one another. Write notes
and sketch labelled diagrams to show your
techniques. Identify the properties that your
techniques depend on.
Analysis
1. In step 2, what properties of the chemicals did
you use to determine your combinations?
2. In step 3, what properties did you use to
determine your combinations?
Application
3. Exchange your four-chemical mixture with
a partner. Do not include your notes and
diagrams. Challenge your partner to suggest
techniques to separate the four chemicals.
Then assess each other’s techniques. What
modiﬁcations, if any, would you make to
your original techniques?
Chapter 1  Observing Matter • MHR
27
(cid:2)
Section Wrap-up
Notice that the classiﬁcation system for matter, shown in the Concept
Organizer, is based mainly on the changes that matter undergoes:
• physical changes to separate mixtures into elements or compounds
• chemical changes to convert compounds or elements into different
compounds or elements
To explain how and why these chemical changes occur, you must look
“deeper” into matter. You must look at its composition. This is what you
will do in the next chapter. You will see how examining the composition
of matter leads to a different classiﬁcation system: the periodic table. You
will also see how the periodic table allows chemists to make predictions
about the properties and behaviour of matter.
Section Review
1
2
C
Copy Figure 1.9 into your notebook. Add the following labels in the
appropriate places: evaporation, condensation, melting, freezing, solid-
ifying. Note: Some labels may apply to the same places on the diagram.
C
You may recall that sublimation is a change of state in which a
solid changes directly into a gas. The reverse is also true. Add the label
“sublimation” to your diagram for question 1. Include arrows to show
the addition or removal of energy.
3
K/U
List three mixtures that you use frequently.
(a) Explain how you know that each is a mixture.
(b) Classify each mixture as either heterogeneous or homogenous.
4
K/U
List three pure substances that you use frequently.
(a) Explain how you know that each is a pure substance.
(b) Try to classify each substance as an element or compound. Explain
your reasoning.
5
6
I
You are given a mixture of wood chips, sand, coffee grounds, and
water. Design a process to clean the water.
MC
The water going down your drain and toilet is cleaned and recy-
cled. You will learn about water puriﬁcation processes in Chapter 9.
(a) Propose a possible series of steps that you could use to clean the
waste water from your home.
(b) Will this cleaned water be drinkable? Explain your answer.
(c) What further steps may be needed to clean this water?
28 MHR • Unit 1  Matter and Chemical Bonding
Review
Reﬂecting on Chapter 1
Summarize this chapter in the format of your
choice. Here are a few ideas to use as guidelines:
• List possible interactions among science, tech-
nology, society, and the environment (STSE).
• Give examples of physical and chemical
properties.
• Make a table of common SI units.
• Think about measurement and uncertainty.
When is a number exact?
• Make up a list of values. Challenge your friends
to identify the number of signiﬁcant digits in
each.
• Review the rules for signiﬁcant digits when
adding, subtracting, multiplying, and dividing
numbers.
• Explain the difference between accuracy and
precision.
• Give examples of physical and chemical changes.
• Into what categories can matter be classiﬁed?
Reviewing Key Terms
For each of the following terms, write a sentence
that shows your understanding of its meaning.
accuracy
chemical property
compound
matter
physical changes
precision
pure substance
STSE
chemical changes
chemistry
element
mixture
physical property
properties
signiﬁcant digits
Knowledge/Understanding
1. Identify each property as either physical or
chemical.
(a) Hydrogen gas is extremely ﬂammable.
(b) The boiling point of ethanol is 78.5˚C.
(c) Chlorine gas is pale green in colour.
(d) Sodium metal reacts violently with water.
2. How can you tell the difference between a
physical change and a chemical change?
3. Name the property that each change depends
on. Then classify the property as either
chemical or physical.
(a) You separate a mixture of gravel and road
salt by adding water to it.
(b) You add baking soda to vinegar, and the
mixture bubbles and froths.
(c) You use a magnet to locate iron nails that
were dropped in a barn ﬁlled knee-deep
with straw.
(d) Carbon dioxide gas freezes at a temperature
of −78˚C.
(e) You recover salt from a solution of saltwater
by heating the solution until all the water
has evaporated.
(f) The temperature of a compost pile rises as
the activity of the bacteria inside the pile
increases.
4. Use the terms “accuracy” and “precision”
to describe the results on the dart boards
shown below. Assume that the darts represent
data and the bulls-eye represents the expected
value.
Exp. I
Exp. II
Exp. III
Exp. IV
5. Examine the containers on the next page.
(a) What volume of liquid does each container
contain? Be as accurate and precise as
possible in your answers.
(b) Assume that the liquid in all three containers
is water. If the ﬂask and the graduated
cylinder are emptied into the beaker, what
is the total volume of water in the beaker?
Report your answer to the correct number
of signiﬁcant digits.
(c) Which container is the best choice for meas-
uring volume in a laboratory? Explain why.
Chapter 1  Observing Matter • MHR
29
11. A plumber installs a pipe that has a diameter
of 10 cm and a length of 2.4 m. Calculate the
volume of water (in cm3) that the pipe will
hold. Express your answer to the correct
number of signiﬁcant digits. Note: The formula
for the volume of a cylinder is V = πr2h, where
r is the radius and h is the height or length.
12. During an investigation, a student monitors
the temperature of water in a beaker. The data
from the investigation are shown in the table
below.
(a) What was the average temperature of the
water? Express your answer to the appropri-
ate number of signiﬁcant digits.
(b) The thermometer that the student used has
a scale marked at 1˚ intervals. Which digits
in the table below are estimated?
Time (min)
Temperature (˚C)
0.0
1
2
3
4
25
24.3
24
23.7
23.6
13. Identify each change as either physical or
chemical.
(a) Over time, an iron swing set becomes
covered with rust.
(b) Juice crystals “disappear” when they are
stirred into a glass of water.
(c) Litmus paper turns pink when exposed to
acid.
(d) Butter melts when you spread it on hot toast.
Inquiry
14. Your teacher asks the class to measure the mass
of a sample of aluminum. You measure the
mass three times, and obtain the following
data: 6.74, 6.70, and 6.71 g. The actual value
is 6.70 g. Here are the results of three other
students:
Student A 6.50, 6.49, and 6.52 g
Student B  6.57, 6.82, and 6.71 g
Student C 6.61, 6.70, and 6.87 g
(a) Graph the four sets of data. (Call yourself
“student D.”)
6. Make each conversion below.
(a) 10 kg to grams (g)
(b) 22.3 cm to metres (m)
(c) 52 mL to centimetres cubed (cm3)
(d) 1.0 L to centimetres cubed (cm3)
7. Identify the number of signiﬁcant digits in
each value.
(a) 0.002 cm
(b) 3107 km
(c) 5 g
(d) 8.6 × 1010 m3
(e) 4.0003 mL
(f) 5.432 × 102 km2
(g) 91 511 L
8. (a) Explain why the value 5700 km could have
two, three, or four signiﬁcant digits.
(b) Write 5700 km with two signiﬁcant digits.
(c) Write 5700 km with four signiﬁcant digits.
9. Complete each calculation. Express your
answer to the correct number of signiﬁcant
digits.
(a) 4.02 mL + 3.76 mL + 0.95 mL
(b) (2.7 × 102 m) × (4.23 × 102 m)
(c) 5 092 kg ÷ 23 L
(d) 2 − 0.3 + 6 − 7
(e) (6.853 × 103 L) + (5.40 × 103 L)
(f) (572.3 g + 794.1 g) ÷ (24 mL + 52 mL)
10. Round each value to the given number of
signiﬁcant digits.
(a) 62 091 to three signiﬁcant digits
(b) 27 to one signiﬁcant digit
(c) 583 to one signiﬁcant digit
(d) 17.25 to three signiﬁcant digits
30 MHR • Unit 1  Matter and Chemical Bonding
(b) Which results are most precise?
(c) Which results are most accurate?
(d) Which results have the highest accuracy
and precision?
15. (a) Design an investigation to discover some of
the physical and chemical properties of
hydrogen peroxide, H2O2.
• any safety symbols or warnings on the
packaging or container
• any hazards associated with the chemical(s)
that the product contains
• suggestions for using the product safely
Back in class, share and analyze the chemicals
that everyone found.
(b) List the materials you need to carry out
(a) Prepare a database that includes all the
your investigation.
(c) What speciﬁc physical and/or chemical
properties does your investigation test for?
(d) What variables are held constant during your
investigation? What variables are changed?
What variables are measured?
(e) If you have time, obtain some hydrogen
peroxide from a drugstore. Perform your
investigation, and record your observations.
Communication
16. Choose one of the common chemicals listed
below. In your notebook, draw a concept web
that shows some of the physical properties,
chemical properties, and uses of this chemical.
• table salt (sodium chloride)
• water
• baking soda (sodium hydrogen carbonate)
• sugar (sucrose)
17. In your notebook, draw a ﬂowchart or concept
web that illustrates the connections between
the following words:
• mixture
• pure substance
• homogeneous
• heterogeneous
• solution
• matter
• water
• cereal
• aluminum
• apple juice
18. Is salad dressing a homogenous mixture or
a heterogeneous mixture? Use diagrams to
explain.
Making Connections
19. Locate 3 cleaning products in your home. For
each product, record the following information:
• the chemical(s) most responsible for its
cleaning action
different chemicals, the products in which
they are found, their hazards, and instruc-
tions for their safe use. Add to the database
throughout the year. Make sure that you
have an updated copy at all times.
(b) Identify the cleaning products that depend
mainly on chemical changes for their
cleaning action. How can you tell?
20. At the beginning of this chapter, you saw how
water, a very safe chemical compound, can be
misrepresented to appear dangerous. Issues
about toxic and polluting chemicals are some-
times reported in newspapers or on television.
List some questions you might ask to help you
determine whether or not an issue was being
misrepresented.
21. Describe the most important STSE connections
for each situation.
(a) Car exhaust releases gases such as sulfur
dioxide, SO2(g), and nitrogen oxide, NO(g).
These gases lead to smog in cities. As well,
they are a cause of acid rain.
(b) In the past, people used dyes from plants
and animals to colour fabrics. These natural
dyes produced a limited range of colours,
and they faded quickly. Today long-lasting
artiﬁcial dyes are available in almost every
possible colour. These dyes were invented
by chemists. They are made in large quanti-
ties for the fabric and clothing industries.
Answers to Practice Problems and
Short Answers to Section Review Questions
Practice Problems: 1.(a) 3 (b) 4 (c) 6 (d) 5 (e) 4 (f) 2 (g) 1 (h) 4
2.(a) 4 (b) 2  3.(a) 101.45 g (b) 2.5 mm (c) 1.70 L (d) 3.07 mL
(e) 35.2 g2 (f) 4 × 10−2 kg/L (g) 8.0 g/cm3 4.(a) chemical
(b) chemical (c) physical (d) physical (e) physical
(f) chemical (g) physical (h) physical
Section Review: 1.2:  2.(a) kg (b) g (c) mL (d) cm (e) m 3.(a) 4
(b) 3 (c) 3  4.(a) 97.88 g (b) 3.01 × 103 km2 (c) 2.0 mL2
(d) 0.12 g/mL  5.(a) pipette (b) Erlenmeyer ﬂask or large
beaker (c) 250 mL beaker (d) graduated cylinder
Chapter 1  Observing Matter • MHR
31
32
Elements and
the Periodic Table
Today, if you want to travel by air across the country or overseas, you
take an airplane. During the ﬁrst three decades of the twentieth century,
you would have boarded a hydrogen-ﬁlled balloon such as the one shown
in the black-and-white photograph. Large and small airships such as
these, called dirigibles, were common sights in the skies above many
North American and European cities. Unfortunately, during a landing in
Lakehurst, New Jersey in 1937, the hydrogen in one of these airships, the
Hindenburg, ignited. The resulting explosion killed 36 people, and
marked the end of the use of hydrogen for dirigibles.
Gas-ﬁlled airships and balloons like the one shown in the colour pho-
tograph now use helium gas instead of hydrogen. Helium, unlike hydro-
gen, does not burn. In fact, helium is a highly unreactive gas. What is it
about hydrogen that makes it so reactive? Why is helium so unreactive?
The answer lies in the structure of the atoms of these elements. In previ-
ous science courses, you traced the history of our understanding of atoms
and their structure. You also learned how chemists use properties to
arrange elements, and the atoms of which they are made, into a remark-
able tool called the periodic table. This chapter highlights and expands on
key ideas from your earlier studies. By the end of the chapter, you will
have a greater understanding of the properties of elements at an atomic
level. This understanding is a crucial foundation for concepts that you
will explore in your chemistry course this year.
Our modern understanding of mat-
ter and its composition was largely
developed before scientists
obtained direct evidence for the
existence of atoms. How can you
explain this fact?
C h a p t e r   P r e v i e w
2.1 Atoms and Their
Composition
2.2 Atoms, Elements, and the
Periodic Table
2.3 Periodic Trends Involving
the Sizes and Energy
Levels of Atoms
C o n c e p t s   a n d   S k i l l s
Yo u   W i l l   N e e d
Before you begin this chapter,
review the following concepts
and skills:
expressing the results
of calculations to the
appropriate number
of decimal places and
signiﬁcant digits (Chapter
1, section 1.2)
Chapter 2  Elements and the Periodic Table • MHR
33
(cid:2)
2.1
Atoms and Their Composition
Elements are the basic substances that make up all matter. About 90
elements exist naturally in the universe. The two smallest and least dense
of these elements are hydrogen and helium. Yet hydrogen and helium
account for nearly 98% of the mass of the entire universe!
Here on Earth, there is very little hydrogen in its pure elemental form.
There is even less helium. In fact, there is such a small amount of helium
on Earth that it escaped scientists’ notice until 1895.
Regardless of abundance, any two samples of hydrogen — from
anywhere on Earth or far beyond in outer space — are identical to each
other. For example, a sample of hydrogen from Earth’s atmosphere is iden-
tical to a sample of hydrogen from the Sun. The same is true for helium.
This is because each element is made up of only a single kind of atom.
For example, the element hydrogen contains only hydrogen atoms. The
element helium contains only helium atoms. What, however, is an atom?
The Atomic Theory of Matter
John Dalton was a British teacher and self-taught scientist. In 1809, he
described atoms as solid, indestructible particles that make up all matter.
(See Figure 2.1.) Dalton’s concept of the atom is one of several ideas in
his atomic theory of matter, which is outlined on the next page. Keep in
mind that scientists have modiﬁed several of Dalton’s ideas, based on later
discoveries. You will learn about these modiﬁcations at the end of this
section. See if you can infer what some of them are as you study the struc-
ture of the atom on the next few pages.
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
deﬁne and describe the
relationships among atomic
number, mass number,
atomic mass, isotope, and
radioisotope
communicate your under-
standing of the following
terms: atom, atomic mass
unit (u), atomic number (Z),
mass number (A), atomic
symbol, isotopes, radioactiv-
ity, radioisotopes
Technology
LINK
How scientists visualize the
atom has changed greatly
since Dalton proposed his
atomic theory in the early nine-
teenth century. Technology has
played an essential role in
these changes. At a library or
on the Internet, research the
key modiﬁcations to the model
of the atom. Create a summary
chart to show your ﬁndings.
Include the scientists involved,
the technologies they used, the
discoveries they made, and the
impact of their discoveries on
the model of the atom. If you
wish, use a suitable graphics
program to set up your chart.
This illustration shows an atom as John Dalton (1766–1844) imagined it.
Figure 2.1
Many reference materials refer to Dalton’s concept of the atom as the “billiard ball
model.” Dalton, however, was an avid lawn bowler. His concept of the atom was almost
certainly inﬂuenced by the smooth, solid bowling balls used in the game.
34 MHR • Unit 1  Matter and Chemical Bonding
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
Dalton’s Atomic Theory (1809)
• All matter is made up of tiny particles called atoms. An atom
cannot be created, destroyed, or divided into smaller particles.
• The atoms of one element cannot be converted into the atoms of
any another element.
• All the atoms of one element have the same properties, such as
mass and size. These properties are different from the properties
of the atoms of any other element.
• Atoms of different elements combine in speciﬁc proportions to
form compounds.
The Modern View of the Atom
An atom is the smallest particle of an element that still retains the identi-
ty and properties of the element. For example, the smallest particle of the
writing material in your pencil is a carbon atom. (Pencil “lead” is actually
a substance called graphite. Graphite is a form of the element carbon.)
An average atom is about 10−10 m in diameter. Such a tiny size is
difﬁcult to visualize. If an average atom were the size of a grain of sand,
a strand of your hair would be about 60 m in diameter!
Atoms themselves are made up of even smaller particles. These
subatomic particles are protons, neutrons, and electrons. Protons and
neutrons cluster together to form the central core, or nucleus, of an atom.
Fast-moving electrons occupy the space that surrounds the nucleus of
the atom. As their names imply, subatomic particles are associated with
electrical charges. Table 2.1 and Figure 2.2 summarize the general features
and properties of an atom and its three subatomic particles.
Table 2.1 Properties of Protons, Neutrons, and Electrons
The atomic theory was a
convincing explanation of
the behaviour of matter. It
explained two established
scientiﬁc laws: the law of
conservation of mass and the
law of deﬁnite composition.
• Law of conservation of
mass : During a chemical
reaction, the total mass of
the substances involved
does not change.
• Law of deﬁnite
proportion: Elements
always combine to form
compounds in ﬁxed
proportions by mass.
(For example, pure water
always contains the
elements hydrogen and
oxygen, combined in the
following proportions:
11% hydrogen and 89%
oxygen.)
How does the atomic theory
explain these two laws?
Subatomic particle
electron
proton
neutron
Charge
1−
1+
0
e−
p+
Symbol Mass (in g)
9.02 × 10−28
1.67 × 10−24
1.67 × 10−24
n0
Radius (in m)
smaller than 10−18
10−15
10−15
Approximately 10
−10 m
Nucleus
Expressing the Mass of Subatomic Particles
As you can see in Table 2.1, subatomic particles are incredibly small.
Suppose that you could count out protons or neutrons equal to
602 000 000 000 000 000 000 000 (or 6.02 × 1023)
and put them on a scale. They would have a mass of about 1 g. This
means that one proton or neutron has a mass of
1 g
6.02 × 1023
= 0.000 000 000 000 000 000 000 001 66 g
= 1.66 × 10
−24 g
It is inconvenient to measure the mass of subatomic particles using units
such as grams. Instead, chemists use a unit called an atomic mass unit
(symbol u). A proton has a mass of about 1 u, which is equal to
1.66 × 10−24 g.
A  Atom
Proton
(positive charge)
Neutron
(no charge)
This illustration shows the modern view of an atom. Notice that a fuzzy,
Figure 2.2
cloud-like region surrounds the atomic nucleus. Electrons move rapidly throughout this
region, which represents most of the atom’s volume.
Approximately 10
−14 m
B  Nucleus
Chapter 2  Elements and the Periodic Table • MHR
35
C H E M
FA C T
The number 6.02 × 1023 is
called the Avogadro constant.
In Chapter 5, you will learn
more about the Avogadro
constant.
C H E M
FA C T
A proton is about 1837 times
more massive than an elec-
tron. According to Table 2.1,
the mass of an electron is
9.02 × 10−28 g. This value is so
small that scientists consider
the mass of an electron to be
approximately equal to zero.
Thus, electrons are not taken
into account when calculating
the mass of an atom.
The Nucleus of an Atom
All the atoms of a particular element have the same number of protons
in their nucleus. For example, all hydrogen atoms — anywhere in the
universe — have one proton. All helium atoms have two protons. All
oxygen atoms have eight protons. Chemists use the term atomic number
(symbol Z ) to refer to the number of protons in the nucleus of each atom
of an element.
As you know, the nucleus of an atom also contains neutrons. In fact,
the mass of an atom is due to the combined masses of its protons and
neutrons. Therefore, an element’s mass number (symbol A) is the total
number of protons and neutrons in the nucleus of one of its atoms. Each
proton or neutron is counted as one unit of the mass number. For exam-
ple, an oxygen atom, which has 8 protons and 8 neutrons in its nucleus,
has a mass number of 16. A uranium atom, which has 92 protons and
146 neutrons, has a mass number of 238.
Information about an element’s protons and neutrons is often
summarized using the chemical notation shown in Figure 2.3. The letter X
represents the atomic symbol for an element. (The atomic symbol is also
called the element symbol.) Each element has a different atomic symbol.
All chemists, throughout the world, use the same atomic symbols. Over
the coming months, you will probably learn to recognize many of these
symbols instantly. Appendix G, at the back of this book, lists the elements
in alphabetical order, along with their symbols. You can also ﬁnd the ele-
ments and their symbols in the periodic table on the inside back cover of
this textbook, and in Appendix C. (You will review and extend your
understanding of the periodic table, in section 2.2.)
mass number
A
atomic number
Z
Figure 2.3
atomic symbol
Notice what the chemical notation in Figure 2.3 does, and does not,
tell you about the structure of an element’s atoms. For example, consider
the element ﬂuorine: 19
9F. The mass number (the superscript 19) indicates
that ﬂuorine has a total of 19 protons and neutrons. The atomic number
(subscript 9) indicates that ﬂuorine has 9 protons. Neither the mass num-
ber nor the atomic number tells you how many neutrons ﬂuorine has. You
can calculate this value, however, by subtracting the atomic number from
the mass number.
Number of neutrons = Mass number − Atomic number
= A − Z
36 MHR • Unit 1  Matter and Chemical Bonding
Thus, for ﬂuorine,
Number of neutrons = A − Z
= 19 − 9
= 10
Now try a few similar calculations in the Practice Problem below.
Practice Problems
1. Copy the table below into your notebook. Fill in the missing
information. Use a periodic table, if you need help identifying
the atomic symbol.
Chemical notation
Element
Number of protons
Number of neutrons
11
5B
208
82Pb
(g)
(i)
239
94Pu
56
26(n)
(q)
(s)
20
10(u)
(a)
(d)
tungsten
helium
(k)
(o)
bismuth
(t)
(v)
(b)
(e)
(h)
(j)
(l)
26
(r)
47
(w)
(c)
(f)
110
2
(m)
(p)
126
60
(x)
Using the Atomic Number to Infer the Number of Electrons
As just mentioned, the atomic number and mass number do not give you
direct information about the number of neutrons in an element. They do
not give you the number of electrons, either. You can infer the number of
electrons, however, from the atomic number. The atoms of each element
are electrically neutral. This means that their positive charges (protons)
and negative charges (electrons) must balance one another. In other words,
in the neutral atom of any element, the number of protons is equal to the
number of electrons. For example, a neutral hydrogen atom contains one
proton, so it must also contain one electron. A neutral oxygen atom con-
tains eight protons, so it must contain eight electrons.
Isotopes and Atomic Mass
All neutral atoms of the same element contain the same number of
protons and, therefore, the same number of electrons. The number of
neutrons can vary, however. For example, most of the oxygen atoms in
nature have eight neutrons in their atomic nuclei. In other words, most
oxygen atoms have a mass number of 16 (8 protons + 8 neutrons). As you
can see in Figure 2.4 on the next page, there are also two other naturally
occurring forms of oxygen. One of these has nine neutrons, so A = 17. The
other has ten neutrons, so A = 18. These three forms of oxygen are called
isotopes. Isotopes are atoms of an element that have the same number of
protons but different numbers of neutrons.
Math
LINK
Expressing numerical data
about atoms in units such as
metres is like using a bulldozer
to move a grain of sand. Atoms
and subatomic particles are
so small that they are not
measured using familiar units.
Instead, chemists often meas-
ure atoms in nanometres
(1 nm = 1 × 10−9 m)
and picometres
(1 pm = 1 × 10−12 m).
• Convert the diameter of
a proton and a neutron
into nanometres and
then picometres.
• Atomic and subatomic
sizes are hard to imagine.
Create an analogy to help
people visualize the size
of an atom and its sub-
atomic particles. (The ﬁrst
sentence of this feature is
an example of an analogy.)
Web
LINK
www.school.mcgrawhill.ca/
resources/
The atomic symbols are linked
to the names of the elements.
The links are not always obvi-
ous, however. Many atomic
symbols are derived from the
names of the elements in a
language other than English,
such as Latin, Greek, German,
or Arabic. With your class-
mates, research the origin
and signiﬁcance of the name
of each element. Go to
the web site above. Go to
Science Resources, then to
Chemistry 11 to ﬁnd out where
to go next. See if you can infer
the rules that are used to cre-
ate the atomic symbols from
the names of the elements.
Chapter 2  Elements and the Periodic Table • MHR
37
8 electrons
8 electrons
8 electrons
atom of oxygen-16
(8 protons + 8 neutrons)
atom of oxygen-17
(8 protons + 9 neutrons)
atom of oxygen-18
(8 protons + 10 neutrons)
The isotopes of an element have very similar chemical properties because
they have the same number of protons and electrons. They differ in mass,
however, because they have different numbers of neutrons.
Some isotopes are more unstable than others. Their nuclei (plural
of nucleus) are more likely to decay, releasing energy and subatomic
particles. This process, called radioactivity, happens spontaneously.
All uranium isotopes, for example, have unstable nuclei. They are called
radioactive isotopes, or radioisotopes for short. Many isotopes are not
radioisotopes. Oxygen’s three naturally occurring isotopes, for example,
are stable. In contrast, chemists have successfully synthesized ten other
isotopes of oxygen, all of which are unstable radioisotopes. (What prod-
ucts result when radioisotopes decay? You will ﬁnd out in Chapter 4.)
Electrons in Atoms
So far, much of the discussion about the atom has concentrated on the
nucleus and its protons and neutrons. What about electrons? What is their
importance to the atom? Recall that electrons occupy the space surround-
ing the nucleus. Therefore, they are the ﬁrst subatomic particles that are
likely to interact when atoms come near one another. In a way, electrons
are on the “front lines” of atomic interactions. The number and arrange-
ment of the electrons in an atom determine how the atom will react, if at
all, with other atoms. As you will learn in section 2.2, and throughout the
rest of this unit, electrons are responsible for the chemical properties of
the elements.
Revisiting the Atomic Theory
John Dalton did not know about subatomic particles when he developed
his atomic theory. Even so, the modern atomic theory (shown on the next
page) retains many of Dalton’s ideas, with only a few modiﬁcations.
Examine the comments to the right of each point. They explain how the
modern theory differs from Dalton’s.
The atomic theory is a landmark achievement in the history of
chemistry. It has shaped the way that all scientists, especially chemists,
think about matter. In the next section, you will investigate another
landmark achievement in chemistry: the periodic table.
Oxygen has three
Figure 2.4
naturally occurring isotopes.
Notice that oxygen-16 has the
same meaning as 16
8O. Similarly,
oxygen-17 has the same meaning
as 17
8O and oxygen-18 has the
same meaning as 18
8O.
C H E M
FA C T
Radioisotopes decay because
their nuclei are unstable. The
time it takes for nuclei to decay
varies greatly. For example, it
takes billions of years for only
half of the nucleus of naturally
occurring uranium-238 to
decay. The nuclei of other
radioisotopes — mainly those
that scientists have synthe-
sized — decay much more
rapidly. The nuclei of some
isotopes, such as sodium-22,
take about 20 years to decay.
For calcium-47, this decay
occurs in a matter of days. The
nuclei of most synthetic
radioisotopes decay so quickly,
however, that the radioiso-
topes exist for mere fractions
of a second.
When chemists refer symboli-
cally to oxgyen-16 atoms, they
often leave out the atomic
number. They write 16O. You
can write other isotopes of
oxygen, and all other elements,
the same way. Why is it
acceptable to leave out the
atomic number?
38 MHR • Unit 1  Matter and Chemical Bonding
The Modern Atomic Theory
• All matter is made up of tiny particles called
atoms. Each atom is made up of smaller subatomic
particles: protons, neutrons, and electrons.
• The atoms of one element cannot be converted
into the atoms of any another element by a
chemical reaction.
• Atoms of one element have the same properties,
such as average mass and size. These properties
are different from the properties of the atoms of
any other element.
• Atoms of different elements combine in speciﬁc
proportions to form compounds.
Although an atom is divisible, it is still the
smallest particle of an element that has
the properties and identity of the element.
Nuclear reactions (changes that alter the
composition of the atomic nucleus) may,
in fact, convert atoms of one element into
atoms of another.
Different isotopes of an element have
different numbers of neutrons and thus
different masses. As you will learn in
Chapter 5, scientists treat elements as if
their atoms have an average mass.
This idea has remained basically
unchanged.
Section Review
1
C
Copy the table below into your notebook. Use a graphic organizer
to show the relationship among the titles of each column. Then ﬁll in
the blanks with the appropriate information. (Assume that the atoms of
each element are neutral.)
Element
Atomic
number
Mass
number
Number
of protons
Number
of electrons
Number
of neutrons
(a)
(e)
(i)
(m)
(q)
(b)
(f)
35
79
(r)
108
(g)
(j)
179
(s)
(c)
33
(k)
(n)
(t)
47
(h)
(l)
(o)
50
(d)
42
45
(p)
69
K/U
Explain the difference between a stable isotope and a
radioisotope. Provide an example other than oxygen to support
your answer.
Examine the information represented by the following pairs: 3
2He; 14
K/U
and 3
(a) For each pair, do both members have the same number of protons?
6C and 16
9F and 18
7N; 19
9F.
1H
electrons? neutrons?
(b) Which pair or pairs consist of atoms that have the same value for Z?
Which consists of atoms that have the same value for A?
C
Compare Dalton’s atomic theory with the modern atomic theory.
Explain why scientists modiﬁed Dalton’s theory.
C
In your opinion, should chemistry students learn about Dalton’s
theory if scientists no longer agree with it completely? Justify
your answer.
2
3
4
5
C H E M
FA C T
Not all chemists believed
that Dalton’s atoms existed. In
1877, one skeptical scientist
called Dalton’s atoms “stupid
hallucinations.” Other scien-
tists considered atoms to be
a valuable idea for understand-
ing matter and its behaviour.
They did not, however, believe
that atoms had any physical
reality. The discovery of
electrons (and, later, the other
subatomic particles) ﬁnally
convinced scientists that
atoms are more than simply
an idea. Atoms, they realized,
must be matter.
Chapter 2  Elements and the Periodic Table • MHR
39
2.2
Atoms, Elements,
and the Periodic Table
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
state, in your own words, the
periodic law
describe elements in the
periodic table in terms of
energy levels and the elec-
tron arrangements
use Lewis structures to rep-
resent valence electrons
communicate your under-
standing of the following
terms: energy levels,
periodic trends, valence
electrons, Lewis structures,
stable octet, octet
Language
LINK
The term periodic means
“repeating in an identiﬁable
pattern.” For example, a calen-
dar is periodic. It organizes
the days of the months into a
repeating series of weeks.
What other examples of
periodicity can you think of?
By the mid 1800’s, there were 65 known elements. Chemists studied these
elements intensively and recorded detailed information about their reac-
tivity and the masses of their atoms. Some chemists began to recognize
patterns in the properties and behaviour of many of these elements. (See
Figure 2.5.)
Other sets of elements display similar trends in their properties and
behaviour. For example, oxygen (O), sulfur (S), selenium (Se), and
tellurium (Te) share similar properties. The same is true of ﬂuorine (F),
chlorine (Cl), bromine (Br), and iodine (I). These similarities prompted
chemists to search for a fundamental property that could be used to
organize all the elements. One chemist, Dmitri Mendeleev (1834–1907),
sequenced the known elements in order of increasing atomic mass. The
result was a table of the elements, organized so that elements with similar
properties were arranged in the same column. Because Mendeleev’s
arrangement highlighted periodic (repeating) patterns of properties, it was
called a periodic table.
The modern periodic table is a modiﬁcation of the arrangement ﬁrst
proposed by Mendeleev. Instead of organizing elements according to
atomic mass, the modern periodic table organizes elements according to
atomic number. According to the periodic law, the chemical and physical
properties of the elements repeat in a regular, periodic pattern when they
are arranged according to their atomic number.
Figures 2.6 and 2.7 outline the key features of the modern periodic
table. Take some time to review these features. Another version of the
periodic table, containing additional data, appears on the inside back
cover of this textbook, as well as in Appendix C.
Figure 2.5
However, they have widely differing atomic masses.
These ﬁve elements share many physical and chemical properties.
lithium, Li
Sodium, Na
Potassium, K
Rubidium, Rb
Cesium, Cs
Shared Physical Properties
Shared Chemical Properties
soft
are very reactive
(cid:2) metallic (therefore malleable, ductile, and good
react vigorously (and explosively) with water
conductors of electricity)
combine with chlorine to form a white solid that
dissolves easily in water
40 MHR • Unit 1  Matter and Chemical Bonding
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
MAIN GROUP
ELEMENTS
1
(IA)
1
H
1.01
3
Li
6.941
11
Na
22.99
19
K
39.10
37
Rb
85.47
55
Cs
132.9
87
Fr
(223)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
metals (main group)
metals (transition)
metals (inner transition)
metalloids
nonmetals
TRANSITION ELEMENTS
3
(IIIB)
4
(IVB)
5
(VB)
6
(VIB)
7
(VIIB)
8
9
(VIIIB)
10
11
(IB)
12
(IIB)
2
(IIA)
4
Be
9.012
12
Mg
24.13
20
Ca
40.08
21
Sc
44.96
38
Sr
87.62
39
Y
88.91
56
Ba
137.3
57
La
138.9
88
Ra
(226)
89
Ac
(227)
22
Ti
47.88
40
Zr
91.22
72
Hf
178.5
104
Rf
(261)
23
V
50.94
41
Nb
92.91
73
Ta
180.9
105
Db
(262)
24
Cr
52.00
42
Mo
95.94
74
W
183.9
106
Sg
(266)
25
Mn
54.94
26
Fe
55.85
27
Co
58.93
43
Tc
(98)
44
Ru
101.1
45
Rh
102.9
75
Re
186.2
76
Os
190.2
77
Ir
192.2
107
Bh
(262)
108
Hs
(265)
109
Mt
(266)
28
Ni
58.69
46
Pd
106.4
78
Pt
195.1
110
Uun
(269)
29
Cu
63.55
47
Ag
107.9
79
Au
197.0
111
Uuu
(272)
30
Zn
65.39
48
Cd
112.4
80
Hg
200.6
112
Uub
(277)
MAIN-GROUP
ELEMENTS
13
(IIIA)
14
(IVA)
15
(VA)
16
(VIA)
17
(VIIA)
7
N
14.01
15
P
30.97
33
As
74.92
51
Sb
121.8
83
Bi
209.0
5
B
10.81
13
Al
26.98
31
Ga
69.72
49
In
114.8
81
TI
204.4
6
C
12.01
14
Si
28.09
32
Ge
72.61
50
Sn
118.7
82
Pb
207.2
114
Uuq
(285)
8
O
16.00
16
S
32.07
34
Se
78.96
52
Te
127.6
84
Po
(209)
116
Uuh
(289)
9
F
19.00
17
Cl
35.45
35
Br
79.90
53
I
126.9
85
At
(210)
18
(VIIIA)
2
He
4.003
10
Ne
20.18
18
Ar
39.95
36
Kr
83.80
54
Xe
131.3
86
Rn
(222)
118
Uuo
(293)
INNER TRANSITION ELEMENTS
6
7
58
Ce
140.1
90
Th
232.0
59
Pr
140.9
91
Pa
(231)
60
Nd
144.2
92
U
238.0
61
Pm
(145)
93
Np
(237)
62
Sm
150.4
63
Eu
152.0
64
Gd
157.3
65
Tb
158.9
66
Dy
162.5
67
Ho
164.9
68
Er
167.3
69
Tm
168.9
70
Yb
173.0
71
Lu
175.0
94
Pu
(242)
95
Am
(243)
96
Cm
(247)
97
Bk
(247)
98
Cf
(251)
99
Es
(252)
100
Fm
(257)
101
Md
(258)
102
No
(259)
103
Lr
(260)
(cid:2) Each element is in a separate
box, with its atomic number,
atomic symbol, and atomic
mass. (Different versions of the
periodic table provide additional
data and details.)
(cid:2) Elements are arranged in seven
numbered periods (horizontal
rows) and 18 numbered groups
(vertical columns).
(cid:2) Groups are numbered according
to two different systems. The
current system numbers the
groups from 1 to 18. An older
system numbers the groups
from I to VIII, and separates them
into two categories labelled A
and B. Both of these systems
are included in this textbook.
(cid:2) The elements in the eight A
groups are the main-group
elements. They are also called
the representative elements.
The elements in the ten B groups
are known as the transition
elements. (In older periodic
tables, Roman numerals are
used to number the A and B
groups.)
(cid:2) Within the B group transition
elements are two horizontal
series of elements called inner
transition elements. They usually
appear below the main periodic
table. Notice, however, that they
ﬁt between the elements in
Group 3 (IIIB) and Group 4 (IVB).
(cid:2) A bold “staircase” line runs from
the top of Group 13 (IIIA) to the
bottom of Group 16 (VIA). This
line separates the elements
into three broad classes: metals,
metalloids (or semi-metals),
and non-metals. (See Figure 2.7
on the next page for more
information.)
(cid:2) Group 1 (IA) elements are known
as alkali metals. They react with
water to form alkaline, or basic,
solutions.
(cid:2) Group 2 (IIA) elements are
known as alkaline earth metals.
They react with oxygen to form
compounds called oxides, which
react with water to form alkaline
solutions. Early chemists called
all metal oxides “earths.”
(cid:2) Group 17 (VIIA) elements are
known as halogens, from the
Greek word hals, meaning
“salt.” Elements in this group
combine with other elements to
form compounds called salts.
(cid:2) Group 18 (VIIIA) elements are
known as noble gases. Noble
gases do not combine in nature
with any other elements.
Figure 2.6
work in this course will focus on the representative elements.
The basic features of the periodic table are summarized here. Most of your
Chapter 2  Elements and the Periodic Table • MHR
41
Cd
Pb
Cu
Cr
Metals
Bi
As
Si
Sb
Cl
S
C
Br
I
B
Metalloids
Te
Nonmetals
Figure 2.7
shown here. Find where they appear in the periodic table in Figure 2.6.
Several examples from each of the three main classes of elements are
Practice Problems
2. Identify the name and symbol of the elements in the following loca-
tions of the periodic table:
(a) Group 14 (IVA), Period 2
(e) Group 12 (IIB), Period 5
(b) Group 11 (IB), Period 4
(f) Group 2 (IIA), Period 4
(c) Group 18 (VIIIA), Period 6
(g) Group 17 (VIIA), Period 5
(d) Group 1 (IA), Period 1
(h) Group 13 (IIIA), Period 3
History
LINK
Mendeleev did not develop
his periodic table in isolation.
He built upon work that had
been done by other chemists,
in other parts of the world,
over several decades.
Research other ideas that
were proposed for organizing
the elements. Include
Mendeleev’s work in your
research. What was it about
his arrangement that con-
vinced chemists to adopt it?
Electrons and the Periodic Table
You have seen how the periodic table organizes elements so that those
with similar properties are in the same group. You have also seen how
the periodic table distinguishes among metals, non-metals, and metalloids.
Other details of the organization of the periodic table may seem bafﬂing,
however. Why, for example, are there different numbers of elements in
the periods?
The reason for this, and other details of the periodic table’s organiza-
tion, involves the number and arrangement of electrons in the atoms of
each element. To appreciate the importance of electrons to the periodic
table, it is necessary to revisit the structure of the atom.
In the following ExpressLab, you will observe elements in much the
same way that scientists did in the early twentieth century. In doing so,
these scientists set the stage for a new understanding of matter and the
electrical structure of its atoms.
42 MHR • Unit 1  Matter and Chemical Bonding
ExpressLab
Observing the Spectra of Elements
In this activity, you will use a device called a
diffraction grating. It separates light into banded
patterns of colour (a spectrum). Different colours
of light have different frequencies and wave-
lengths, so they have different amounts of
energy. Red light is less energetic, for example,
than blue light.
Safety Precautions
• Gas discharge tubes operate at a voltage that is
high enough to cause serious injury. Observe
them only from a safe distance, as determined
by your teacher.
Materials
diffraction grating
incandescent light source
gas discharge tubes containing different elements
Procedure
1. Use the diffraction grating to observe the light
that is emitted from an ordinary incandescent
light bulb. Make a quick sketch to record your
observations.
2. Observe the light that is emitted from the
3. Observe the light that is emitted from the
discharge tubes of other elements. Sketch
your observations for each element.
Analysis
1. If the electrons in a discharge tube are moving
everywhere in the space around the nucleus,
their spectrum should look like the spectrum
of an ordinary light bulb. What does hydro-
gen’s spectrum look like? How do the spectra
of the other elements compare with the
spectrum of a light bulb and the spectrum
of hydrogen?
2. Hydrogen has only one electron. Why, then,
does its spectrum have four coloured lines?
3. Why is the light that is emitted by hydrogen
different from the light that is emitted by
the other elements? Explain the difference
in terms of electrons.
Application
4. What do gas discharge tubes have in common
with street lights? Do research to ﬁnd out
which gases are used in street lamps, and why
certain gases are chosen for certain locations.
l
e
v
e
l
y
g
r
e
n
e
d
n
o
c
e
s
l
e
v
e
l
y
g
r
e
n
e
t
s
r
i
f
l
e
v
e
l
y
g
r
e
n
e
d
r
i
h
t
l
e
v
e
l
y
g
r
e
n
e
h
t
r
u
o
f
l
e
v
e
l
y
g
r
e
n
e
h
t
f
i
f
hydrogen gas discharge tube.
should be about 1 m from the discharge tube.
Come no farther than your teacher directs.
Sketch your observations.
CAUTION
You
s
u
e
l
c
u
n
Electrons and Energy Levels
Electrons cannot move haphazardly. Their
movement around an atomic nucleus is restricted
to ﬁxed regions of space. These regions are three-
dimensional, similar to the layers of an onion.
Figure 2.8 shows a representation of these
regions. Keep in mind that they are not solid.
They are volumes of space in which electrons may
be found. You may have heard these regions
called energy shells or shells. In this textbook,
they are called energy levels. An electron that
is moving in a lower energy level is close to the
nucleus. It has less energy than it would if it
were moving in a higher energy level.
Figure 2.8
Energy levels of an atom from the ﬁfth period
Chapter 2  Elements and the Periodic Table • MHR
43
Examine the following
illustration. Then answer
these questions.
• Which book possesses
more potential energy?
Why?
• Can a book sit between
shelves instead of on a
shelf as shown?
• How does the potential
energy of a book on a
higher shelf change if it is
moved to a lower shelf?
• How do you think this
situation is related
to electrons and the
potential energy they
possess when they move
in different energy levels?
Electronic Learning Partner
Your Chemistry 11 Electronic
Learning Partner has an
interactive activity to help you
assess your understanding
of the relationship among
elements, their atomic number,
and their position in the
periodic table.
There is a limit to the number of electrons that can occupy each ener-
gy level. For example, a maximum of two electrons can occupy the ﬁrst
energy level. A maximum of eight electrons can occupy the second energy
level. The periodic trends (repeating patterns) that result from organizing
the elements by their atomic number are linked to the way in which
electrons occupy and ﬁll energy levels. (See Figure 2.9.)
As shown in Figure 2.9A, a common way to show the arrangement of
electrons in an atom is to draw circles around the atomic symbol. Each
circle represents an energy level. Dots represent electrons that occupy
each energy level. This kind of diagram is called a Bohr-Rutherford dia-
gram. It is named after two scientists who contributed their insights to the
atomic theory.
Figure 2.9B shows that the ﬁrst energy level is full when two electrons
occupy it. Only two elements have two or fewer electrons: hydrogen and
helium. Hydrogen has one electron, and helium has two. These elements,
with their electrons in the ﬁrst energy level, make up Period 1 of the
periodic table.
As you can see in Figure 2.9C, Period 2 elements have two occupied
energy levels. The second energy level is full when eight electrons occupy
it. Neon, with a total of ten electrons, has its ﬁrst and second energy levels
ﬁlled. Notice how the second energy level ﬁlls with electrons as you move
across the period from lithium to ﬂuorine.
H
He
B
Li
Be
B
C
NN
O
F
Ne
A
C
Figure 2.9
energy level. (C) The eight Period 2 elements have two energy levels.
(A) A Bohr-Rutherford diagram (B) Hydrogen and helium have a single
44 MHR • Unit 1  Matter and Chemical Bonding
Patterns Based on Energy Levels and Electron Arrangements
The structure of the periodic table is closely related to energy levels and
the arrangement of electrons. Two important patterns result from this
relationship. One involves periods, and the other involves groups.
The Period-Related Pattern
As you can see in Figure 2.9, elements in Period 1 have electrons in one
energy level. Elements in Period 2 have electrons in two energy levels.
This pattern applies to all seven periods. An element’s period number is
the same as the number of energy levels that the electrons of its atoms
occupy. Thus, you could predict that Period 5 elements have electrons
that occupy ﬁve energy levels. This is, in fact, true.
What about the inner transition elements — the elements that are
below the periodic table? Figure 2.10 shows how this pattern applies to
them. Elements 58 through 71 belong in Period 6, so their electrons
occupy six energy levels. Elements 90 through 103 belong in Period 7, so
their electrons occupy seven energy levels. Chemists and chemical tech-
nologists tend to use only a few of the inner transition elements (notably
uranium and plutonium) on a regular basis. Thus, it is more convenient to
place all the inner transition elements below the periodic table.
C H E M
FA C T
Energy levels and the arrange-
ment of electrons involve ideas
from theoretical physics. These
ideas are beyond the scope of
this course. Appendix D at the
back of this book provides a
brief introduction to these
ideas. If you pursue your stud-
ies in chemistry next year and
beyond, you will learn a more
complete theory of electron
arrangement.
1
IA
1
H
3
Li
11
Na
19
K
37
Rb
55
Cs
87
Fr
2
IIA
4
Be
12
Mg
20
Ca
38
Sr
56
Ba
88
Ra
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
13
14
IIIA
5
B
IVA
6
C
13
Al
31
Ga
49
In
81
TI
14
SI
32
Ge
50
Sn
82
Pb
15
VA
7
N
15
P
33
As
51
Sb
83
Bi
16
17
VIA
8
O
VIIA
9
F
16
S
34
Se
52
Te
84
Po
17
Cl
35
Br
53
I
85
At
18
VIIIA
2
He
10
Ne
18
Ar
36
Kr
54
Xe
86
Rn
3
4
IIIB
21
Sc
39
Y
71
Lu
IVB
22
Ti
40
Zr
72
Hf
5
VB
23
V
41
Nb
73
Ta
6
7
8
9
10
VIB
24
Cr
42
Mo
74
W
VIIB
25
Mn
43
Tc
75
Re
VIIIB
27
Co
45
Rh
77
Ir
28
Ni
46
Pd
78
Pt
26
Fe
44
Ru
76
Os
12
11
IB IIB
29
Cu
47
Ag
79
Au
30
Zn
48
Cd
80
Hg
70
Yb
102
No
103
Lr
104
Rf
105
Db
106
Sg
107
Bh
108
Hs
109
Mt
110
Uun
111
Uuu
112
Uub
114
Uuq
116
Unh
118
Uuo
57
La
89
Ac
58
Ce
90
Th
59
Pr
91
Pa
60
Nd
92
U
61
Pm
93
Np
62
Sm
94
Pu
63
Eu
95
Am
64
Gd
96
Cm
65
Tb
97
BK
66
Dy
98
Cf
67
Ho
99
Es
68
Er
100
Fm
69
Tm
101
Md
Figure 2.10
in their proper place.
The “long form” of the periodic table includes the inner transition metals
The Group-Related Pattern
The second pattern emerges when you consider the electron arrangements
in the main-group elements: the elements in Groups 1 (IA), 2 (IIA), and
13 (IIIA) to 18 (VIIIA). All the elements in each main group have the same
number of electrons in their highest (outer) energy level. The electrons
that occupy the outer energy level are called valence electrons. The term
“valence” comes from a Latin word that means “to be strong.” “Valence
electrons” is a suitable name because the outer energy level electrons are
the electrons involved when atoms form compounds. In other words,
valence electrons are responsible for the chemical behaviour of elements.
Chapter 2  Elements and the Periodic Table • MHR
45
You can infer the number of valence electrons in any main-group
element from its group number. For example, Group 1 (IA) elements have
one valence electron. Group 2 (IIA) elements have two valence electrons.
For elements in Groups 13 (IIIA) to 18 (VIIIA), the number of valence
electrons is the same as the second digit in the current numbering system.
It is the same as the only digit in the older numbering system. For exam-
ple, elements in Group 15 (VA) have 5 valence electrons. The elements in
Group 17 (VIIA) have 7 valence electrons.
Using Lewis Structures to Represent Valence Electrons
It is time-consuming to draw electron arrangements using Bohr-Rutherford
diagrams. It is much simpler to use Lewis structures to represent elements
and the valence electrons of their atoms. To draw a Lewis structure, you
replace the nucleus and inner energy levels of an atom with its atomic
symbol. Then you place dots around the atomic symbol to represent the
valence electrons. The order in which you place the ﬁrst four dots
is up to you. You may ﬁnd it simplest to start at the top and proceed
clockwise: right, then bottom, then left.
Examine Figure 2.11, and then complete the Practice Problems that
follow. In Chapter 3, you will use Lewis structures to help you visualize
what happens when atoms combine to form compounds.
Li
Be
B
C
N
O
F
Ne
Examine these Lewis structures for the Period 2 elements. Place a dot on
Figure 2.11
each side of the element —one dot for each valence electron. Then start pairing dots
when you reach ﬁve or more valence electrons.
Practice Problems
3. Draw boxes to represent the ﬁrst 20 elements in the periodic table.
Using Figure 2.9 as a guide, sketch the electron arrangements for
these elements.
4. Redraw the 20 elements from Practice Problem 2 using Lewis
structures.
5. Identify the number of valence electrons in the outer energy levels of
the following elements:
(a) chlorine
(b) helium
(c) indium
(d) strontium
(e) rubidium
(f) lead
(g) antimony
(h) selenium
(i) arsenic
(j) xenon
6. Use the periodic table to draw Lewis structures for the following
elements: barium (Ba), gallium (Ga), tin (Sn), bismuth (Bi), iodine (I),
cesium (Cs), krypton (Kr), xenon (Xe).
46 MHR • Unit 1  Matter and Chemical Bonding
The Signiﬁcance of a Full Outer Energy Level
The noble gases in Group 18 (VIIIA) are the only elements that exist as
individual atoms in nature. They are extremely unreactive. They do not
naturally form compounds with other atoms. (Scientists have manipulated
several of these elements in the laboratory to make them react, however.)
What is it about the noble gases that explains this behaviour?
Recall that chemical reactivity is determined by valence electrons.
Thus, there must be something about the arrangement of the electrons in
the noble gases that explains their unreactivity. All the noble gases have
outer energy levels that are completely ﬁlled with the maximum number
of electrons. Helium has a full outer energy level of two valence electrons.
The other noble gases have eight valence electrons in the outer energy
level. Chemists reason that having a full outer energy level must be a very
stable electron arrangement.
What does this stability mean? It means that a full outer energy level
is unlikely to change. Scientists have observed that, in nature, situations
or systems of lower energy are favoured over situations or systems of
higher energy. For example, a book on a high shelf has more potential
energy (is less stable) than a book on a lower shelf. If you move a book
from a high shelf to a lower shelf, it has less potential energy (is more
stable). If you move a book to the ﬂoor, it has low potential energy
(is much more stable).
When atoms have eight electrons in the outer energy level (or two
electrons for hydrogen and helium), chemists say that they have a
stable octet. Often this term is shortened to just octet. An octet is a very
stable electron arrangement. As you will see in Chapter 3, an octet is
often the result of changes in which atoms combine to form compounds.
Section Wrap-up
You have seen that the structure of the periodic table is directly related to
energy levels and arrangements of electrons. The patterns that emerge
from this relationship enable you to predict the number of valence elec-
trons for any main group element. They also enable you to predict the
number of energy levels that an element’s electrons occupy. The relation-
ship between electrons and the position of elements in the periodic table
leads to other patterns, as well. You will examine several of these patterns
in the next section.
Section Review
1
2
K/U
State the periodic law, and provide at least two examples to
illustrate its meaning.
K/U
Identify the group number for each of these sets of elements.
Then choose two of these groups and write the symbols for the ele-
ments within it.
• alkali metals
• noble gases
• halogens
• alkaline earth metals
Chapter 2  Elements and the Periodic Table • MHR
47
3
(a)
K/U
Identify the element that is described by the following
information. Refer to a periodic table as necessary.
• It is a Group 14 (IVA) metalloid in the third period.
• It is a Group 15 (VA) metalloid in the ﬁfth period.
• It is the other metalloid in Group 15 (VA).
• It is a halogen that exists in the liquid state at room temperature.
Develop four more element descriptions like those in part (a).
Exchange them with a classmate and identify each other’s elements.
C
(b)
4
5
K/U
What is the relationship between electron arrangement and the
organization of elements in the periodic table?
C
In writing, sketches, or both, explain to someone who has never
seen the periodic table how it can be used to tell at a glance the num-
ber of valence electrons in the atoms of an element.
6
(a)
K/U
How many valence electrons are there in an atom of each of
these elements?
neon
bromine
sulfur
strontium
sodium
chlorine
helium
tin
magnesium
silicon
(b) Present your answers from part (a) in the form of Lewis structures.
(c) Without consulting a periodic table, classify each element from part
(a) as a metal, non-metal, or metalloid.
7
8
9
K/U
How many elements are liquids at room temperature?
Name them.
K/U
Compare and contrast the noble gases with the other elements.
I
An early attempt to organize the elements placed them in groups of
three called triads. Examine the three triads shown below.
Triad 1
Triad 2
Triad 3
Mn
Cr
Fe
Li
Na
K
S
Se
Te
(a) Infer the reasoning for grouping the elements in this way.
(b) Which of the elements in these three triads still appear together in
the same group of the modern periodic table?
10
MC
Using print or electronic resources, or both, ﬁnd at least one com-
mon technological application for each of the following elements:
(a) europium
(b) neodymium
(c) carbon
(d) nitrogen
(e) silicon
(f) mercury
(g) ytterbium
(h) bromine
(i) chromium
(j) krypton
11
(a)
C
Draw Lewis structures for each of these elements: lithium,
sodium, potassium, magnesium, aluminum, carbon.
(b) Which of these elements have the same number of occupied
energy levels?
(c) Which have the same number of valence electrons?
48 MHR • Unit 1  Matter and Chemical Bonding
Periodic Trends Involving the
Sizes and Energy Levels of Atoms
2.3
In section 2.1, you learned that the size of a typical atom is about 10−10 m.
You know, however, that the atoms of each element are distinctly differ-
ent. For example, the atoms of different elements have different numbers
of protons. This means, of course, that they also have different numbers
of electrons. You might predict that the size of an atom is related to the
number of protons and electrons it has. Is there evidence to support this
prediction? If so, is there a pattern that can help you predict the relative
size of an atom for any element in the periodic table?
In Investigation 2-A, you will look for a pattern involving the size of
atoms. Chemists deﬁne, and measure, an atom’s size in terms of its radius.
The radius of an atom is the distance from its nucleus to the approximate
outer boundary of the cloud-like region of its electrons. This boundary is
approximate because atoms are not solid spheres. They do not have a
ﬁxed outer boundary.
Figure 2.12 represents how the radius of an atom extends from its
nucleus to the approximate outer boundary of its electron cloud. Notice
that the radius line in this diagram is just inside the outer boundary of the
electron cloud. An electron may also spend time beyond the end of the
radius line.
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
use your understanding of
electron arrangement and
forces in atoms to explain
the following periodic
trends: atomic radius,
ionization energy, electron
afﬁnity
analyze data involving
atomic radius, ionization
energy, and electron afﬁnity
to identify and describe
general periodic trends
communicate your under-
standing of the following
terms: ion, anion, cation
ionization energy,
electron afﬁnity
electron “cloud”
nucleus
radius
radius
Figure 2.12
A representation of the radius of an atom
Chapter 2  Elements and the Periodic Table • MHR
49
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
S K I L L   F O C U S
Predicting
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
Analyzing Atomic Radius Data
Materials
to be decided in class
Procedure
1. The table below lists the atomic radii (plural
of radius) for the main-group elements. Design
different scale models that could help you
visualize and compare the sizes of the atoms.
Your models can be two-dimensional or
three-dimensional, large or small.
2. Discuss your designs as a group. Choose a
design that you think will best show the
information you require.
3. Build your models. Arrange them according
to their positions in the periodic table.
Examine the main-group elements in the periodic
table. Imagine how their size might change as
you move down a group or across a period. What
knowledge and reasoning can you use to infer
the sizes of the atoms?
Question
How do the sizes of main-group atoms compare
within a group and across a period?
Prediction
Predict a trend (pattern) that describes how the
sizes of main-group atoms change down a group
and across a period. Include a brief explanation
to justify your prediction.
Safety Precautions
Be careful when handling any sharp instruments
or materials that you choose to use.
Atomic Radii of Main-Group Elements
Name of element
Atomic radius in
picometres (pm)
Name of element
Atomic radius in
picometres (pm)
Name of element
Atomic radius in
picometres (pm)
aluminum
antimony
argon
astatine
barium
beryllium
bismuth
boron
bromine
calcium
carbon
cesium
chlorine
fluorine
143
159
88
145
222
112
170
98
112
197
91
267
97
57
gallium
germanium
helium
hydrogen*
indium
iodine
krypton
lead
lithium
magnesium
neon
nitrogen
oxygen
phosphorus
141
137
49
79
166
132
103
175
155
160
51
92
65
128
polonium
potassium
radon
rubidium
selenium
silicon
sodium
strontium
sulfur
tellurium
thallium
tin
xenon
167
235
134
248
140
132
190
215
127
142
171
162
124
*Quantum mechanical value for a free hydrogen atom
50 MHR • Unit 1  Matter and Chemical Bonding
Analysis
1. How do atomic radii change as you look from
top to bottom within a group?
2. How do atomic radii change as you look from
left to right across a period?
3. Compare your observations with your predic-
tion. Explain why your results did, or did not,
agree with your prediction.
Conclusion
4. State whether or not atomic radius is a period-
ic property of atoms. Give evidence to support
your answer.
Application
5. Would you expect atoms of the transition ele-
ments to follow the same trend you observed
for the main-group elements? Locate atomic
radius data for the transition elements (not
including the inner transition elements). Make
additional models, or draw line or bar graphs,
to verify your expectations.
Chapter 2  Elements and the Periodic Table • MHR
51
Trends for Atomic Size (Radius)
There are two general trends for atomic size:
• As you go down each group in the periodic table, the size of an atom
increases. This makes sense if you consider energy levels. As you go
down a group, the valence electrons occupy an energy level that is
farther and farther from the nucleus. Thus, the valence electrons experi-
ence less attraction for the nucleus. In addition, electrons in the inner
energy levels block, or shield, the valence electrons from the attraction
of the nucleus. As a result, the total volume of the atom, and thus the
size, increases with each additional energy level.
• As you go across a period, the size of an atom decreases. This trend
might surprise you at ﬁrst, since the number of electrons increases as
you go across a period. You might think that more electrons would
occupy more space, making the atom larger. You might also think that
repulsion from their like charges would force the electrons farther apart.
The size of an atom decreases, however, because the positive charge on
the nucleus also increases across a period. As well, without additional
energy the electrons are restricted to their outer energy level. For exam-
ple, the outer energy level for Period 2 elements is the second energy
level. Electrons cannot move beyond this energy level. As a result, the
positive force exerted by the nucleus pulls the outer electrons closer,
reducing the atom’s total size.
Figure 2.13 summarizes the trends for atomic size. The Practice
Problems that follow give you a chance to apply your understanding of
these trends.
direction of increasing size
direction of
increasing
size
Figure 2.13
a period in the periodic table.
Atomic size increases down a group and decreases across
Practice Problems
7. Using only their location in the periodic table, rank the atoms in
each set by decreasing atomic size. Explain your answers.
(a) Mg, Be, Ba
(b) Ca, Se, Ga
(c) Br, Rb, Kr
(d) Se, Br, Ca
(e) Ba, Sr, Cs
(f) Se, Br, Cl
(g) Mg, Ca, Li
(h) Sr, Te, Se
(i) In, Br, I
(j) S, Se, O
52 MHR • Unit 1  Matter and Chemical Bonding
Trends for Ionization Energy
A neutral atom contains equal numbers of positive charges (protons) and
negative charges (electrons). The particle that results when a neutral atom
gains electrons or gives up electrons is called an ion. Thus, an ion is a
charged particle. An atom that gains electrons becomes a negatively
charged anion. An atom that gives up electrons becomes a positively
charged cation. Figure 2.14 shows the formation of ions for several ele-
ments. As you examine the diagrams, pay special attention to
• the energy level from which electrons are gained or given up
• the charge on the ion that is formed when an atom gains or gives up
electrons
• the arrangement of the electrons that remain after electrons are gained
or given up
Group 1 (IA)
Group 2 (IIA)
Group 16 (VIA)
Group 17 (VIIA)
neutral
atoms
NaNa
MgMg
giving up
or gaining
electrons
NaNa
MgMg
+
2+
resulting
ions
NaNa
MgMg
SS
SS
SS
2−
ClCl
ClCl
ClCl
−
These diagrams show the ions that are formed from neutral atoms of
Figure 2.14
sodium, magnesium, sulfur, and chlorine. What other element has the same electron
arrangement that sodium, magnesium, sulﬁde, and chloride ions have?
Try to visualize the periodic table as a cylinder, rather than a ﬂat
plane. Can you see a relationship between ion formation and the electron
arrangement of noble gases? Examine Figure 2.14 as well as 2.15 on the
next page. The metals that are main-group elements tend to give up elec-
trons and form ions that have the same number of electrons as the nearest
noble gases. Non-metals tend to gain electrons and form ions that have
the same number of electrons as the nearest noble gases. For example,
when a sodium atom gives up its single valence electron, it becomes a
positively charged sodium ion. Its outer electron arrangement is like
neon’s outer electron arrangement. When a ﬂuorine atom gains an
electron, it becomes a negatively charged ion with an outer electron
arrangement like that of neon.
Chapter 2  Elements and the Periodic Table • MHR
53
5A 6A
(15)
(16)
N3–
O2–
S2–
3A
(13)
Al3
7A
(17)
H−
F−
Cl−
Br−
I−
8A
(18)
He
Ne
Ar
Kr
2A
(2)
1A
(1)
+
Li
+
Na
Mg2+
+
K
+
Rb
Ca2+
Sr2+
Xe Cs
+
Ba2+
Examine the rela-
Figure 2.15
tionship between ion charge and
noble gas electron arrangement.
Figure 2.15 can help you determine the charge on an ion. Count the
number of groups an ion is from the nearest noble gas. That number is
the charge on the ion. For example, aluminum is three groups away
from neon. Thus, an aluminum ion has a charge of 3+. Sulfur is two
groups away from argon. Thus, a sulﬁde ion has a charge of 2−.
Remember: Metals form positive ions (cations) and non-metals form
negative ions (anions).
It takes energy to overcome the attractive force of a nucleus and pull
an electron away from a neutral atom. The energy that is required to
remove an electron from an atom is called ionization energy. The bar
graph in Figure 2.16 shows the ionization energy that is needed to remove
one electron from the outer energy level of the atoms of the main-group
elements. This energy is called the ﬁrst ionization energy. It is measured
in units of kJ/mol. A kilojoule (kJ) is a unit of energy. A mole (mol) is an
amount of a substance. (You will learn about the mole in Unit 2.)
As you can see, atoms that give up electrons easily have low ioniza-
tion energies. You would probably predict that the alkali metals of Group
1 (IA) would have low ionization energies. These elements are, in fact,
extremely reactive because it takes so little energy to remove their single
valence electron.
He
2372
Ne
2080
F
1681
Ionization
energy
(kJ/mol)
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
H
131
C H E M
FA C T
All elements, except hydrogen,
have more than one electron
that can be removed.
Therefore, they have more
than one ionization energy.
The energy that is needed to
remove a second electron is
called the second ionization
energy. The energy that is
needed to remove a third
electron is the third ionization
energy, and so on. What trend
would you expect to see in the
values of the ﬁrst, second, and
third ionization energies for
main-group elements? What is
your reasoning?
N
1402
O
1314
C
1086
Ar
1520
Cl
1256
Kr
1351
S
999P
1012
Br
1143
Si
786
Se
941As
947
Al
577
Ge
761
Ga
579
Sn
708
Te
869
Sb
834
Xe
1170
I
1009
At
(926)
Po
813
Rn
1037
In
558
Bi
703
Pb
715
TI
589
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0
8A
(VIIIA)
17
(VIIA)
16
(VIA)
15
13
(IIIA)
14
(VA)
(IVA)
Group
Be
899
B
800
Li
520
Mg
738
Na
496
0
1
2
3
Perio
d
4
Ca
590
K
419
Rb
403
Sr
549
Ba
503
Cs
376
5
6
2
(IIA)
1
(IA)
Figure 2.16
elements.
This graph represents the ﬁrst ionization energy for the main-group
54 MHR • Unit 1  Matter and Chemical Bonding
Summarizing Trends for Ionization Energy
Although you can see a few exceptions in Figure 2.16, there are two
general trends for ionization energy:
• Ionization energy tends to decrease down a group. This makes sense in
terms of the energy level that the valence electrons occupy. Electrons in
the outer energy level are farther from the positive force of the nucleus.
Thus, they are easier to remove than electrons in lower energy levels.
• Ionization energy tends to increase across a period. As you go across a
period, the attraction between the nucleus and the electrons in the outer
energy level increases. Thus, more energy is needed to pull an electron
away from its atom. For this trend to be true, you would expect a noble
gas to have the highest ionization energy of all the elements in the same
period. As you can see in Figure 2.16, they do.
Figure 2.17 summarizes these general trends for ionization energy.
The Practice Problems below give you a chance to apply your understand-
ing of these trends.
direction of increasing ionization energy
direction of
increasing
ionization
energy
Figure 2.17
a period.
Ionization energy tends to decrease down a group and increase across
Practice Problems
8. Using only a periodic table, rank the elements in each set by
increasing ionization energy. Explain your answers.
(a) Xe, He, Ar
(b) Sn, In, Sb
(c) Sr, Ca, Ba
(d) Kr, Br, K
(e) K, Ca, Rb
(f) Kr, Br, Rb
9. Using only a periodic table, identify the atom in each of the follow-
ing pairs with the lower ﬁrst ionization energy.
(a) B, O
(b) B, In
(c) I, F
(d) F, N
(e) Ca, K
(f) B, Tl
C O U R S E
C H A L L E N G E
Your understanding of periodic
trends such as atomic radius
and ionization energy will help
you identify some unknown
elements in the Chemistry
Course Challenge at the end of
this book.
Chapter 2  Elements and the Periodic Table • MHR
55
Chemistry Bulletin
tungsten and rhenium. Tantalum’s resistance
to corrosion and high melting point make it
suitable for use in surgical equipment and
implants. For example, some of the pins that
are used by surgeons to hold a patient’s broken
bones together are made of tantalum.
Tantalum is resistant to corrosion because a
thin ﬁlm of tantalum oxide forms when tanta-
lum is exposed to oxygen. The metal oxide acts
as a protective layer. The oxide also has special
refractive properties that make it ideal for use
in camera lenses.
Cesium is quite different from tantalum,
but it, too, has many high-tech applications.
Cesium is a silvery-white metal. It is found in
a mineral called pollucite. Cesium is the softest
of all the metals and is a liquid at just above
room temperature. It is also the most reactive
metal on Earth.
Cesium has a low ionization energy. It
readily gives up its single valence electron
to form crystalline compounds with all the
halogen non-metals. Cesium is also very
photoelectric. This means that it easily gives
up its lone outer electron when it is exposed
to light. Thus, cesium is used in television
cameras and trafﬁc signals. As well, it has the
potential to be used in ion propulsion engines
for travel into deep space.
Making Connections
1. Make a table to show the differences and
similarities between tantalum and cesium.
For each metal, add a column to describe
how its different properties make it useful
for speciﬁc applications.
2. Bernic Lake is one of the few locations
where tantulum can be found. As well,
it is the most important cesium source in
the world. Research and describe what
geographical conditions led to the presence
of two such rare metals in one location.
Manitoba Mine Specializes in Rare Metals
At TANCO in Bernic Lake, Manitoba, miners
are busy ﬁnding and processing two rare and
very different metallic elements: tantalum and
cesium. Both of these metals are important
parts of “high-tech” applications around the
world. They are used in nuclear reactors and as
parts of aircraft, missiles, camera lenses, and
surgical instruments like the one shown above.
Tantalum is found only in Canada,
Australia, Brazil, Zaire, and China. TANCO
(the Tantalum Mining Corporation of Canada)
is the only mine in North America that pro-
duces tantalum. TANCO is also the world’s
main producer of cesium. Other than the fact
that tantalum and cesium are both found at
TANCO and both are used in high-tech
applications, they share little in common.
Tantalum is a heavy, hard, and brittle grey
metal. In its pure form, it is extremely ductile
and can be made into a ﬁne wire. This has
proved useful for making surgical sutures.
Another property that makes tantalum useful is
its resistance to corrosion by most acids, due to
its very limited reactivity. At normal tempera-
tures, tantalum is virtually non-reactive. In
fact, tantalum has about the same resistance to
corrosion as glass. Tantalum can withstand
higher temperatures than glass, however. It has
a melting point of 3290 K — higher than the
melting points of all other elements, except
56 MHR • Unit 1  Matter and Chemical Bonding
Trends for Electron Afﬁnity
In everyday conversation, if you like something, you may say that you
have an afﬁnity for it. For example, what if you enjoy pizza and detest
asparagus? You may say that you have a high afﬁnity for pizza and a
low afﬁnity for asparagus. If you prefer asparagus to pizza, your afﬁnities
are reversed.
Atoms are not living things, so they do not like or dislike anything.
You know, however, that some atoms have a low attraction for electrons.
Other atoms have a greater attraction for electrons. Electron afﬁnity is a
measure of the change in energy that occurs when an electron is added
to the outer energy level of an atom to form a negative ion.
Figure 2.18 identiﬁes the electron afﬁnities of the main-group
elements. If energy is released when an atom of an element gains an
electron, the electron afﬁnity is expressed as a negative integer. When
energy is absorbed when an electron is added, electron afﬁnity is low, and
is expressed as a positive integer. Notice, for example, that ﬂuorine has
the highest electron afﬁnity (indicated by a large, negative integer). This
indicates that ﬂuorine is very likely to be involved in chemical reactions.
In fact, ﬂuorine is the most reactive of all the elements.
Metals have very low electron afﬁnities. This is especially true for the
Group 1 (IA) and 2 (IIA) elements. Atoms of these elements form stable
positive ions. A negative ion that is formed by the elements of these
groups is unstable. It breaks apart into a neutral atom and a free electron.
Examine Figure 2.18. What trends can you observe? How regular are
these trends?
1
(IA)
H
− 72.8
2
(IIA)
13
(IIIA)
14
(IVA)
15
(VA)
16
(VIA)
17
(VIIA)
18
(VIIIA)
He
(+21)
Li
− 59.6
Be
(+241)
B
− 26.7
C
− 122
N
0
O
− 141
F
− 328
Ne
(+29)
Na
− 52.9
Mg
(+230)
Al
− 42.5
Si
− 134
P
− 72.0
S
− 200
Cl
− 349
Ar
(+34)
K
− 48.4
Ca
(+156)
Ga
− 28.9
Ge
− 119
As
− 78.2
Se
− 195
Br
− 325
Kr
(+39)
Rb
− 46.9
Sr
(+167)
In
− 28.9
Sn
− 107
Sb
− 103
Te
− 190
I
− 295
Xe
(+40)
Cs
− 45.5
Ba
(+52)
Tl
− 19.3
Pb
− 35.1
Bi
− 91.3
Po
− 183
At
− 270
Rn
(+41)
The units for electron afﬁnity are the same as
Figure 2.18
the units for ionization energy: kJ/mol. High negative numbers
mean a high electron afﬁnity. Low negative numbers and any
positive numbers mean a low electron afﬁnity.
Chapter 2  Elements and the Periodic Table • MHR
57
Tools
& Techniques
Analyzing the Ice Man’s Axe
In September 1991, hikers in the Alps Mountains
near the Austrian-Italian border discovered the
body of a man who had been trapped in a glacier.
He was almost perfectly preserved. With him was
an assortment of tools, including an axe with a
metal blade.
Scientists were particularly interested in the
axe. At ﬁrst, they believed that it was bronze,
which is an alloy of copper and tin. There was a
direction of
increasing
electron
affinity
Electron afﬁnity
Figure 2.19
tends to decrease down a group
and increase across a period.
complication, however. Dating techniques that
were used for the clothing and body suggested
that the “Ice Man” was about 5300 years old.
Bronze implements do not appear in Europe’s fos-
sil record until about 4000 years ago. Either
Europeans were using bronze earlier than origi-
nally thought, or the axe was made of a different
material. Copper was consistent with the Ice
Man’s age, since it has been used for at least the
past 6000 years.
One technique to determine a metal’s identity
is to dissolve it in acid. The resulting solution is
examined for evidence of ions. Scientists did not
want to damage the precious artifact in any way,
though.
The solution was an analytical technique
called X-ray ﬂuorescence. The object is irradiated
with high-energy X-ray radiation. Its atoms
absorb the radiation, causing electrons from a
lower energy level to be ejected from the atom.
This causes electrons from an outer energy level
to “move in,” to occupy the vacated space. As
the electrons fall to a less energetic state, they
emit X-rays. The electrons of each atom emit
X-rays of a particular wavelength. Scientists use
this energy “signature” to identify the atom.
Analysis by X-ray ﬂuorescence revealed
that the metal in the blade of the axe was almost
pure copper.
direction of increasing electron affinity
The trends for electron afﬁnity, shown in Figure 2.19, are more
irregular than the trends for ionization energy and atomic radius.
Nevertheless, the following general trends can be observed:
• Electron afﬁnity tends to decrease down a group. For example, ﬂuorine
has a higher electron afﬁnity than iodine.
• Electron afﬁnity tends to increase across a period. For example, calcium
has a lower electron afﬁnity than sulfur.
58 MHR • Unit 1  Matter and Chemical Bonding
ThoughtLab
Design an Annotated Periodic Table
You have learned a great deal about the proper-
ties of the elements. In the following chapters,
you will learn more. With your classmates, devel-
op your own large-scale periodic table to record
the properties and common uses of the elements.
Procedure
1. Use print and electronic resources (including
this textbook) to ﬁnd information about one
element. Consult with your classmates to
make sure that everyone chooses a different
element.
2. Find the following information about your
element:
• atomic number
• atomic mass
• atomic symbol
• melting point
• boiling point
• density
• atomic radius
• ionization energy
• electron afﬁnity
• place and date discovered, and the name
of the scientist who discovered it
• uses, both common and unusual
• hazards and methods for safe handling
If possible, ﬁnd a photograph of the element
in its natural form. If this is not possible, ﬁnd a
photograph that shows one or more com-
pounds in which the element is commonly
found.
3. Record your ﬁndings on a sheet of notepaper
or blank paper. Arrange all the sheets of paper,
for all the elements, in the form of a periodic
table on a wall in the classroom. Make sure
that you leave space to insert additional prop-
erties and uses of your element as you learn
about them during this course.
Analysis
1. What uses of your element did you know
about? Which uses surprised you? Why?
2. Examine the dates on which the elements
were discovered. What pattern do you notice?
How can you explain this pattern?
3. Do you think that scientists have discovered
all the naturally occurring elements? Do you
think they have discovered all the synthetically
produced elements? Give reasons to justify
your opinions.
Section Wrap-up
Despite some irregularities and exceptions, the following periodic trends
summarize the relationships among atomic size, ionization energy, and
electron afﬁnity:
• Trends for atomic size are the reverse of trends for ionization energy
and electron afﬁnity. Larger atoms tend to have lower ionization
energies and lower electron afﬁnities.
• Group 16 (VIA) and 17 (VIIA) elements attract electrons strongly. They
do not give up electrons readily. In other words, they have a strong
tendency to form negative ions. Thus, they have high ionization
energies and high electron afﬁnities.
• Group 1 (IA) and 2 (IIA) elements give up electrons readily. They have
low or no attraction for electrons. In other words, they have a strong
tendency to form positive ions. Thus, they have low ionization energies
and low electron afﬁnities.
• Group 18 (VIIIA) elements do not attract electrons and do not give up
electrons. In other words, they do not naturally form ions. (They are
very stable.) Thus, they have very high ionization energies and very
low electron afﬁnities.
Chapter 2  Elements and the Periodic Table • MHR
59
The trends you have examined in this chapter have an enormous
inﬂuence on the ability of atoms to combine and form compounds. In
the next chapter, you will use these trends to help you understand and
predict the kinds of compounds that atoms form. As well, you will learn
about another periodic trend. This trend called electronegativity, is related
to the formation of some of the most common compounds in your life,
such as water, carbon dioxide, and sugar.
Section Review
1
K/U
How does your understanding of electron arrangement and forces
in atoms help you explain the following periodic trends?
(a) atomic radius
(b) ionization energy
(c) electron afﬁnity
2
K/U
Using only their location in a periodic table, rank each of the
following sets of elements in order of increasing atomic size. Explain
your answer in each case.
(a) Mg, S, Cl
(b) Al, B, In
(c) Ne, Ar, Xe
(d) Rb, Xe, Te
(e) P, Na, F
(f) O, S, N
K/U
Using only their location in a periodic table, rank each of the
following sets of elements in order of decreasing ionization energy.
Explain your answer in each case.
(a) Cl, Br, I
(b) Ga, Ge, Se
(c) K, Ca, Kr
(d) Na, Li, Cs
(e) S, Cl, Br
(f) Cl, Ar, K
4
K/U
Which element in each of the following pairs will have the lower
electron afﬁnity? Explain your answer in each case.
(a) K or Ca
(b) O or Li
(c) S or Se
(d) Cs or F
5
C
The graph shows a periodic trend, but is only partially complete.
Copy it into your notebook and ﬁll in all the data and labels that will
make it complete. Title the graph with the trend it shows.
250
200
150
100
50
0
Unit Project Prep
3
Look ahead to the project at
the end of this unit. Many
common chemical products
contain elements (as compo-
nents of compounds) from
some groups of the periodic
table more than others.
Examine ingredient labels from
different chemical products.
Which element groups are
represented most frequently?
Why might that be?
What data does this graph need to be complete?
6
I
Use your understanding of periodic trends to sketch the shape of a
graph that shows a trend that is opposite to that shown in question 5.
Label the x- and y-axes, and add any other labels that you think are
necessary to represent the trend you are showing.
60 MHR • Unit 1  Matter and Chemical Bonding
Review
Reﬂecting on Chapter 2
Summarize this chapter in the format of your
choice. Here are a few ideas to use as guidelines:
• Identify the subatomic particles that make up
atoms, as well as the theory that chemists
use to explain the composition and behaviour
of atoms.
• Use the periodic law to examine the
structure and organization of the periodic table
of the elements.
• Draw Lewis structures to model the arrange-
ments of electrons in the outer energy levels
of atoms.
• Identify periodic trends involving atomic size,
ionization energy, and electron afﬁnity.
Reviewing Key Terms
For each of the following terms, write a sentence
that shows your understanding of its meaning.
element
atom
atomic number (Z)
isotope
periodic law
periodic trend
Lewis structure
octet
ionization energy
atomic mass unit (u)
mass number (A)
radioisotope
energy level
valence electrons
stable octet
atomic radius
electron afﬁnity
Knowledge/Understanding
1. Explain the difference between an atom and an
element.
2. Compare protons, neutrons, and electrons
in terms of their charge, their mass, and
their size.
3. What information does the following notation
express: 16
8O?
4. Write an equation that shows how to calculate
the number of neutrons in a neutral atom if
you know its mass number and its atomic
number.
5. Use an example and the appropriate terminolo-
gy to explain the difference between an isotope
and a radioisotope.
6. In your notebook, copy the table below and ﬁll
in the missing information.
Symbol
7N−3
14
(e)
24(g)3+
52
(l)
(m)(F)
Protons Neutrons
Electrons
Charge
(a)
34
(h)
(n)
(b)
45
(i)
10
(c)
36
(j)
(o)
(d)
(f)
(k)
(p)
7. A cobalt atom has an atomic mass of 59 and an
atomic number of 27. How many neutrons does
it have? How many electrons does it have?
8. (a) Hydrogen atoms are lying side-by-side along
a line that is 1 mm long. How many hydro-
gen atoms are there?
(b) How many potassium atoms would lie side-
by-side along the same 1 mm line?
9. Use a Venn diagram or a graphic organizer of
your choice to compare Dalton’s atomic theory
with the more modern atomic theory that you
learned about in this chapter.
10. Invent an entirely different name for the
periodic table. Give reasons to support your
choice.
11. Consider the following elements: H, Li, N, F,
Co, Ag, Kr, I, Hg.
(a) Sketch an outline of the periodic table, with
these elements properly placed.
(b) State the group number and period number
each element belongs to.
(c) Identify each element as a metal, metalloid,
or non-metal.
(d) Identify the state of each element at room
temperature.
(e) Draw the Lewis structure for each of these
elements.
12. (a) Which of the following trends is best repre-
sented by this diagram: atomic size, ioniza-
tion energy, or electron afﬁnity? Justify your
decision.
(b) Sketch outlines of the periodic table to show
the trends for the remaining two choices
from part (a). Explain how these trends are
related to the one in part (a).
Chapter 2  Elements and the Periodic Table • MHR
61
13. Arrange the following elements into groups
that share similar properties: Ca, K, Ga, P, Si,
Rb, B, Sr, Sn, Cl, Bi, Br. How much conﬁdence
do you have in your groupings, and why?
14. Use a drawing of your choice to show clearly
the relationship among the following terms:
valence, stable octet, electron, energy level.
15. In what ways are periodic trends related to the
Communication
18. Explain how you would design a data base to
display information about the atomic numbers,
atomic masses, the number of subatomic parti-
cles, and the number of electrons in the outer
energy levels of the main-group elements. If
you have access to spreadsheet software, con-
struct this table.
arrangement of electrons in atoms?
19. (a) Decide on a way to compare, in as much
Inquiry
16. Imagine hearing on the news that somebody
has discovered a new element. The scientist
who discovered this element claims that it
ﬁts between tin and antimony on the periodic
table.
(a) How likely is it for this claim to be true?
Justify your answer.
(b) Write at least three questions that you could
ask this scientist. What is your reasoning for
asking these questions? (In other words,
what do you expect to hear that could help
convince you that the scientist is right or
that you are?)
17. Technetium, with an atomic number of 43, was
discovered after Mendeleev’s death.
Nevertheless, he used the properties of man-
ganese, rhenium, molybdenum, and ruthenium
to predict technetium’s properties.
(a) Use a chemical database to ﬁnd the follow-
ing properties for the above-mentioned ele-
mental "neighbours" of technetium:
• atomic mass
• appearance
• melting point
• density
If you would like to truly follow in
Mendeleev’s footsteps, you could also look for
the chemical formulas of the compounds that
these elements form with oxygen and chlorine.
(Such compounds are called oxides and chlo-
rides.)
(b) Use this data to predict the properties for
technetium.
(c) Consult a chemical data base to assess your
predictions against the observed properties
for technetium.
62 MHR • Unit 1  Matter and Chemical Bonding
detail as you can, the elements sodium and
helium. The following terms should appear
in your answer. Use any other terms that you
think are necessary to complete your answer
fully.
atom
nucleus
neutron
energy level
periodic table
group
atomic radius
ionization energy
element
proton
electron
valence
periodic trend
period
electron afﬁnity
(b) Modify your answer to part (a) so that a class
of grade 4 students can understand it.
20. Element A, with three electrons in its outer
energy level, is in Period 4 of the periodic
table. How does the number of its valence
electrons compare with that of Element B,
which is in Group 13 (IIIA) and Period 6? Use
Lewis structures to help you express your
answer.
21. Which elements would be affected if the ele-
ments in Periods 1, 2, 3, and 4 were arranged
based on their atomic mass, rather than their
atomic number? Based on what you have
learned in this chapter, how can you be reason-
ably sure that arranging elements by their atom-
ic number is accurate?
Making Connections
22. “When she blew her nose, her handkerchief
glowed in the dark.” The woman who made
this statement in the early 1900s was one of
several factory workers who were hired to paint
clock and watch dials with luminous paint.
This paint glowed in the dark, because it con-
tained radium (atomic number 88), which is
energy level.  4. The pattern of outer energy level elec-
trons from Practice Problem 3 is repeated by placing
dots around the atomic symbol for each element.  5. (a) 7
(b) 2  (c) 3  (d) 2  (e) 1  (f) 4  (g) 5 (h) 6  (i) 5  (j) 8  6. Ba has
two dots; Ga has 3 dots; Sn has 4 dots; Bi has 5 dots;
I has 7 dots; Cs has 1 dot; Kr has 8 dots; Xe has 8 dots.
7. (a) Ba, Mg, Be  (b) Ca, Ga, Se  (c) Rb, Br, Kr
(d) Ca, Se, Br  (e) Cs, Ba, Sr  (f) Se, Br, Cl (g) Ca, Mg, Li
(h) Sr, Te, Se  (i) In, I, Br  (j) Se, S, O  8. (a) Xe, Ar, He
(b) In, Sn, Sb  (c) Ba, Sr, Ca  (d) K, Br, Kr  (e) Rb, K, Ca
(f) Rb, Br, Kr  9. (a) B  (b) In  (c) I  (d) N  (e) K (f) Tl
Section Review: 2.1: 1. (a) silver  (b) 47  (c) 47  (d) 61
(e) arsenic  (f) 33  (g) 75  (h) 33  (i) bromine  (j) 80  (k) 35
(l) 35  (m) gold  (n) 79  (o) 79  (p) 100  (q) tin  (r) 50  (s) 119
(t) 50  3. (a) last pair has same protons and electrons, but
different neutrons  (b) last pair has same value for Z;
ﬁrst pair has same value for A  2.2: 2. 1 (1A), 18 (8A), 17
(7A), 2 (2A)  3. (a) Si; Sb; Te; Br  6. (a) 8; 7; 6; 2; 1; 7; 2; 5;
2; 4.  (c) non-metal; non-metal; non-metal; metal; metal;
non-metal; non-metal; metal, metal; metalloid  7. two:
mercury and bromine  9. (b) Triads 2 and 3  11. (b) Na,
Mg, and Al have same number of energy levels, as do Li
and C  (c) Li, Na, and K have same number of valence
electrons  2.3: 2. (a) Cl, S, Mg  (b) B, Al, In  (c) Ne, Ar, Xe
(d) Xe, Te, Rb  (e) F, P, Na  (f) O, N, S 3. (a) Cl, Br, I  (b) Se,
Ge, Ga  (c) Kr, Ca, K  (d) Li, Na, Cs  (e) Cl, Br, S  (f) Ar, Cl,
K  4. (a) Ca,  (b) Li  (c) Se  (d) Cs
highly radioactive and toxic. Marie and Pierre
Curie discovered radium in 1898. Chemists
knew as early as 1906 that the element was
dangerous. Nevertheless, it was used not only
for its “glowing effects,” but also as a medicine.
In fact, several companies produced drinks,
skin applications, and foods containing radium.
Choose either one of the topics below for
research.
• the uses and health-related claims made for
radium during the early 1900s
• the story of the so-called “radium girls”—the
factory workers who painted clock and watch
faces with radium paint
How does the early history of radium and its
uses illustrate the need for people to under-
stand the connections among science, technolo-
gy, society, and the environment?
23. Have you ever heard someone refer to alu-
minum foil as “tin foil”? At one time, the foil
was, in fact, made from elemental tin. Find out
why manufacturers phased out tin in favour of
aluminum. Compare their chemical and physi-
cal properties. Identify and classify the prod-
ucts made from or with aluminum. What are
the technological costs and beneﬁts of using
aluminum? What health-related and environ-
ment-related issues have surfaced as a result of
its widespread use in society? Write a brief
report to assess the economic, social, and envi-
ronment impact of our use of aluminum.
74 W (h) 74  (i) 4
47 Ag (t) silver  (u) Ne  (v) neon  (w) 10  (x) 10
2He (j) 2  (k) plutonium
83 Bi (r) 83
Answers to Practice Problems and Short Answers to
Section Review Questions:
Practice Problems:  1. (a) boron  (b) 5  (c) 6  (d) lead  (e) 82
(f) 126  (g) 184
(l) 94  (m) 145  (n) Fe  (o) iron  (p) 30  (q) 209
(s) 154
2. (a) carbon  (b) copper  (c) radon  (d) hydrogen
(e) cadmium  (f) calcium  (g) iodine  (h) aluminum
3. H and He have one occupied energy level; H has 1
electron, He has 2. Li, Be, B, C, N, O, F, and Ne have
two energy levels. First energy level is ﬁlled with two
electrons. Second energy of Li has 1 electron, and elec-
trons increase by one, totaling 8 in outer energy level for
Ne. Na, Mg, Al, Si, P, S, Cl, Ar have three occupied
energy levels. First two energy levels are full. Third
energy level of Na has 1 electron, and electrons increase
by one, totaling 8 in outer energy level for Ar. K and Ca
have four occupied energy levels. First three energy
levels are full. K has 1 electron and Ca has two in outer
Chapter 2  Elements and the Periodic Table • MHR
63
64
Chemical Compounds
and Bonding
The year was 1896. A chance discovery sent a message echoing from
Yukon’s Far North to the southern reaches of the United States: “Gold!”
People migrated in great numbers to the Yukon Territory, hoping to make
their fortunes. Within two years, these migrants transformed a small ﬁsh-
ing village into bustling Dawson City— one of Canada’s largest cities at
the time. They also launched the country’s ﬁrst metal-mining industry.
Gold, like all metals, is shiny, malleable, ductile, and a good conduc-
tor of electricity and heat. Unlike most metals and other elements, howev-
er, gold is found in nature in its pure form, as an element. Most elements
are chemically combined in the form of compounds. Why is this so? Why
do atoms of some elements join together as compounds, while others do
not? In this chapter, you will use the periodic trends you examined in
Chapter 2 to help you answer these questions. You will learn about the
bonds that hold elements together in compounds. At the same time, you
will learn how to write chemical formulas and how to name compounds.
Your teeth are made of a
material that is naturally
able to withstand the
abrasion and chemical
activity that takes place
in your mouth when you
eat. Although gold does
not react with most sub-
stances, it is not a suit-
able material for tooth
replacement. Why? What
materials are used today
for ﬁllings and tooth
replacements?
C h a p t e r   P r e v i e w
3.1 Classifying Chemical
Compounds
3.2 Ionic and Covalent
Bonding: The Octet Rule
3.3 Polar Covalent Bonds
and Polar Molecules
3.4 Writing Chemical
Formulas and Naming
Chemical Compounds
C o n c e p t s   a n d   S k i l l s
Yo u   W i l l   N e e d
Before you begin this chapter,
review the following concepts
and skills:
drawing Lewis structures
to represent valence
electrons in the outer
energy levels of atoms
(Chapter 2, section 2.1)
identifying and
explaining periodic trends
(Chapter 2, section 2.2)
identifying elements
by name and by symbol
(Chapter 2, section 2.2)
Chapter 3  Chemical Compounds and Bonding • MHR
65
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
3.1
Classifying Chemical Compounds
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
describe how electron
arrangement and forces
in atoms can explain the
periodic trend associated
with electronegativity
perform a Thought Lab to
classify compounds as
ionic or covalent according
to their properties
predict the ionic character
of a given bond using
electronegativity values
communicate your under-
standing of the following
terms: chemical bonds,
ionic bond, covalent bond,
electronegativity
As you learned in the chapter opener, most elements do not exist in
nature in their pure form, as elements. Gold, silver, and platinum are
three metals that can be found in Earth’s crust as elements. They are
called “precious metals” because this occurrence is so rare. Most other
metals, and most other elements, are found in nature only as compounds.
As the prospectors in the Yukon gold rush were searching for the
element gold, they were surrounded by compounds. The streams they
panned for gold ran with water, H2O, a compound that is essential to the
survival of nearly every organism on this planet. To sustain their energy,
the prospectors ate food that contained, among other things, starch.
Starch is a complex compound that consists of carbon, hydrogen, and
oxygen. To ﬂavour their food, they added sodium chloride, NaCl, which
is commonly called table salt. Sometimes a compound called pyrite, also
known as “fool’s gold,” tricked a prospector. Pyrite (iron disulﬁde, FeS2)
looks almost exactly like gold, as you can see in Figure 3.1. Pyrite,
however, will corrode, and it is not composed of rare elements. Thus, it
was not valuable to a prospector.
A
B
Figure 3.1
between them. Can you tell which of these photos shows gold and which shows pyrite?
Prospectors used the physical properties of gold and pyrite to distinguish
There are only about 90 naturally occurring elements. In comparison,
there are thousands upon thousands of different compounds in nature,
and more are constantly being discovered. Elements combine in many
different ways to form the astonishing variety of natural and synthetic
compounds that you see and use every day.
66 MHR • Unit 1  Matter and Chemical Bonding
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
Because there are so many compounds, chemists have developed a classi-
ﬁcation system to organize them according to their properties, such as
melting point, boiling point, hardness, conductivity, and solubility. In the
following Express Lab, you will use the property of magnetism to show
that an element has formed a compound.
ExpressLab
A Metal and a Compound
Humans have invented ways to extract iron
from its compounds in order to take advantage
of its properties. Does iron remain in its uncom-
bined elemental form once it has been extracted?
No, it doesn’t. Instead, it forms rust, or iron(III)
oxide, Fe2O3. How do we know that rust and iron
are different substances? One way to check is to
test a physical property, such as magnetism. In
this activity, you will use magnetism to compare
the properties of iron and rust.
Safety Precautions
Procedure
3. Test the iron nail with the magnet. Record
your observations.
4. Gently rub the rusted nail with the other nail
over the cardboard. Some rust powder will
collect on the cardboard.
5. Hold up the cardboard horizontally. Move the
magnet back and forth under the cardboard.
Record your observations.
Analysis
1. How did the magnet affect the new iron nail?
Based on your observations, is iron magnetic?
2. What did you observe when you moved the
magnet under the rust powder?
1. Obtain a new iron nail and a rusted iron nail
3. What evidence do you have to show that iron
from your teacher.
and rust are different substances?
2. Obtain a thin, white piece of cardboard and a
magnet. Wrap your magnet in plastic to keep
it clean.
4. Consider what you know about iron and rust
from your everyday experiences. Is it more
likely that rust will form from iron, or iron
from rust?
Properties of Ionic and Covalent Compounds
Based on their physical properties, compounds can be classiﬁed into
two groups: ionic compounds and covalent compounds. Some of the
properties of ionic and covalent compounds are summarized in Table 3.1.
Table 3.1 Comparing Ionic and Covalent Compounds
Property
Ionic compound
Covalent compound
state at room
temperature
melting point
electrical conductivity
as a liquid
crystalline solid
liquid, gas, solid
high
yes
low
no
solubility in water
most have high solubility most have low solubility
conducts electricity
when dissolved in water
yes
not usually
In the following Thought Lab, you will use the properties of various
compounds to classify them as covalent or ionic.
Chapter 3  Chemical Compounds and Bonding • MHR
67
ThoughtLab
Ionic or Covalent?
Imagine that you are a chemist. A colleague has
just carried out a series of tests on the following
compounds:
ethanol
carbon tetrachloride
glucose
table salt (sodium chloride)
water
potassium permanganate
You take the results home to organize and ana-
lyze them. Unfortunately your colleague labelled
the tests by sample number and forgot to write
down which compound corresponded to each
sample number. You realize, however, that you
can use the properties of the compounds to
identify them. Then you can use the compounds’
properties to decide whether they are ionic or
covalent.
Procedure
1. Copy the following table into your notebook.
Sample
Compound
name
Dissolves
in water?
Conductivity
as a liquid or
when
dissolved in
water
1
2
3
4
5
6
yes
yes
yes
yes
no
yes
high
low
high
low
low
low
Analysis
1. Write down the reasoning you used to identify
each compound, based on the properties
given.
2. Write down the reasoning you used to
decide whether each compound was ionic
or covalent.
3. Were you unsure how to classify any of the
compounds? Which ones, and why?
4. Think about the properties in the table you
ﬁlled in, as well as your answers to questions
1 to 3. Which property is most useful for
deciding whether a compound is ionic or
covalent?
5. Suppose that you could further subdivide the
covalent compounds into two groups, based
on their properties. Which compounds would
you group together? Explain your answer.
Melting
point
801˚C
0.0˚C
240˚C
146˚C
−23˚C
−114˚C
Appearance
Covalent
or ionic?
clear, white crystalline solid
clear, colourless liquid
purple, crystalline solid
white powder
clear, colourless liquid
clear, colourless liquid
2. Based on what you know about the properties
Applications
of compounds, decide which compound
corresponds to each set of properties. Write
your decisions in your table. Once you have
identiﬁed the samples, share your results as a
class and come to a consensus. Hint: Carbon
tetrachloride is not soluble in water.
3. Examine the properties associated with each
compound. Decide whether each compound
is ionic or covalent. If you are unsure, leave
the space blank. Discuss your results as a
class, and come to a consensus.
6. Use a chemistry reference book or the Internet
to ﬁnd an MSDS for ethanol, carbon tetrachlo-
ride, and potassium permanganate.
(a) Write down the health hazards associated
with each compound.
(b) What precautions would a chemist who was
performing tests on ethanol and carbon
tetrachloride need to take?
68 MHR • Unit 1  Matter and Chemical Bonding
Table Salt: An Ionic Compound
Sodium chloride, NaCl, is a familiar compound. You know it as table salt.
The sodium in sodium chloride plays a vital role in body functions. We
need to ingest about 500 mg of sodium a day. Too much sodium chloride,
however, may contribute to high blood pressure. In the winter, sodium
chloride is put on roads and sidewalks to melt the ice, as shown in
Figure 3.2. Although this use of sodium chloride increases the safety of
pedestrians and drivers, there are several drawbacks. For example, the
saltwater discolours and damages footwear, and it corrodes the metal
bodies of cars and trucks. Also, as shown in Figure 3.3, deer and moose
that are attracted to the salt on the roads can be struck by vehicles.
Sodium chloride is
Figure 3.2
used to melt ice because salt
water has a lower melting point
than pure water.
This moose was attracted to the sodium chloride that was put on the road
Figure 3.3
to melt snow and ice. Humans, like most organisms, need sodium to maintain normal
body functions.
Sodium chloride is a typical ionic compound. Like most ionic com-
pounds, it is a crystalline solid at room temperature. It melts at a very
high temperature, at 801˚C. As well, it dissolves easily in water. A solu-
tion of sodium chloride in water is a good conductor of electricity. Liquid
sodium chloride is also a good electrical conductor.
Carbon Dioxide: A Covalent Compound
The cells of most organisms produce carbon dioxide, CO2,
during cellular respiration: the process that releases energy
from food. Plants, like the ones shown in Figure 3.4, synthe-
size their own food from carbon dioxide and water using
the Sun’s energy.
Carbon dioxide has most of the properties of a typical
covalent compound. It has a low melting point (–79˚C). At
certain pressures and temperatures, carbon dioxide is a liq-
uid. Liquid carbon dioxide is a weak conductor of electricity.
Figure 3.4
food, using the Sun’s energy.
Plants use carbon dioxide and water to produce their own
Chapter 3  Chemical Compounds and Bonding • MHR
69
The bubbles ﬁzzing
Figure 3.5
out of the soft drink contain car-
bon dioxide.
Do you think that water is a
covalent compound or an
ionic compound? List water’s
physical properties. Can
you tell whether water is a
covalent compound or an
ionic compound based only
on its physical properties?
Why or why not?
Carbon dioxide is somewhat soluble in water, especially at high pressures.
This is why soft drinks are bottled under pressure. When you open a
bottle of pop, some of the carbon dioxide comes out of solution. Often,
this happens too quickly, as you can see in Figure 3.5. A solution of
carbon dioxide in water is a weak conductor of electricity.
What Is Bonding?
Why are carbon dioxide and sodium chloride so different? Why can we
divide compounds into two categories that display distinct physical
properties? The answers come from an understanding of chemical bonds:
the forces that attract atoms to each other in compounds. Bonding
involves the interaction between the valence electrons of atoms. Usually
the formation of a bond between two atoms creates a compound that is
more stable than either of the two atoms on their own.
The different properties of ionic and covalent compounds result from
the manner in which chemical bonds form between atoms in these com-
pounds. Atoms can either exchange or share electrons.
When two atoms exchange electrons, one atom loses its valence
electron(s) and the other atom gains the electron(s). This kind of bonding
usually occurs between a metal and a non-metal. Recall, from Chapter 2,
that metals have low ionization energies and non-metals have high elec-
tron afﬁnities. That is, metals tend to lose electrons and non-metals tend
to gain them. When atoms exchange electrons, they form an ionic bond.
Atoms can also share electrons. This kind of bond forms between two
non-metals. It can also form between a metal and a non-metal when the
metal has a fairly high ionization energy. When atoms share electrons,
they form a covalent bond.
How can you determine whether the bonds that hold a compound
together are ionic or covalent? Examining the physical properties of
the compound is one method. This method is not always satisfactory,
however. Often a compound has some ionic characteristics and some
covalent characteristics. You saw this in the previous Thought Lab.
For example, hydrogen chloride, also known as hydrochloric acid, has
a low melting point and a low boiling point. (It is a gas at room tempera-
ture.) These properties might lead you to believe that hydrogen chloride is
a covalent compound. Hydrogen chloride, however, is extremely soluble
in water, and the water solution conducts electricity. These properties are
characteristic of an ionic compound. Is there a clear, theoretical way to
decide whether the bond between hydrogen and chlorine is ionic or
covalent? The answer lies in a periodic trend.
Electronegativity: Attracting Electrons
When two atoms form a bond, each atom attracts the other atom’s
electrons in addition to its own. The electronegativity of an atom is a
measure of an atom’s ability to attract electrons in a chemical bond. EN
is used to symbolize electronegativity. There is a speciﬁc electronegativity
associated with each element.
As you can see in Figure 3.6, electronegativity is a periodic property,
just as atomic size, ionization energy, and electron afﬁnity are. Atomic
size, ionization energy, and electron afﬁnity, however, are properties of
single atoms. In contrast, electronegativity is a property of atoms that are
involved in chemical bonding.
70 MHR • Unit 1  Matter and Chemical Bonding
1
H
2.20
3
Li
0.98
11
Na
0.93
19
K
0.82
37
Rb
0.82
55
Cs
0.79
87
Fr
0.7
4
Be
1.57
12
Mg
1.31
20
Ca
1.00
38
Sr
0.95
56
Ba
0.89
88
Ra
0.9
Electronegativities
21
Sc
1.36
39
Y
1.22
22
Ti
1.54
40
Zr
1.33
72
Hf
1.3
104
Rf
-
23
V
1.63
41
Nb
1.6
73
Ta
1.5
105
Db
-
24
Cr
1.66
42
Mo
2.16
74
W
1.7
106
Sg
-
25
Mn
1.55
43
Tc
2.10
75
Re
1.9
107
Bh
-
26
Fe
1.83
44
Ru
2.2
76
Os
2.2
108
Hs
-
27
Co
1.88
45
Rh
2.28
77
Ir
2.2
109
Mt
-
28
Ni
1.91
46
Pd
2.20
78
Pt
2.2
110
Uun
-
29
Cu
1.90
47
Ag
1.93
79
Au
2.4
111
Uuu
-
30
Zn
1.65
48
Cd
1.69
80
Hg
1.9
112
Uub
-
5
B
2.04
13
Al
1.61
31
Ga
1.81
49
In
1.78
81
TI
1.8
113
-
6
C
2.55
14
Si
1.90
32
Ge
2.01
50
Sn
1.96
82
Pb
1.8
114
Uuq
-
7
N
3.04
15
P
2.19
33
As
2.18
51
Sb
2.05
83
Bi
1.9
115
-
8
O
3.44
16
S
2.58
34
Se
2.55
52
Te
2.1
84
Po
2.0
116
Uuh
-
9
F
3.98
17
Cl
3.16
35
Br
2.96
53
I
2.66
85
At
2.2
117
-
2
He
-
10
Ne
-
18
Ar
-
36
Kr
-
54
Xe
-
86
Rn
-
118
Uuo
-
57
La
1.10
58
Ce
1.12
59
Pr
1.13
60
Nd
1.14
89
Ac
1.1
90
Th
1.3
91
Pa
1.5
92
U
1.7
61
Pm
-
93
Np
1.3
62
Sm
1.17
94
Pu
1.3
63
Eu
-
95
Am
-
64
Gd
1.20
96
Cm
-
65
Tb
-
97
BK
-
66
Dy
1.22
67
Ho
1.23
98
Cf
-
99
Es
-
68
Er
1.24
100
Fm
-
69
Tm
1.25
101
Md
-
70
Yb
-
102
No
-
71
Lu
1.0
103
Lr
-
Electronegativity is
Figure 3.6
a periodic trend.  It increases up
a group and across a period.
Which element is the most
electronegative? Not including
the noble gases, which
element is the least
electronegative?
The trend for electronegativity is the reverse of the trend for atomic size.
Examine Figure 3.7, on the next page, to see what this means. In general,
as atomic size decreases from left to right across a period, electronegativi-
ty increases. Why? The number of protons (which attract electrons) in the
nucleus increases. At the same time, the number of ﬁlled, inner electron
energy levels (which shield the protons from valence electrons) remains
the same. Thus the electrons are pulled more tightly to the nucleus,
resulting in a smaller atomic size. The atom attracts a bonding pair of
electrons more strongly, because the bonding pair can move closer to
the nucleus.
In the second period, for example, lithium has the largest atomic
size and the lowest electronegativity. As atomic size decreases across the
second period, the electronegativity increases. Fluorine has the smallest
atomic size in the third period (except for neon) and the highest elec-
tronegativity. Because noble gases do not usually participate in bonding,
their electronegativities are not given.
Similarly, as atomic size increases down a group, electronegativity
decreases. As you move down a group, valence electrons are less strongly
attracted to the nucleus because the number of ﬁlled electron energy
levels between the nucleus and the valence electrons increases. In a
compound, increasing energy levels between valence electrons and the
nucleus mean that the nucleus attracts bonding pairs less strongly.
For example, in Group 2 (IIA), beryllium has the smallest atomic
radius and the largest electronegativity. As atomic size increases down
the group, electronegativity decreases.
Figure 3.7 shows the relationship between atomic size and electro-
negativity for the main-group elements in periods 2 to 6.
Chapter 3  Chemical Compounds and Bonding • MHR
71
Periodic trends for
Figure 3.7
electronegativity (bars) and
atomic size (spheres) are
inversely related.
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
Electro-
negativity
1.5
Be
Mg
Ca
Sr
Ba
1.0
0.5
Li
0
2
Na
K
Rb
Cs
3
4
5
6
Period
F
O
N
P
As
C
Si
Ge
Sn
Sb
Pb
Bi
B
Al
Ga
In
Tl
S
Se
Te
Po
Cl
Br
I
At
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0
1A
(1)
2A
(2)
3A
(13)
4A
(14)
5A
(15)
6A
(16)
7A
(17)
Group
Predicting Bond Type Using Electronegativity
You can use the differences between electronegativities to decide whether
the bond between two atoms is ionic or covalent. The symbol ∆EN stands
for the difference between two electronegativity values. When calculating
the electronegativity difference, the smaller electronegativity is always
subtracted from the larger electronegativity, so that the electronegativity
difference is always positive.
How can the electronegativity difference help you predict the type of
bond? By the end of this section, you will understand the aswer to this
question. Consider three different substances: potassium ﬂuoride, KF,
oxygen, O2, and hydrochloric acid, HCl. Potassium ﬂuoride is an ionic
compound made up of a metal and a non-metal that have very different
electronegativities. Potassium’s electronegativity is 0.82. Fluorine’s
electronegativity is 3.98. Therefore, ∆EN for the bond between potassium
and ﬂuorine is 3.16.
Now consider oxygen. This element exists as units of two atoms held
together by covalent bonds. Each oxygen atom has an electronegativity of
3.44. The bond that holds the oxygen atoms together has an electronega-
tivity difference of 0.00 because each atom in an oxygen molecule has an
equal attraction for the bonding pair of electrons.
Finally, consider hydrogen chloride, or hydrochloric acid. Hydrogen
has an electronegativity of 2.20, and chlorine has an electronegativity of
3.16. Therefore, the electronegativity difference for the chemical bond in
hydrochloric acid, HCl, is 0.96. Hydrogen chloride is a gas at room tem-
perature, but its water solution conducts electricity. Is hydrogen chloride
a covalent compound or an ionic compound? Its ∆EN can help you
decide, as you will see below.
72 MHR • Unit 1  Matter and Chemical Bonding
The Range of Electronegativity Differences
When two atoms have electronegativities that are identical, as in oxygen,
they share their bonding pair of electrons equally between them in a
covalent bond. When two atoms have electronegativities that are very dif-
ferent, as in potassium ﬂuoride, the atom with the lower electronegativity
loses an electron to the atom with the higher electronegativity. In
potassium ﬂuoride, potassium gives up its valence electron to ﬂuorine.
Therefore, the bond is ionic.
It is not always clear whether atoms share electrons or transfer them.
Atoms with different electronegativities can share electrons unequally
without exchanging them. How unequal does the sharing have to be
before the bond is considered ionic?
Figure 3.8 shows the range of electronegativity differences. These
values go from mostly covalent at 0.0 to mostly ionic at 3.3. Chemists
consider bonds with an electronegativity difference that is greater than
1.7 to be ionic, and bonds with an electronegativity difference that is less
than 1.7 to be covalent.
3.3
(cid:2)EN
1.7
Mostly Ionic
Polar covalent
0.5
0
Mostly
covalent
Figure 3.8
Chemical bonds range in character from mostly ionic to mostly covalent.
Table 3.2 shows how you can think of bonds as having a percent ionic
character or percent covalent character, based on their electronegativity
differences. When bonds have nearly 50% ionic or covalent character,
they have characteristics of both types of bonding.
Table 3.2 Character of Bonds
Electronegativity
difference
Percent ionic
character
Percent covalent
character
0.00 0.65 0.94 1.19 1.43 1.67 1.91 2.19 2.54 3.03
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
Based on Table 3.2, what kind of bond forms between hydrogen and
chlorine? ∆EN for the bond in hydrogen chloride, HCl, is 0.96. This is
lower than 1.7. Therefore, the bond in hydrogen chloride is a covalent
bond.
Calculate ∆EN and predict bond character in the following Practice
Problem.
Chapter 3  Chemical Compounds and Bonding • MHR
73
Practice Problems
1. Determine ∆EN for each bond shown. Indicate whether each bond is
ionic or covalent.
(a) O—H
(b) C—H
(c) Mg— Cl
(d) B—F
(e) Cr — O
(f) C— N
(g) Na—I
(h) Na— Br
Section Wrap-up
In this section, you learned that most elements do not exist in their pure
form in nature. Rather, they exist as different compounds. You reviewed
the characteristic properties of ionic and covalent compounds. You
considered the periodic nature of electronegativity, and you learned how
to use the electronegativity difference to predict the type of bond. You
learned, for example, that ionic bonds form between two atoms with very
different electronegativities.
In section 3.2, you will explore ionic and covalent bonding in terms
of electron transfer and sharing. You will use your understanding of
the nature of bonding to explain some properties of ionic and covalent
compounds.
Section Review
1
2
3
4
K/U
Name the typical properties of an ionic compound. Give two
examples of ionic compounds.
K/U
Name the typical properties of covalent compounds. Give two
examples of covalent compounds.
C
In your own words, describe and explain the periodic trend for
electronegativity.
K/U
Based only on their position in the periodic table, arrange the
elements in each set in order of increasing attraction for electrons in
a bond.
(a) Li, Br, Zn, La, Si
(b) P, Ga, Cl, Y, Cs
5
K/U
Determine ∆EN for each bond. Indicate whether the bond is ionic
or covalent.
(a) N—O
(b) Mn—O
(c) H—Cl
(d) Ca—Cl
6
I
A chemist analyzes a white, solid compound and ﬁnds that it
does not dissolve in water. When the compound is melted, it does not
conduct electricity.
(a) What would you expect to be true about this compound’s melting
point?
(b) Are the atoms that make up this compound joined with covalent or
ionic bonds? Explain.
74 MHR • Unit 1  Matter and Chemical Bonding
Ionic and Covalent
Bonding: The Octet Rule
In section 3.1, you reviewed your understanding of the physical proper-
ties of covalent and ionic compounds. You learned how to distinguish
between an ionic bond and a covalent bond based on the difference
between the electronegativities of the atoms. By considering what
happens to electrons when atoms form bonds, you will be able to explain
some of the characteristic properties of ionic and covalent compounds.
The Octet Rule
Why do atoms form bonds? When atoms are bonded together, they are
often more stable. We know that noble gases are the most stable elements
in the periodic table. What evidence do we have? The noble gases are
extremely unreactive. They do not tend to form compounds. What do the
noble gases have in common? They have a ﬁlled outer electron energy
level. When an atom loses, gains, or shares electrons through bonding
to achieve a ﬁlled outer electron energy level, the resulting compound
is often very stable.
According to the octet rule, atoms bond in order to achieve an
electron conﬁguration that is the same as the electron conﬁguration of a
noble gas. When two atoms or ions have the same electron conﬁguration,
they are said to be isoelectronic with one another. For example, Cl− is
isoelectronic with Ar because both have 18 electrons and a ﬁlled outer
energy level. This rule is called the octet rule because all the noble gases
(except helium) have eight electrons in their ﬁlled outer energy level.
(Recall that helium’s outer electron energy level contains only two
electrons.)
3.2
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
demonstrate an understand-
ing of the formation of ionic
and covalent bonds, and
explain the properties of
the products
explain how different
elements combine to form
covalent and ionic bonds,
using the octet rule
represent the formation of
ionic and covalent bonds
using diagrams
communicate your under-
standing of the following
terms: octet rule, isoelec-
tronic, pure covalent bond,
diatomic elements, double
bond, triple bond, molecular
compounds, intramolecular
forces, intermolecular
forces, metallic bond, alloy
Ionic Bonding
In Section 3.1 you learned that the electronegativity
difference for the bond between sodium and chlorine
is 2.1. Thus, the bond is an ionic bond. Sodium has a
very low electronegativity, and chlorine has a very
high electronegativity. Therefore, when sodium and
chlorine interact, sodium transfers its valence electron
to chlorine. As shown in Figure 3.9, sodium becomes
Na+ and chlorine becomes Cl−.
How does the formation of an ionic bond between
sodium and chlorine reﬂect the octet rule? Neutral
sodium has one valence electron. When it loses this
electron to chlorine, the resulting Na+ cation has an
electron energy level that contains eight electrons. It
is isoelectronic with the noble gas neon. On the other
hand, chlorine has an outer electron energy level that
contains seven electrons. When chlorine gains sodium’s
Sodium’s electron is transferred to chlorine. The atoms
Figure 3.9
become oppositely charged ions with stable octets. Because they
are oppositely charged, they are strongly attracted to one another.
electron transfer
according to
octet rule
1+
opposite
charges
attract
11p
12n
11p
12n
17p
18n
17p
18n
1−
1+
1−
ions
form
ionic
bond
11p
12n
17p
18n
Chapter 3  Chemical Compounds and Bonding • MHR
75
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
PROBLEM TIP
When you draw Lewis struc-
tures to show the formation
of a bond, you can use differ-
ent colours or symbols to
represent the electrons from
different atoms. For example,
use an “x” for an electron from
sodium, and an “o” for an
electron from chlorine. Or, use
open and closed cirlces as is
shown here. This will make it
easier to see how the elec-
trons have been transferred.
electron, it becomes an anion that is isoelectronic with the noble gas
argon. As you can see in Figure 3.10, you can represent the formation of
an ionic bond using Lewis structures.
Thus, in an ionic bond, electrons are transferred from one atom to
another so that they form oppositely charged ions. The strong force of
attraction between the oppositely charged ions is what holds them
together.
Na
Cl
[Na]+ [ Cl ]−
Figure 3.10
atom and a chlorine atom.
These Lewis structures show the formation of a bond between a sodium
Transferring Multiple Electrons
In sodium chloride, NaCl, one electron is transferred from sodium to
chlorine. In order to satisfy the octet rule, two or three
electrons may be transferred from one atom to another. For example,
consider what happens when magnesium and oxygen combine.
The electronegativity difference for magnesium oxide is
3.4 − 1.3 = 2.1. Therefore, magnesium oxide is an ionic compound.
Magnesium contains two electrons in its outer shell. Oxygen contains
six electrons in its outer shell. In order to become isoelectronic with a
noble gas, magnesium needs to lose two electrons and oxygen needs to
gain two electrons. Hence, magnesium transfers its two valence electrons
to oxygen, as shown in Figure 3.11. Magnesium becomes Mg2+, and
oxygen becomes O2−.
Mg
O
[Mg]2+
[ O ]2−
Figure 3.11
sium atom and an oxygen atom.
These Lewis structures show the formation of a bond between a magne-
Try the following problems to practise representing the formation of
ionic bonds between two atoms.
Practice Problems
2. For each bond below, determine ∆EN . Is the bond ionic or covalent?
(a) Ca—O
(b) K—Cl
(c) K—F
(d) Li—F
(e) Li—Br
(f) Ba—O
3. Draw Lewis structures to represent the formation of each bond
in question 2.
76 MHR • Unit 1  Matter and Chemical Bonding
Careers
in Chemistry
Metallurgist
Alison Dickson
Alison Dickson is a metallurgist at Polaris, the
world’s northernmost mine. Polaris is located on
Little Cornwallis Island in Nunavut. It is a lead
and zinc mine, operated by Cominco Ltd., the
world’s largest producer of zinc concentrate.
After ore is mined at Polaris, metallurgists
must separate the valuable lead- and zinc-bearing
compounds from the waste or “slag.” First the
ore is crushed and ground with water to produce
ﬂour-like particles. Next a process called ﬂotation
is used to separate the minerals from the slag.
In ﬂotation, chemicals are added to the metal-
containing compounds. The chemicals react with
the lead and zinc to make them very insoluble in
water, or hydrophobic. Air is then bubbled
through the mineral and water mixture. The
hydrophobic particles attach to the bubbles and
ﬂoat to the surface. They form a stable froth, or
concentrate, which is collected. The concentrate
is ﬁltered and dried, and then stored for
shipment.
Dickson says that she decided on metallurgy
as a career because she wanted to do something
that was “hands-on.” After completing her sec-
ondary education in Malaysia, where she
grew up, Dickson moved to Canada. She studied
mining and mineral process engineering at the
University of British Columbia.
Dickson says that she also wanted to do
something adventurous. She wanted to travel and
live in different cultures. As a summer student,
Dickson worked at a Chilean copper mine. Her
current job with Cominco involves frequent travel
to various mines. “Every day provides a new
challenge,” Dickson says. When she is at Polaris,
Dickson enjoys polar bear sightings on the tundra.
Making Career Connections
Are you interested in a career in mining and
metallurgy? Here are two ways that you can get
information:
1. Explore the web site of The Canadian Institute
of Mining, Metallurgy and Petroleum. Go to
www.school.mcgrawhill.ca/resources/, to
Science Resources, then to Chemistry 11 to
know where to go next. It has a special section
for students who are interested in mining and
metallurgy careers. This section lists education
in the ﬁeld, scholarships and bursaries, and
student societies for mining and metallurgy.
2. To discover the variety of jobs that are
available for metallurgists, search for
careers at Infomine. Go to
www.school.mcgrawhill.ca/resources/,
to Science Resources, then to Chemistry 11
to know where to go next. Many of the
postings are for jobs overseas.
Ionic Bonding That Involves More Than Two Ions
Sometimes ionic compounds contain more than one atom of each ele-
ment. For example, consider the compound that is formed from calcium
and ﬂuorine. Because the electronegativity difference between calcium
and ﬂuorine is 3.0, you know that a bond between calcium and ﬂuorine
is ionic. Calcium has two electrons in its outer energy level, so it needs
to lose two electrons according to the octet rule. Fluorine has seven elec-
trons in its outer energy level, so it needs to gain one electron, again
according to the octet rule. How do the electrons of these elements
interact so that each element achieves a ﬁlled outer energy level?
Chapter 3  Chemical Compounds and Bonding • MHR
77
Ca
F
F
[ F ]−
[Ca]2+
[ F ]−
Figure 3.12
calcium and two atoms of ﬂuorine.
These Lewis structures show the formation of bonds between one atom of
Examine Figure 3.11. In an ionic bond, calcium tends to lose two
electrons and ﬂuorine tends to gain one electron. Therefore, one calcium
atom bonds with two ﬂuorine atoms. Calcium loses one of each of its
valence electrons to each ﬂuorine atom. Calcium becomes Ca2+, and
ﬂuorine becomes F−. They form the compound calcium ﬂuoride, CaF2.
In the following Practice Problems, you will predict the kind of ionic
compound that will form from two elements.
Electronic Learning Partner
Practice Problems
Your Chemistry 11 Electronic
Learning Partner has an
interactive simulation on
forming ionic compounds.
4. For each pair of elements, determine ∆EN .
(a) magnesium and chlorine
(d) sodium and oxygen
(b) calcium and chlorine
(e) potassium and sulfur
(c) lithium and oxygen
(f) calcium and bromine
5. Draw Lewis structures to show how each pair of elements in
question 4 forms bonds to achieve a stable octet.
Explaining the Conductivity of Ionic Compounds
Now that you understand the nature of the bonds in ionic compounds,
can you explain some of their properties? Consider electrical conductivity.
Ionic compounds do not conduct electricity in their solid state. They are
very good conductors in their liquid state, however, or when they are dis-
solved in water. To explain these properties, ask yourself two questions:
1. What is required for electrical conductivity?
2. What is the structure of ionic compounds in the liquid, solid, and
dissolved states?
An electrical current can ﬂow only if charged particles are available to
move and carry the current. Consider sodium chloride as an example. Is
there a mobile charge in solid sodium chloride? No, there is not. In the
solid state, sodium and chlorine ions are bonded to each other by strong
ionic bonds. Like all solid-state ionic compounds, the ions are arranged
in a rigid lattice formation, as shown in Figure 3.13.
78 MHR • Unit 1  Matter and Chemical Bonding
In the solid state, the ions cannot move very much. Thus, there is no
mobile charge. Solid sodium chloride does not conduct electricity.
In solid sodium
Figure 3.13
chloride, NaCl, sodium and
chlorine are arranged in a rigid
lattice pattern.
Cl−
Na+
In molten sodium chloride, the rigid lattice structure is broken. The ions
that make up the compound are free to move, and they easily conduct
electricity. Similarly, when sodium chloride is dissolved, the sodium
and chlorine ions are free to move. The solution is a good conductor
of electricity, as shown in Figure 3.14. You will learn more about ionic
compounds in solution in Chapter 9.
Go back to Table 3.1. What
other properties of ionic com-
pounds can you now explain
with your new understanding
of ionic bonding?
sodium
chloride
solution
chloride ions
donate
electrons
at the positive
electrode
e-
DC
source
e-
+
+
+
+
+
+
Cl0
Cl0
Cl-
Na0
Na+
Na+
Cl-
Na0
-
-
-
-
-
-
sodium ions
accept electrons
at the negative
electrode
positive electrode
negative electrode
You are probably familiar with the ionic crystals in caves. Stalagmites and
stalactites are crystal columns that form when water, containing dissolved
lime, drips very slowly from the ceiling of a cave onto the ﬂoor below.
How do these ionic crystals grow?
When a clear solution of an ionic compound is poured over a seed
crystal of the same compound, the ions align themselves according to
the geometric arrangement in the seed crystal. You will observe this for
yourself in Investigation 3-A.
Aqueous sodium
Figure 3.14
chloride is a good conductor
of electricity.
Chapter 3  Chemical Compounds and Bonding • MHR
79
S K I L L   F O C U S
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
5. Raise the burette as high as it will go. Place it
on the lab bench where you intend to grow
your crystal column.
6. Pour some sodium acetate trihydrate crystals
onto the lab bench. Using clean and dry
forceps, choose a relatively large crystal
(the seed crystal). Place it directly underneath
the burette spout.
7. Turn the buret stopcock slightly so that the
solution drips out slowly. Adjust the position
of the seed crystal so that the drops fall on it.
(You can drip the solution right onto the
bench, or onto a glass plate if you prefer.)
8. Observe the crystal for 10 min. Record your
observations about the crystal column or your
apparatus. Continue to make observations
every 10 min.
Analysis
1. Describe your observations.
2. Why does the column form upward?
3. What was the purpose of the seed crystal?
4. What improvements would you suggest for
better results in the future?
Conclusions
5. What kind of change is taking place when
a crystal forms? Is the change chemical or
physical? Explain.
Application
6. Repeat steps 1 to 3 in the Procedure. Once
you remove the solution from the heat, seal
the ﬂask with a clean, dry rubber stopper.
Allow the ﬂask to cool to room temperature.
Next, remove the stopper and carefully add
only one crystal of sodium acetate trihydrate
to the ﬂask. Record your observations, and
explain what is happening.
Crystalline Columns
In this investigation, you will prepare a super-
saturated solution of sodium acetate. (A super-
saturated solution contains more dissolved solute
at a speciﬁc temperature than is normally possi-
ble.) Then you will use the solution to prepare
your own ionic crystal.
Question
How can you build a crystal column on your
laboratory bench?
Prediction
If the solution drips slowly enough, a tall
crystal column will form.
Safety Precautions
Materials
water
sodium acetate trihydrate crystals
balance
10 mL graduated cylinder
100 mL Erlenmeyer ﬂask
hot plate
squirt bottle
burette
burette stand
forceps
Procedure
1. Place 50 g of sodium acetate trihydrate
in a clean 100 mL Erlenmeyer ﬂask.
2. Add 5 mL of water. Heat the solution slowly.
3. Swirl the ﬂask until the solid completely
dissolves. If any crystals remain inside the
ﬂask or on the neck, wash them down with
a small amount of water.
4. Remove the ﬂask from the heat. Pour the
solution into a clean, dry burette.
80 MHR • Unit 1  Matter and Chemical Bonding
Covalent Bonding
You have learned what happens when the electronegativity difference
between two atoms is greater than 1.7. The atom with the lower elec-
tronegativity transfers its valence electron(s) to the atom with the higher
electronegativity. The resulting ions have opposite charges. They are held
together by a strong ionic bond.
What happens when the electronegativity difference is very small?
What happens when the electronegativity difference is zero? As an exam-
ple, consider chlorine. Chlorine is a yellowish, noxious gas. What is it like
at the atomic level? Each chlorine atom has seven electrons in its outer
energy level. In order for chlorine to achieve the electron conﬁguration of
a noble gas according to the octet rule, it needs to gain one electron. When
two chlorine atoms bond together, their electronegativity difference is
zero. The electrons are equally attracted to each atom.
Therefore, instead of transferring electrons, the two atoms each share
one electron with each other. In other words, each atom contributes one
electron to a covalent bond. A covalent bond consists of a pair of shared
electrons. Thus, each chlorine atom achieves a ﬁlled outer electron energy
level, satisfying the octet rule. Examine Figure 3.15 to see how to repre-
sent a covalent bond with a Lewis structure.
When two atoms of the same element form a bond, they share their
electrons equally in a pure covalent bond. Elements with atoms that bond
to each other in this way are known as diatomic elements.
When atoms such as carbon and hydrogen bond to each other, their
electronegativities are so close that they share their electrons almost
equally. Carbon and hydrogen have an electronegativity difference of only
2.6 − 2.2 = 0.4. In Figure 3.16, you can see how one atom of carbon forms
a covalent bond with four atoms of hydrogen. The compound methane,
CH4, is formed.
Each hydrogen atom shares one of its electrons with the carbon. The
carbon shares one of its four valence electrons with each hydrogen. Thus,
each hydrogen atom achieves a ﬁlled outer energy level, and so does
carbon. (Recall that elements in the ﬁrst period need only two electrons
to ﬁll their outer energy level.) When analyzing Lewis structures that show
covalent bonds, count the shared electrons as if they belong to each of the
bonding atoms. In the following Practice Problems, you will represent
covalent bonding using Lewis structures.
Practice Problems
6. Show the formation of a covalent bond between two atoms of each
diatomic element.
(a) iodine
(b) bromine
(c) hydrogen
(d) ﬂuorine
Cl
Cl
Cl
Cl
These Lewis
Figure 3.15
structures show the formation
of a bond between two atoms of
chlorine.
C H E M
FA C T
Some examples of diatomic
elements are chlorine, Cl2,
bromine, Br2, iodine, I2,
nitrogen, N2, and hydrogen, H2.
H
CH
H
H
This Lewis
Figure 3.16
structure shows a molecule of
methane, CH4.
7. Use Lewis structures to show the simplest way in which each pair of
elements forms a covalent compound, according to the octet rule.
(a) hydrogen and oxygen
(d) iodine and hydrogen
(b) chlorine and oxygen
(e) nitrogen and hydrogen
(c) carbon and hydrogen
(f) hydrogen and rubidium
Electronic Learning Partner
Your Chemistry 11 Electronic
Learning Partner has several
animations that show ionic and
covalent bonding.
Chapter 3  Chemical Compounds and Bonding • MHR
81
O
O
OO
These Lewis
Figure 3.17
structures show the formation
of a double bond between two
atoms of oxygen.
O
C O
This Lewis struc-
Figure 3.18
ture shows the double bond in a
molecule of carbon dioxide, CO2.
N N
This Lewis
Figure 3.19
structure shows the triple bond
in a molecule of nitrogen, N2.
PROBLEM TIP
When drawing Lewis
structures to show covalent
bonding, you can use lines
between atoms to show the
bonding pairs of electrons.
One line (−) signiﬁes a single
bond. Two lines (=) signify a
double bond. Three lines (=−)
signify a triple bond. Non-
bonding pairs are shown as
dots in the usual way.
Multiple Covalent Bonds
Atoms sometimes transfer more than one electron in ionic bonding.
Similarly, in covalent bonding, atoms sometimes need to share two or
three pairs of electrons, according to the octet rule. For example, consider
the familiar diatomic element oxygen. Each oxygen atom has six electrons
in its outer energy level. Therefore, each atom requires two additional
electrons to achieve a stable octet. When two oxygen atoms form a bond,
they share two pairs of electrons, as shown in Figure 3.17. This kind of
covalent bond is called a double bond.
Double bonds can form between different elements, as well. For
example, consider what happens when carbon bonds to oxygen in carbon
dioxide. To achieve a stable octet, carbon requires four electrons, and
oxygen requires two electrons. Hence, two atoms of oxygen bond to one
atom of carbon. Each oxygen forms a double bond with the carbon, as
shown in Figure 3.18.
When atoms share three pairs of electrons, they form a triple bond.
Diatomic nitrogen contains a triple bond, as you can see in Figure 3.19.
Try the following problems to practise representing covalent bonding
using Lewis structures. Watch for multiple bonding!
Practice Problems
8. One carbon atom is bonded to two sulfur atoms. Use a Lewis
structure to represent the bonds.
9. A molecule contains one hydrogen atom bonded to a carbon atom,
which is bonded to a nitrogen atom. Use a Lewis structure to
represent the bonds.
10. Two carbon atoms and two hydrogen atoms bond together, forming
a molecule. Each atom achieves a full outer electron level. Use a
Lewis structure to represent the bonds.
Explaining the Low Conductivity of Covalent Compounds
Covalent compounds have a wider variety of properties than ionic
compounds. Some dissolve in water, and some do not. Some conduct
electricity when molten or dissolved in water, and some do not. If you
consider only covalent compounds that contain bonds with an electroneg-
ativity difference that is less than 0.5, you will notice greater consistency.
For example, consider the compounds carbon disulﬁde, CS2, dichlorine
monoxide, Cl2O, and carbon tetrachloride, CCl4. What are some of the
properties of these compounds? They all have low boiling points. None of
them conducts electricity in the solid, liquid, or gaseous state.
How do we explain the low conductivity of these pure covalent
compounds? The atoms in each compound are held together by strong
covalent bonds. Whether the compound is in the liquid, solid, or gaseous
state, these bonds do not break. Thus, covalent compounds (unlike ionic
compounds) do not break up into ions when they melt or boil. Instead,
their atoms remain bonded together as molecules. For this reason, cova-
lent compounds are also called molecular compounds. The molecules
that make up a pure covalent compound cannot carry a current, even if
the compound is in its liquid state or in solution.
82 MHR • Unit 1  Matter and Chemical Bonding
Evidence for Intermolecular Forces
You have learned that pure covalent compounds are not
held together by ionic bonds in lattice structures. They do
form liquids and solids at low temperatures, however.
Something must hold the molecules together when a
covalent compound is in its liquid or solid state. The forces
that bond the atoms to each other within a molecule are
called intramolecular forces. Covalent bonds are intramole-
cular forces. In comparison, the forces that bond molecules
to each other are called intermolecular forces.
You can see the difference between intermolecular
forces and intramolecular forces in Figure 3.20. Because
pure covalent compounds have low melting and boiling
points, you know that the intermolecular forces must be
very weak compared with the intramolecular forces. It does
not take very much energy to break the bonds that hold the
molecules to each other.
There are several different types of intermolecular
forces. You will learn more about them in section 3.3, as
well as in Chapters 8 and 11.
intermolecular forces
(weak relative to
covalent bonds)
intramolecular forces
(strong covalent bonds)
Figure 3.20
Strong intramolecular forces (cova-
lent bonds) hold the atoms in molecules together.
Relatively weak intermolecular forces act between
molecules.
Metallic Bonding
In this chapter, you have seen that non-metals tend to form ionic
bonds with metals. Non-metals tend to form covalent bonds with other
non-metals and with themselves. How do metals bond to each other?
We know that elements that tend to form ionic bonds have very
different electronegativities. Metals bonding to themselves or to other
metals do not have electronegativity differences that are greater than 1.7.
Therefore, metals probably do not form ionic bonds with each other.
Evidence bears this out. A pure metal, such as sodium, is soft enough
to be cut with a butter knife. Other pure metals, such as copper or gold,
can be drawn into wires or hammered into sheets. Ionic
compounds, by contrast, are hard and brittle.
e−
Do metals form covalent bonds with each other? No.
They do not have enough valence electrons to achieve
stable octets by sharing electrons. Although metals do not
form covalent bonds, however, they do share their electrons.
In metallic bonding, atoms release their electrons to a
shared pool of electrons. You can think of a metal as a non-
rigid arrangement of metal ions in a sea of free electrons,
as shown in Figure 3.21. The force that holds metal atoms
together is called a metallic bond. Unlike ionic or covalent
bonding, metallic bonding does not have a particular orien-
tation in space. Because the electrons are free to move, the
metal ions are not rigidly held in a lattice formation.
Therefore, when a hammer pounds metal, the atoms can
slide past one another. This explains why metals can be
easily hammered into sheets.
2+
2+
2+
2+
e−
e−
e−
e−
e−
e−
e−
e−
e−
e−
2+
e−
2+
2+
e−
2+
e−
e−
e−
e−
e−
e−
2+
2+
2+
e−
e−
e−
e−
e−
2+
e−
2+
2+
e−
e−
2+
e−
e−
e−
e−
2+
e−
e−
e−
e−
e−
2+
2+
2+
2+
e−
e−
e−
e−
Figure 3.21
In magnesium metal, the two valence
electrons from each atom are free to move in an
“electron sea.” The valence electrons are shared
by all the metal ions.
Pure metals contain metallic bonds, as do alloys. An alloy is a
homogeneous mixture of two or more metals. Different alloys can have
different amounts of elements. Each alloy, however, has a uniform compo-
sition throughout. One example of an alloy is bronze. Bronze contains
copper, tin, and lead, joined together with metallic bonds. You will learn
more about alloys in Chapter 4 and Chapter 8.
Chapter 3  Chemical Compounds and Bonding • MHR
83
Section Wrap-up
In this section, you learned how to distinguish between an ionic bond
and a pure covalent bond. You learned how to represent these bonds
using Lewis structures. You were also introduced to metallic bonding.
In section 3.3, you will learn about “in between” covalent bonds
with ∆EN greater than 0.5 but less than 1.7. You will learn how the nature
of these bonds inﬂuences the properties of the compounds that contain
them. As well, you will examine molecules in greater depth. You will
explore ways to visualize them in three dimensions, which will help you
further understand the properties of covalent compounds.
Section Review
1
K/U
Use Lewis structures to show how each pair of elements forms
an ionic bond.
(a) magnesium and ﬂuorine
(c) rubidium and chlorine
(b) potassium and bromine
(d) calcium and oxygen
2
K/U
Use Lewis structures to show how the following elements form
covalent bonds.
(a) one silicon atom and two oxygen atoms
(b) one carbon atom, one hydrogen atom, and three chlorine atoms
(c) two nitrogen atoms
(d) two carbon atoms bonded to each other—three hydrogen atoms
bonded to one of the carbon atoms, and one hydrogen atom and one
oxygen atom bonded to the other carbon atom
3
K/U
Use what you know about electronegativity differences to
decide what kind of bond would form between each pair of elements.
(a) palladium and oxygen
(d) sodium and iodine
(b) carbon and bromine
(e) beryllium and ﬂuorine
(c) silver and sulfur
(f) phosphorus and calcium
4
5
6
C
“In general, the farther away two elements are from each other
in the periodic table, the more likely they are to participate in ionic
bonding.” Do you agree with this statement? Explain why or why not.
C
Covalent bonding and metallic bonding both involve electron shar-
ing. Explain how covalent bonding is different from metallic bonding.
MC
Ionic compounds are extremely hard. They hold their shape
extremely well.
(a) Based on what you know about ionic bonding within an ionic
crystal, explain these properties.
(b) Give two reasons to explain why, in spite of these properties,
it is not practical to make tools out of ionic compounds.
84 MHR • Unit 1  Matter and Chemical Bonding
Polar Covalent Bonds
and Polar Molecules
In section 3.2, you learned what kind of bond forms when the electronega-
tivity difference between two atoms is very small or very large. You now
understand how electrons are shared or transferred in bonds. Thus, you
can explain the properties of ionic compounds, and some of the proper-
ties of covalent compounds.
How can you explain the wide variety of properties that covalent
compounds have? Covalent compounds may be solids, liquids, or gases
at different temperatures. Some covalent compounds dissolve in water,
and some do not. In fact, water itself is a covalent compound! Examine
Figures 3.22 and 3.23. Why are the bonds in water different from the
bonds in dinitrogen monoxide? Both of these compounds are made up of
two elements, and each molecule contains three atoms. The differences in
the properties of these compounds are explained in part by the ∆EN of
their bonds.
3.3
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
construct molecular models
predict the polarity of
a given bond, using
electronegativity values
predict the overall polarity of
molecules, using electroneg-
ativity values and molecular
models
communicate your under-
standing of the following
terms: polar covalent bond,
lone pairs, bonding pairs,
polar molecule, dipolar
molecules, non-polar
molecule
Water may be
Figure 3.22
liquid, solid, or gas in nature.
Why does the water that is
sprayed up by this skier
form a sheet?
Figure 3.23
Dinitrogen monox-
ide, also known as laughing gas,
boils at about −89˚C. Laughing
gas is used as an anaesthetic for
dental work.
Chapter 3  Chemical Compounds and Bonding • MHR
85
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
Polar Covalent Bonds: The “In-Between” Bonds
When two bonding atoms have an electronegativity difference that is
greater than 0.5 but less than 1.7, they are considered to be a particular
type of covalent bond called a polar covalent bond. In a polar covalent
bond, the atoms have signiﬁcantly different electronegativities. The
electronegativity difference is not great enough, however, for the less
electronegative atom to transfer its valence electrons to the other, more
electronegative atom. The difference is great enough for the bonding
electron pair to spend more time near the more electronegative atom than
the less electronegative atom.
For example, the bond between oxygen and hydrogen in water has
an electronegativity difference of 1.24. Because this value falls between
0.5 and 1.7, the bond is a polar covalent bond. The oxygen attracts the
electrons more strongly than the hydrogen. Therefore, the oxygen has a
slightly negative charge and the hydrogen has a slightly positive charge.
Since the hydrogen does not completely transfer its electron to the oxy-
gen, their respective charges are not +1 and −1, but rather δ+ and δ−. The
symbol δ+ (delta plus) stands for a partial positive charge. The symbol
δ− (delta minus) stands for a partial negative charge. Figure 3.24 illustrates
the partial negative and positive charges across an oxygen-hydrogen bond.
Figure 3.25 shows the polar covalent bond between hydrogen and
chlorine.
O
(cid:2)−
H
(cid:2)+
δ+
δ−
ClH
Figure 3.24
The O end of an O—H bond
has a partial negative charge. The H end
has a partial positive charge.
Figure 3.25
The Cl end of a H—Cl bond
has a partial negative charge. The H end
has a partial positive charge.
Try the following problems to practise identifying the partial charges
across polar covalent bonds.
Practice Problems
11. Predict whether each bond will be covalent, polar covalent, or ionic.
(a) C —F
(b) O—N
(c) Cl—Cl
(d) Cu—O
(e) Si—H
(f) Na—F
(g) Fe —O
(h) Mn—O
12. For each polar covalent bond in problem 11, indicate the locations
of the partial charges.
13. Arrange the bonds in each set in order of increasing polarity.
(A completely polarized bond is an ionic bond.)
(a) H—Cl, O—O, N—O, Na —Cl
(b) C — Cl, Mg — Cl, P— O, N—N
P R O B E W A R E
If you have access to prob-
ware, do the Chemistry 11 lab,
Properties of Bonds, now.
Electronic Learning Partner
Your Chemistry 11 Electronic
Learning Partner has a ﬁlm clip
that shows the formation of
bonds in water, hydrogen gas,
and sodium chloride.
86 MHR • Unit 1  Matter and Chemical Bonding
Comparing Molecular Models
Throughout this chapter, you have seen several different types of
diagrams representing molecules. These diagrams, or models, are useful
for highlighting various aspects of molecules and bonding. Examine
Figure 3.26 to see the various strengths of the different models.
A A Lewis structure shows you
exactly how many electrons are
involved in each bond in a com-
pound. Some Lewis structures
show bonding pairs as lines
between atoms.
OH
H
O C O
Electronic Learning Partner
Your Chemistry 11 Electronic
Learning Partner has a video
clip that explains how to draw
Lewis structures.
OH
CO
H
O
B A structural diagram shows single
bonds as single lines and multiple
bonds as multiple lines. It does
not show non-bonding pairs. It is
less cluttered than a Lewis struc-
ture. It clearly shows whether the
bonds involved are single, dou-
ble, or triple bonds.
C A ball-and-stick model shows
atoms as spheres and bonds as
sticks. It accurately shows how
the bonds within a molecule are
oriented in three-dimensional
space. The distances between the
atoms are exaggerated, however.
In this model, you can see the dif-
ferences in the shapes of carbon
dioxide and water.
D A space-ﬁlling model shows
atoms as spheres. It is the most
accurate representation of the
shape of a real molecule.
A
B
C
D
Figure 3.26
using a variety of different models.
You can compare a molecule of water with a molecule of carbon dioxide
Consider a molecule of water and a molecule of carbon dioxide. Both
water and carbon dioxide contain two atoms of the same element bonded
to a third atom of another element. According to Figure 3.26, however,
water and carbon dioxide molecules are different shapes. Why does
carbon dioxide have a linear shape while water is bent?
Web
LINK
There are ways of represent-
ing molecules in addition to
the ones shown in Figure 3.26.
Seach for some examples
on the Internet. Go to
www.school.mcgrawhill.ca/
resources/ for some ideas on
where to start.
Chapter 3  Chemical Compounds and Bonding • MHR
87
Figure 3.27
A tetrahedron has
four equal sides.
lone pairs
H
O
H
bonding pairs
Figure 3.28
Two non-bending
pairs account for water’s bent
shape.
To understand why molecules have different shapes, consider how
electron arrangement affects shape. The Lewis structure for water, for
example, shows that the oxygen is surrounded by four electron pairs. As
shown in ﬁgure 3.26, two of the pairs are involved in bonding with the
hydrogen atoms and two of the pairs are not. Electron pairs that are not
involved in bonding are called lone pairs. Electron pairs that are involved
in bonding are called bonding pairs.
Electron pairs are arranged around molecules so that they are a maxi-
mum distance from each other. This makes sense, because electrons are
negatively charged and they repel each other. The shape that allows four
electron pairs to be a maximum distance from each other around an atom
is a tetrahedron. Figure 3.27 shows a tetrahedron.
The Shape of a Water Molecule
In a water molecule, there are four electron pairs around the oxygen atom.
Two of these pairs bond with the hydrogen. The electron pairs are
arranged in a shape that is nearly tetrahedral. When you draw the
molecule, however, you draw only the oxygen atom and the two hydrogen
atoms. This is where the bent shape comes from, as you can see in
Figure 3.28.
The Shape of a Carbon Dioxide Molecule
Now consider carbon dioxide, CO2. Why does a carbon dioxide molecule
have a linear shape? Examine the Lewis structure for carbon dioxide. The
central carbon atom is surrounded by eight electrons (four pairs), like the
oxygen atom in a water molecule. In a carbon dioxide molecule, though,
all the electrons are involved in bonding. There are no lone pairs. Because
the bonding electrons spend most of their time between the carbon and
oxygen atoms, they are arranged in a straight line. This allows them to be
as far away from each other as possible, as you can see in Figure 3.29.
lone
pairs
O
C
O
lone
pairs
bonding pairs
Figure 3.29
Carbon dioxide is linear in shape.
88 MHR • Unit 1  Matter and Chemical Bonding
The shapes of the water molecule and the
carbon dioxide molecule, as shown in the
diagram you have seen, make sense based on
what we know about electron pairs. These
shapes have also been supported by experi-
ment. You will learn more about experimental
evidence for the structure of carbon dioxide
and water later in this chapter.
Drawing the Lewis structure of a molecule
can help you determine the molecule’s shape.
In Figure 3.30, you can see the shape of the
ammonia, NH3, molecule. The ammonia
molecule has three bonding electron pairs and
one lone pair on its central atom, all arranged
in a nearly tetrahedral shape. Because there is
one lone pair, the molecule’s shape is pyrami-
dal. The molecule methane, CH4, is shown in
Figure 3.31. This molecule has four bonding
pairs on its central atom and no lone pairs.
It is shaped like a perfectly symmetrical
tetrahedron.
H
H
Canadians
in Chemistry
lone pair
N
H
H
C
H
H
H
Figure 3.30
An ammonia mole-
cule is shaped like a pyramid.
Figure 3.31
A methane
molecule is shaped as though
its hydrogen atoms were on the
corners of a tetrahedron.
constraints. At the University of Toronto, Dr. Ozin
teaches his students the new science of inten-
tional design, instead of the old trial-and-error
methods.
Born in London, England, in 1943, Geoffrey
Ozin earned a doctorate in chemistry at Oxford
University. He joined the University of Toronto
in 1969. Ozin’s father was a tailor. In a way, Ozin
is continuing the family tradition. Ozin, however,
uses ionic and covalent bonds, atoms and
molecules, acids, gases, and solutions to fashion
his creations.
In 1996, Dr. Ozin demonstrated the
self-assembly of crystals with a porous
structure in space, under the conditions (such as
microgravity) found aboard a Space Shuttle.
Since then, he has shown how the self-assembly
of many materials can be controlled to produce
their structure.
Dr. Ozin’s latest achievement involves
structure. Ozin was part of an international
research team that created regular microscopic
cavities inside a piece of silicon. This material
can transmit light photons in precisely regulated
ways. In the future, this material might be used
to build incredibly fast computers that function
by means of photons instead of electrons!
Chapter 3  Chemical Compounds and Bonding • MHR
89
Dr. Geoffrey Ozin
His work has ﬂown on a Space Shuttle, and it has
been hailed as art. It may well be part of the next
computing revolution.
What does Dr. Geoffrey Ozin do? As little as
possible, for he believes in letting the atoms do
most of the work. This approach has made him
one of the more celebrated chemists in Canada.
Time and again, he has brought together organic
and inorganic molecules, polymers, and metals in
order to create materials with just the right struc-
ture for a speciﬁc purpose.
Self-assembly is the key. Atoms and
molecules are driven into pre-designed shapes
by intermolecular forces and geometrical
Polar Bonds and Molecular Shapes
Water molecules are attracted to one another. Because we are surrounded
by water, we are surrounded by evidence of this attraction. Re-examine
the water skier in Figure 3.22. If water molecules did not attract one
another, do you think the spray from the ski would form a “sheet” as
shown? Try ﬁlling a glass with water. As you near the rim, add water very
slowly. If you are careful, you can ﬁll the glass so that the water bulges
over the rim. After a rainfall, you have probably seen beads of water on
the surface of vehicles. In Figure 3.32, you can see further evidence of
the attraction of water molecules to one another.
Why do water molecules “stick together”? To answer this question,
you need to consider both the nature of the bonds within a water
molecule and its shape.
The shape of water
Figure 3.32
droplets is evidence that water
molecules are attracted to one
another. This property of water
can be explained by the polarity
of its O—H bonds.
The Polar Water Molecule
First consider the shape of a water molecule. You have discovered that
a water molecule has a bent shape. Each oxygen-hydrogen bond is polar.
The hydrogen atom has a partial positive charge and the oxygen atom has
a partial negative charge. You know that the bonds are polar, but what
about the molecule as a whole? Because the molecule is bent, there is a
partial negative charge on the oxygen end and a partial positive charge
on the hydrogen end, as shown in Figure 3.33.
negatively charged end
(cid:2)−
(cid:2)−
O
Water is a polar
Figure 3.33
molecule because of its shape
and the polarity of its bonds.
H
(cid:2)+
H
(cid:2)+
(cid:2)+
positively charged end
90 MHR • Unit 1  Matter and Chemical Bonding
Because the water molecule as a whole has a partial negative charge on
one end and a partial positive charge on the other end, it is called a polar
molecule. Because water is polar, its negative and positive ends attract
each other. This explains why liquid water “sticks” to itself. Figure 3.34
shows how water molecules attract each other in the liquid state.
(cid:2)+
(cid:2)−
(cid:2)−
(cid:2)+
(cid:2)+
(cid:2)−
(cid:2)−
(cid:2)+
(cid:2)−
(cid:2)+
(cid:2)+
(cid:2)+
(cid:2)+
(cid:2)+
The negative ends of water molecules attracts
Figure 3.34
the positive ends. Some of the resulting intermolecular forces
are shown here.
Two other examples of polar molecules are ammonia and hydrogen
chloride, shown in Figures 3.35 and 3.36. Polar molecules are also called
dipolar molecules because they have a negative pole and a positive pole.
The Non-Polar Carbon Dioxide Molecule
The bond between carbon and oxygen is polar. It has an electronegativity
difference of 1.0. Does this mean that carbon dioxide, a molecule that
contains two carbon-oxygen double bonds, is a polar molecule? No, it
does not. The oxygen atoms have partial negative charges, and the
carbon atom has a partial positive charge. The molecule, however, is
straight and symmetrical. As you can see in Figure 3.37, the effects of
the polar bonds cancel each other out. Therefore, while carbon dioxide
contains polar bonds, it is a non-polar molecule. It has neither a positive
pole nor a negative pole.
negatively charged end
(cid:2)−
(cid:2)−
N
H
(cid:2)+
H
(cid:2)+
H
(cid:2)+
(cid:2)+
positively
charged end
Because an ammo-
Figure 3.35
nia molecule contains polar
bonds and is asymmetrical, it is
a polar molecule.
(cid:2)+
H
(cid:2)−
Cl
Hydrogen chloride
Figure 3.36
contains one polar bond.
Therefore, the molecule is polar.
(cid:2)+
(cid:2)−
F
C
F
(cid:2)−
F
(cid:2)−
O
(cid:2)−
C
(cid:2)+
O
(cid:2)−
F
(cid:2)−
Figure 3.37
Carbon dioxide is a non-polar molecule because it is symmetrical.
Carbon tetraﬂuoride, CF4, shown in Figure 3.38, is another example of a
non-polar molecule that contains polar bonds.
Carbon tetraﬂuo-
Figure 3.38
ride, CF4, contains four polar
bonds. Because of its symmetry,
however, it is a non-polar
molecule.
Chapter 3  Chemical Compounds and Bonding • MHR
91
S K I L L   F O C U S
Modelling concepts
Analyzing and interpreting
Communicating results
(e) nitrogen bonded to three hydrogens: NH3
(f) carbon bonded to four chlorines: CCl4
boron bonded to three ﬂuorines: BF3
(g)
3. Build a three-dimensional model of each
molecule using your model kit.
4. Sketch the molecular models you have built.
5. In your notebook, make a table like the one
below. Give it a title, ﬁll in your data, and
exchange your table with a classmate.
Compound
Lewis structure
for compound
Sketch of predicted
shape of molecule
Analysis
1. Compare your models with the models that
your classmates built. Discuss any differences.
2. How did your Lewis structures help you
predict the shape of each molecule?
Conclusion
3. Summarize the strengths and limitations of
creating molecular models using molecular
model kits.
Applications
4. Calculate the electronegativity difference for
each bond in the molecules you built. Show
partial charges. Based on the electronegativity
difference and the predicted shape of each
molecule, decide whether the molecule is
polar or non-polar.
5. Look back through Chapter 3, and locate some
different simple molecules. Build models of
these molecules. Predict whether they are
polar or non-polar.
Modelling Molecules
We cannot see molecules with our eyes or with
a light microscope. We can predict their shapes,
however, based on what we know about their
electron conﬁgurations. In this investigation, you
will practise working with a kit to build models
of molecules.
Question
How can you build models of molecules to help
you predict their shape and polarity?
Materials
molecular model kit
pen
paper
Procedure
1. Obtain a model kit from your teacher.
2. Draw a Lewis structure for each molecule
below.
(a) hydrogen bonded to a hydrogen: H2
(b) chlorine bonded to a chlorine: Cl2
(c) oxygen bonded to two hydrogens: H2O
(d) carbon bonded to two oxygens: CO2
92 MHR • Unit 1  Matter and Chemical Bonding
C H E M
FA C T
Differences in melting points
and boiling points are due
in part to the polarity of the
molecules that make up the
compounds. They are also
due to the different masses
of the individual molecules.
Properties of Polar and Non-Polar Molecules
Because water is made up of polar molecules with positive and negative
ends that attract one another, water tends to “stick” to itself. This means
that it has a high melting point and boiling point, relative to other cova-
lent compounds. For example, carbon dioxide is made up of non-polar
molecules. These molecules do not attract each other as much as polar
molecules do, because they do not have positive and negative poles.
Compounds that are made up of non-polar molecules generally have
lower melting points and boiling points than compounds that are made
up of polar molecules. In fact, compounds with non-polar molecules,
like carbon dioxide, are often gases at room temperature.
Section Wrap-up
In section 3.2, you learned about the strong bonds that hold ions in clear-
ly-deﬁned lattice patterns. You learned that these bonds are responsible
for the properties of ionic compounds. You also learned how to describe
the properties of compounds that are made up of molecules with covalent
bonds. In this section, you discovered that the properties of compounds
with polar covalent bonds depend on their shape. The following Concept
Organizer summarizes some of the properties of covalent compounds that
are made up of polar and non-polar molecules.
In sections 3.2 and 3.3, you learned how to represent compounds
using Lewis structures and molecular models. In the next section, you
will learn how chemists name compounds and represent them using
symbols.
Concept Organizer Melting Point and Bonding Concepts
Ionic
compound
strong ionic bonds
hold ions in lattice
formation
extemely high
melting point
melting point
NaCI
NaCI
sodium chloride
sodium chloride
801˚
801˚C
polar molecules
relatively strong
intermolecular
forces
melting point
is lower
than ionic
H2O
water
0˚C
Covalent
compound
non-polar molecules
relatively weak
intermolecular
forces
melting point tends
to be lower than
polar
CO2
carbon dioxide
−57˚C
Chapter 3  Chemical Compounds and Bonding • MHR
Chapter 3  Chemical Compounds and Bonding • MHR
93
93
Unit Project Prep
Before beginning your Unit
Project, think about properties
of compounds that would be
useful in common chemical
products. What kinds of
properties would an abrasire
or a window-cleaning ﬂuid
need to have? What kinds
of compounds exhibit these
properties?
Section Review
1
K/U
Determine ∆EN for each bond. Is the bond ionic, covalent, or
polar covalent?
(a) B—F
(b) C —H
(c) Na — Cl
(d) Si—O
(e) S —O
(f) C —Cl
2
3
4
K/U
For each polar covalent bond in question 1, label the partial
negative and partial positive charges on each end.
C
Explain how a non-polar molecule can contain polar bonds.
K/U
Arrange each set of bonds in order of increasing polarity,
using only their position in the periodic table.
(a) H— Cl, H—Br, O— F, K— Br
(b) C — O, C — F, C — H, C — Br
5
K/U
Check your arrangements in question 4 by determining the ∆EN
for each bond. Explain any discrepancies between your two sets
of predictions.
6
I
A molecule of chloroform, CHCl3, has the same shape as
a molecule of methane, CH4. However, methane’s boiling point
is −164˚C and chloroform’s boiling point is 62˚C. Explain the
difference between the two boiling points.
7
K/U
Determine the shape of each molecule by drawing a Lewis struc-
ture and considering the distribution of electron pairs around the
atoms. Determine ∆EN for the bonds. Use the ∆EN and the shape to
predict whether the molecule is polar or non-polar.
(a) SiCl4
(b) PCl3
8
MC
How would Earth and life on Earth be different if water were
a non-polar molecule? Write a paragarph explaining your ideas.
94 MHR • Unit 1  Matter and Chemical Bonding
Writing Chemical Formulas and
Naming Chemical Compounds
3.4
You have used Lewis structures to demonstrate how ionic and covalent
bonds form between atoms. When given two elements, you determined
how many atoms of each element bond together to form a compound,
according to the octet rule. For example, you used the periodic table and
your understanding of the octet rule to determine how calcium and
bromine bond to form an ionic compound. Using a Lewis structure, you
determined that calcium and bromine form a compound that contains
two bromine atoms for every calcium atom, as shown in Figure 3.39.
Chemical Formulas
Lewis structures are helpful for keeping track of electron transfers in
bonding and for making sure that the octet rule is obeyed. As well,
Lewis structures can be used to help determine the ratio of the atoms in
a compound. To communicate this ratio, chemists use a special kind of
shorthand called a chemical formula. A chemical formula provides two
important pieces of information:
1. the elements that make up the compound
2. the number of atoms of each element that are present in a compound
The order in which the elements are written also communicates important
information. The less electronegative element or ion is usually listed ﬁrst
in the formula, and the more electronegative element or ion comes sec-
ond. For example, the ionic compound that is formed from calcium and
bromine is written CaBr2. Calcium, a metal with low electronegativity, is
written ﬁrst. The subscript 2 after the bromine indicates that there are two
bromine atoms for every calcium atom.
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
(cid:2) write the formulas of binary
and tertiary compounds,
including compounds that
contain elements with
multiple valences
communicate formulas
using IUPAC and traditional
systems
recognize the formulas
of compounds in various
contexts
communicate your
understanding of the
following terms: chemical
formula, valence, polyatomic
ions, zero sum rule, chemi-
cal nomenclature, binary
compound, Stock system,
tertiary compounds
Ca
Br
Br
[ Br ]−
[Ca]2+
[ Br ]−
no subscript
(”1“ is implied)
symbol of positive ion
CaBr2
subscript indicating
2 bromine ions
symbol of negative ion
Figure 3.39
These Lewis structures
show the formation of calcium bromide.
CaBr2 is the chemical formula of the compound formed
Figure 3.40
by calcium and bromine. When a subscript is omitted, only one atom is
present per formula unit.
Chapter 3  Chemical Compounds and Bonding • MHR
95
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
Mg2+
O2−
In a crystal of
Figure 3.41
magnesium oxide, MgO, magne-
sium and oxygen atoms exist in
a 1:1 ratio.
What does the formula of
calcium bromide represent?
What a Chemical Formula Represents
For covalent compounds, the chemical formula represents how many of
each type of atom are in each molecule. For example, the formula NH3
signiﬁes that a molecule of ammonia contains one nitrogen atom and
three hydrogen atoms. The formula C2H6 tells you that a molecule of
propane contains two atoms of carbon and six atoms of hydrogen.
For ionic compounds, the formula represents a ratio rather than
a discrete particle. For example, the formula for magnesium oxide, MgO,
signiﬁes that magnesium and oxygen exist in a one-to-one atomic ratio.
Recall that MgO exists in a lattice structure held together by ionic bonds,
as shown in Figure 3.41. The formula MgO represents the ratio in which
ions are present in the compound.
Using Valence Numbers to Describe Bonding Capacity
You have seen how Lewis structures can help you draw models of ionic,
covalent, and polar covalent compounds. When you draw a Lewis
structure, you can count how many electrons are needed by each atom
to achieve a stable octet. Thus, you can ﬁnd out the ratio in which the
atoms combine. Once you know the ratio of the atoms, you can write the
chemical formula of the compound. Drawing Lewis structures can become
overwhelming, however, when you are dealing with large molecules. Is
there a faster and easier method for writing chemical formulas?
Every element has a certain capacity to combine with other atoms.
An atom of a Group 1 (IA) element, for example, has the capacity to lose
one electron from its valence level in order to bond with another atom.
A number is assigned to each element to describe the element’s bonding
capacity. This number is called the valence. Thus, Group 1 (IA) elements,
such as sodium and lithium, have a valence of +1. The 1 indicates that
these elements tend to have one electron involved in bonding. This makes
sense, because Group 1 elements have only one electron in their outer
electron energy level. The + indicates that these elements tend to give up
their electrons, becoming positively charged ions. They may transfer their
electrons, or they may attract the electron relatively weakly in a polar
covalent bond.
On the other hand, Group 17 (VIIA) elements (the halogens) have a
valence of −1. Again, the 1 indicates that these elements tend to have one
electron involved in bonding. However, they need to gain an electron to
achieve a stable octet. In general, halogens become more negatively
charged when they participate in bonding.
As a general rule, if two atoms form an ionic bond, the valence tells
you the charges on the ions that are formed. If a covalent bond is formed,
the valence tells you how many electrons the atoms contribute to the
covalent bond.
You can use the periodic table to predict valence numbers. For
example, Group 2 (IIA) elements have two electrons in their outer energy
level. To achieve a stable octet, they need to lose these two electrons.
Therefore, the valence for all Group 2 elements is +2.
96 MHR • Unit 1  Matter and Chemical Bonding
Practice Problems
14. Use the periodic table to predict the most common valences of the
atoms in Groups 16 (VIA) and 17 (VIIA).
15. If you had to assign a valence to the noble gases, what would it be?
Explain your answer.
The smaller atoms of elements in the ﬁrst two periods usually have only
one common valence, which is easily determined from the periodic table.
Many larger elements, however, have more than one valence because the
electron distribution in these elements is much more complex. Therefore,
you will have to memorize the valences of the elements that are common-
ly used in this course. Some useful valences are listed in Table 3.3, with
the most common valences listed ﬁrst.
Table 3.3 Common Valences of Selected Elements
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
H(+1)H(+1)
Li(+1) Be(+2)
Na(+1) Mg(+2)
K(+1) Ca(+2)
Rb(+1) Sr(+2)
Cs(+1) Ba(+2)
Cr(+3)
Cr(+2)
Cr(+6)
Fe(+3) Co(+2)
Ni(+2)
Cu(+2)
Fe(+2)
Co(+3)
Ni(+3) Cu(+1)
Zn(+2) Ga(+3)
Ag(+1) Cd(+2)
Au(+3)
Hg(+2)
Au(+1)
Hg(+1)
Sn(+4)
Sn(+2)
Pb(+2)
Pb(+4)
N(−3)
O(−2) F(−1)
P(−3)
S(−2) Cl(−1)
Br(−1)
I(−1)
Polyatomic Ions
Some compounds contain ions that are made from more than one atom.
These ions are called polyatomic ions. (The preﬁx poly means “many.”)
Calcium carbonate, CaCO3 , which is found in chalk, contains one calcium
cation and one polyatomic anion called carbonate, CO3
2− .
Polyatomic ions are in fact charged molecules. For example, the car-
bonate ion consists of one carbon atom covalently bonded to three oxygen
atoms. The entire molecule has a charge of −2. Therefore, its valence is −2,
as well. Polyatomic ions remain unchanged in simple chemical reactions
because of the strong bonds that hold the component atoms together. They
behave as a single unit and should be treated as a single ion.
Table 3.4 on the next page gives the valences, formulas, and names of
many common polyatomic ions.
Chapter 3  Chemical Compounds and Bonding • MHR
97
Language
LINK
It is important to learn the
names and valences of the ﬁve
most common polyatomic ions:
nitrate, carbonate, chlorate,
sulfate, and phosphate. These
ions form many of the chemi-
cals in nature and in common
use. While the task seems
overwhelming, it may help to
learn the “big ﬁve” using a
mnemonic, or memory aid. You
can use the following
mnemonic to remember their
names, valences, and number
of oxygen atoms:
NICK the CAMEL had a CLAM
for SUPPER in PHOENIX.
The ﬁrst letter identiﬁes the
polyatomic ion. The number of
vowels represents the valence.
The number of consonants
represents the number of oxy-
gen atoms. For example, NICK
(nitrate) has three consonants
and one vowel. Therefore,
nitrate contains three oxygen
atoms and has a valence of −1.
(All of these valences are
negative.)
Try to come up with your own
mnemonic.
The most common polyatomic cation is the ammonium ion, [NH4
+ form a particle with a +1 charge. Because the
The ﬁve atoms in NH4
atoms are bonded together strongly, the polyatomic ion is not altered in
most chemical reactions. For example, when ammonium chloride is
dissolved in water, the only ions in the solution are ammonium ions and
chloride ions.
+].
Table 3.4 Names and Valences of Some Common Ions
Valence = −1
Ion
−
H2PO3
−
H2PO4
−
MnO4
−
NO2
−
NO3
OCN−
HS−
OH−
SCN−
Valence = −2
Ion
2−
O2
2−
SiO3
2−
SO3
2−
SO4
2−
S2O3
Valence = −3
Name
dihydrogen phosphite
dihydrogen phosphate
permanganate
nitrite
nitrate
cyanate
hydrogen sulfide
hydroxide
thiocyanate
Name
peroxide
silicate
sulfite
sulfate
thiosulfate
Ion
CN−
CH3COO−
ClO−
−
−
−
ClO2
ClO3
ClO4
Name
cyanide
acetate
hypochlorite
chlorite
chlorate
perchlorate
hydrogen carbonate
hydrogen sulfite
hydrogen sulfate
Name
carbonate
oxalate
chromate
dichromate
hydrogen phosphite
hydrogen phosphate
−
HCO3
−
HSO3
−
HSO4
Ion
2−
CO3
2−
C2O4
2−
CrO4
2−
Cr2O7
2−
2−
HPO3
HPO4
Ion
3−
3−
AsO3
AsO4
Name
arsenite
arsenate
Ion
3−
3−
PO3
PO4
Name
phosphite
phosphate
Writing Chemical Formulas Using Valences
You can use valences to write chemical formulas. This method is faster
than using Lewis structures to determine chemical formulas. As well,
you can use this method for both ionic and covalent compounds. In order
to write a chemical formula using valences, you need to know which
elements (or polyatomic ions) are in the compound, and their valences.
You also need to know how to use the zero sum rule: For neutral chemi-
cal formulas containing ions, the sum of positive valences plus negative
valences of the atoms in a compound must equal zero.
In the compound potassium ﬂuoride, KF, each potassium ion has a
charge of +1. Each ﬂuoride ion has a charge of –1. Because there is one of
each ion in the formula, the sum of the valences is zero.
98 MHR • Unit 1  Matter and Chemical Bonding
What is the formula of a compound that consists of magnesium and
chlorine? You know that the valence of magnesium, Mg, is +2. The
valence of chlorine, Cl, is −1. The formula MgCl is not balanced, however,
because it does not yet obey the zero sum rule. How can you balance this
formula? You might be able to see, at a glance, that two chlorine atoms are
needed for every magnesium atom. If it is not obvious how to balance a
formula, you can follow these steps:
1. Write the unbalanced formula. Remember that the metal
is ﬁrst and the non-metal is second.
Mg Cl
2. Place the valence of each element on top of the appropriate
symbol.
+2
Mg
−1
Cl
3. Using arrows, bring the numbers (without the signs) down
to the subscript positions by crossing over.
+2
Mg
−1
Cl
4. Check the subscripts. Any subscript of “1” can be removed.
MgCl2
You can check your formula by drawing a Lewis structure, as shown in
Figure 3.42.
Practice Problems
16. Write a balanced formula for a compound that contains
sulfur and each of the following elements. Use a valence
of −2 for sulfur.
(a) sodium
(d) aluminum
(b) calcium
(c) barium
(e) rubidium
(f) hydrogen
17. Write a balanced formula for a compound that contains
calcium and each of the following elements.
(a) oxygen
(b) sulfur
(c) chlorine
(d) bromine
(e) phosphorus
(f) ﬂuorine
How do you write and balance formulas that contain polyatomic ions?
The same steps can be used, as long as you keep the atoms that belong to
a polyatomic ion together. The easiest way to do this is to place brackets
around the polyatomic ion at the beginning.
For example, suppose that you want to write a balanced formula
for a compound that contains potassium and the phosphate ion. Use
the following steps as a guide.
[Mg]2+ [ Cl ]−
[ Cl ]−
This Lewis
Figure 3.42
structure represents magnesium
chloride, MgCl2. Each atom has
achieved a stable octet.
PROBLEM TIP
After the crossing over step,
you may need to reduce the
subscripts to their lowest
terms. For example, Mg2O2
becomes MgO. Be2O2 becomes
BeO. Remember, formulas for
ionic compounds represent
ratios of ions.
Chapter 3  Chemical Compounds and Bonding • MHR
99
PROBLEM TIP
In this formula, the brackets
must remain around the
ammonium ion to distinguish
the subscripts. The subscript 4
refers to how many hydrogen
atoms are in each ammonium
ion. The subscript 3 refers to
how many ammonium ions are
needed to form an ionic com-
pound with the phosphate ion.
1. Write the unbalanced formula. Place brackets around any
polyatomic ions that are present.
PO4
(PO4)
2. Write the valence of each ion above it. (Refer to Table 3.4.)
K
K
+1
K
−3
(PO4)
3. Cross over, and write the subscripts.
K3(PO4)1
4. Tidy up the formula. Remember that you omit the subscript if
there is only one particle in the ionic compound or molecule.
Here the brackets are no longer needed, so they can be removed.
K3PO4
Pay close attention to the brackets when you are writing formulas that
contain polyatomic ions. For example, how would you write the formula
for a compound that contains ammonium and phosphate ions?
1. Write the unbalanced formula. Place brackets around any
polyatomic ions that are present.
PO4
NH4
(NH4) (PO4)
2. Write the valence above each ion.
−3
+1
(NH4) (PO4)
3. Cross over, and write in the subscripts.
(NH4)3(PO4)1
4. Tidy up the formula. Remove the brackets only when the
polyatomic ion has a subscript of “1”.
(NH4)3PO4
Try the following problems to practise writing formulas for compounds
containing polyatomic ions.
Practice Problems
18. Use the information in Table 3.4 to write a chemical formula for
a compound that contains sodium and each of the following
polyatomic ions.
(a) nitrate
(c) sulﬁte
(e) thiosulfate
(b) phosphate
(d) acetate
(f) carbonate
19. Repeat question 19 using magnesium instead of sodium.
100 MHR • Unit 1  Matter and Chemical Bonding
Naming Chemical Compounds
When writing a chemical formula, you learned that you write the metal
element ﬁrst. Similarly, the metal comes ﬁrst when naming a chemical
compound. For example, sodium chloride is formed from the metal
sodium and the non-metal chlorine. Think of other names you have seen
in this chapter, such as beryllium chloride, calcium oxide, and aluminum
oxide. In each case, the metal is ﬁrst and the non-metal is second. In other
words, the cation is ﬁrst and the anion is second. This is just one of the
rules in chemical nomenclature: the system that is used in chemistry for
naming compounds.
A chemical formula identiﬁes a speciﬁc chemical compound because
it reveals the composition of the compound. Similarly, the name of a
compound distinguishes the compound from all other compounds.
Figure 3.43
Many common chemicals have trivial, or common, names.
In the early days of chemistry, there were no rules for naming compounds.
Often, compounds received the names of people or places. Some of the
original names are still used today. They are called trivial or common
names because they tell little or nothing about the chemistry of the
compounds. For example, potassium nitrate, KNO3, is commonly known
as saltpetre. The Greek word for rock is petra, and saltpetre is a salt found
crusted on rocks. The chemical name of a compound of ammonium and
chloride ions, is ammonium chloride NH4Cl. Long before NH4Cl received
this name, however, people commonly referred to it as sal ammoniac.
They mined this ionic compound near the ancient Egyptian temple of
Ammon in Libya. The name sal ammoniac literally means “salt of
Ammon.” Figure 3.43 shows other examples of common (trivial) names
for familiar compounds.
Early chemists routinely gave trivial names to substances before
understanding their chemical structure and behaviour. This situation
changed during the mid- to late-1800s. By this time, chemistry was
ﬁrmly established as a science. Chemists observed and discovered new
patterns of chemical relationships (such as periodicity). As well, chemists
discovered new chemical compounds with tremendous frequency. The
rapidly increasing number of chemical compounds required a more
organized method of nomenclature.
Chapter 3  Chemical Compounds and Bonding • MHR 101
The International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) was
formed in 1919 by a group of chemists. The main aim of IUPAC was to
establish international standards for masses, measurement, names, and
symbols used in the discipline of chemistry. To further that aim, IUPAC
developed, and continues to develop, a consistent and thorough system
of nomenclature for compounds.
Table 3.5 contains the IUPAC names of selected common compounds
as well as their common names.
Table 3.5 Common Chemical Compounds
IUPAC name
Chemical formula
Common name
Use or propety
aluminum oxide
calcium carbonate
calcium oxide
hydrochloric acid
magnesium hydroxide
dinitrogen monoxide
silicon dioxide
sodium carbonate
sodium chloride
sodium hydrogen carbonate
sodium hydroxide
sodium thiosulfate
Al2O3
CaCO3
CaO
HCl
alumina
abrasive
limestone, marble
building, sculpting
lime
neutralizing acidified lakes
muriatic acid
cleaning metal
Mg(OH)2
milk of magnesia
antacid
N2O
SiO2
Na2CO3
NaCl
NaHCO3
NaOH
NaS2O3
laughing gas
quartz sand
used in dentistry as an anaesthetic
manufacturing glass
washing soda
general cleaner
table salt
enhancing flavour
baking soda
making baked goods rise
lye
hypo
neutralizing acids
fixer in photography
Naming Binary Compounds Containing a Metal and a Non-metal
A binary compound is an inorganic compound that contains two elements.
Binary compounds may contain a metal and a non-metal or two non-
metals. Binary compounds are often ionic compounds. To name a binary
ionic compound, name the cation ﬁrst and the anion second. For example,
the compound that contains sodium and chlorine is called sodium chlo-
ride.
In the subsections that follow, you will examine the rules for naming
metals and non-metals in binary compounds.
Naming Metals in Chemical Compounds: The Stock System
The less electronegative element in a binary compound is always named
ﬁrst. Often this element is a metal. You use the same name as the element.
For example, sodium chloride, NaCl, calcium oxide, CaO, and zinc
sulﬁde, ZnS, contain the metals sodium, calcium, and zinc.
Many of the common metals are transition elements that have more
than one possible valence. For example, tin is able to form the ions Sn2+
and Sn4+, iron can form Fe2+ and Fe3+, and copper can form Cu+ and
Cu2+. (The most common transition metals with more than one valence
number are listed in Table 3.3.) The name of a compound must identify
which ion is present in the compound. To do this, the element’s name is
used, followed by the valence in parentheses, written in Roman numerals.
Therefore, Sn4+ is tin(IV), Fe3+ is iron(III), and Cu2+ is copper(II). This
naming method is called the Stock system after Alfred Stock, a German
chemist who ﬁrst used it. Some examples of Stock system names are
listed in Table 3.6.
102 MHR • Unit 1  Matter and Chemical Bonding
Another Method for Naming Metals with Two Valences
In a method that predates the Stock system, two different endings are
used to distinguish the valences of metals. The ending -ic is used to repre-
sent the larger valence number. The ending -ous is used to represent
the smaller valence number. Thus, the ions Sn2+ and Sn4+ are named
stannous ion and stannic ion. To use this system, you need to know the
Latin name of an element. For example, the two ions of lead are the
plumbous and plumbic ions. See Table 3.6 for more examples.
This naming method has several drawbacks. Many metals have more
than two oxidation numbers. For example, chromium can form three
different ions, and manganese can form ﬁve different ions. Another draw-
back is that the name does not tell you what the valence of the metal is.
It only tells you that the valence is the smaller or larger of two.
Table 3.6 Two ways to Name Cations with Two Valences
element
ion
Stock system
Alternative system
copper
mercury
lead
Cu+
Cu2+
2+
Hg2
Hg2+
Pb2+
Pb4+
copper(I)
copper(II)
mercury(I)
mercury(II)
lead(II)
lead(IV)
cuprous
cupric
mercurous
mercuric
plumbous
plumbic
Naming Non-Metals in Chemical Compounds
To distinguish the non-metal from the metal in the name of a chemical
compound, the non-metal (or more electronegative element) is always
written second. Its ending changes to -ide. For example, hydrogen changes
to hydride, carbon changes to carbide, sulfur changes to sulﬁde, and
iodine changes to iodide.
Putting It All Together
To name a binary compound containing metal and a non-metal, write the
name of the metal ﬁrst and the name of the non-metal second. For exam-
ple, a compound that contains potassium as the cation and bromine as the
anion is called potassium bromide. Be sure to indicate the valence if
necessary, using the Stock system. For example, a compound that contains
Pb2+ and oxygen is called lead(II) oxide.
Practice Problems
20. Write the IUPAC name for each compound.
(a) Al2O3
(b) CaBr2
(c) Na3P
(d) Cu2S
(e) Mg3N2
(f) HgI2
21. Write the formula of each compound.
(a) iron(II) sulﬁde
(d) cobaltous chloride
(b) stannous oxide
(e) manganese(II) iodide
(c) chromium(II) oxide
(f) zinc oxide
Some types of ionic com-
pounds can absorb water
so that each formula unit is
attached to a speciﬁc number
of water molecules. They are
called hydrates. BaOH2 • 8H2O
is called barium hydroxide
octahydrate. CaSO4 • 2H2O is
called calcium sulfate dihy-
drate. Can you see the pattern?
Try naming MgSO4 • 7H2O. Use
Table 3.8 to help you. You will
learn more about hydrates
in Chapter 6.
Chapter 3  Chemical Compounds and Bonding • MHR 103
Naming Compounds That Contain Hydrogen
If a binary compound contains hydrogen as the less electronegative
element, “hydrogen” is used ﬁrst in the name of the compound. For
example, HCl is called hydrogen chloride and H2S is called hydrogen
sulﬁde. Sometimes hydrogen can be the anion, usually in a compound
that contains a Group 1 metal. If hydrogen is the anion, its ending must
be changed to -ide. For example, NaH is called sodium hydride and LiH
is called lithium hydride. Hydrogen-containing compounds can also be
formed with the Group 15 elements. These compounds are usually
referred to by their common names as opposed to their IUPAC names. For
example, NH3 is called ammonia, PH3 is called phosphine, AsH3 is called
arsine, and SbH3 is called stibine.
Many compounds that contain hydrogen are also acids. For example,
H2SO4, hydrogen sulfate, is also called sulfuric acid. You will learn about
acid nomenclature in Chapter 10.
Practice Problems
22. Write the IUPAC name for each compound.
(a) H2Se
(b) HCl
(c) HF
(d) LiH
(e) CaH2
(f) PH3
Naming Compounds That Contain Polyatomic Ions
Many compounds contain one or more polyatomic ions. Often these
compounds contain three elements, in which case they are called tertiary
compounds. Although they are not binary compounds, they still contain
one type of anion and one type of cation. The same naming rules that
apply to binary compounds apply to these compounds as well. For
example, NH4Cl is called ammonium chloride. Na2SO4 is called sodium
sulfate. NiSO4 is called nickel(II) sulfate. NH4NO3 is called ammonium
nitrate.
The non-metals in the periodic table are greatly outnumbered by the
metals. There are many negatively charged polyatomic ions, however,
to make up for this. In fact, polyatomic anions are commonly found in
everyday chemicals. Refer back to Table 3.4 for the names of the most
common polyatomic anions.
When you are learning the names of polyatomic ions, you will notice
a pattern. For example, consider the polyatomic ions that contain chlorine
and oxygen:
ClO−
−
ClO2
−
ClO3
−
ClO4
hypochlorite
chlorite
chlorate
perchlorate
Can you see the pattern? Each ion has the same valence, but different
numbers of oxygen atoms. The base ion is the one with the “ate” ending
chlorate. It contains three oxygen atoms. When the ending is changed
to “ite,” subtract an oxygen atom from the chlorate ion. The resulting
chlorite ion contains two oxygen atoms. Add “hypo” to “chlorite,” and
subtract one more oxygen atom. The resulting hypochlorite ion has one
104 MHR • Unit 1  Matter and Chemical Bonding
oxygen atom. Adding “per” to “chlorate,” means that you should add an
oxygen to the chlorate ion. The perchlorate ion has four oxygen atoms.
The base “ate” ions do not always have three oxygen atoms like
chlorate does. Consider the polyatomic ions that contain sulfur and
2−, contains four oxygen
oxygen. In this case, the base ion, sulfate, SO4
2−, therefore contains three oxygen atoms.
atoms. The sulﬁte ion, SO3
2−, contains two oxygen atoms. Once you know
The hyposulﬁte ion, SO2
the meanings of the preﬁxes and sufﬁxes, you need only memorize the
formulas of the “ate” ions. You can work out the formulas for the related
ions using their preﬁxes and sufﬁxes. The meanings of the preﬁxes and
sufﬁxes are summarized in Table 3.7. In this table, the “x” stands for the
number of oxygen atoms in the “ate” ion.
Table 3.7 Meaning of preﬁxes and sufﬁxes
Prefix and suffix
Number of oxygen atoms
hypo
per
ite
ite
ate
ate
x − 2 oxygen atoms
x − 1 oxygen atoms
x oxygen atoms
x + 1 oxygen atoms
Practice Problems
23. Write the IUPAC name for each compound.
(a) (NH4)2SO3
(b) Al(NO2)3
(c) Li2CO3
(d) Ni(OH)2
(e) Ag3PO4
(f) Cu(CH3COO)2
Naming Binary Compounds That Contain Two Non-Metals
To indicate that a binary compound is made up of two non-metals, a
preﬁx is usually added to both non-metals in the compound. This preﬁx
indicates the number of atoms of each element in one molecule or formu-
la unit of the compound. For example, P2O5 is named diphosphorus pen-
toxide. Alternatively, the Stock System may be used, and P2O5 can be
named phosphorus (V) oxide. AsBr3 is named phosphorus tribromide.
The preﬁx mono- is often left out when there is only one atom of the ﬁrst
element in the name. A list of numerical preﬁxes is found in Table 3.8.
Practice Problems
24. Write the IUPAC name for each compound.
(a) SF6
(b) N2O5
(c) PCl5
(d) CF4
Language
LINK
The preﬁx “thio” in the name
of a polyatomic ion means that
an oxygen atom in the root
“ate” ion has been replaced
by a sulfur atom. For example,
2−, while
the sulfate ion is SO4
2−.
the thiosulfate ion is S2O3
Notice that the valence does
not change.
Table 3.8 Numerical Preﬁxes for
Binary Compounds That Contain
Two Non-Metals
Number
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Prefix
mono-
di-
tri-
tetra-
penta-
hexa-
hepta-
octa-
nona-
deca-
Chapter 3  Chemical Compounds and Bonding • MHR 105
Section Wrap-up
In section 3.4, you learned how to name ionic and covalent compounds.
You also learned how to write their formulas. In Chapter 4, you will learn
how compounds and elements interact in nature, in the laboratory, and
in everyday life. These interactions are responsible for the tremendous
variety of substances and materials found on Earth.
Section Review
1
K/U
Write an unambiguous name for each compound.
(a) K2CrO4
(b) NH4NO3
(c) Na2SO4
(d) Sr3(PO4)2
(e) KNO2
(f) Ba(ClO)2
Unit Project Prep
2
K/U
Write the name of each binary compound.
In this section, you saw some
common names for chemicals.
Before you begin your Unit
Project, create a list of names
of chemicals found in common
household cleaning products.
If you know only the common
name, ﬁnd out the chemical
name.
(a) MgCl2
(b) Na2O
(c) FeCl3
(d) CuO
(e) ZnS
(f) AlBr3
3
K/U
Write the formula of each compound.
(a) sodium hydrogen carbonate
(b) potassium dichromate
(c) sodium hypochlorite
(d) lithium hydroxide
(e) potassium permanganate
(f) ammonium chloride
(g) calcium phosphate
(h) sodium thiosulfate
4
K/U
Write the formula and name of two possible
compounds that could be formed from
each pair of elements.
(a) vanadium and oxygen
(b) iron and sulfur (−2)
(c) nickel and oxygen
5
C
The formula for hydrogen peroxide is H2O2.
Explain why it is not correct to write the formula
for this covalent compound as HO.
106 MHR • Unit 1  Matter and Chemical Bonding
Review
Reﬂecting on Chapter 3
Summarize this chapter in the format of your
choice. Here are a few ideas to use as guidelines:
• Elements combine to form a wide variety of
Knowledge/Understanding
1. Both electronegativity and electron afﬁnity
describe electron attraction. Explain how
they are different.
compounds.
• Ionic compounds and covalent compounds have
characteristic properties. You can use these
properties to classify various compounds.
• You can use the concepts of electron arrange-
ment and forces in atoms to explain the periodic
trend of electronegativity.
• The electronegativity difference between
elements can be used to predict what kinds of
compounds the elements will form.
• Lewis structures can represent the formation of
ionic and covalent compounds according to the
octet rule.
• You can explain the conductivity of covalent
and ionic compounds using an understanding of
covalent and ionic bonding.
• By predicting the shapes of molecules, you can
predict their polarity.
• The polarity of molecules can be used to explain
the range of boiling points and melting points
among compounds that contain molecules with
similar masses.
• There is a methodical way to unambiguously
name compounds and write their chemical
formulas.
Reviewing Key Terms
For each of the following terms, write a sentence
that shows your understanding of its meaning.
chemical bonds
covalent bond
octet rule
pure covalent bond
double bond
molecular compounds
intermolecular forces
alloy
lone pairs
polar molecule
non-polar molecule
valence
zero sum rule
binary compound
tertiary compounds
ionic bond
electronegativity
isoelectronic
diatomic elements
triple bond
intramolecular forces
metallic bond
polar covalent bond
bonding pairs
dipolar molecules
chemical formula
polyatomic ions
chemical nomenclature
Stock system
2. Calculate ∆EN for each bond.
(a) Zn— O
(b) Mg — I
(c) Co —Cl
(d) N— O
3. Indicate whether each bond in question 2 is
ionic or covalent.
4. Name three characteristics of covalent
compounds and three characteristics of
ionic compounds.
5. Give two examples of ionic compounds and
two examples of covalent compounds.
6. How does a property of noble gases lead to
the octet rule?
7. Draw a Lewis structure to represent each
ionic compound.
(a) potassium bromide
(b) calcium ﬂuoride
(c) magnesium oxide
(d) lithium oxide
8. Draw a Lewis structure to represent each
covalent compound.
(a) CO2
(b) NaH
(c) NF3
9. Describe, in detail, what happens when an
ionic bond forms between calcium and
chlorine. Use Lewis structures to illustrate
your description.
10. Diatomic elements (such as oxygen, nitrogen,
and chlorine) tend to exist at room temperature
as gases. Explain why this is true using your
understanding of bonding.
11. A solid covalent compound has both intermole-
cular and intramolecular forces. Do solid ionic
compounds contain intermolecular forces?
Explain your answer.
12. Distinguish between a non-polar covalent bond
and a polar covalent bond.
13. Distinguish between an ionic bond and a polar
covalent bond.
Chapter 3  Chemical Compounds and Bonding • MHR 107
14. Without calculating ∆EN , arrange each set
of bonds from most polar to least polar. Then
calculate ∆EN for each bond to check your
arrangement.
(a) Mn— O, Mn— N, Mn—F
(b) Be — F, Be — Cl, Be — Br
(c) Ti— Cl, Fe— Cl, Cu— Cl, Ag— Cl, Hg— Cl
15. What kind of diagram would you use (Lewis
structure, structural diagram, ball-and-stick
model, or space-ﬁlling model) to illustrate
each idea?
(a) When sodium and chlorine form an ionic
bond, sodium loses an electron and chlorine
gains an electron.
(b) Water, H2O, is a molecule that has a bent
shape.
(c) Each oxygen atom in carbon dioxide, CO2,
has two bonding pairs and two non-bonding
pairs.
(d) Silicon tetrachloride, SiCl4, is a tetrahedral
molecule.
16. Write the valences for the elements in each
compound. If the compound is ionic, indicate
the charge that is associated with each valence.
(a) AgCl
(c) PCl5
(e) TiO2
(g) CaO
(b) Mn3P2
(d) CH4
(f) HgF2
(h) FeS
17. Write the formula of each compound.
(a) tin(II) ﬂuoride
(b) barium sulfate
(c) hydrogen cyanide
(d) cesium bromide
(e) ammonium hydrogen phosphate
(f) sodium periodate
(g) potassium bromate
(h) sodium cyanate
18. Write the name of each compound.
(a) HIO2
(c) CsF
(e) NaHSO4
(g) K2Cr2O7
(b) KClO4
(d) NiCl2
(f) Al2(SO3)3
(h) Fe(IO4)3
19. Name each compound in two different ways.
(a) FeO
(c) CuCl2
(e) PbO2
(b) SnCl4
(d) CrBr3
(f) HgO
108 MHR • Unit 1  Matter and Chemical Bonding
Inquiry
20. Suppose that you have two colourless
compounds. You know that one is an ionic
compound and the other is a covalent com-
pound. Design an experiment to determine
which compound is which. Describe the
tests you would perform and the results you
would expect.
21. You have two liquids, A and B. You know that
one liquid contains polar molecules, and the
other liquid contains non-polar molecules. You
do not know which is which, however. You
pour each liquid so that it falls in a steady, nar-
row stream. As you pour, you hold a negatively
charged ebonite rod to the stream. The stream
of liquid A is deﬂected toward the rod. The rod
does not affect the stream of liquid B. Which
liquid is polar? Explain your answer.
Communication
22. Explain how you would predict the most com-
mon valences of the elements of the second
period (Li, Be, B, C, N, O, F, and Ne) if you did
not have access to the periodic table. Use Lewis
structures to illustrate your explanation.
23. Create a concept map to summarize what you
learned in this chapter about the nature of
bonding and the ways in which bonding mod-
els help to explain physical and chemical
properties.
24. Compare and contrast ionic bonding and metal-
lic bonding. Include the following ideas:
• Metals do not bond to other metals in deﬁ-
nite ratios. Metals do bond to non-metals in
deﬁnite ratios.
• Solid ionic compounds do not conduct
electricity, but solid metals do.
25. Explain why it was important for chemists
worldwide to decide on a system for naming
compounds.
Making Connections
26. Chemists do not always agree on names, not
just for compounds but even for elements. As
new elements are synthesized in laboratories,
they must be named. Until 1997, there was a
controversy over the names of elements 104 to
109 (called the transfermium elements). The
periodic table at the back of this textbook gives
the names that have now been accepted. Do
some research to ﬁnd out what other names
were proposed for those elements. Find out
what justiﬁcation was given for the alternative
names and the accepted names. Then write an
essay in which you evaluate the choice that
was made. Do you agree or disagree? Justify
your opinion.
Answers to Practice Problems and
Short Answers to Section Review Questions:
Practice Problems:  1.(a) 1.24, covalent (b) 0.50, covalent
(c) 1.85, ionic (d) 1.94, ionic (e) 1.78, ionic (f) 0.49, cova-
lent (g) 1.73, ionic (h) 2.03, ionic  2.(a) 2.44, ionic (b) 2.34,
ionic (c) 3.16, ionic (d) 3.00, ionic (e) 1.98, ionic (f) 2.55,
ionic  3.(a) one calcium atom gives up two electrons to
one oxygen atom (b) one potassium atom gives up one
electron to one chlorine atom (c) one potassium atom
gives up one electron to one ﬂuorine atom (d) one lithi-
um atom gives up one electron to one ﬂuorine atom
(e) one lithium atom gives up one electron to one
bromine atom (f) one barium atom gives up two
electrons to one oxygen atom  4.(a) 1.85 (b) 2.16 (c) 2.46
(d) 2.51 (e) 1.76 (f) 1.96  5.(a) one magnesium atom gives
up one electron to each of two chlorine atoms (b) one
calcium atom gives up one electron to each of two
chlorine atoms (c) two lithium atoms each give up one
electron to one oxygen atom (d) two sodium atoms each
give up one electron to one oxygen atom (e) two potassi-
um atoms each give up one electron to one sulfur atom
(f) one calcium atom gives up one electron to each of
two bromine atoms  6.(a) Each iodine atom has seven
electrons. Two iodine atoms bonded together share one
pair of electrons so each has access to eight electrons.
(b) Each bromine atom has seven electrons. Two bromine
atoms bonded together share one pair of electrons so
that each has access to eight electrons. (c) Each hydrogen
atom has one electron. Two hydrogen atoms bonded
together share one pair of electrons so that each has
access to two electrons. (d) Each ﬂuorine atom has seven
electrons. Two ﬂuorine atoms bonded together share one
pair of electrons so that each has access to eight elec-
trons.  7.(a) One hydrogen atom bonds to one oxygen
atom, sharing one electron pair. (b) Two chlorine atoms
bond to one oxygen atom. Each chlorine atom shares
one pair of electrons with the oxygen atom. (c) One car-
bon atom bonds to four hydrogen atoms. Each hydrogen
atom shares one pair of electrons with the carbon atom.
(d) One iodine atom bonds to one hydrogen atom. They
share an electron pair. (e) One nitrogen atom bonds to
three hydrogen atoms. Each hydrogen atom shares a pair
of electrons with the nitrogen atom. (f) One hydrogen
atom bonds to one rubidium atom. They share a pair of
13.(a) O—O, N—O,
(d) Cu δ +, O δ −
electrons.  8. The carbon atom shares two pairs of elec-
trons with each sulfur atom, so it has two double bonds.
9. The carbon atom shares one pair of electrons with
hydrogen, and three pairs of electrons with the nitrogen
atom.  10. The two carbon atoms share three pairs of
electrons in a triple bond. Each carbon atom shares one
pair of electrons with one hydrogen atom.  11.(a) polar
covalent (b) covalent (c) covalent (d) polar covalent
(e) covalent (f) ionic (g) polar covalent (h) ionic  12.(a) C δ +,
F δ −
(g) Fe δ +, O δ −
H—Cl, Na—Cl (b) N—N, P—O, C—Cl, Mg—C  14. Group
13, 3, Group 16, –2, Group 17, –1  15. 0, do not tend to
gain or lose electrons  16.(a) Na2S (b) CaS (c) BaS (d) Al2S3
(e) Rb2S (f) H2S  17.(a) CaO (b) CaS (c) CaCl2 (d) CaBr2
(e) Ca3P2 (f) CaF2 18.(a) NaNO3 (b) Na3PO4 (c) Na2SO3
(d) NaCH3COO (e) Na2S2O3 (f) Na2CO3 19. Mg(NO3)2
(b) Mg3(PO4)2 (c) MgSO3 (d) Mg(CH3COO)2 (e) MgS2O3
20.(a) aluminum oxide (b) calcium bromide (c) sodium
phosphide (d) copper(I) sulﬁde (e) magnesium nitride
(f) mercury(II) iodide  21.(a) FeS (b) SnO (c) CrO (d) CoCl2
(e) MnI2 (f) ZnO  22.(a) hydrogen selenide (b) hydrogen
chloride (c) hydrogen ﬂuoride (d) lithium hydride (e) cal-
cium hydride (f) phosphorus(III) hydride  23.(a) ammoni-
um sulﬁte (b) aluminum nitrite (c) lithium carbonate
(d) nickel(II) hydroxide (e) silver phosphate (f) copper(II)
acetate  24.(a) sulfur hexaﬂuoride (b) dinitrogen pentoxide
(c) phosphorus pentachloride (d) carbon tetraﬂuoride
Section Review: 3.1: 4.(a) Li, La, Zn, Si, Br (b) Cs, Y, Ga, P,
Cl  5.(a) 0.40, covalent (b) 1.89, ionic (c) 0.96, covalent
(d) 2.16, ionic  6.(a) low (b) covalent  3.2:  1.(a) one magne-
sium atom gives up one electron to each of two ﬂuorine
atoms (b) one potassium electron gives up one electron
to one bromine atom (c) one rubidium atom gives up one
electron to one chlorine atom (d) one calcium atom gives
up two electrons to one oxygen atom  2.(a) The hydrogen
atom and chlorine atoms all bond to the carbon atom.
(b) Each hydrogen and chlorine atom shares one electron
pair with the carbon atom. (c) The two nitrogen atoms
share three pairs of electrons in a triple covalent bond.
3.(a) covalent (b) covalent (c) covalent (d) ionic
3.3: 1.(a) 1.94, ionic (b) 0.35, covalent (c) 2.23, ionic
(d) 1.54, polar covalent (e) 0.86, polar covalent (f) 0.61,
polar covalent  2.(d) Si δ +, O δ −
4.(a) O—F, H—Br, H—Cl, K—Br (b) C—H, C—Br, C—O,
C—F  7.(a) 1.26, non-polar molecule (b) 0.97, polar mole-
cule (c) 1.55, non-polar molecule  3.4: 1.(a) potassium
chromate (b) ammonium nitrate (c) sodium sulfate (d)
strontium phosphate (e) potassium nitrite (f) barium
hypochlorite  2.(a) magnesium chloride (b) sodium oxide
(c) iron(III) chloride (d) copper(II) oxide (e) zinc sulﬁde
(f) aluminum bromide  3.(a) NaHCO3 (b) K2Cr2O7 (c) NaClO
(d) LiOH (e) KMnO4 (f) NH4Cl (g) Ca3(PO4)2 (h) Na2S2O3
4.(a) any two of: vanadium(II) oxide, VO, vanadium(III)
oxide, V2O3, vanadium(IV) oxide, VO2, vanadium(V)
oxide, V2O5 (b) iron(II) sulﬁde, FeS, iron(I) sulﬁde, Fe2S
(c) nickel(II) oxide, NiO, nickel(III) oxide, Ni2O3
(f) C δ +, Cl δ −
(e) S δ +, O δ −
Chapter 3  Chemical Compounds and Bonding • MHR 109
110
Classifying Reactions:
Chemicals in Balance
Picture a starry night and tired hikers sitting around a campﬁre.
Everywhere in this peaceful setting, chemical reactions are taking place.
The cellulose in the ﬁrewood reacts with the oxygen in the air, producing
carbon dioxide and water. The light and heat of the campﬁre are evidence
of the chemical reaction. If someone roasts a marshmallow its sugars react
with oxygen. The soft, white marshmallow forms a brown and brittle
crust. When someone eats a marshmallow, the chemicals in the stomach
react with the sugar molecules to digest them. A person telling a story
exhales carbon dioxide with every breath. Carbon dioxide is the product
of respiration, another chemical reaction.
In each star in the night sky above, another type of reaction is taking
place. This type of reaction is called a nuclear reaction, because it
involves changes within the nucleus of the atom. Nuclear reactions are
responsible for the enormous amounts of heat and light generated by all
the stars, including our Sun.
Back on Earth, however, chemical reactions are everywhere in our
daily lives. We rely on chemical reactions for everything from powering a
car to making toast. In this chapter, you will learn how to write balanced
chemical equations for these reactions. You will look for patterns and
similarities between the chemical equations, and you will classify the
reactions they represent. As well, you will learn how to balance and
classify equations for nuclear reactions.
You learned above that the cellulose in ﬁrewood can react
with oxygen to produce carbon dioxide and water. How can
you describe and classify a chemical reaction that causes a
piece of ﬁrewood to become a chunk of charcoal? What is
happening as the charcoal burns away?
C h a p t e r   P r e v i e w
4.1 Chemical Equations
4.2 Synthesis and
Decomposition Reactions
4.3 Single Displacement and
Double Displacement
Reactions
4.4 Simple Nuclear Reactions
C o n c e p t s   a n d   S k i l l s
Yo u   W i l l   N e e d
Before you begin this chapter,
review the following concepts
and skills:
deﬁning and describing
the relationships among
atomic number, mass
number, atomic mass,
isotope, and radioisotope
(Chapter 2, section 2.1)
naming chemical
compounds (Chapter 3,
section 3.4)
(cid:2) writing chemical formulas
(Chapter 3, section 3.4)
explaining how different
elements combine to form
covalent and ionic bonds
using the octet rule
(Chapter 3, sections 3.2
and 3.3)
Chapter 4  Classifying Reactions: Chemicals in Balance • MHR 111
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
4.1
Chemical Equations
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
use word equations
and skeleton equations
to describe chemical
reactions
balance chemical equations
communicate your under-
standing of the following
terms: chemical reactions,
reactant, product, chemical
equations, word equation,
skeleton equation, law of
conservation of mass,
balanced chemical equation
Write the chemical formulas
of the products in the reactions
described in Practice Problem 1.
C H E M
FA C T
Caffeine is an ingredient in
coffee, tea, chocolate, and
cola drinks. Its chemical name
is 1,3,7-trimethylxanthene. You
can see how long names like
this would become unwieldy
in word equations.
In Chapter 3, you learned how and why elements combine to form
different compounds. In this section, you will learn how to describe
what happens when elements and compounds interact with one another
to form new substances. These interactions are called chemical reactions.
A substance that undergoes a chemical reaction is called a reactant. A
substance that is formed in a chemical reaction is called a product.
For example, when the glucose in a marshmallow reacts with oxygen
in the air to form water and carbon dioxide, the glucose and oxygen are
the reactants. The carbon dioxide and water are the products. Chemists
use chemical equations to communicate what is occurring in a chemical
reaction. Chemical equations come in several forms. All of these forms
condense a great deal of chemical information into a short statement.
Word Equations
A word equation identiﬁes the reactants and products of a chemical
reaction by name. In Chapter 3, you learned that chlorine and sodium
combine to form the ionic compound sodium chloride. This reaction can
be represented by the following word equation:
sodium + chlorine → sodium chloride
In this equation, “+” means “reacts with” and “→” means “to form.” Try
writing some word equations in the following Practice Problems.
Practice Problems
1. Describe each reaction using a word equation. Label the reactant(s)
and product(s).
(a) Calcium and ﬂuorine react to form calcium ﬂuoride.
(b) Barium chloride and hydrogen sulfate react to form hydrogen
chloride and barium sulfate.
(c) Calcium carbonate, carbon dioxide, and water react to form
calcium hydrogen carbonate.
(d) Hydrogen peroxide reacts to form water and oxygen.
(e) Sulfur dioxide and oxygen react to form sulfur trioxide.
2. Yeast can facilitate a reaction in which the sugar in grapes reacts to
form ethanol and carbon dioxide. Write a word equation to describe
this reaction.
Word equations are useful because they identify the products and
reactants in a chemical reaction. They do not, however, provide any
chemical information about the compounds and elements themselves.
If you did not know the formula for sodium chloride, for example, this
equation would not help you understand the reaction very well. Another
shortcoming of a word equation is that the names for chemicals are often
very long and cumbersome. Chemists have therefore devised a more
convenient way of representing reactants and products.
112 MHR • Unit 1  Matter and Chemical Bonding
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
Skeleton Equations
Using a chemical formula instead of a chemical name simpliﬁes a
chemical equation. It allows you to see at a glance what elements and
compounds are involved in the reaction. A skeleton equation lists the
chemical formula of each reactant on the left, separated by a + sign
if more than one reactant is involved, followed by an arrow →. The
chemical formula of each product is listed on the right, again separated
by a + sign if more than one product is produced. A skeleton equation
also shows the state of each reactant by using the appropriate subscript,
as shown in Table 4.1.
The reaction of sodium metal with chlorine gas to form sodium
chloride can be represented by the following skeleton equation:
Na(s) + Cl2(g) → NaCl(s)
A skeleton equation is more useful to a chemist than a word equation,
because it shows the formulas of the compounds involved. It also shows
the state of each substance.Try writing some skeleton equations in the
following Practice Problems.
Practice Problems
3. Write a skeleton equation for each reaction.
(a) Solid zinc reacts with chlorine gas to form solid zinc chloride.
(b) Solid calcium and liquid water react to form solid calcium
hydroxide and hydrogen gas.
(c) Solid barium reacts with solid sulfur to produce solid barium sulﬁde.
(d) Aqueous lead(II) nitrate and solid magnesium react to form
aqueous magnesium nitrate and solid lead.
4. In each reaction below, a solid reacts with a gas to form a solid.
Write a skeleton equation for each reaction.
(a) carbon dioxide + calcium oxide → calcium carbonate
(b) aluminum + oxygen → aluminum oxide
(c) magnesium + oxygen → magnesium oxide
Why Skeleton Equations Are Incomplete
Although skeleton equations are useful, they do not fully describe chemi-
cal reactions. To understand why, consider the skeleton equation showing
the formation of sodium chloride (above). According to this equation, one
sodium atom reacts with one chlorine molecule containing two chlorine
atoms. The product is one formula unit of sodium chloride, containing
one atom of sodium and one atom of chlorine. Where has the extra
chlorine atom gone?
The Law of Conservation of Mass
All atoms must be accounted for, according to an important law. The law
of conservation of mass states that in any chemical reaction, the mass
of the products is always equal to the mass of the reactants. In other
words, according to this law, matter can be neither created nor destroyed.
Chemical reactions proceed according to the law of conservation of mass,
which is based on experimental evidence.
Table 4.1 Symbols
Used in Chemical Equations
Symbol
+
Meaning
reacts with
(reactant side)
+
→
(s)
((cid:2))
(g)
and (product side)
to form
solid or precipitate
liquid
gas
(aq)
in aqueous (water)
solution
C H E M
FA C T
Many chemical reactions can
go in either direction, so an
arrow pointing in the opposite
direction is often added to the
equation. This can look like
. To indicate which
or
reaction is more likely to
occur, one arrow can be
drawn longer than the other:
for example:
or
.
Chapter 4  Classifying Reactions: Chemicals in Balance • MHR 113
Careers
in Chemistry
Food Chemist
How do you make a better tasting sports drink?
How can you make a gravy mix that can be ready
to serve in 5 min, yet maintain its consistency
under a heat lamp for 8 h? Food chemists use
their knowledge of chemical reactions to improve
food quality and develop new products.
A good example of food chemistry in action
is the red pimento stufﬁng in olives. Chopped
pimentos (sweet red peppers) and sodium algi-
nate are mixed. This mixture is then added to a
solution of calcium chloride. The sodium alginate
reacts with the calcium chloride. Solid calcium
alginate forms, which causes the stream of
pimento mixture to form a gel instantly. The
gelled strip is then sliced thinly and stuffed into
the olives.
Food chemists work in universities, govern-
ment laboratories, and major food companies. To
become a food chemist, most undergraduates
take a food science degree with courses in chem-
istry. It is also possible to become a food chemist
with an undergraduate chemistry degree plus
experience in the food industry. Students can
specialize in food chemistry at the graduate level.
Make Career Connections
1. If you are interested in becoming a food
chemist, you can look for a summer or part-
time job in the food industry.
2. To ﬁnd out more about food science, search
for Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada's web
site and the Food Web web site. You can also
contact the Food Science department of a
university.
History
LINK
Jan Baptista van Helmont
(1577–1644) was a Flemish
physician who left medical
practice to devote himself
to the study of chemistry. He
used the mass balance in an
important experiment that laid
the foundations for the law
of conservation of mass.
He showed that a deﬁnite
quantity of sand could be fused
with excess alkali to form a
kind of glass. He also showed
that when this product was
treated with acid, it regenerat-
ed the original amount of sand
(silica). As well, Van Helmont is
famous for demonstrating the
existence of gases, which he
described as “aerial ﬂuids.”
Investigate on the Internet or
in the library to ﬁnd out how he
did this.
Balanced Chemical Equations
A balanced chemical equation reﬂects the law of conservation of mass.
This type of equation shows that there is the same number of each kind
of atom on both sides of the equation. Some skeleton equations are, by
coincidence, already balanced. For example, examine the reaction of
carbon with oxygen to form carbon dioxide, shown in Figure 4.1. In the
skeleton equation, one carbon atom and two oxygen atoms are on the left
side of the equation, and one carbon atom and two oxygen atoms are on
the right side of the equation.
++
C
++
O2
CO2
Figure 4.1
This skeleton equation is already balanced.
114 MHR • Unit 1  Matter and Chemical Bonding
Most skeleton equations, however, are not balanced, such as the one
showing the formation of sodium chloride. Examine Figure 4.2 to see
why. There is one sodium atom on each side of the equation, but there
are two chlorine atoms on the left side and only one chlorine atom on
the right side.
To begin to balance an equation, you can add numbers in front of the
appropriate formulas. The numbers that are placed in front of chemical
formulas are called coefﬁcients. They represent how many of each atom,
molecule, or formula unit take part in each reaction. For example, if you
add a coefﬁcient of 2 to NaCl in the equation in Figure 4.2, you indicate
that two formula units of NaCl are produced in the reaction. Is the equa-
tion balanced now? As you can see by examining Figure 4.3, it is not. The
chlorine atoms are balanced, but now there is one sodium atom on the
left side of the equation and two sodium atoms on the right side.
Na
+
Cl2
NaCl
Na
+
Cl2
2NaCl
Figure 4.2
of the reactants is greater than the mass of the product.
This skeleton equation is unbalanced. The mass
The equation is still unbalanced. The mass of
Figure 4.3
the product is now greater than the mass of the reactants.
Add a coefﬁcient of 2 to the sodium on the reactant side. As you can
see in Figure 4.4, the equation is now balanced. The mass of the products
is equal to the mass of the reactants. This balanced chemical equation
satisﬁes the law of conservation of mass.
2Na +
Cl2
2NaCl
Figure 4.4
The equation is now balanced according to the law of conservation of mass.
Why is it not acceptable to
balance the equation
Na + Cl2 → NaCl
by changing the formula of
NaCl to NaCl2? Would this not
satisfy the law of conservation
of mass? Write an explanation
in your notebook.
Chapter 4  Classifying Reactions: Chemicals in Balance • MHR 115
You cannot balance an equation by changing any of the chemical
formulas. The only way to balance a chemical equation is to put the
appropriate numerical coefﬁcient in front of each compound or element
in the equation.
Many skeleton equations are simple enough to balance by a back-and-
forth process of reasoning, as you just saw with the sodium chloride
reaction. Try balancing the equations in the Practice Problems that follow.
Practice Problems
5. Copy each skeleton equation into your notebook, and balance it.
(a) S(s) + O2(g) → SO2(g)
(b) P4(s) + O2(g) → P4O10(s)
(c) H2(g) + Cl2(g) → HCl(g)
(d) SO2(g) + H2O((cid:2)) → H2SO3(aq)
6. Indicate whether these equations are balanced. If they are not,
balance them.
(a) 4Fe(s) + 3O2(g) → 2Fe2O3(s)
(b) HgO(s) → Hg((cid:2)) + O2(g)
(c) H2O2(aq) → 2H2O((cid:2)) + O2(g)
(d) 2HCl(aq) + Na2SO3(aq) → 2NaCl(aq) + H2O((cid:2)) + SO2(g)
Steps for Balancing Chemical Equations
More complex chemical equations than the ones you have already tried
can be balanced by using a combination of inspection and trial and error.
Here, however, are some steps to follow.
Step 1 Write out the skeleton equation. Ensure that you have copied
all the chemical formulas correctly.
Step 2 Begin by balancing the atoms that occur in the largest number
on either side of the equation. Leave hydrogen, oxygen, and
other elements until later.
Step 3 Balance any polyatomic ions, such as sulfate, SO4
2−, that occur
on both sides of the chemical equation as an ion unit. That is,
do not split a sulfate ion into 1 sulfur atom and 4 oxygen
atoms. Balance this ion as one unit.
Step 4 Next, balance any hydrogen or oxygen atoms that occur in a
combined and uncombined state. For example, combined
oxygen might be in the form of CO2, while uncombined
oxygen occurs as O2.
Electronic Learning Partner
Step 5 Finally, balance any other element that occurs in its
Go to the Chemistry 11
Electronic Learning Partner for
some extra practice balancing
chemical equations.
uncombined state: for example, Na or Cl2.
Step 6 Check your answer. Count the number of each type of atom on
each side of the equation. Make sure that the coefﬁcients used
are whole numbers in their lowest terms.
Examine the following Sample Problem to see how these steps work.
116 MHR • Unit 1  Matter and Chemical Bonding
Sample Problem
Balancing Chemical Equations
Problem
Copper(II) nitrate reacts with potassium hydroxide to form
potassium nitrate and solid copper(II) hydroxide.
Balance the equation.
Cu(NO3)2(aq) + KOH(aq) → Cu(OH)2(s) + KNO3(aq)
What Is Required?
The atoms of each element on the left side of the equation should
equal the atoms of each element on the right side of the equation.
Plan Your Strategy
−, then OH−). Check to see
Balance the polyatomic ions ﬁrst (NO3
whether the equation is balanced. If not, balance the potassium
and copper ions. Check your equation again.
Act on Your Strategy
There are two NO3
− ions on the left, so put a 2 in front of KNO3.
Cu(NO3)2(aq) + KOH(aq) → Cu(OH)2(s) + 2KNO3(aq)
To balance the two OH− ions on the right, put a 2 in front of the KOH.
Cu(NO3)2(aq) + 2KOH(aq) → Cu(OH)2(s) + 2KNO3(aq)
Check to see that the copper and potassium ions are balanced. They
are, so the equation above is balanced.
Check Your Solution
Tally the number of each type of atom on each side of the equation.
Cu(NO3)2(aq) + 2KOH(aq) → Cu(OH)2(s) + 2KNO3(aq)
Left Side
Cu
−
NO3
K
OH−
1
2
2
2
Right Side
1
2
2
2
Practice Problems
7. Copy each chemical equation into your notebook, and balance it.
(a) SO2(g) + O2(g) → SO3(g)
(b) BaCl2(aq) + Na2SO4(aq) → NaCl(aq) + BaSO4(s)
8. When solid white phosphorus, P4 , is burned in air, it reacts with
oxygen to produce solid tetraphosphorus decoxide, P4O10. When
water is added to the P4O10, it reacts to form aqueous phosphoric
acid, H3PO4. Write and balance the chemical equations that repre-
sent these reactions.
Continued ...
Math
LINK
,
What does it mean when
a fraction is expressed in
lowest terms? The fraction  5
10
expressed in lowest terms,
is  1
. Similarly, the equation
2
4H2(g) + 2O2(g) → 4H2O((cid:2))
is balanced, but it can be
simpliﬁed by dividing all
the coefﬁcients by two.
2H2(g) + O2(g) → 2H2O((cid:2))
Write the balanced equation
6KClO3(s) → 6KCl(g) + 9O2(s) so
that the coefﬁcients are the
lowest possible whole num-
bers. Check that the equation
is still balanced.
Chapter 4  Classifying Reactions: Chemicals in Balance • MHR 117
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 117
9. Copy each chemical equation into your notebook, and balance it.
(a) As4S6(s) + O2(g) → As4O6(s) + SO2(g)
(b) Sc2O3(s) + H2O((cid:2)) → Sc(OH)3(s)
(c) C2H5OH((cid:2)) + O2(g) → CO2(g) + H2O((cid:2))
(d) C4H10(g) + O2(g) → CO(g) + H2O(g)
Section Wrap-up
In this section, you learned how to represent chemical reactions using
balanced chemical equations. Because there are so many different
chemical reactions, chemists have devised different classiﬁcations for
these reactions. In section 4.2, you will learn about ﬁve different types
of chemical reactions.
Section Review
1
2
3
4
MC
In your own words, explain what a chemical reaction is. Write
descriptions of four chemical reactions that you encounter every day.
C
Write a word equation, skeleton equation, and balanced equation
for each reaction.
(a) Sulfur dioxide gas reacts with oxygen gas to produce gaseous sulfur
trioxide.
(b) Metallic sodium reacts with liquid water to produce hydrogen gas
and aqueous sodium hydroxide.
(c) Copper metal reacts with an aqueous hydrogen nitrate solution to
produce aqueous copper(II) nitrate, nitrogen dioxide gas, and liquid
water.
The equation for the decomposition of hydrogen peroxide, H2O2
K/U
is H2O2(aq) → H2O((cid:2)) + O2(g). Explain why you cannot balance it by
writing it as H2O2(aq) → H2O((cid:2)) + O(g)
Balance the following chemical equations.
K/U
(a) Al(s) + O2(g) → Al2O3(s)
(b) Na2S2O3(aq) + I2(aq) → NaI(aq) + Na2S4O6(aq)
(c) Al(s) + Fe2O3(s) → Al2O3(s) + Fe(s)
(d) NH3(g) + O2(g) → NO(g) + H2O((cid:2))
(e) Na2O(s) + (NH4)2SO4(aq) → Na2SO4(aq) + H2O((cid:2)) + NH3(aq)
(f) C5H12((cid:2)) + O2(g) → CO2(g) + H2O(g)
5
I
A student places 0.58 g of iron and 1.600 g of copper(II) sulfate in
a reaction vessel. The reaction vessel has a mass of 40.32 g, and it
contains 100.00 g of  water. The aqueous copper sulfate and solid
iron react to form solid copper and aqueous iron(II) sulfate. After the
reaction, the reaction vessel plus the products have a mass of 142.5 g.
Explain the results. Then write a balanced chemical equation to
describe the reaction.
118 MHR • Unit 1  Matter and Chemical Bonding
Synthesis and
Decomposition Reactions
How are different kinds of compounds formed? In section 4.1, you
learned that they are formed by chemical reactions that you can describe
using balanced chemical equations. Just as there are different types of
compounds, there are different types of chemical reactions. In this
section, you will learn about ﬁve major classiﬁcations for chemical
reactions. You will use your understanding of chemical formulas and
chemical equations to predict products for each class of reaction.
Why Classify?
People use classiﬁcations all the time. For example, many types of wild
mushrooms are edible, but many others are poisonous—even deadly! How
can you tell which is which? Poisonous and deadly mushrooms have
characteristics that distinguish them from edible ones, such as odour,
colour, habitat, and shape of roots. It is not always easy to distinguish
one type of mushroom from another; the only visible difference may be
the colour of the mushroom’s spores. Therefore, you should never try to
eat any wild mushrooms without an expert’s advice.
Examine Figure 4.5. Which mushroom looks more appetizing to you?
An expert will always be able to distinguish an edible mushroom from a
poisonous mushroom based on the characteristics that have been used to
classify each type. By classifying, they can predict the effects of eating any
wild mushroom.
4.2
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
distinguish between
synthesis, decomposition,
and combustion reactions
(cid:2) write balanced chemical
equations to represent
synthesis, decomposition,
and combustion reactions
predict the products of
chemical reactions
demonstrate an under-
standing of the relationship
between the type of
chemical reaction and the
nature of the reactants
communicate your under-
standing of the following
terms: synthesis reaction,
decomposition reaction,
combustion reaction,
incomplete combustion
A
The mushroom on the left, called a
Figure 4.5
chanterelle, is edible and very tasty. The mushroom
on the right is called a death cap. It is extremely
poisonous.
B
Chapter 4  Classifying Reactions: Chemicals in Balance • MHR 119
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
In the same way, you can recognize similarities between chemical
reactions and the types of reactants that tend to undergo different types
of reactions. With this knowledge, you can predict what will happen
when one, two, or more substances react. In this section, you will often
see chemical reactions without the subscripts showing the states of matter.
They are omitted deliberately because, in most cases, you are not yet in a
position to predict the states of the products.
Synthesis Reactions
In a synthesis reaction, two or more elements or compounds combine to
form a new substance. Synthesis reactions are also known as combination
or formation reactions. A general equation for a synthesis reaction is
A + B → C
In a simple synthesis reaction, one element reacts with one or more other
elements to form a compound. Two, three, four, or more elements may
react to form a single product, although synthesis reactions involving four
or more reactants are extremely rare. Why do you think this is so? When
two elements react together, the reaction is almost always a synthesis
reaction because the product is almost always a single compound. There
are several types of synthesis reactions. Recognizing the patterns of the
various types of reactions will help you to predict whether substances
will take part in a synthesis reaction.
When a metal or a non-metal element reacts with oxygen, the product
is an oxide. Figure 4.6 shows a familiar example, in which iron reacts
with oxygen according to the following equation:
3Fe(s) + O2(g) → Fe2O3(s)
The iron in this car
Figure 4.6
undergoes a synthesis reaction
with the oxygen in the air. Iron(III)
oxide, also known as rust, is
formed.
Two other examples of this type of reaction are:
2H2(g) + O2(g) → 2H2O(g)
2Mg(s) + O2(g) → 2MgO(s)
A second type of synthesis reaction involves the reaction of a metal and
a non-metal to form a binary compound. One example is the reaction of
potassium with chlorine.
2K(s) + Cl2(g) → 2KCl(s)
120 MHR • Unit 1  Matter and Chemical Bonding
History
LINK
Today we have sophisticated
lab equipment to help us ana-
lyze the products of reactions.
In the past, when such equip-
ment was not available,
chemists sometimes jeopard-
ized their safety and health to
determine the products of the
reactions they studied. Sir
Humphry Davy (1778–1829),
a contributor to many areas
of chemistry, thought nothing
of inhaling the gaseous prod-
ucts of the chemical reactions
that he carried out. He tried
to breathe pure CO2, then
known as ﬁxed air. He nearly
suffocated himself by breath-
ing hydrogen. In 1800, Davy
inhaled dinitrogen monoxide,
N2O, otherwise known as
nitrous oxide, and discovered
its anaesthetic properties.
What is nitrous oxide used
for today?
As you begin learning about
different types of chemical
reactions, keep a separate list
of each type of reaction. Add
to the list as you encounter
new reactions.
Synthesis Reactions Involving Compounds
In the previous two types of synthesis reactions, two elements reacted to
form one product. There are many synthesis reactions in which one or
more compounds are the reactants. For the purpose of this course, howev-
er, we will deal only with the two speciﬁc types of synthesis reactions
involving compounds that you should recognize: oxides and water.
When a non-metallic oxide reacts with water, the product is an
acid. You will learn more about acids and the rules for naming them in
Chapter 10. The acids that form when non-metallic oxides and water react
are composed of hydrogen cations and polyatomic anions containing
oxygen and a non-metal. For example, one contributor to acid rain is
hydrogen sulfate (sulfuric acid), H2SO4, which forms when sulfur trioxide
reacts with water. The sulfur trioxide comes from sources such as
industrial plants that emit the gas as a byproduct of burning fossil fuels,
as shown in Figure 4.7.
SO3(g) + H2O((cid:2)) → H2SO4(aq)
Figure 4.7
Sulfuric acid is formed in a synthesis reaction.
Sulfur trioxide, emitted by this factory, reacts with the water in the air.
Conversely, when a metallic oxide reacts with water, the product is a
metal hydroxide. Metal hydroxides belong to a group of compounds called
bases. You will learn more about bases in Chapter 10. For example, when
calcium oxide reacts with water, it forms calcium hydroxide, Ca(OH)2.
Calcium oxide is also called lime. It can be added to lakes to counteract
the effects of acid precipitation.
CaO(s) + H2O((cid:2)) → Ca(OH)2(aq)
Sometimes it is difﬁcult to predict the product of a synthesis reaction.
The only way to really know the product of a reaction is to carry out the
reaction and then isolate and identify the product. For example, carbon
can react with oxygen to form either carbon monoxide or carbon dioxide.
Therefore, if all you know is that your reactants are carbon and oxygen,
you cannot predict with certainty which compound will form. You can
only give options.
C(s) + O2(g) → CO2(g)
2C(s) + O2(g) → 2CO(g)
You would need to analyze the products of the reaction by experiment to
determine which compound was formed.
Chapter 4  Classifying Reactions: Chemicals in Balance • MHR 121
Try predicting the products of synthesis reactions in the following
Practice Problems.
Practice Problems
10. Copy the following synthesis reactions into your notebook. Predict
the product of each reaction. Then balance each chemical equation.
(a) K + Br2 →
(b) H2 + Cl2 →
(c) Ca + Cl2 →
(d) Li + O2 →
11. Copy the following synthesis reactions into your notebook. For
each set of reactants, write the equations that represent the possible
products.
(a) Fe + O2 →
(suggest two different synthesis reactions)
(b) V + O2 →
(suggest four different synthesis reactions)
(c) Co + Cl2 →
(suggest two different synthesis reactions)
(d) Ti + O2 →
(suggest three different synthesis reactions)
12. Copy the following equations into your notebook. Write the product
of each reaction. Then balance each chemical equation.
(a) K2O + H2O →
(b) MgO + H2O →
(c) SO2 + H2O →
13. Ammonia gas and hydrogen chloride gas react to form a solid
compound. Predict what the solid compound is. Then write a
balanced chemical equation.
Decomposition Reactions
In a decomposition reaction, a compound breaks down into elements or
other compounds. Therefore, a decomposition reaction is the opposite of
a synthesis reaction. A general formula for a decomposition reaction is:
C → A + B
The substances that are produced in a decomposition reaction can be
elements or compounds. In the simplest type of decomposition reaction,
a compound breaks down into its component elements. One example is
the decomposition of water into hydrogen and oxygen. This reaction
occurs when electricity is passed through water. Figure 4.8 shows an
apparatus set up for the decomposition of water.
2H2O → 2H2 + O2
More complex decomposition reactions occur when compounds break
down into other compounds. An example of this type of reaction is
shown in Figure 4.9. The photograph shows the explosive decomposition
of ammonium nitrate.
As electricity passes
Figure 4.8
through the water, it decomposes
to hydrogen and oxygen gas.
122 MHR • Unit 1  Matter and Chemical Bonding
When ammonium nitrate is heated to a high temperature, it forms
dinitrogen monoxide and water according to the following balanced
equation:
NH4NO3(s) → N2O(g) + 2H2O(g)
Try predicting the products of the decomposition reactions in the
following Practice Problems.
Practice Problems
14. Mercury(II) oxide, or mercuric oxide, is a bright red powder. It
decomposes on heating. What are the products of the decomposition
of HgO?
15. What are the products of the following decomposition reactions?
Predict the products. Then write a balanced equation for each
reaction.
(a) HI →
(b) Ag2O →
(c) AlCl3 →
(d) MgO →
16. Calcium carbonate decomposes into calcium oxide and carbon
dioxide when it is heated. Based on this information, predict the
products of the following decomposition reactions.
(a) MgCO3 →
(b) CuCO3 →
Combustion Reactions
Combustion reactions form an important class of chemical reactions.
The combustion of fuel — wood, fossil fuel, peat, or dung — has,
throughout history, heated and lit our homes and cooked our food.
The energy produced by combustion reactions moves our airplanes,
trains, trucks, and cars.
A complete combustion reaction is the reaction of a compound or
element with O2 to form the most common oxides of the elements that
make up the compound. For example, a carbon-containing compound
undergoes combustion to form carbon dioxide, CO2. A sulfur-contain-
ing compound reacts with oxygen to form sulfur dioxide, SO2.
Combustion reactions are usually accompanied by the production
of light and heat. In the case of carbon-containing compounds,
complete combustion results in the formation of, among other things,
carbon dioxide. For example, methane, CH4, the primary constituent
of natural gas, undergoes complete combustion to form carbon dioxide,
(the most common oxide of carbon), as well as water. This combustion
reaction is represented by the following equation:
CH4(g) + 2O2(g) → CO2(g) + 2H2O(g)
The combustion of methane, shown in Figure 4.10, leads to the formation
of carbon dioxide and water.
The complete combustion of any compound that contains carbon,
hydrogen, and oxygen (such as ethanol, C2H5OH) produces carbon
dioxide and water.
At high temperatures,
Figure 4.9
ammonium nitrate explodes,
decomposing into dinitrogen
monoxide and water.
This photo shows
Figure 4.10
the combustion of methane in a
laboratory burner.
Chapter 4  Classifying Reactions: Chemicals in Balance • MHR 123
Compounds that contain elements other than carbon also undergo
complete combustion to form stable oxides. For instance, sulfur-contain-
ing compounds undergo combustion to form sulfur dioxide, SO2, a
precursor to acid rain. Complete combustion reactions are often also
synthesis reactions. Metals, such as magnesium, undergo combustion
to form their most stable oxide, as shown in Figure 4.11.
2Mg(s) + O2(g) → 2MgO(s)
Magnesium metal burns in oxygen. The smoke
Figure 4.11
and ash that are produced in this combustion reaction are
magnesium oxide.
In the absence of sufﬁcient oxygen, carbon-containing compounds under-
go incomplete combustion, leading to the formation of carbon monoxide,
CO, and water. Carbon monoxide is a deadly gas. You should always make
sure that sufﬁcient oxygen is present in your indoor environment for your
gas furnace, gas stove, or ﬁreplace.
Try the following problems to practise balancing combustion
reactions.
Practice Problems
17. The alcohol lamps that are used in some science labs are often
fuelled with methanol, CH3OH. Write the balanced chemical
equation for the complete combustion of methanol.
18. Gasoline is a mixture of compounds containing hydrogen and
carbon, such as octane, C8H18. Write the balanced chemical
equation for the complete combustion of C8H18.
19. Acetone, C3H6O , is often contained in nail polish remover. Write the
balanced chemical equation for the complete combustion of acetone.
20. Kerosene consists of a mixture of hydrocarbons. It has many uses
including jet fuel and rocket fuel. It is also used as a fuel for hurri-
cane lamps. If we represent kerosene as C16H34 , write a balanced
chemical equation for the complete combustion of kerosene.
Copy the following skeleton
equation for the combustion
of pentane, C5H12, into your
notebook and balance it.
C5H12 + O2 → CO2 + H2O
If it took you a long time to
balance this equation, chances
are that you did not use the
quickest method. Try balancing
carbon ﬁrst, hydrogen second,
and ﬁnally oxygen. What is the
advantage of leaving O2 until
the end? Would this method
work for incomplete combus-
tion reactions? Would this
method work if the “fuel”
contained oxygen in addition
to C and H? Now try balancing
the chemical equation for the
combustion of heptane (C7H16)
and the combustion of rubbing
alcohol, isopropanol (C3H8O).
124 MHR • Unit 1  Matter and Chemical Bonding
Section Wrap-up
In this section, you learned about three major types of reactions: synthe-
sis, decomposition, and combustion reactions. Using your knowledge
about these types of reactions, you learned how to predict the products
of various reactants. In section 5.3, you will increase your understanding
of chemical reactions even further, learning about two major types of
chemical reactions. As well, you will observe various chemical reactions
in three investigations.
Section Review
1
K/U
Write the product for each synthesis reaction. Balance the
chemical equation.
(a) Be + O2 →
(b) Li + Cl2 →
(c) Mg + N2 →
(d) Al + Br2 →
(e) K + O2 →
2
K/U
Write the products for each decomposition reaction. Balance the
chemical equation.
(a) K2O →
(b) CuO →
(c) H2O →
(d) Ni2O3 →
(e) Ag2O →
3
C
Write a balanced chemical equation for each of the following word
equations. Classify each reaction.
(a) With heating, solid tin(IV) hydroxide produces solid tin(IV) oxide
and water vapour.
(b) Chlorine gas reacts with crystals of iodine to form iodine trichloride.
4
5
6
K/U
Write a balanced chemical equation for the combustion of
butanol, C4H9OH.
I
A red compound was heated, and the two products were collected.
The gaseous product caused a glowing splint to burn brightly. The
other product was a shiny pure metal, which was a liquid at room
temperature. Write the most likely reaction that would explain these
results. Classify the reaction. Hint: Remember that the periodic table
identiﬁes the most common valences.
MC
Explain why gaseous nitrogen oxides emitted by automobiles and
industries contribute to acid rain. Write balanced chemical reactions
to back up your ideas. You may need to look up chemical formulas for
your products.
Unit Project Prep
Before you design your
Chemistry Newsletter at the
end of Unit 1, consider that
fuels are composed of com-
pounds containing hydrogen
and carbon (hydrocarbons).
What kind of reaction have you
seen in this section that
involves those kinds of com-
pounds? What type of warning
would you expect to see on a
container of lawnmower fuel?
How is the warning related to
the types of reaction that
involve hydrocarbons?
Chapter 4  Classifying Reactions: Chemicals in Balance • MHR 125
4.3
Single Displacement and
Double Displacement Reactions
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
distinguish between
synthesis, decomposition,
combustion, single
displacement, and double
displacement reactions
(cid:2) write balanced chemical
equations to represent
single displacement and
double displacement
reactions
predict the products of
chemical reactions and test
your predictions through
experimentation
demonstrate an understand-
ing of the relationship
between the type of
chemical reaction and the
nature of the reactants
investigate, through experi-
mentation, the reactivity of
different metals to produce
an activity series
communicate your under-
standing of the following
terms: single displacement
reaction, activity series,
double displacement
reaction, precipitate,
neutralization reactions
In section 4.2, you learned about three different types of chemical reactions.
In section 4.3, you will learn about two more types of reactions. You will
learn how performing these reactions can help you make inferences about
the properties of the elements and compounds involved.
Single Displacement Reactions
In a single displacement reaction, one element in a compound is
displaced (or replaced) by another element. Two general reactions
represent two different types of single displacement reactions. One type
involves a metal replacing a metal cation in a compound, as follows:
A + BC → AC + B
For example, Zn(s) + Fe(NO3)2(aq) → Zn(NO3)2(aq) + Fe2(s)
The second type of single displacement reaction involves a non-metal
(usually a halogen) replacing an anion in a compound, as follows:
For example, Cl2(g) + CaBr2(aq) → CaCl2(aq) + Br2((cid:2))
DE + F → DF + E
Single Displacement Reactions and the Metal Activity Series
Most single displacement reactions involve one metal displacing another
metal from a compound. In the following equation, magnesium metal
replaces the zinc in ZnCl2, thereby liberating zinc as the free metal.
Mg(s) + ZnCl2(aq) → MgCl2(aq) + Zn(s)
The following three reactions illustrate the various types of single
displacement reactions involving metals:
1. Cu(s) + 2AgNO3(aq) → Cu(NO3)2(aq) + 2Ag(s)
In this reaction, one metal replaces another metal in an ionic
compound. That is, copper replaces silver in AgNO3. Because of
the +2 charge on the copper ion, it requires two nitrate ions to
balance its charge.
2. Mg(s) + 2HCl(aq) → MgCl2(aq) + H2(g)
In this reaction, magnesium metal replaces hydrogen from
hydrochloric acid, HCl(aq). Since hydrogen is diatomic, it is “liberated”
in the form of H2. This reaction is similar to reaction 1 if
• you treat hydrochloric acid as an ionic compound (which it techni-
cally is not), and if
• you treat hydrogen as a metal (also, technically, not the case).
3. 2Na(s) + 2H2O((cid:2)) → 2NaOH(aq) + H2(g)
Sodium metal displaces hydrogen from water in this reaction. Again,
since hydrogen is diatomic, it is produced as H2. As above, you can
understand this reaction better if
• you treat hydrogen as a metal, and if
• you treat water as an ionic compound, H+(OH−).
126 MHR • Unit 1  Matter and Chemical Bonding
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
All of the reactions just described follow the original general example of a
single displacement reaction:
A + BC → AC + B
Figures 4.12 and 4.13 show two examples of single displacement reactions.
When analyzing single displacement reactions, use the following
guidelines:
• Treat hydrogen as a metal.
• Treat acids, such as HCl, as ionic compounds of the form H+Cl−.
(Treat sulfuric acid, H2SO4, as H+H+SO4
2−).
• Treat water as ionic, with the formula H+(OH−).
Lithium metal
Figure 4.12
reacts violently with water in a
single displacement reaction.
Lithium must be stored under
kerosene or oil to avoid reaction
with atmospheric moisture,
or oxygen.
When an iron nail is placed in a solution of copper(II) sulfate, a single
Figure 4.13
displacement reaction takes place.
Fe(s) + CuSO4(aq) → FeSO4(aq) + Cu(s)
Notice the formation of copper metal on the nail.
Practice Problems
21. Each of the following incomplete equations represents a single
displacement reaction. Copy each equation into your notebook,
and write the products. Balance each chemical equation. When in
doubt, use the most common valence.
(a) Ca + H2O →
(b) Zn + Pb(NO3)2 → (f) Mg + Pt(OH)4 →
(c) Al + HCl →
(d) Cu + AgNO3 →
(g) Ba + FeCl2 →
(h) Fe + Co(ClO3)2 →
(e) Pb + H2SO4 →
Through experimentation, chemists have ranked the relative reactivity of
the metals, including hydrogen (in acids and in water), in an activity series.
The reactive metals, such as potassium, are at the top of the activity series.
The unreactive metals, such as gold, are at the bottom. In Investigation 4-A,
you will develop an activity series using single displacement reactions.
Chapter 4  Classifying Reactions: Chemicals in Balance • MHR 127
MICROSCALE
S K I L L   F O C U S
Predicting
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
Creating an Activity
Series of Metals
Certain metals, such as silver and gold, are
extremely unreactive, while sodium is so reactive
that it will react with water. Zinc is unreactive
with water. It will, however, react with acid. Why
will magnesium metal react with copper sulfate
solution, while copper metal will not react with
aqueous magnesium sulfate? In Chapter 3, you
learned that an alloy is a solution of two or more
metals. Steel is an alloy that contains mostly iron.
Is its reactivity different from iron’s reactivity?
Question
How can you rank the metals, including hydro-
gen, in terms of their reactivity? Is the reactivity
of an alloy very different from the reactivity of its
major component?
Predictions
Based on what you learned in Chapter 3 about
periodic trends, make predictions about the
relative reactivity of copper, iron, magnesium,
zinc, and tin. Explain your reasons for these
predictions.
What do you know about alloys such as
bronze, brass, and steel? Based on what you
know, make a prediction about whether steel
will be more or less reactive than iron, its
main component.
Materials
well plate(s): at least a 6 × 8 matrix
wash bottle with distilled water
5 test tubes
test tube rack
dilute HCl(aq)
6 small pieces each of copper, iron, magnesium,
zinc, tin, steel, galvanized steel, stainless steel
dropper bottles of dilute solutions of CuSO4,
FeSO4, MgSO4, ZnSO4, SnCl2
Cation or
solution
Metal
HCI
H2O
2+Cu
2+Fe
2+Mg
2+Sn
Cu
Mg
Sn
Zn
Fe
steel
galvanized steel
stainless steel
128 MHR • Unit 1  Matter and Chemical Bonding
Safety Precautions
Handle the hydrochloric acid solution with care.
It is corrosive. Wipe up any spills with copious
amounts of water, and inform your teacher.
Procedure
1. Place your well plate(s) on a white sheet of
paper. Label them according to the matrix on
the previous page.
2. Place a rice-grain-sized piece of each metal in
the appropriate well. Record the appearance
of each metal.
3. Put enough drops of the appropriate solution
to completely cover the piece of metal.
4. Record any changes in appearance due to a
chemical reaction. In reactions of metal with
acid, look carefully for the formation of bub-
bles. If you are unsure about any observation,
repeat the experiment in a small test tube.
This will allow you to better observe the
reaction.
5. If you believe that a reaction has occurred,
write “r” on the matrix. If you believe
that no reaction has occurred, write “nr” on
the matrix.
6. Dispose of the solutions in the waste
beaker supplied by your teacher. Do not
pour anything down the drain.
Analysis
1. For any reactions that occurred, write the
corresponding single displacement reaction.
2. (a) What was the most reactive metal that you
tested?
(b) What was the least reactive metal that you
tested?
3. Look at Figure 4.12. Lithium reacts violently
with water to form aqueous lithium hydroxide
and hydrogen gas. Do you expect lithium to
react with hydrochloric acid?
(a) Write the balanced chemical equation for
this reaction.
(b) Is lithium more or less reactive than
magnesium?
4. What evidence do you have that hydrogen in
hydrochloric acid is different from hydrogen
in water?
Conclusion
5. (a) Write the activity series corresponding to
your observations. Include hydrogen in the
form of water and also as an ion (H+). Do
not include the alloys.
(b) How did the reactivity of the iron compare
with the reactivity of the various types
of steel?
6. How do you think an activity series for metal
would help you predict whether or not a
single displacement reaction will occur? Use
examples to help you explain your answer.
7. You have learned that an alloy is a homoge-
neous mixture (solution) of two or more
metals. Steel consists of mostly iron.
(a) Which type of steel appeared to be the most
reactive? Which type was the least reactive?
Did you notice any differences?
(b) What other components make up steel,
galvanized steel, and stainless steel?
Application
8. For what applications are the various types of
steel used? Why would you not use iron for
these applications?
Chapter 4  Classifying Reactions: Chemicals in Balance • MHR 129
PROBLEM TIP
A single displacement reaction
always favours the production
of the less reactive metal. In
other words, the “free” metal
that is formed from the com-
pound must always be less
reactive than the metal that
displaced it. For example,
2AgNO3(aq) + Cu(s) →
Cu(NO3)2(aq) + 2Ag(s)
Silver metal is more stable
than copper metal. In other
words, silver is below copper
in the activity series.
The Metal Activity Series
As you can see in Table 4.2, the more reactive metals are at the top of the
activity series. The less reactive metals are at the bottom. A reactive metal
will displace or replace any metal in a compound that is below it in the
activity series. Metals from lithium to sodium will displace hydrogen as a
gas from water. Metals from magnesium to lead will displace hydrogen as
a gas only from acids. Copper, mercury, silver, and gold will not displace
hydrogen from acids.
Table 4.2 Activity Series of Metals
Metal
lithium
potassium
barium
calcium
sodium
magnesium
aluminum
zinc
chromium
iron
cadmium
cobalt
nickel
tin
lead
hydrogen
copper
mercury
silver
platinum
gold
Displaces hydrogen
from acids
Displaces hydrogen
from cold water
Most Reactive
Least Reactive
C H E M
FA C T
Most metals that we use
in everyday life are actually
alloys. An alloy is a solid
solution of one metal (or non-
metal) in another metal. For
example, steel is an alloy of
iron. Steel has many uses, from
construction to the automobile
industry. If the iron were not
alloyed with other elements,
it would not have the physical
and chemical properties
required, such as hardness
and corrosion resistance.
You can use the activity series to help you predict the products of the
reaction of a metal and a metal-containing compound. For example,
consider the following incomplete equation.
Fe(s) + CuSO4(aq) →
You can see from the activity series that iron is above copper. This means
that iron is more reactive than copper. This reaction will proceed.
Fe(s) + CuSO4(aq) → FeSO4(aq) + Cu(s)
The copper metal produced is less reactive than iron metal. What about
the following incomplete reaction between silver and calcium chloride?
Ag(s) + CaCl2(aq) →
Silver is below calcium in the activity series, meaning that it is less
reactive. There would be no reaction between these two substances.
Predict whether the substances in the following Practice Problem will react.
130 MHR • Unit 1  Matter and Chemical Bonding
Based on what you know
about the electronegativity and
electron afﬁnity for the halo-
gens, explain the organization
of the halogen activity series.
Practice Problems
22. Using the activity series, write a balanced chemical equation for
each single displacement reaction. If you predict that there will be
no reaction, write “NR.”
(a) Cu + MgSO4 →
(b) Zn + FeCl2 →
(c) K + H2O →
(d) Al + H2SO4 →
(e) Fe + Al2(SO4)3 →
(f) Ni + NiCl2 →
(g) Zn + H2SO4 →
(h) Mg + SnCl2 →
Single Displacement Reactions Involving Halogens
Non-metals, typically halogens, can also take part in single displacement
reactions. For example, molecular chlorine can replace bromine from KBr,
an ionic compound, producing bromine and potassium chloride.
Cl2(g) + 2KBr(aq) → 2KCl(aq) + Br2((cid:2))
The activity series for halogens directly mirrors the position of
halogens in the periodic table. It can be shown simply in the following
way. Fluorine is the most reactive, and iodine is the least reactive.
F>Cl>Br>I
In the same way as you used the activity series for metals, you can use the
activity series for halogens to predict whether substances will undergo a
single displacement reaction. For example, ﬂuorine is above chlorine in
the activity series. So, given the reactants ﬂuorine and sodium chloride,
you can predict that the following reaction will occur:
F2(g) + 2NaCl(aq) → 2NaF(aq) + Cl2(aq)
On the other hand, iodine is below bromine in the activity series. So,
given the reactants iodine and calcium bromide, you can predict that no
reaction will occur.
I2(aq) + CaBr2(aq) → NR
Try the following problems to practise using the metal and halogen
activity series to predict whether reactions will occur.
Practice Problems
23. Using the activity series for halogens, write a balanced chemical
equation for each single displacement reaction. If you predict that
there will be no reaction, write “NR”.
(a) Br2 + KCl →
(b) Cl2 + NaI →
24. Using the appropriate activity series, write a balanced chemical
equation for each single displacement reaction. If you predict that
there will be no reaction, write “NR”.
(a) Pb + HCl →
(b) KI + Br2 →
(c) KF + Cl2 →
(d) Ca + H2O →
(e) MgSO4 + Zn →
(f) Ni + H2SO4 →
Chapter 4  Classifying Reactions: Chemicals in Balance • MHR 131
Double Displacement Reactions
A double displacement reaction involves the exchange of cations between
two ionic compounds, usually in aqueous (water) solution. A double
displacement reaction is also known as a double replacement reaction.
A general equation for a double displacement reaction is:
AB + CD → CB + AD
In this equation, A and C are cations and B and D are anions.
Consider the following situation. You have two unlabelled beakers.
One contains distilled water, and the other contains salt water. The two
samples look virtually identical. How can you quickly determine which
is the salt water without tasting them? (You should never taste anything
in a chemistry laboratory.)
A common test for the presence of chloride ions in water is the
addition of a few drops of silver nitrate solution. The formation of a
white solid indicates the presence of chloride ions, as you can see in
Figure 4.14.
A double displacement reaction has occurred. That is, the cations
in the reactants have essentially changed places. This switch is
modelled in Figure 4.15.
When a few drops
Figure 4.14
of silver nitrate, AgNO3, are
added to a sample of salt water,
NaCl(aq), a white precipitate of
silver chloride, AgCl, is formed.
NaCl(aq) + AgNO3(aq) → AgCl(s) + NaNO3(aq)
Figure 4.15
and chloride ions come into contact, they form a solid.
Sodium chloride and silver nitrate form ions in solution. When silver ions
Since silver chloride is virtually insoluble in water, it forms a solid
compound, or precipitate.
Double displacement reactions tend to occur in aqueous solution. Not
all ionic compounds, however, will react with one another in this way.
You can tell that a double displacement reaction has taken place in the
following cases:
• a solid (precipitate) forms
• a gas is produced
• some double displacement reactions also form a molecular compound,
such as water. It is hard to tell when water is formed, because often the
reaction takes place in water.
Double Displacement Reactions that Form a Precipitate
A precipitate is a solid that separates from a solution as the result of a
chemical reaction. You will learn more about precipitates in Chapter 9.
Many double displacement reactions involve the formation of a precipitate.
Examine the double displacement reaction that occurs when aqueous
solutions of barium chloride and potassium sulfate are mixed. A white
precipitate is immediately formed. The equation for the reaction is
BaCl2(aq) + K2SO4(aq) → BaSO4(s) + 2KCl(aq)
132 MHR • Unit 1  Matter and Chemical Bonding
You should think about two questions when analyzing a double
displacement reaction.
1. How do we determine the products?
2. Which of the products — if any — will precipitate out of solution?
Barium chloride solution contains Ba2+ ions and Cl− ions. Potassium
sulfate solution contains K+ and SO4
2− ions. When they are mixed, the
Ba2+ ions come in contact with SO4
2− ions. Because barium sulfate is
insoluble, the product comes out of solution as a solid. The K+ ions and
Cl− ions also come into contact with each other, but potassium chloride is
soluble, so these ions stay in solution.
How do you know that the precipitate is BaSO4 and not KCl? More
generally, how can you predict whether a precipitate will be formed in a
double displacement reaction? In this chapter, you will be given informa-
tion on solubility as you need it. You will learn more about how to
predict whether a compound is soluble or not in Chapter 9. Barium
sulfate, BaSO4 is not soluble in water, while potassium chloride, KCl,
is. Therefore, a reaction will take place and barium sulfate will be the
precipitate.
In summary, to determine the products and their physical states in a
double displacement reaction, you must ﬁrst “deconstruct” the reactants.
Then switch the cations, and “reconstruct” the products using proper
chemical formulas. You should then balance the chemical equation. You
will be given information to determine which of the products, if any, will
form a precipitate. Finally, you can write the physical state — (s) or (aq) —
of each product and balance the equation.
Given the following reactants, how would you predict the products
of the reaction and their state? Note that many hydroxide compounds,
including magnesium hydroxide, are insoluble. Potassium cations form
soluble substances with all anions.
MgCl2(aq) + KOH(aq) →
Examine ﬁgure 4.16 to see how to separate the compounds into ions, Mg2+
and Cl−; K+ and OH−. Then switch the anions and write chemical formu-
las for the new compounds. Check to ensure your equation is balanced.
1
MgCl2
+
2KOH
→ Mg(OH)2(s)
+
2KCl(aq)
Mg2+
Cl−
K+
OH−
2
Mg2+
OH−
K+
Cl−
Figure 4.16
Predicting a double displacement reaction.
What happens if both products are soluble ionic compounds? Both
ionic compounds will be ions dissolved in the water. If neither product
precipitates out, no reaction occurs. Try the following problem to practise
writing the products of double displacement reactions and predicting
their states.
Chapter 4  Classifying Reactions: Chemicals in Balance • MHR 133
PROBLEM TIP
When aqueous solutions of
barium chloride and sodium
chromate are mixed, a precipi-
tate is formed. The balanced
equation for this double
replacement reaction is
BaCl2(aq) + Na2CrO4(aq) →
BaCrO4(?) + 2NaCl(?)
What is the precipitate? From
experience, you know that
NaCl is water soluble. So,
by process of elimination, the
precipitate must be barium
chromate, BaCrO4(s).
Practice Problems
25. Write a balanced chemical equation for each double displacement
reaction. Write “NR” if you predict that no reaction will occur. Note
that K+, Na+, and Li+ ions form soluble compounds with all anions.
All nitrate compounds are soluble. Sulfate compounds with Ca2+,
Sr2+, Ba2+, Ra2+, and Pb2+ are insoluble, but most other sulfate
compounds are soluble. Lead(II) iodide is insoluble.
(a) Pb(NO3)2(aq) + KI(aq) →
(b) FeCl3(aq) + Na2SO4(aq) →
(c) NaNO3(aq) + MgSO4(aq) →
(d) Ba(NO3)2(aq) + MgSO4(aq) →
Double Displacement Reactions That Produce a Gas
In certain cases, you know that a double displacement reaction has
occurred because a gas is produced. The gas is formed when one of the
products of the double displacement reaction decomposes to give water
and a gas.
Consider the reaction of aqueous sodium carbonate (washing soda)
and hydrochloric acid, shown in Figure 4.17. Hydrochloric acid is sold at
the hardware store under the common name “muriatic acid.” If you carry
out this reaction, you immediately see the formation of carbon dioxide
gas. The ﬁrst reaction that takes place is a double displacement reaction.
Determine the products in the following way. Separate the reactions into
ions, and switch the anions. Write chemical formulas for the products
and balance the equation.
Na2CO3(aq) + 2HCl(aq) → 2NaCl(aq) +
H2CO3(aq)
But this isn’t all that is happening! The carbonic acid, H2CO3 , is unstable
and subsequently decomposes to carbon dioxide and water.
H2CO3(aq)
Overall, we can write this two-step reaction as follows:
→ H2O((cid:2)) + CO2(g)
Na2CO3(aq) + 2HCl(aq) → 2NaCl(aq) + H2O((cid:2)) + CO2(g)
Another double displacement reaction results in the formation of
gaseous ammonia, NH3. Ammonia, a pungent-smelling gas, is an impor-
tant industrial chemical. It is used as a fertilizer and, when dissolved in
water, as a household cleaner. Ammonium hydroxide is formed in the
reaction below
NH4Cl(aq) + NaOH(aq) →
NH4OH(aq)
+ NaCl(aq)
The ammonium hydroxide, NH4OH , immediately decomposes to give
ammonia and water, according to the equation
NH4OH(aq)
Combining these equations gives
→ NH3(g) + H2O((cid:2))
NH4Cl(aq) + NaOH(aq) → NaCl(aq) + NH3(g) + H2O((cid:2))
This example illustrates the formation of a gas by an initial double
displacement reaction, followed by the decomposition of one of the
products to a gas and water.
The reaction of
Figure 4.17
hydrochloric acid and sodium
carbonate, Na2CO3 (washing
soda), is a double displacement
reaction. This reaction initially
forms sodium chloride and car-
bonic acid, H2CO3. The carbonic
acid spontaneously decomposes
to water and carbon dioxide gas.
134 MHR • Unit 1  Matter and Chemical Bonding
Practice Problems
26. (a) When sodium sulﬁte, Na2SO3(aq), is mixed with hydrogen chloride,
HCl(aq) (hydrochloric acid), the odour of sulfur dioxide gas, SO2(g),
is detected. Write the balanced chemical equation for this reaction.
(b) Hydrogen sulﬁde, H2S, is a poisonous gas that has the odour of
rotten eggs. When aqueous calcium sulﬁde, CaS, is reacted with
sulfuric acid, a rotten egg smell is detected. Write the balanced
chemical equation for this reaction.
C H E M
FA C T
To non-chemists, the term
“salt” refers solely to sodium
chloride. To chemists, “salt” is
a generic term that describes
an ionic compound with an
anion that is not OH− or O2−
and with a cation that is not
H+. Sodium chloride, NaCl, and
potassium ﬂuoride, KF, are
two examples.
The Formation of Water in a Neutralization Reaction
Neutralization reactions are a special type of double displacement reaction
that produces water. Neutralization involves the reaction of an acid with
a base to form water and an ionic compound. You will learn more about
neutralization reactions in Chapter 10. For example, the neutralization of
hydrogen nitrate (nitric acid) with sodium hydroxide (a base) is a double
displacement reaction.
HNO3(aq) + NaOH(aq) → NaNO3(aq) + H2O((cid:2))
Often neutralization reactions produce no precipitate or gas. In Chapter 10,
you will learn how chemists recognize when neutralization reactions
take place.
Practice Problems
27. Write the balanced chemical equation for each neutralization
reaction.
(a) HCl(aq) + LiOH(aq) →
(b) HClO4(aq) + Ca(OH)2(aq) →
(c) H2SO4(aq) + NaOH(aq) →
28. Write the balanced chemical equation for each double replacement
reaction. Be sure to indicate the physical state of all products.
(a) BaCl2(aq) + Na2CrO4(aq) → (A precipitate is produced.)
(b) H3PO4(aq) + NaOH(aq) → (Water is produced.)
(c) K2CO3(aq) + HNO3(aq) → (A gas is produced.)
You have learned about a variety of double displacement reactions.
In Investigation 4-B, you will make predictions about whether double
displacement reactions will take place. Then you will make observations
to test your predictions.
In Investigation 4-C, you will perform reactions that involve copper
compounds to reinforce what you have learned about the different types
of reactions. You will identify the series of reactions that begin by reacting
copper and ﬁnish by producing copper.
Consider the reaction
KNO3(aq) + NaI(aq) →
KI(aq) + NaNO3(aq)
The products are both water
soluble. Has a chemical reac-
tion occurred? If the water is
allowed to evaporate, what
compounds will remain?
Chapter 4  Classifying Reactions: Chemicals in Balance • MHR 135
MICROSCALE
S K I L L   F O C U S
S K I L L   F O C U S
Predicting
Predicting
Performing and recording
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
Analyzing and interpreting
Observing Double
Displacement Reactions
A double displacement reaction involves
the exchange of cations between two ionic
compounds, usually in aqueous solution. It can
be represented with the general equation
AB + CD → AD + CB
Most often, double displacement reactions result
in the formation of a precipitate. However, some
double displacement reactions result in the
formation of an unstable compound which
then decomposes to water and a gas.
The reaction of an acid and a base — a
neutralization reaction — is also a type of double
displacement reaction. It results in the formation
of a salt and water.
Question
How can you tell if a double displacement
reaction has occurred? How can you predict the
products of a double displacement reaction?
Prediction
For each reaction in Tables A and B, write a
balanced chemical equation. Use the following
guidelines to predict precipitate formation in
Table A.
• Hydrogen, ammonium, and Group I ions form
soluble compounds with all negative ions.
• Chloride ions form compounds that are not
very soluble when they bond to silver, lead(II),
mercury(I), and copper(I) positive ions.
Materials
well plate
sheet of white paper
several test tubes
test tube rack
test tube holder
2 beakers (50 mL)
tongs
scoopula
laboratory burner
ﬂint igniter
red litmus paper
wooden splint
wash bottle with distilled water
HCl solution
the following aqueous solutions in dropper
bottles: BaCl2, CaCl2, MgCl2, Na2SO4, NaOH,
AgNO3, Pb(NO3)2, KI, FeCl3 , solid Na2CO3
and NH4Cl
Safety Precautions
• Hydrochloric acid is corrosive. Use care when
handling it.
• Before lighting the laboratory burner, check
that there are no ﬂammable liquids nearby.
• If you accidentally spill a solution on your
skin, immediately wash the area with copious
amounts of water.
• Wash your hands thoroughly after the
• All compounds that are formed from a nitrate
experiment.
and a positive ion are soluble.
• With the exception of the ions in the ﬁrst
bulleted point, as well as strontium, barium,
radium, and thallium positive ions, hydroxide
ions form compounds that do not dissolve.
• Iodide ions that are combined with silver,
lead(II), mercury(I), and copper(I) are not
very soluble.
• Chromate compounds are insoluble, except
when they contain ions from the ﬁrst bulleted
point.
Procedure
1. Copy Tables A and B into your notebook.
Do not write in this textbook.
2. Place the well plate on top of the sheet of
white paper.
3. Carry out each of the reactions in Table A
by adding several drops of each solution to
a well. Record your observations in Table A.
136 MHR • Unit 1  Matter and Chemical Bonding
136 MHR • Unit 1  Matter and Chemical Bonding
If you are unsure about the formation of a
precipitate, repeat the reaction in a small
test tube for improved visibility.
Analysis
1. Write the balanced chemical equation
for each reaction in Table A.
2. For each reaction in Table B, write the
appropriate balanced chemical equation for
the double displacement reaction. Then
write a balanced chemical equation for the
decomposition reaction that leads to the
formation of a gas and water.
Conclusion
3. How did you know when a double displace-
ment reaction had occurred? How did your
results compare with your predictions?
Application
4. Suppose that you did not have any informa-
tion about the solubility of various com-
pounds, but you did have access to a large
variety of ionic compounds. What would you
need to do before predicting the products of
the displacement reactions above? Outline a
brief procedure.
4. Place a scoopula tipful of Na2CO3 in a 50 mL
beaker. Add 5 mL of HCl. Use a burning
wooden splint to test the gas produced.
Record your observations in Table B.
5. Place a scoopula tipful of NH4Cl in a test
tube. Add 2 mL NaOH. To detect any odour,
gently waft your hand over the mouth of the
test tube towards your nose. Warm the tube
gently (do not boil) over a ﬂame. Record your
observations in Table B.
6. Dispose of all chemicals in the waste beaker
supplied by your teacher. Do not pour any-
thing down the drain.
Table A Double Displacement
Reactions That May Form a Precipitate
Skeleton equation
Observations
MgCl2 + NaOH
FeCl3 + NaOH
BaCl2 + Na2SO4
CaCl2 + AgNO3
Pb(NO3)2 + KI
Table B Double Displacement
Reactions That May Form a Gas
Reaction
Observations
Na2CO3 + HCl
NH4Cl + NaOH
Chapter 4  Classifying Reactions: Chemicals in Balance • MHR 137
MICROSCALE
S K I L L   F O C U S
S K I L L   F O C U S
Predicting
Predicting
Performing and recording
Performing and Recording
Analyzing and interpreting
Analyzing and Interpreting
From Copper to Copper
This experiment allows you to carry out
the sequential conversion of copper metal
to copper(II) nitrate to copper(II) hydroxide
to copper(II) oxide to copper(II) sulfate and back
to copper metal. This conversion is carried out
using synthesis, decomposition, single displace-
ment, and double displacement reactions.
• Do not allow electrical cords to hang over the
edge of the bench.
• NaOH and H2SO4 solutions are corrosive.
Handle them with care. If you accidentally
spill a solution on your skin, wash the area
immediately with copious amounts of cool
water. Inform your teacher.
Question
What type of chemical reaction is involved in
each step of this investigation?
Prediction
Examine the ﬁve reactions outlined in the proce-
dure. Predict what reactions will occur, and
write equations to describe them.
Materials
hot plate
glass rod
wash bottle with distilled water
50 mL Erlenmeyer ﬂask
beaker tongs
250 mL beaker containing ice and liquid water
red litmus paper
Cu(NO3)2 solution
*6 mol/L NaOH solution in dropping bottle
*3 mol/L H2SO4 solution in dropping bottle
0.8 g of ﬂaked zinc
Safety Precautions
• Constantly stir, or swirl, any precipitate-
containing solution that is being heated to
avoid a sudden boiling over, or bumping.
• Unplug any hot plate not in use.
Procedure
Reaction A:  Reaction of Copper
Metal to form Copper(II) Nitrate
Cu(s) + 4HNO3(aq) →
Cu(NO3)2(aq) + 2NO2(g) + 2H2O((cid:2))
Your teacher will carry out steps 1 to 4
CAUTION
in the fumehood before class. Concentrated
nitric acid is required, and the NO2(g) produced
is poisonous. Furthermore, this reaction is quite
slow. Your teacher will perform a brief demon-
stration of this reaction so that you may record
observations.
1. Place 0.100 g (100 mg) of Cu in a 50 mL
Erlenmeyer ﬂask.
2. Add 2 mL of 6 mol/L HNO3(aq) to the ﬂask in
the fumehood.
3. Warm the ﬂask on a hot plate in the
fumehood. The heating will continue until
all the Cu dissolves and the evolution of
brown NO2(g) ceases.
4. Cool the ﬂask in a cool water bath.
5. Add about 2 mL of distilled water to the
ﬂask containing the Cu(NO3)2 solution.
*The unit mol/L refers to concentration. You will learn more about this in Unit 3.
For now, you should know that 6 mol/L NaOH and 3 mol/L H2SO4 are highly
corrosive solutions, and you should treat them with respect.
138 MHR • Unit 1  Matter and Chemical Bonding
11. When the reaction is complete, add 5 mL of
3 mol/L sulfuric acid while stirring or swirling
the solution. This removes any unreacted zinc
but does not affect the copper metal. Carefully
decant the liquid into a clean waste container.
Wash the copper metal carefully several times
with water. Return the copper metal to your
teacher. Wash your hands.
sulfuric acid is highly corrosive. If any comes
in contact with your skin, rinse the area
thoroughly and immediately with water.
This
CAUTION
Analysis
1. What type of reaction is occurring in reactions
A through E?
2. Write a balanced chemical equation for
reactions B through E.
3. Explain why H2SO4 reacts with Zn but not
with Cu. (See step 11 in the procedure.)
4. Could another metal have been used in place
of Zn in step 10? Explain.
5. Why was powdered Zn used in step 10, rather
than a single piece of Zn?
6. You used 0.100 g of Cu metal in reaction A.
How much copper should theoretically be
recovered at the end of reaction E?
Conclusion
7. Create a ﬂowchart that shows each step of the
reaction series. Include the balanced chemical
equations.
Reaction B:  Preparation
of Copper(II) Hydroxide
6. At room temperature, while stirring with a
glass rod, add 6 mol/L NaOH, drop by drop,
until the solution is basic to red litmus
paper. (Red litmus paper turns blue in basic
solution.) Do not put the red litmus paper
in the solution. Dip the glass rod into the
solution and touch it to the red litmus paper.
Record your observations.
Reaction C: Preparation of Copper(II) Oxide
7. While constantly stirring the solution with a
glass rod, heat the mixture from step 6 on a
hot plate until a black precipitate is formed.
If necessary, use the wash bottle to wash loose
any unreacted light blue precipitate that is
adhering to the side of the ﬂask.
8. When all of the light blue precipitate has
reacted to form the black precipitate, cool the
ﬂask in an ice bath or a cool water bath for
several minutes.
Reaction D: Preparation
of Copper(II) Sulfate Solution
9. Carefully add about 6 mL of 3 mol/L sulfuric
acid to the ﬂask. Stir it until all the black
precipitate has dissolved. Record your
observations.
highly corrosive. If any comes in contact
with your skin, rinse the area thoroughly
and immediately with water.
The sulfuric acid is
CAUTION
Reaction E: Regeneration of Copper Metal
10. In the fumehood or in a well ventilated area,
carefully add about 0.8 g of powdered zinc to
the solution of copper(II) sulfate. Stir or swirl
the solution until the blue colour disappears.
Record your observations.
You
should wear a mask for this step to avoid
breathing in the powdered zinc.
CAUTION
Chapter 4  Classifying Reactions: Chemicals in Balance • MHR 139
Concept Organizer
Predicting Chemical Reactions
Reaction Type
General Equation
Concepts
Synthesis
A + B→C
Decomposition
C→A + B
knowledge of bonding
and periodic table
Chemical Reactions
Combustion
A + oxygen →oxides of A +
other compound(s)
Single Displacement
A + BC→AC + B
Double Displacement
AC + BD→AD + BC
• activity series of metals
and halogens
• knowledge of bonding
and periodic table
• understanding of
solubility
• knowledge of bonding
and periodic table
Section Wrap-up
In sections 4.2 and 4.3, you have examined ﬁve different types of chemi-
cal reactions: synthesis, decomposition, combustion, single displacement,
and double displacement. Equipped with this knowledge, you can exam-
ine a set of reactants and predict what type of reaction will occur and
what products will be formed. The Concept Organizer above provides a
summary of the types of chemical reactions.
Section Review
Unit Project Prep
1
K/U
Write the product(s) of each single displacement reaction. If you
Before you design your
Chemistry Newsletter at the
end of Unit 1, take a look at
some of the labels of chemical
products in your home. Are
there any warnings about mix-
ing different products together?
Use what you know about
chemical reactions to explain
why mixing some chemical
products might be dangerous.
predict that there will be no reaction, write “NR.” Balance each
chemical equation.
(a) Li + H2O →
(b) Sn + FeCl2 →
(c) F2 + KI →
(d) Al + MgSO4 →
(e) Zn + CuSO4 →
(f) K + H2O →
2
K/U
Complete each double displacement reaction. Be sure to indicate
the physical state of each product. Then balance the equation.
Hint: Compounds containing alkali metal ions are soluble. Calcium
chloride is soluble. Iron(III) hydroxide is insoluble.
(c) K2CrO4 + NaCl →
(a) NaOH + Fe(NO3)3 →
(d) K2CO3 + H2SO4 →
(b) Ca(OH)2 + HCl →
140 MHR • Unit 1  Matter and Chemical Bonding
140 MHR • Unit 1  Matter and Chemical Bonding
3
(a)
C
Explain why the following chemical equation represents a double
displacement reaction followed by a decomposition reaction.
(NH4)2SO4(aq) + KOH(aq) → NH3(g) + H2O((cid:2)) + K2SO4(aq)
(b) Balance the chemical equation in part (a).
4
5
K/U
Identify each reaction as synthesis, combustion (complete
or incomplete), decomposition, single displacement, or double
displacement. Balance the equations, if necessary.
(a) C8H18((cid:2)) + O2(g) → CO(g) + H2O(g)
(b) Pb(s) + H2SO4(aq) → PbSO4(s) + H2(g)
(c) Al2(SO4)3(aq) + K2CrO4(aq) → K2SO4(aq) + Al2(CrO4)3(s)
(d) C3H7OH((cid:2)) + O2(g) → CO2(g) + H2O(g)
(e) (NH4)2Cr2O7(s) → N2(g) + H2O(g) + Cr2O3(s)
(f) Mg(s) + N2(g) → Mg3N2(s)
(g) N2O4(g) → 2NO2(g)
MC
Biosphere II was created in 1991 to test the idea that scientists
could build a sealed, self-sustaining ecosystem. The carbon dioxide
levels in Biosphere II were lower than scientists had predicted.
Scientists discovered that the carbon dioxide was reacting with
calcium hydroxide, a basic compound in the concrete.
(a) Write two balanced equations to show the reactions. Then classify
the reactions. Hint: In the ﬁrst reaction, carbon dioxide reacts with
water in the concrete to form hydrogen carbonate. Hydrogen carbon-
ate, an acid, reacts with calcium hydroxide, a base.
(b) Why do you think scientists failed to predict that this would happen?
(c) Suggest ways that scientists could have combatted the problem.
6
K/U
What reaction is shown in the ﬁgure below? Write a balanced
chemical equation to describe the reaction, then classify it.
Copper wire
coated with
silver
Copper
nitrate
solution
Copper
wire
Silver
nitrate
solution
Ag+
2e–
Cu2+
Ag+
Ag atoms
coating
wire
Cu atoms
in wire
Chapter 4  Classifying Reactions: Chemicals in Balance • MHR 141
4.4
Simple Nuclear Reactions
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
balance simple nuclear
equations
communicate your under-
standing of the following
terms: nuclear reactions,
nuclear equation, alpha (α)
particle emission, beta (β)
decay, beta particle, gamma
(γ) radiation, nuclear ﬁssion,
nuclear fusion
This patient is
Figure 4.18
about to undergo radiation
therapy.
Media
LINK
The media are full of
references to radioactivity. For
example, the comic book hero
Spiderman gained the abilities
of a spider after being bitten
by a radioactive spider. Bart
Simpson reads Radioactive
Man comics. Can you think
of any other references to
radioactivity in popular
culture? What kind of
reputation do radioactivity and
nuclear reactions have? Do
you think this reputation
is deserved?
You have seen some chemical reactions that involve the formation and
decomposition of different compounds. These reactions involve the
rearrangement of atoms due to the breaking and formation of chemical
bonds. Chemical bonds involve the interactions between the electrons of
various atoms. There is another class of reactions, however, that are not
chemical. These reactions involve changes that occur within the nucleus
of atoms. These reactions are called nuclear reactions.
We know that nuclear weapons are capable of mass destruction, yet
radiation therapy, shown in Figure 4.18, is a proven cancer ﬁghter. Smoke
detectors, required by law in all homes, rely on the radioactive decay of
americium-241. The human body itself is radioactive, due to the presence
of radioactive isotopes including carbon-14, phosphorus-32, and potassi-
um-40. Most people view radioactivity and nuclear reactions with a
mixture of fascination, awe, and fear. Since radioactivity is all around us,
it is important to understand what it is, how it arises, and how we can
deal with it safely.
Types of Radioactive Decay and Balancing Nuclear Equations
There are three main types of radioactive decay: alpha particle emission,
beta particle emission, and the emission of gamma radiation. When an
unstable isotope undergoes radioactive decay, it produces one or more dif-
ferent isotopes. We represent radioactive decay using a nuclear equation.
Two rules for balancing nuclear equations are given below.
Rules for Balancing Nuclear Equations
1. The sum of the mass numbers (written as superscripts) on each
side of the equation must balance.
2. The sum of the atomic numbers (written as subscripts) on each
side of the equation must balance.
Alpha Decay
Alpha (α) particle emission, or alpha decay, involves the loss of one alpha
particle. An α particle is a helium nucleus, 4
2He, composed of two protons
and two neutrons. Since it has no electrons, an alpha particle carries a
charge of +2.
One example of alpha particle emission is the decay of radium. This
decay is shown in the following equation:
226
88Ra → 222
86Rn + 4
2He
Notice that the sum of the mass numbers on the right (222 + 4) equals
the mass on the left (226). As well, the atomic numbers balance
(88 = 86 + 2). Thus, this nuclear equation is balanced.
142 MHR • Unit 1  Matter and Chemical Bonding
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
In another example of alpha particle emission, Berkelium-248 is
formed by the decay of a certain radioisotope according to the balanced
nuclear equation:
a
bX → 248
97Bk + 4
2He
Given this information, what is a
bX? You can use your knowledge of how
to balance a nuclear equation to determine the identity of a radioisotope
undergoing alpha particle decay.
The total of the atomic masses on the right side is (248 + 4) = 252.
The total of the atomic numbers on the right is (97 + 2) = 99. Therefore,
a = 252 and b = 99. From the periodic table, you see that element number
99 is Es, einsteinium. The missing atom is 252
99Es, so the balanced nuclear
equation is:
99Es → 248
Try the following problems to practise balancing alpha emission
nuclear reactions.
97Bk + 4
2He
252
Practice Problems
29. Uranium was the ﬁrst element shown to be radioactive. Complete
the following reaction representing the alpha decay of uranium-238.
238
92U →
+ 4
2He
30. Radon-222, 222
86Rn, is known to decay by alpha particle emission.
Write a balanced nuclear equation and name the element produced
in this decay process.
31. Plutonium-242 decays by emitting an alpha particle. Write the
balanced nuclear equation for this reaction.
32. Neodymium-144, 144
60Nd, decays by alpha particle emission. Write
the balanced nuclear equation for this nuclear decay.
−1e. For example, hydrogen-3, or tritium, emits a beta particle to
Beta Decay
Beta (β ) decay occurs when an isotope emits an electron, called a beta
particle. Because of its tiny mass and −1 charge, a beta particle, is repre-
sented as  0
form helium-3 as illustrated by the equation:
2He + 0
−1e
1H → 3
Notice that the total of the atomic masses and the total of the atomic
numbers on each side of the nuclear equation balance. What is happen-
ing, however to the hydrogen-3 nucleus as this change occurs? In effect,
the emission of a beta particle is accompanied by the conversion, inside
the nucleus, of a neutron into a proton:
3
→
1
0n
neutron
1
1H
proton
+
0
−1e
electron (β particle)
History
LINK
Marie Curie discovered the
element polonium, Po, in 1898.
She named polonium after
Poland, her homeland. Curie
won two Nobel Prizes, one in
Physics (1903) for sharing in
the discovery of radioactivity,
and one in Chemistry (1911) for
the discovery of radium, which
has been used to treat cancer.
Radium-226 undergoes alpha
decay to yield radon-222.
C H E M
FA C T
One of the most harmful
potential sources of radiation
in the home is radon gas.
Radon-222 is a product of the
decay of uranium-containing
rocks beneath Earth’s surface.
Since radon is denser than air,
it can build up to dangerous
levels in basements when it
seeps through cracks in walls
and ﬂoors. Simple radon
detectors can be purchased
at hardware stores.
Chapter 4  Classifying Reactions: Chemicals in Balance • MHR 143
C H E M
FA C T
The nucleus of the most com-
mon isotope of hydrogen con-
sists of one proton. Therefore,
a proton can be represented by
H+ or 1
1H.
C H E M
FA C T
The terms radiation and
radioactivity are often con-
fused. Radiation refers to
electromagnetic radiation—
everything from gamma rays,
to X-rays, to visible light,
to microwaves, to radio and
television signals. Radioactivity,
on the other hand, involves the
emission of particles or energy
from an unstable nucleus.
Carbon-14 is a radioactive isotope of carbon. Its nucleus emits a beta,
particle to form a nitrogen-14 nucleus, according to the balanced
nuclear equation shown below in Figure 4.19.
7N + 0
−1e
6C → 14
14
proton
neutron
(cid:2) particle
(electron)
14
6
C
N14
7
e0
-1
Carbon-14 decays by emitting a beta particle and converting to
Figure 4.19
nitrogen-14. Notice that a neutron in the nucleus of carbon is converted to a protron
as the β particle is emitted.
Radioactive waste from certain nuclear power plants and from
weapons testing can lead to health problems. For example, ions of the
radioactive isotope strontium-90, an alkali metal, exhibit chemical behav-
iour similar to calcium ions. This leads to incorporation of the ions in
bone tissue, sending ionizing radiation into bone marrow, and possibly
causing leukemia. Given the following equation for the decay of stron-
tium-90, how would you complete it?
90
38Sr →
+ 0
−1e
Since both atomic numbers and mass numbers must balance, you can ﬁnd
the other product.
The mass number of the unknown element is equal to 90 + 0 = 90.
The atomic number of the unknown element is equal to 38 − (−1) = 39.
From the periodic table, you can see that element 39 is yttrium, Y.
The balanced nuclear equation is therefore
90
38Sr → 90
39Y + 0
−1e
You can check your answer by ensuring that the total mass number and
the total atomic number on each side of the equation are the same.
Mass numbers balance: 90 = 90 + 0
Atomic numbers balance: 38 = 39 + (−1)
Try the following problems to practise balancing beta emission
equations.
Practice Problems
33. Write the balanced nuclear equation for the radioactive decay of
potassium-40 by emission of a β particle.
34. What radioisotope decays by β particle emission to form 47
21Sc?
35. Complete the following nuclear equation:
73
31Ga → 0
−1e +
144 MHR • Unit 1  Matter and Chemical Bonding
Canadians
in Chemistry
Harriet Brooks
It was the Nobel that just missed being Canadian.
In 1907, Ernest Rutherford left Montréal’s McGill
University for a position in England. The following
year, he received the Nobel Prize for Chemistry for
his investigations of the chemistry of radioactive
substances. Most of the work, however, had been
done in Montréal. Moreover, one young Canadian
woman had played an important role in putting it
on the right track.
Harriet Brooks is nearly forgotten today, even
though she helped to show that elements could
be transformed. For over a century, chemists had
rejected the dream of the ancient alchemists who
thought that they might turn lead into gold with the
help of the philosopher's stone. They believed that
elements were forever ﬁxed and unchangeable.
Then Harriet Brooks arrived on the scene.
When she joined Rutherford’s team, she was
asked to measure the atomic mass of the isotopes
that make up the mysterious vapour given off by
radium. She determined that its atomic mass was
between 40 and 100, whereas radium was known
to have an atomic mass of over 140. Surely this
was not just a gaseous form of radium. Somehow
radium was turning into another element!
It turned out that Brooks’ result was a mis-
take. Radon — as the mystery gas is now known —
has almost the same atomic mass as radium.
Brooks’ result was a fruitful mistake, however.
Her experiment led to a basic understanding of
radioactivity and isotopes.
Why did Rutherford win a Nobel Prize for
Chemistry? Both he and Brooks worked as
physicists. By proving that elements transformed,
Rutherford, Brooks, and their co-workers revolu-
tionized traditional chemistry.
Gamma Radiation
Gamma (γ) radiation is high energy electromagnetic radiation. It often
accompanies either alpha or beta particle emission. Since gamma
γ, or simply γ.
radiation has neither mass nor charge, it is represented as 0
0
For example, cesium-137 is a radioactive isotope that is found in nuclear
fall-out. It decays with the emission of a beta particle and gamma
radiation, according to the equation
55Cs → 137
56Ba + 0
−1e + 0
137
γ
0
How is gamma radiation produced in a radioactive decay? When a
radioactive nucleus emits an alpha or beta particle, the nucleus is often
left in an unstable, high-energy state. The “relaxation” of the nucleus to
a more stable state is accompanied by the emission of gamma radiation.
Nuclear Fission and Fusion
All cases of radioactive decay involve the atom’s nucleus. Since these
processes do not involve the atom’s electrons, they occur regardless of the
chemical environment of the nucleus. For example, radioactive hydrogen-
3, or tritium, will decay by β particle emission whether it is contained in
a water molecule or hydrogen gas, or in a complex protein.
Chapter 4  Classifying Reactions: Chemicals in Balance • MHR 145
Mode
Emission
Decay
α Decay
α (4
2He)
reactant
product
β Decay
β
0
−1
1
0n
1
1p
in nucleus
in nucleus
γ Emission
γ
0
0
Change in …
Mass
numbers
Atomic
numbers
Number of
neutrons
−4
−2
−2
α expelled
β
0
−1
β expelled
0
+1
−1
γ
0
0
0
0
0
+
+
+
excited
nucleus
stable
nucleus
γ photon
radiated
Figure 4.20
A summary of alpha decay, beta decay, and gamma emission
Many chemical reactions, once begun, can be stopped. For example,
a combustion reaction, such as a ﬁre, can be extinguished before it burns
itself out. Nuclear decay processes, on the other hand, cannot be stopped.
The principles of balancing nuclear equations apply to all nuclear
reactions. Nuclear ﬁssion occurs when a highly unstable isotope splits
into smaller particles. Nuclear ﬁssion usually has to be induced in a
particle accelerator. Here, an atom can absorb a stream of high-energy
particles such as neutrons, 1
smaller fragments.
0n . This will cause the atom to split into
For example, when uranium-235 absorbs a high energy neutron, 1
0n, it
breaks up, or undergoes ﬁssion as follows:
235
92U + 1
0n → 87
35Br+
How would you identify the missing particle? Notice that three neutrons,
1
0n, have a mass number of 3 and a total atomic number of 0. The total
atomic mass on the left side is (235 + 1) = 236. On the right we have
(87 + 3(1)) = 90, and so (236 − 90) = 146 remains. The missing particle
must have a mass number of 146.
+ 31
0n
The total atomic number on the left is 92. The total atomic number
on the right, not including the missing particle, is 35. This means that
(92 − 35) = 57 is the atomic number of the missing particle. From the
periodic table, atomic number 57 corresponds to La, lanthanum. The
balanced nuclear equation is
92U + 1
57La + 31
0n
35Br + 146
0n → 87
235
Check your answer by noting that the total mass number and the total
atomic number are the same on both sides.
146 MHR • Unit 1  Matter and Chemical Bonding
Nuclear fusion occurs when a target nucleus absorbs an accelerated
particle. The reaction that takes place in a hydrogen bomb is a fusion
reaction, as are the reactions that take place within the Sun, shown in
Figure 4.21. Fusion reactions require very high temperatures to proceed
but produce enormous amounts of energy. The fusion reaction that takes
place in a hydrogen bomb is represented by the following equation:
0n → 3
Notice that the total mass numbers and the total atomic numbers are
the same on both sides.
3Li + 1
1H + 4
2He
6
Practice Problems
36. Astatine can be produced by the bombardment of a certain atom
with alpha particles, as follows:
The Sun’s interior
Figure 4.21
has a temperature of about
15 000 000 °C, due to the energy
provided by nuclear fusion
reactions.
+ 4
2He → 211
Identify the atom.
85At + 21
0n
37. Balance the following equation by adding a coefﬁcient.
252
96Cf + 10
5B → 257
101Md +
1
0n
38. How many neutrons are produced when U-238 is bombarded with
C-12 nuclei in a particle accelerator? Balance the following equation.
92U + 12
6C → 246
98Cf +
238
1
0n
39. Aluminum-27, when it collides with a certain nucleus, transforms
into phosphorus-30 along with a neutron. Write a balanced nuclear
equation for this reaction.
Section Wrap-Up
In this chapter, you learned how atoms can interact with each other and
how unstable isotopes behave. In the ﬁrst three sections, you learned
about chemical reactions. In section 4.4, you learned about different types
of nuclear reactions: reactions in which atoms of one element change into
atoms of another element. In Unit 2, you will learn how stable isotopes
contribute to an indirect counting method for atoms and molecules.
Section Review
1
K/U
Draw a chart in your notebook to show alpha decay, beta decay,
gamma decay, nuclear fusion, and nuclear ﬁssion. Write a description
and give an example of each type of reaction. Illustrate each example
with a drawing.
2
K/U
Complete each nuclear equation. Then state the type of nuclear
reaction that each equation represents.
→233
(a) 232
(b) 233
(c) 226
(d) 210
90Th +
91Pa →233
88Ra →
83Bi →206
81Tl +
92U+
90Th
2He
+ 4
Chapter 4  Classifying Reactions: Chemicals in Balance • MHR 147
(e) 210
83Bi → +206
81 Tl +
(f)
(g) 6
3Li + 2
+1
0n →90
1H → 2
38 Sr + 143
54 Xe + 31
0n
3
4
MC
Nuclear reactors have complex cooling systems that absorb the
heat given off by the ﬁssion reaction. The absorbed heat is used to
produce steam to drive a generator, thus producing electrical energy.
Cooling the steam for re-use requires a large amount of cool water,
which is usually obtained from a nearby river or lake. A large amount
of hot water is then released into the river or lake. Do you think this is
a form of pollution? What kinds of problems might warm water cause?
K/U
Alpha or beta particle emission from a radioactive nucleus is
often, but not always, accompanied by gamma rays. Why does the
presence of gamma rays not affect how a nuclear equation of this type
is balanced?
5
K/U
Write a balanced nuclear equation to describe each of the
following statements. Classify the reactions.
(a) Radon-222 undergoes alpha decay, forming polonium-218.
(b) When hydrogen-2 (deuterium) and hydrogen-3 (tritium) react, they
form an alpha particle and a subatomic particle.
(c) Bismuth-214 undergoes beta decay, emitting one electron and
forming a different nucleus.
(d) When a neutron collides with uranium-235, it forms krypton-92 and
one other nucleus.
(e) Polonium-218 decays to lead-214, emitting one other particle.
(f) Strontium-90 emits a subatomic particle, forming yttrium-90.
148 MHR • Unit 1  Matter and Chemical Bonding
3. Explain how balancing a chemical equation
satisﬁes the law of conservation of mass.
4. Copy each chemical equation into your
notebook, and balance it.
(a) PdCl2(aq) + HNO3(aq) → Pd(NO3)2(aq) + HCl(aq)
(b) Cr(s) + HCl(aq) → CrCl2(aq) + H2(g)
(c) FeO(s) + O2(g) → Fe2O3(s)
5. What type of chemical reaction is illustrated
in each diagram below?
Review
Reﬂecting on Chapter 4
Summarize this chapter in the format of your
choice. Here are a few ideas to use as guidelines.
• Distinguish between chemical reactions and
nuclear reactions.
• Summarize guidelines for balancing
chemical equations.
• Summarize the different types of
chemical reactions.
• Summarize the types of nuclear decay.
• Explain why knowing the solubility of
compounds is important to predicting
double displacement reactions.
• Summarize guidelines for balancing
nuclear equations
• Describe how to use the activity series of
metals and the activity series of halogens.
Reviewing Key Terms
For each of the following terms, write a sentence
that shows your understanding of its meaning.
activity series
neutralization
reactions
nuclear equation
alpha (α) particle
emission
balanced chemical
equation
beta particle
beta (β ) decay
chemical equations
chemical reactions
combustion reaction
decomposition reaction single displacement
nuclear ﬁssion
nuclear fusion
nuclear reactions
precipitate
product
reactant
reactions
double displacement
reaction
gamma (γ) radiation
incomplete combustion word equation
law of conservation
of mass
skeleton equation
synthesis reaction
Knowledge/Understanding
1. How can you tell if a chemic.al reaction has
occurred?
2. Explain why the mixing of red paint with
white paint does not constitute a chemical
reaction, even though the “product” has a
different appearance.
6. Classify each reaction as synthesis, decomposi-
tion, single displacement, double displacement,
or combustion. Also, balance each chemical
equation.
(a) H2(g) + CuO(s) → Cu(s) + H2O(g)
(b) Ag(s) + S8(s) → Ag2S(s)
(c) C4H8(g) + O2(g) → CO2(g) + H2O(g)
(d) NH3(g) + HCl(g) → NH4Cl(s)
(e) Mg(s) + O2(g) → MgO(s)
(f) RbCl(s) + O2(g) → RbClO4(s)
(g) Cu2S(s) + O2(g) → Cu2O(g) + SO2(g)
7. Why is the solubility chart useful for analyzing
double displacement reactions?
8. Nitrogen dioxide is a component of smog. It
is produced in an automobile engine’s combus-
tion chamber. When exposed to sunlight,
nitrogen dioxide forms nitrogen monoxide
and oxygen. What type of reaction is this?
Chapter 4  Classifying Reactions: Chemicals in Balance • MHR 149
Chapter 4  Classifying Reactions: Chemicals in Balance • MHR 149
9. Write a balanced chemical equation
corresponding to each word equation.
(a) The reaction between aqueous sodium
hydroxide and iron(III) nitrate produces a
precipitate.
(b) Powdered antimony reacts with chlorine
gas to produce antimony trichloride.
(c) Mercury(II) oxide is prepared from its
elements.
(d) Ammonium nitrite decomposes into nitrogen
gas and water.
(e) Aluminum metal reacts with a solution of
zinc sulfate to produce aluminum sulfate
and metallic zinc.
10. Consider the unbalanced chemical equation
corresponding to the formation of solid lead(II)
chromate, PbCrO4:
Pb(NO3)2(aq) + K2CrO4(aq) → PbCrO4(s) + KNO3(aq)
(a) What type of chemical reaction is this?
(b) Balance the equation.
11. In general, what is formed when an oxide of a
non-metal reacts with water? Give an example.
12. In general, what is formed when an oxide of a
metal reacts with water? Give an example.
13. Complete and balance each nuclear equation.
2He+
1H → 4
Then classify the reaction.
(a) 2
(b) 239
(c) 239
(d) 238
1H + 3
92 U →
93 Np → 239
92 U → 234
+ 0
−1
94 Pu +
90 Th +
β
+ 20
0
reacting hydrochloric acid with calcium car-
bonate. Write the balanced chemical equation
corresponding to this reaction, and classify it.
Inquiry
17. An American penny is composed of a zinc
core clad in copper. Some of the copper is
ﬁled away, exposing the zinc, and placed in
a solution of hydrochloric acid. Describe what
will occur.
18. What will happen to a silver earring that is
accidentally dropped into toilet bowl cleaner
that contains hydrochloric acid?
Communication
19. Explain why it is advisable to store chemicals
in tightly sealed bottles out of direct sunlight.
20. Why is smoking not allowed near an oxygen
source? What would happen if a match were
struck in an oxygen-rich atmosphere?
21. Even if a smoker is very careful not to let a
lighted cigarette come in contact with liquid
gasoline, why is it very dangerous to smoke
when refuelling an automobile?
22. Solutions that have been used to process
ﬁlm contain silver ions, Ag+
(a) Explain how you could recover the silver,
(aq).
γ
in the form of an ionic compound.
(b) How could you recover the silver
as silver metal?
14. Write the product(s) for each reaction. If you
predict that there will be no reaction, write
“NR.” Balance each chemical equation.
(a) BaCl2(aq) + Na2CO3(aq) →
(b) Fe(s) + CuSO4(aq) →
(c) C2H2(g) + O2(g) →
(d) PCl5(s) →
(e) Mg(s) + Fe2O3 →
(f) Ca(s) + Cl2(g) →
+ Cl2(g)
15. Iron often occurs as an oxide, such as Fe2O3. In
the steel industry, Fe2O3 is reacted with carbon
monoxide to produce iron metal and carbon
dioxide. Write the balanced chemical equation
for this reaction, and classify it.
16. Calcium chloride is often used to melt ice
on roads and sidewalks, or to prevent it from
forming. Calcium chloride can be made by
150 MHR • Unit 1  Matter and Chemical Bonding
150 MHR • Unit 1  Matter and Chemical Bonding
Making Connections
23. Calcium oxide, CaO (lime), is used to make
mortar and cement.
(a) State two reactions that could be used to
make lime. Classify each reaction, based on
the types of reactions studied in this chapter.
(b) In construction, cement is prepared by
mixing the powdered cement with water.
Write the chemical equation that represents
the reaction of calcium oxide with water.
Why are we cautioned not to expose skin
to dry cement mix and wet cement? It may
help you to know that bases are often
corrosive. They can burn exposed skin.
29. [234/90]Th 30. [222/86]Rn → [4/2]He + [218/82]Pb
31. [242/94]Pu → [4/2]He + [238/92]U 32. [144/60]Nd
→ [4/2]He + [140/58]Ce 33. [40/19]K → [0/ − 1]e
+ [40/20]Ca 34. [47/20]Ca 35. [73/31]Ga → [0/ − 1]e
+ [73/32]Ge 36. [208/83]Bi 37. 5  38. 4
39. [27/13]Al+ [4/2]He → [30/15]P + [1/0]n
Section Review: 4.1: 2.(a) 2SO2(g) + O2(g) → 2SO3(g)
(b) Na(s) + H2O(l) → H2(g) + NaOH(aq) (c) Cu(s) + HNO3(aq)
→ Cu(NO3)2(aq) + NO2(g) + H2O(l)
4.(a) 4Al(s) + 3O2(g) →
42Al2O3(s) (b) 2Na2S2O3(aq) + I2(aq) → 2NaI(aq)
+ Na2S4O6(aq) (c) 2Al(s) + Fe2O3(s) → Al2O3(s) + 2Fe(s)
(d) 4NH3(g) + 5O2(g) → 4NO(g) + 6H2O(l) (e) Na2O(s)+
(NH4)2SO4(aq) + H2O(l) + NH3(aq) (f) C5H12(l) + 8O2(g) →
5CO2(g) + 6H2O(g) 5. Fe(s) + CuSO4(aq) → Cu(s) + FeSO4(aq)
4.2: 1.(a) Be + O2 → BeO (b) 2Li + Cl2 → 2LiCl
(c) Mg + N2 → Mg3N2 (d) Ca + Br2 → CaBr2 2.(a) 2K2O
→ O2 + 4K (b) 2CuO → 2Cu + O2 (c) 2H2O → 2H2 + O2
(d) 2Ni2O3 → 4Ni + 3O2 (e) 2Ag2O → 4Ag + O2
3.(a) Sn(OH)4(s) → SnO2(s) + 2H2O(g), decomposition
(b) 3Cl2(g) + I2(s) → 2ICl3 synthesis (c) C4H9OH + 6O2
→ 5H2O + 4CO2 5. 2HgO(s) → O2(g) + 2Hg(s)
decomposition 4.3: 1.(a) Li + H2O → Li2O + H2 (b) NR
(c) F2 + 2KI → 2KF + I2 (d) NR (e) Zn + CuSO4 → Cu
+ ZnSO4 (f) K + H2O → K2O + H2 2.(a) NaOH(aq)+
Fe(NO3)3(aq) → NaNO3(aq) + Fe(OH)3(s) (b) Ca(OH)2(aq)+
HCl(aq) → CaCl2(aq) + H2O)(l) (c) NR (d) K2CO3(s)+
H2SO4(aq) → K2SO4(aq) + CO2(g) + H2O(l)
3.(b) (NH4)2SO4(aq) + 2KOH(aq) → 2NH3(g) + 2H2O(l)
+ K2SO4(aq) 4.(a) incomplete combustion (b) single
displacement (c) double displacement (d) complete
combustion (e) decomposition (f) synthesis
(g) decomposition  5.4: 2.(a) [1/0]n (b) [0/ − 1]e
(c) [222/2]Rn (d) [4/2]He (e) [236/92]U (f) [4/2]He
Answers to Practice Problems and
Short Answers to Section Review Questions
Practice Problems: 1.(a) calcium + ﬂuorine (reactants) →
calcium ﬂuoride (product) (b) barium chloride + hydro-
gen sulfate → hydrogen chloride + barium sulfate
(c) calcium carbonate + carbon dioxide + water
→ calcium hydrogen carbonate (d) hydrogen peroxide →
water + oxygen (e) sulfur dioxide + oxygen → sulfur
trioxide  2. Sugar → ethanol + carbon dioxide
3.(a) Zn(s) + Cl2(g) → ZnCl2(s) (b) Ca(s) + H2O(l) →
Ca(OH)2(aq) + H2(g) (c) Ba(s) + S(s) → BaS(s) (d) Pb(NO3)2(aq)
+ Mg(s) → Mg(NO3)2(aq) + Pb(s) 4.(a) CO2(g) + CaO(s) →
CaCO3(s) (b) Al(s) + O2(g) → Al2O3(s) (c) Mg(s) + O2(g) →
MgO(s) 5.(a) S(s) + O2(g) → SO2(g) (b) P4(s) + 5O2(g) →
P4O10(s) (c) H2(g) + Cl2(g) → 2HCl(g) (d) SO2(g) + H2O(l) →
H2SO3(aq) 6.(a) balanced (b) 2HgO(s) → 2Hg(l) + O2(g)
(c) H2O2(aq) → 2H2O(l) + O2(g) (d) balanced  7.(a) 2SO2(g)
+ O2(g) → 2SO3(g) (b) BaCl2(aq) + Na2SO4(aq) → NaCl(aq)
+ BaSO4(s) 8. P4(s) + 5O2(g) → P4O10(s); P4O10(s) + 6H2O(l)
→ 4H3PO4(aq) 9.(a) As4S6(s) + 9O2(g) → As4O6(s) + 6SO2(g)
(b) Sc2O3(s) + 3H2O(l) → 2Sc(OH)3(s) (c) C2H5OH(l) + 3O2(g)
→ 2CO2(g) + 3H2O(l) (d) 2C4H10(g) + 9O2(g) → 8CO(g)
+ 10H2O(g) 10.(a) 2K + Br2 → 2KBr (b) H2 + Cl2 → 2HCl
(c) Ca + Cl2 → CaCl2 (d) Li + O2 → LiO2 11.(a) products
are Fe2O3, FeO (b) possible products: V2O5, VO, V2O3,
VO2 (c) possible products: TiO2, TiO, Ti2O3 12.(a) K2O
+ H2O → 2KOH (b) MgO + H2O → Mg(OH)2
(c) SO2 + H2O → H2SO3 13. NH3(g) + HCl(g) → NH4Cl(s)
14. Hg, O2 15.(a) 2HI → H2 + I2 (b) 2Ag2O → 4Ag + O2
(c) 2AlCl3 → 2Al + 3Cl2 (d) MgO → Mg + O2
16.(a) MgCO3 → MgO + CO2 (b) CuCO3 → CuO + CO2
17. 2CH3OH + 3O2 → 2CO2 + 4H2O
18. 2C8H18 + 25O2 → 16CO2 + 18H2O 19. C3H6O + O2
→ CO2 + H2O 20. 2C16H34 + 49O2 → 32CO2 + 34H2O
21.(a) Ca + 2H2O → Ca(OH)2 + H2 (b) Zn + Pb(NO3)2 →
Zn(NO3)2 + Pb (c) 2Al + 6HCl → 2AlCl3 + 3H2 (d) Li+
AgNO3 → Ag + LiNO3 (e) Pb + H2SO4 → PbSO4 + H2
(f) 2Mg + Pt(OH)4 → 2Mg(OH)2 + Pt (g) Ba + FeCl2 →
BaCl2 + Fe (h) Fe + Co(ClO3)2 → Fe(ClO3)3 + Co
22.(a) NR (b) Zn + FeCl2 → ZnCl2 + Fe (c) K + H2O →
KOH + H2 (d) 2Al + 3H2SO4 → Al2(SO4)3 + 3H2 (e) NR
(f) NR (g) Zn + H2SO4 → ZnSO4 + H2 (h) Mg + SnCl2 →
MgCl2 + Sn 23.(a) NR (b) Cl2 + 2NaI → 2NaCl + I2
24.(a) 2Pb + 2HCl → 2PbCl + H2 (b) KI + Br2 → KBr + I2
(c) NR (d) Ca + H2O → Ca(OH)2 + H2 (e) NR (f) Ni+
H2SO4 → NiSO4 + H2 25.(a) Pb(NO3)2(aq) + 2KI(aq) →
2KNO3(aq) + PbI2(s) (b) NR (c) NR (d) Ba(NO3)2(aq)+
Mg(SO4)(aq) → BaSO4(s) + Mg(NO3)2(aq) 26.(a) Na2SO3(aq)
+ 2HCl(aq) → SO2(g) + 2NaCl(aq) + H2O(l) (b) CaS(aq)+
H2SO4(aq) → H2S(g) + CaSO4(l)
H2O(l) + LiCl(aq) (b) HclO4(aq) + Ca(OH)2(aq) → H2O(l)
+ Ca(ClO4)2(aq) (c) H2SO4(aq) + NaOH(aq) → Na2SO4(aq)
+ H2O(l) 28.(a) BaCl2(aq) + Na2CrO4(aq) → BaCrO4(s)
+ 2NaCl(aq) (b) HNO3(aq) + NaOH(aq) → H2O(l) + NaNO3(aq)
(c) K2CO3(aq) + 2HNO3(aq) → H2O(l) + 2KNO3(aq) + CO2(g)
27.(a) HCl(aq) + LiOH(aq) →
Chapter 4  Classifying Reactions: Chemicals in Balance • MHR 151
Chapter 4  Classifying Reactions: Chemicals in Balance • MHR 151
U N I T   1   Project
Developing a
Chemistry Newsletter
Background
Many of the chemicals in your school laboratory are
hazardous. Some are corrosive, some are ﬂammable,
and some are poisonous. Many exhibit these proper-
ties when they are combined. You can work safely
with these chemicals, as long as you treat them with
care and respect, observe proper safety precautions,
and follow the directions that are given by your
teacher and this textbook.
Did you know that many of the chemical products
in your home are hazardous, too? For example, com-
mon household bleach, when used as directed, is safe
for disinfecting and whitening clothing. Hazard labels
on bleaching products, however, warn against mixing
bleach with acids, household ammonia, or products
that contain these chemicals. Bleach, when combined
with acids, produces toxic chlorine gas. The products
of combining bleach with ammonia are explosive.
Most homes contain numerous chemical products,
ranging from cleaners and disinfectants, to fertilizers
and fuels. All potentially hazardous products have a
warning on their containers or on paper inserts in
their packaging. Many, but not all, have a list of the
chemicals they contain. Some hazardous products
advise users only to keep them away from children
and pets.
How much do you know about the safe use of
chemical products? Would you know what to do if an
accidental spill occurred? Would the members of your
family, or people in your community, know what to do?
Challenge
Design, produce, and distribute a newsletter to
inform your community about the safe use of common
chemical products. Include the potential hazards of
these products to living things and the environment.
Also include emergency procedures to follow if an
accident occurred.
Materials
Select a medium for your newsletter, such as a
traditional paper newsletter or an electronic version
for the Internet. For a traditional newsletter, you
will need to decide on methods of production and
distribution. For an electronic version, you will need
to use computer hardware and software.
152 MHR • Unit 1  Matter and Chemical Bonding
Design Criteria
A
As a class, develop a rubic listing criteria for
assessing the newsletters. For example, one
criterion may involve a newsletter’s effectiveness in
altering the behaviour of its readers. You may want
to develop different criteria for traditional and elec-
tronic newsletters.
Your newsletter must be factual, easy to read for a
wide variety of audiences, and educational.
B
Action Plan
1
The following items must be part of your
newsletter:
• examples of household chemical products and
their uses
• hazards associated with each chemical product
• suggestions to encourage safe and responsible use
• environmental considerations for the disposal of
the chemical products
• alternative products (if any), and hazards
(if any) associated with these alternatives
• an interview with a professional who
researches, develops, or works with
household chemical products
2
Develop detailed steps to research, plan, and
produce your newsletter. Include deadlines for
completion and speciﬁc roles for the members
of your group (for example, editor, writers, artists,
and designers).
Evaluate
Present your completed newsletter to your class. Hold
a focus group session to evaluate the content and
impact of your newsletter. The focus group could
include students from other classes, parents and
relatives, and members of the community.
Assessment
After you complete this project:
Assess the success of your project based on how
similar the ﬁnal project is to your action plan.
Assess your project based on how clearly the
chemistry concepts and safety recommendations
are conveyed.
Assess your project using the rubric designed
in class.
Unit 1 Project • MHR 153
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
Review
Knowledge/Understanding
Multiple Choice
In your notebook, write the letter for the best
answer to each question.
1. Which statement is the best scientiﬁc
description (based on observations) of a car?
(a) It is red, and it goes fast.
(b) It was made in Detroit by unionized workers,
using metal and ﬁbreglass.
(c) It has chrome bumpers, a red ﬁbreglass body,
and wheels made of a magnesium alloy. It
has been tested on a straight road and found
to be able to accelerate from 0 to 60 km/h
in 4.9 s.
(d) It is owned by my cousin.
(e) My cousin bought it at the car dealership
down the street. She got a good deal on it.
2. An ocean is not a solution because
(a) solutions cannot contain salt
(b) solutions cannot be blue
(c) solutions should not have particles that can
be seen
(d) solutions should not be clear enough to see
through them
5. Now suppose that you measure the mass of a
chemical on a ﬁlter paper. The mass of the
ﬁlter paper is 1.6 g. The mass of the chemical
and the ﬁlter paper, together, is 14.168 g. How
many signiﬁcant digits should the ﬁnal mass of
the chemical have?
(a) three, because you subtract to determine the
number of signiﬁcant digits
(b) three, because you use the least number of
signiﬁcant digits after the decimal place (the
tenths place in this question)
(c) ﬁve, because you measured the chemical and
ﬁlter paper very accurately and you want
your answer to be as precise as possible
(d) two, because you should use the least
number of signiﬁcant digits in the numbers
in the question
(e) as many as you like, because both of the
given quantities are exact numbers
6. Rust is an example of
(a) a compound
(b) an element
(c) a homogeneous mixture
(d) a heterogeneous mixture
(e) a solution
(e) a whale could not breathe through a solution
7. Which statement contains only qualitative
3. Which mass is expressed to four signiﬁcant dig-
its?
(a) 0.0027 g
(b) 0.027 g
(c) 0.270 g
(d) 2.70 g
(e) 2.700 g
4. Suppose that you multiply a density of
13.6 g/cm3 by a volume of 2.0 cm3. How many
signiﬁcant digits does the resulting mass have?
(a) ﬁve, because you add the total number of
signiﬁcant digits in the question
(b) three, because you use the greatest number
of signiﬁcant digits in the numbers in the
question
(c) six, because you multiply the signiﬁcant
digits in the question when you multiply
the numbers
(d) two, because you use the least number of
signiﬁcant digits in the numbers in the
question
(e) as many as you like, because both of the
given quantities are exact numbers
observations about a copper sulfate solution?
(a) The solution ﬁlls a 250 mL beaker, and the
solution is clear.
(b) The solution has not evaporated more than
0.5 mL overnight, and the temperature is
23˚C.
(c) The solution is clear and is a pale blue
colour.
(d) 4.6 g of copper sulfate was added to 249 mL
of water to produce the solution.
(e) The solution easily conducts about 3 V of
electricity between two probes.
8. Which of the following chemical groups are
least likely to react with other elements?
(a) the halogen gases
(b) the noble gases
(c) the transition metals
(d) the alkaline earth metals
(e) the alkali metals
154 MHR • Unit 1  Matter and Chemical Bonding
9. Periodic trends are linked to
14. The measurement 4.90 m has three signiﬁcant
(a) the number of electrons in an atom and the
ﬁgures.
way they are arranged
(b) the atomic mass of the atoms
(c) the number of neutrons that an atom has
(d) the temperature of the elements
(e) the arrangement of the protons
10. Blake measured a piece of steel three times
using Vernier calipers. He recorded values
of 13.62 mm, 13.53 mm, and 13.55 mm. His
lab partner Ayako measured the same piece
of steel. She recorded values of 13.45 mm,
13.33 mm, and 13.56 mm. Which of the
following statements are true?
(a) Blake’s results were more precise than
Ayako’s.
(b) Ayako’s results were more precise
than Blake’s.
(c) Blake’s results were more accurate
than Ayako’s.
(d) Ayako’s results were more accurate than
Blake’s.
15. Matter is anything that has a weight and a
density.
16. The three standard states of matter that exist at
room temperature are liquid, solid, and plasma.
17. When iron rusts, a compound becomes an ele-
ment. This is a physical change.
18. Acid rain is a pure liquid.
19. When water melts, a quantitative chemical
change occurs.
20. To change water from ice to liquid, energy must
be removed from the water.
21. A gold ring is an example of a heterogeneous
mixture.
22. Water is an example of an element.
23. When the atoms of two elements are not
signiﬁcantly different in size, the element
with the larger atomic radius has a smaller
electronegativity.
(e) Blake’s results and Ayako’s results were
24. Nitric oxide, NO, is a non-polar molecule.
equally accurate and precise.
11. Which of the following represent polar
covalent bonds?
(i) Na–Cl; (ii) N–O; (iii) Hg–O; (iv) Ag–S
(a) (i), (iii), and (iv) only
(b) (ii) and (iii) only
(c) (iii) and (iv) only
(d) (iii) only
(e) (i) only
12. Which equation most accurately represents the
following reaction:
iron metal + copper(II) sulfate solution →
copper metal + iron(II) sulfate solution
(a) Fe(s) + Cu(SO4)2(aq) → Cu(s) + Fe(SO4)2(aq)
(b) Fe(aq) + Cu(SO4)(aq) → Cu(aq) + Fe(SO4)(aq)
(c) 2Fe(s) + Cu2(SO4)(aq) → 2Cu(s) + Fe2(SO4)(aq)
(d) Fe(s) + Cu(SO4)(aq) → Cu(s) + Fe(SO4)(aq)
(e) Fe(s) + CuS(aq) → Cu(s) + FeS(aq)
True/False
In your notebook, indicate whether each statement
is true or false. If a statement is false, rewrite it to
make it true.
13. Masses of 3.9 g, 4.1 g, and 4.0 g were obtained
on a scale for a brass 5 g weight. This scale is
accurate but not precise.
25. In a balanced chemical equation, the number
of particles of products is always equal to the
number of particles of reactants.
Short Answer
26. Name four chemical processes that occur in
everyday life.
27. How many different types of atoms would
you expect to ﬁnd in a cylinder of pure
nitrogen gas?
28. Using only a periodic table, rank the atoms in
each set in order of decreasing size. Explain
your ranking.
(a) Na, K, H
(b) Mg, S, Si
(c) Cl, K, Ar
29. Using only a periodic table, rank the elements
in each set in order of increasing ionization
energy. Explain your ranking.
(a) B, N, F
(b) F, Cl, Br
(c) Na, Cs, K
30. Using only a periodic table, rank the elements
in each set in order of increasing electron
afﬁnity. Explain your ranking.
Unit 1 Review • MHR 155
(a) Be, Ca, Mg
(b) Kr, Se, Br
(c) Na, Cs, K
31. Write the chemical name for each compound.
(a) NH4NO3
(b) Pb(C2H3O2)4
(c) S2Cl2
(d) Ba(NO2)2
(e) P4O10
(f) Mn2O3
32. Write the chemical formula of each compound.
(a) strontium chloride
(b) lead(II) sulﬁte
(c) chromium(III) acetate
(d) hydrogen sulﬁde
(e) iodine heptaﬂuoride
33. Explain why it is useful to classify reactions.
34. Balance each chemical equation, if necessary.
State which class it belongs to.
(a) Zn(s) + AgNO3(aq) → Zn(NO3)2(aq) + Ag(s)
(b) Fe(s) + S(s) → FeS(s)
(c) KClO3(s) → 2KCl(s) + 3O2(g)
(d) NaCO3(aq) + MgSO4(aq) → MgCO3(s)
+ Na2SO4(aq)
(e) C2H6O((cid:2)) + O2(g) → CO2(g) + H2O(g)
35. Predict the products of each reaction. Then
write a balanced chemical equation, and state
which class the reaction belongs to.
(a) Mg(s) + HCl(aq) →
(b) HgO(s) →
(c) Al(s) + O2(g) →
(d) C6H12O6(s) + O2(g) →
(e) BaCl2(aq) + Na2SO4(aq) →
Inquiry
36. Describe an experimental procedure to
test three qualitative properties and two
quantitative properties of lead.
37. Design an experiment that uses acids to test
the reactivities of one metal from each of the
following groups: alkali metals, alkaline earth
metals, and transition metals.
38. Raja weighed calcium sulfate on ﬁlter papers
for an experiment that he performed three
times. His data are shown below.
156 MHR • Unit 1  Matter and Chemical Bonding
Mass of filter
paper
Mass of
paper + powder
Mass of
calcium sulfate
Trial # 1
4.13 g
Trial # 2
4.2 g
Trial # 3
4.12 g
13.6 g
12.81 g
10.96 g
9.47 g
8.51 g
6.8 g
What errors did Raja make in his reporting and
calculations?
39. What kinds of tests could be used to differenti-
ate between unknown metal and non-metal
samples in a laboratory? Design an experiment
that includes these tests.
40. You are given a substance. You must decide
whether it is an ionic compound or a covalent
compound. The substance has roughly cube-
shaped granules, which are translucent and
colourless.
(a) Predict whether the compound is ionic or
covalent.
(b) Explain your prediction.
(c) Design an experiment to collect data that
will support your prediction.
41. A student drops a coil of metal wire, X(s), into a
water solution of a metal sulfate, ZSO4(aq). The
student observes that the colour of the solution
changes, and that a metallic-looking substance
appears to be forming on the metal wire. Based
on these observations, answer the following
questions.
(a) Has a reaction taken place? If so, what
kind of reaction has taken place? Explain
your answer.
(b) Which metal is more reactive, metal X or
metal Z in compound ZSO4? Explain your
answer.
(c) Write the names of a real metal and a metal
sulfate that you predict would behave this
way in a laboratory.
Communication
42. Perform each calculation. Express the answer
to the correct number of signiﬁcant digits.
(a) 19.3 g + 2.22 g
(b) 14.2 cm × 1.1 cm × 3.69 cm
(c) 57.9 kg ÷ 3.000 dm3
(d) 18.76 g – 1.3 g
(e) 25.2 + 273˚C
43. Name four groups in the periodic table. Give
characteristics of each group, and list three
members of each group.
44. Copy the following table into your notebook,
and ﬁll in the missing information. If isotopic
data are not given, use the atomic mass from the
periodic table to ﬁnd the number of neutrons.
Atom or ion
with
mass number
14N3−
+
7Li
Number
of
protons
Number
of
neutrons
Number
of
electrons
16
3
2
20
18
2
16
45. Draw a Lewis structure for each element.
(a) argon, Ar
(b) sodium, Na
(c) aluminum, Al
(d) boron, B
46. Draw a Lewis structure for each element.
Explain the two patterns that appear.
(a) carbon, C
(b) neon, N
(c) oxygen, O
(d) ﬂuorine, F
(e) chlorine, Cl
(f) bromine, Br
47. Describe three periodic trends. Explain how
these trends change across and down the
periodic table.
48. Arrange the following quantities in a table
to show which are physical and chemical
properties, which are qualitative, and which
are quantitative: melting point, colour, density,
reactivity with acids, ﬂammability, malleability,
electrical conductivity, boiling point, reactivity
with air, hardness, toxicity, brittleness.
49. Draw a Lewis structure for each compound.
(a) CrBr2
(b) H2S
(c) CCl4
(d) AsH3
(e) CS2
50. Draw diagrams to represent each class of
reaction below. Use symbols or drawings to
represent different kinds of atoms.
(a) synthesis
(b) decomposition
(c) combustion
(d) single displacement
(e) double displacement
51. Compare the boiling points of ammonia, NH3,
phosphorus trihydride, PH3, and arsenic
trihydride, AsH3. Use the periodic table and
the concept of molecular shape and polarity.
52. The molecule BF3 contains polar covalent
bonds, yet the molecule is not polar. Explain
why. Include a diagram with your explanation.
Making Connections
53. What effects do accuracy, precision, and margin
of error have in courts of law? Consider court
cases that involve forensic analysis. What are
the implications of inaccurate science in the
courts?
54. Some metals (such as gold, lead, and silver)
were known and widely used in ancient
times. Other metals have only been discovered
relatively recently. For example, both sodium
and potassium were discovered in the early
nineteenth century by Sir Humphrey Davy.
Explain why ancient cultures knew about some
metals, while other metals remained unknown
for thousands of years.
C O U R S E
C H A L L E N G E
Planet Unknown
Consider the following as you continue to plan for
your Chemistry Course Challenge:
• How did chemists use trends of physical and
chemical properties to arrange elements in a
periodic table?
• What are several ways of comparing the reactivity
of metals?
• How can you use the physical and chemical
properties of elements to help identify them?
Unit 1 Review • MHR 157
Chemical Quantities
U N I T   2   C O N T E N T S
CHAPTER  5
Counting Atoms and Molecules:
The Mole
CHAPTER  6
Chemical Proportions in Compounds
CHAPTER  7
Quantities in Chemical Reactions
DESIGN  YOUR  OWN  INVESTIGATION
Analyzing a Mixture Using
Stoichiometry
UNIT 2 OVERALL  EXPECTATIONS
What is the mole? Why is it
important for analyzing
chemical systems?
How are the quantitative
relationships in balanced
chemical reactions used for
experiments and calculations?
Why are quantitative
chemical relationships
important in the home
and in industries?
Unit Investigation Prep
Read pages 274–275 before begin-
ning this unit. There, you will have
the opportunity to determine the
composition of a mixture. You can
start planning your investigation
well in advance by knowing the
kind of skills and information you
need to have as you progress
through Unit 2.
158
In the 1939 ﬁlm The Wizard of Oz,
Dorothy and her companions col-
lapsed in sleep in a ﬁeld of poppies.
This scene is not realistic, however.
Simply walking in a ﬁeld of poppies
will not put you into a drugged sleep.
Poppy seeds do, however,
contain a substance called opium.
Opium contains the drugs morphine,
codeine, and heroin, collectively
known as opiates.
While you are unlikely to expe-
rience any physiological effects from
eating the poppy seeds on a bagel,
they could cost you your job! For
some safety sensitive jobs, such as
nursing and truck-driving, you may
be required to take a drug test as
part of the interview process.
Each gram of poppy seeds may
contain 2 mg to 18 mg of morphine
and 0.6 mg to 2.4 mg of codeine.
Eating foods with large amounts of
poppy seeds can cause chemists to
detect opiates in urine. The opiates
may be at levels above employers’
speciﬁed limits.
Knowing about quantities in
chemical reactions is crucial to
interpreting the results of drug tests.
Policy-makers and chemists need
to understand how the proportions
of codeine to morphine caused by
eating poppy seeds differ from the
proportions caused by taking opiates.
In this unit, you will carry out
experiments and calculations based
on the quantitative relationships in
chemical formulas and reactions.
160
Counting Atoms and
Molecules: The Mole
A recipe for chocolate chip mufﬁns tells you exactly what ingredients
you will need. One recipe might call for ﬂour, butter, eggs, milk, vinegar,
baking soda, sugar, and chocolate chips. It also tells you how much of
each ingredient you will need, using convenient units of measurement.
Which of the ingredients do you measure by counting? Which do you
measure by volume or by mass? The recipe does not tell you exactly how
many chocolate chips or grains of sugar you will need. It would take far
too long to count individual chocolate chips or grains of sugar. Instead, the
amounts are given in millilitres or grams—the units of volume or mass.
In some ways, chemistry is similar to baking. To carry out a reaction
successfully— in chemistry or in baking—you need to know how much
of each reactant you will need. When you bake something with vinegar
and baking soda, for example, the baking soda reacts with acetic acid in
the vinegar to produce carbon dioxide gas. The carbon dioxide gas helps
the batter rise. The chemical equation for this reaction is
NaHCO3(s) + CH3COOH(aq) → NaCH3COO(aq) + H2O((cid:2)) + CO2(g)
According to the balanced equation, one molecule of baking soda
reacts with one molecule of acetic acid to form a salt, water, and carbon
dioxide. If you wanted to carry out the reaction, how would you know the
amount of baking soda and vinegar to use? Their molecules are much too
small and numerous to be counted like eggs.
In this chapter, you will learn how chemists count atoms by organiz-
ing large numbers of them into convenient, measurable groups. You will
learn how these groups relate the number of atoms in a substance to its
mass. Using your calculator and the periodic table, you will learn how
to convert between the mass of a substance and the number of atoms
it contains.
How do recipe writers
know that they have the
right number of molecules
of each ingredient to ensure
tasty mufﬁns?
C h a p t e r   P r e v i e w
5.1 Isotopes and Average
Atomic Mass
5.2 The Avogadro Constant
and the Mole
5.3 Molar Mass
C o n c e p t s   a n d   S k i l l s
Yo u   W i l l   N e e d
Before you begin this chapter,
review the following concepts
and skills:
deﬁning and describing
the relationships among
atomic number, mass
number, atomic mass,
and isotope (Chapter 2,
section 2.1)
(cid:2) writing chemical formulas
and equations (Chapter 3,
section 3.4)
balancing chemical
equations by inspection
(Chapter 4, section 4.1)
Chapter 5  Counting Atoms and Molecules: The Mole • MHR 161
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
5.1
Isotopes and
Average Atomic Mass
How does the mass of a substance relate to the number of atoms in
the substance? To answer this question, you need to understand how the
relative masses of individual atoms relate to the masses of substances that
you can measure on a balance.
The head of a pin, like the one shown in Figure 5.1, is made primarily
of iron. It has a mass of about 8 × 10−3 g, yet it contains about 8 × 1019
atoms. Even if you could measure the mass of a single atom on a balance,
the mass would be so tiny (about 1 × 10−22 g for an iron atom) that it
would be impractical to use in everyday situations. Therefore, you need to
consider atoms in bulk, not individually.
How do you relate the mass of individual atoms to the mass of a large,
easily measurable number of atoms? In the next two sections, you will
ﬁnd out.
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
describe the relationship
between isotopic abundance
and average atomic mass
solve problems involving
percentage abundance of
isotopes and relative atomic
mass
explain the signiﬁcance of a
weighted average
communicate your under-
standing of the following
terms: isotopic abundance,
average atomic mass,
mass spectrometer,
weighted average
Figure 5.1
The head of a typical pin contains about 80 quintillion atoms.
Relating Atomic Masses to Macroscopic Masses
In Chapter 2, you learned that the mass of an atom is expressed in
atomic mass units. Atomic mass units are a relative measure, deﬁned by
the mass of carbon-12. According to this deﬁnition, one atom of carbon-12
is assigned a mass of 12 u. Stated another way, 1 u = 1
12
one atom of carbon-12.
of the mass of
The masses of all other atoms are deﬁned by their relationship to
carbon-12. For example, oxygen-16 has a mass that is 133% of the mass
of carbon-12. Hence the mass of an atom of oxygen-16 is
133
100
× 12.000 u = 16.0 u .
162 MHR • Unit 2  Chemical Quantities
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
Usually, not all the atoms in an element have the same mass. As you
learned in Chapter 2, atoms of the same element that contain different
numbers of neutrons are called isotopes. Most elements are made up of
two or more isotopes. Chemists need to account for the presence of iso-
topes when ﬁnding the relationship between the mass of a large number
of atoms and the mass of a single atom. To understand why this is impor-
tant, consider the following analogy.
Imagine that you have the task of ﬁnding the total mass of 10 000
spoons. If you know the mass of a dessertspoon, can you assume that its
mass represents the average mass of all the spoons? What if the 10 000
spoons include soupspoons, dessertspoons, and tablespoons? If you use
the mass of a dessertspoon to calculate the total mass of all the spoons,
you may obtain a reasonable estimate. Your answer will not be accurate,
however, because each type of spoon has a different mass. You cannot
calculate an accurate average mass for all the spoons based on knowing
the mass of only one type. How can you improve the accuracy of your
answer without determining the mass of all the spoons?
Mg-24
Mg-25
Mg-26
C H E M
FA C T
Magnesium plays a variety of
roles in the body. It is involved
in energy production, nerve
function, and muscle relax-
ation, to name just a few.
The magnesium in these
tablets, like all naturally
occurring magnesium, is
made up of three isotopes.
Think about ﬁnding the average mass of a group of objects that have
Figure 5.2
different masses. How is this similar to ﬁnding the average mass of an element that is
composed of different isotopes?
Isotopic Abundance
Chemists face a situation similar to the one described above. Because all
the atoms in a given element do not have the same number of neutrons,
they do not all have the same mass. For example, magnesium has three
naturally occurring isotopes. It is made up of 79% magnesium-24,
10% magnesium-25, and 11% magnesium-26. Whether the magnesium
is found in a supplement tablet (like the ones on the right) or in seawater
as Mg(OH)2, it is always made up of these three isotopes in the same
proportion. The relative amount in which each isotope is present in an
element is called the isotopic abundance. It can be expressed as a percent
or as a decimal fraction. When chemists consider the mass of a sample
containing billions of atoms, they must take the isotopic abundance
into account.
Chapter 5  Counting Atoms and Molecules: The Mole • MHR 163
C H E M
FA C T
The only elements with only
one naturally occurring
isotope are beryllium, sodium,
aluminum, and phosphorus.
Average Atomic Mass and the Periodic Table
The average atomic mass of an element is the average of the masses
of all the element’s isotopes. It takes into account the abundance of each
isotope within the element. The average atomic mass is the mass that is
given for each element in the periodic table.
It is important to interpret averages carefully. For example, in 1996,
the average size of a Canadian family was 3.1. Of course, no one family
actually has 3.1 people. In the same way, while the average atomic mass
of carbon is 12.01 u, no one atom of carbon has a mass of 12.01 u.
Examine Figure 5.3. Since the atomic mass unit is based on carbon-12,
why does the periodic table show a value of 12.01 u, instead of exactly
12 u? Carbon is made up of several isotopes, not just carbon-12. Naturally
occurring carbon contains carbon-12, carbon-13, and carbon-14. If all
these isotopes were present in equal amounts, you could simply ﬁnd
the average of the masses of the isotopes. This average mass would be
about 13 u, since the masses of carbon-13 and carbon-14 are about 13 u
and 14 u respectively.
The isotopes, though, are not present in equal amounts. Carbon-12
comprises 98.9% of all carbon, while carbon-13 accounts for 1.1%.
Carbon-14 is present in a very small amount— about 1 × 10−10%. It makes
sense that the average mass of all the isotopes of carbon is 12.01 u—very
close to 12— since carbon-12 is by far the predominant isotope.
6
C
12.01
average atomic mass (u)
The atomic mass that is given in the periodic table represents the average
Figure 5.3
mass of all the naturally occurring isotopes of the element. It takes into account their
isotopic abundances.
Thus chemists need to know an element’s isotopic abundance and the
mass of each isotope to calculate the average atomic mass. How do
chemists determine the isotopic abundance associated with each element?
How do they ﬁnd the mass of each isotope? They use a mass
spectrometer, a powerful instrument that generates a magnetic ﬁeld to
obtain data about the mass and abundance of atoms and molecules. You
will learn more about the mass spectrometer in Tools & Techniques on
page 166. You can use the data obtained with a mass spectrometer to
calculate the average atomic mass given in the periodic table.
164 MHR • Unit 2  Chemical Quantities
Working with Weighted Averages
If you obtain the isotopic abundance of an element from mass spectrome-
ter data or a table, you can calculate the average atomic mass of the ele-
ment. You do this by calculating the weighted average of each isotope’s
mass. A weighted average takes into account not only the values associat-
ed with a set of data, but also the abundance or importance of each value.
Normally, when you calculate the average of a set of data, you ﬁnd the
equally weighted average. You add the given values and divide the total
by the number of values in the set. Each value in the average is given
equal weight. For example, imagine that you have three objects: A, B, and
C. A has a mass of 1.0 kg, B has a mass of 2.0 kg, and C has a mass of 3.0
kg. Their average mass is
Mass of (A + B + C)
Number of items
= 1.0 kg + 2.0 kg + 3.0 kg
3
= 2.0 kg
What if you have a set containing two of A, one of B, and three of C?
Their average mass becomes
2(1.0 kg) + 2.0 kg + 3(3.0 kg)
6
This is a weighted average.
= 2.2 kg
Another way to calculate the same weighted average is to consider
the relative abundance of each object. There are six objects in total. A is
present as  2
6
is present as  3
6
ed in the following way:
(17%) of the total, and C
(50%) of the total. Thus their average mass can be calculat-
(33%) of the total, B is present as  1
6
(0.33)(1.0 kg) + (0.17)(2.0 kg) + (0.50)(3.0 kg) = 2.2 kg
Calculating Average Atomic Mass
You can use a similar method to calculate average atomic mass. If you
know the atomic mass of each isotope that makes up an element, as well
as the isotopic abundance of each isotope, you can calculate the average
atomic mass of the element.
(cid:2)
For example, lithium exists as two isotopes: lithium-7 and lithium-6.
As you can see in Figure 5.4, lithium-7 has a mass of 7.015 u and makes
up 92.58% of lithium. Lithium-6 has a mass of 6.015 u and makes up
the remaining 7.42%. To calculate the average atomic mass of lithium,
multiply the mass of each isotope by its abundance.
7.42
100
Looking at the periodic table conﬁrms that the aver-
age atomic mass of lithium is 6.94 u. The upcoming
Sample Problem gives another
example of how to calculate average
atomic mass.
(cid:3)
(6.015 u) = 6.94 u
(cid:3)
(7.015 u) +
92.58
100
(cid:2)
92.6 %
Lithium-7
We use weighted averages all
the time! For example, course
marks are often based on
weighted averages. Suppose
that the ﬁnal mark in a chem-
istry course is determined
as follows: laboratory 25%,
tests 30%, homework and
quizzes 5%, project 10%, and
ﬁnal exam 30%. A student
obtains the following marks:
, tests  261
laboratory  114
,
300
130
homework and quizzes  90
95
project  21
25
, and ﬁnal exam  70
80
,
.
What is the student’s ﬁnal
mark in chemistry?
How is the atomic mass of an
atom different from the mass
number of the atom? How are
the atomic mass and mass
number similar?
7.4%
Lithium-6
Figure 5.4
consists of two isotopes, 7
Naturally occurring lithium
3Li and 6
3Li.
Chapter 5  Counting Atoms and Molecules: The Mole • MHR 165
Tools
& Techniques
The Mass Spectrometer
Many chemists depend on instruments known
as mass spectrometers. Mass spectrometers can
detect trace pollutants in the atmosphere, provide
information about the composition of large mole-
cules, and help to determine the age of Earth’s
oldest rocks.
As well, mass spectrometers can ﬁnd the
relative abundance of each isotope in an element.
In 1912, J.J. Thompson ﬁrst detected neon-20
and neon-22 in a sample of neon gas by using a
magnetic ﬁeld to separate the isotopes.
Today’s mass spectrometers also use a mag-
netic ﬁeld to separate the isotopes of an element.
Since a magnetic ﬁeld can only affect the path of
a charged particle, the atoms must ﬁrst be
charged, or “ionized.” The magnetic ﬁeld then
deﬂects ions with the same charge, but different
masses, onto separate paths. Imagine rolling a
tennis ball at a right angle to the air current from
a fan. The air current deﬂects the path of the ball.
The same air current deﬂects a Ping-Pong™ ball
more than a tennis ball. Similarly, a magnetic
ﬁeld deﬂects isotopes of smaller mass more than
isotopes of larger mass.
In a mass spectrometer, elements that are not
gases are vaporized by heating. Next, the gas
atoms are ionized. In electron impact ionization,
the gas atoms are bombarded with a stream of
electrons from a heated ﬁlament. These electrons
collide with the gas atoms, causing each atom to
lose an electron and become a positive ion.
The ions are focussed and accelerated by elec-
tric ﬁelds, toward a magnetic ﬁeld. The magnetic
ﬁeld deﬂects them and forces them to take a
curved path. Lighter ions curve more than heavier
ions. Therefore ions from different isotopes arrive
at different destinations. Since ions have a charge,
a detector can be used to register the current at
each destination. The current is proportional to
the number of ions that arrive at the destination.
An isotope that has a larger relative abundance
generates a larger current. From the currents at
the different destinations, chemists can deduce
the proportion of each isotope in the element.
Mass spectral data for neon, below, show
the relative abundance of the isotopes of neon.
Using mass spectrometers, chemists now detect
a signal from neon-21, in addition to the signals
from neon-20 and neon-22.
2 If necessary, heater
vaporizes sample
Detector
20Ne+
21Ne+
Lightest particles in sample
22Ne+
3
Electron beam knocks
electrons from atoms
Charged particle
beam
1
Sample
enters
chamber
Electron
source
4
Electric field accelerates
particles toward
magnetic region
5
Magnetic field separates
particles according to
their mass/change ratio
Magnet
Mass spectroscopy of neon
Heaviest particles
in sample
20Ne+
(90.5%)
22Ne+
(9.2%)
21Ne+
(0.3%)
3
2
1
Mass/charge
e
c
n
a
d
n
u
b
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
P
100
80
60
40
20
0
Mass spectral data for isotopes
of neon
166 MHR • Unit 2  Chemical Quantities
Sample Problem
Average Atomic Mass
Problem
Naturally occurring silver exists as two isotopes. From the mass of
each isotope and the isotopic abundance listed below, calculate the
average atomic mass of silver.
Isotope
Atomic mass (u) Relative abundance (%)
107
47
Ag
109
47
Ag
106.9
108.9
51.8
48.2
What Is Required?
You need to ﬁnd the average atomic mass of silver.
What Is Given?
You are given the relative abundance and the atomic mass
of each isotope.
Plan Your Strategy
Multiply the atomic mass of each isotope by its relative abundance,
expressed as a decimal. That is, 51.8% expressed as a decimal is
0.518 and 48.2% is 0.482.
Act on Your Strategy
Average atomic mass of Ag = 106.9 u (0.518) + 108.9 u (0.482)
= 107.9 u
Check Your Solution
In this case, the abundance of each isotope is close to 50%. An
average atomic mass of about 108 u seems right, because it is
between 106.9 u and 108.9 u. Checking the periodic table reveals
that the average atomic mass of silver is indeed 107.9 u.
Practice Problems
1. The two stable isotopes of boron exist in the following
C H E M
FA C T
Why are the atomic masses of
individual isotopes not exact
whole numbers? After all, 12C
has a mass of exactly 12 u.
Since carbon has 6 neutrons
and 6 protons, you might
assume that protons and neu-
trons have masses of exactly
1 u each. In fact, protons and
neutrons have masses that are
close to, but slightly different
from, 1 u. As well, the mass of
electrons, while much smaller
than the masses of protons
and neutrons, must still be
taken into account.
Why is carbon-12 the only
isotope with an atomic mass
that is a whole number?
proportions: 19.78% 10
Calculate the average atomic mass of boron.
5B (10.01 u) and 80.22% 11
5B (11.01 u).
2. In nature, silicon is composed of three isotopes. These isotopes
(with their isotopic abundances and atomic masses) are 28
(92.23%, 27.98 u), 29
14Si (3.10%,
29.97 u). Calculate the average atomic mass of silicon.
14Si (4.67%, 28.97 u), and 30
14Si
Continued ...
Chapter 5  Counting Atoms and Molecules: The Mole • MHR 167
C H E M
FA C T
In some periodic tables,
the average atomic mass
is referred to as the atomic
weight of an element. This
terminology, while technically
incorrect, is still in use and is
generally accepted.
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 167
3. Copper is a corrosion-resistant metal that is used extensively in
plumbing and wiring. Copper exists as two naturally occurring
isotopes: 63
29Cu (64.93 u). These isotopes have
isotopic abundances of 69.1% and 30.9% respectively. Calculate
the average atomic mass of copper.
29Cu (62.93 u) and 65
4. Lead occurs naturally as four isotopes. These isotopes (with
their isotopic abundances and atomic masses) are 204
204.0 u), 206
208
82Pb (51.55%, 208.0 u). Calculate the average atomic mass
of lead.
82Pb (1.37%,
82Pb (20.82%, 207.0 u), and
82Pb (26.26%, 206.0 u), 207
ExpressLab
A Penny for your Isotopes
2. Sort your pennies into groups of pre-1997
“isotopes” and post-1997 “isotopes” of
centium.
3. Count the number of pennies in each group.
4. Find the mass of ten pennies from each group.
Divide the total mass by 10 to get the mass of
each centium “isotope.”
5. Use the data you have just gathered to calcu-
late the mass of the pennies, using a weighted
average. This represents the “average atomic
mass” of centium.
Analysis
1. In step 4, you used the average mass of
ten pennies to represent the mass of one
“isotope” of centium.
(a) Why did you need to do this? Why did you
not just ﬁnd the mass of one penny from
each group?
(b) If you were able to ﬁnd the mass of real
isotopes for this experiment, would you
need to do step 4? Explain.
2. Compare your “average atomic mass” for
centium with the “average atomic mass”
obtained by other groups.
(a) Are all the masses the same? Explain any
differences.
(b) What if you were able to use real isotopes
of an element, such as copper, for this
experiment? Would you expect results to be
consistent throughout the class? Explain.
The mass of a Canadian penny has decreased
several times over the years. Therefore you can
use pennies to represent different “isotopes” of a
ﬁctitious element, centium. That is, each “atom”
of centium reacts the same way—it is still worth
1¢ —but the various isotopes have different
characteristic masses.
Safety Precautions
Procedure
1. Obtain a bag of pennies from your teacher.
Since the mass of a penny decreased in 1982
and 1997, your bag will contain pennies dated
anywhere from 1982 to the present date.
168 MHR • Unit 2  Chemical Quantities
C H E M
FA C T
If you wear contact lenses,
you may use boron every day.
Boron is part of boric acid,
H3BO3, which is contained in
many cleaning solutions for
contact lenses.
Calculating Isotopic Abundance
Chemists use a mass spectrometer to determine accurate values for the
isotopic abundance associated with each element. Knowing the average
atomic mass of an element, you can use the masses of its isotopes to
calculate the isotopic abundances.
Sample Problem
Isotopic Abundance
Problem
Boron exists as two naturally occurring isotopes: 10
and 11
of boron.
5B (11.01 u). Calculate the relative abundance of each isotope
5B (10.01 u)
What Is Required?
You need to ﬁnd the isotopic abundance of boron.
What Is Given?
Atomic mass of 10
Atomic mass of 11
From the periodic table, the average atomic mass of boron
is B = 10.81 u.
5B = 10.01 u
5B = 11.01 u
Plan Your Strategy
Express the abundance of each isotope as a decimal rather than a
percent. The total abundance of both isotopes is therefore 1. Let the
abundance of boron-10 be x. Let the abundance of boron-11 be 1 − x.
Set up an equation, and solve for x.
Act on Your Strategy
Average atomic mass = x(atomic mass B-10) + (1 − x)(atomic mass B-11)
10.81 = x(10.01) + (1 − x)(11.01)
10.81 = 10.01x + 11.01 − 11.01x
11.01x − 10.01x = 11.01 − 10.81
x = 0.2000
The abundance of boron-10 is 0.2000.
The abundance of boron-11 is 1 − x, or 1 − 0.2000 = 0.8000.
The abundance of 10
of 11
5B is 80.00%.
5B is therefore 20.00%. The abundance
Check Your Solution
The fact that boron-11 comprises 80% of naturally occurring boron
makes sense, because the average atomic mass of boron is 10.81 u.
This is closer to 11.01 u than to 10.01 u.
Continued ...
Chapter 5  Counting Atoms and Molecules: The Mole • MHR 169
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 169
Practice Problems
5. Hydrogen is found primarily as two isotopes in nature:
1H (1.0078 u) and 2
1
1H (2.0140 u). Calculate the percentage abun-
dance of each isotope based on hydrogen’s average atomic mass.
6. Lanthanum is composed of two isotopes: 138
57La (137.91 u) and
139
57La (138.91 u). Look at the periodic table. What can you say
about the abundance of 138
57 La?
7. Rubidium ignites spontaneously when exposed to oxygen to form
rubidium oxide, Rb2O. Rubidium exists as two isotopes: 85
(84.91 u) and 87
37Rb (86.91 u). If the average atomic mass of
rubidium is 85.47 u, determine the percentage abundance of 85
37Rb
37Rb .
8. Oxygen is composed of three isotopes: 16
8O (15.995 u),
8O (17.999 u). One of these isotopes, 17
8O (16.999 u), and 18
17
comprises 0.037% of oxygen. Calculate the percentage
abundance of the other two isotopes, using the average
atomic mass of 15.9994 u.
8O,
Section Wrap-up
In this section, you learned how isotopic abundance relates to average
atomic mass. Since you know the average mass of an atom in any given
element, you can now begin to relate the mass of a single atom to the
mass of a large number of atoms. First you need to establish how many
atoms are in easily measurable samples. In section 5.2, you will learn how
chemists group atoms into convenient amounts.
Section Review
1
2
3
4
K/U
The average atomic mass of potassium is 39.1 u. Explain why no
single atom of potassium has a mass of 39.1 u.
I
Naturally occurring magnesium exists as a mixture of three
isotopes. These isotopes (with their isotopic abundances and atomic
masses) are Mg-24 (78.70%, 23.985 u), Mg-25 (10.13%, 24.985 u),
and Mg-26 (11.17%, 25.983 u). Calculate the average atomic mass
of magnesium.
C
Assume that an unknown element, X, exists naturally as three
different isotopes. The average atomic mass of element X is known,
along with the atomic mass of each isotope. Is it possible to calculate
the percentage abundance of each isotope? Why or why not?
C
You know that silver exists as two isotopes: silver-107 and silver-
109. However, radioisotopes of silver, such as silver-105, silver-106,
silver-108, and silver-110 to silver-117 are known. Why do you not
use the abundance and mass of these isotopes when you calculate the
average atomic mass of silver? Suggest two reasons.
170 MHR • Unit 2  Chemical Quantities
The Avogadro
Constant and the Mole
In section 5.1, you learned how to use isotopic abundances and isotopic
masses to ﬁnd the average atomic mass of an element. You can use the
average atomic mass, found in the periodic table, to describe the average
mass of an atom in a large sample.
Why is relating average atomic mass to the mass of large samples
important? In a laboratory, as in everyday life, we deal with macroscopic
samples. These samples contain incredibly large numbers of atoms or
molecules. Can you imagine a cookie recipe calling for six septillion
molecules of baking soda? What if copper wire in a hardware store were
priced by the atom instead of by the metre, as in Figure 5.5? What if we
paid our water bill according to the number of water molecules that we
used? The numbers involved would be ridiculously inconvenient. In this
section, you will learn how chemists group large numbers of atoms into
amounts that are easily measurable.
5.2
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
describe the relationship
between moles and number
of particles
solve problems involving
number of moles and
number of particles
explain why chemists use
the mole to group atoms
communicate your under-
standing of the following
terms: mole, Avogadro
constant
Copper wire is often
Figure 5.5
priced by the metre because the
metre is a convenient unit. What
unit do chemists use to work with
large numbers of atoms?
Grouping for Convenience
In a chemistry lab, as well as in other contexts, it is important to be able
to measure amounts accurately and conveniently. When you purchase
headache tablets from a drugstore, you are conﬁdent that each tablet
contains the correct amount of the active ingredient. Years of testing and
development have determined the optimum amount of the active ingredi-
ent that you should ingest. If there is too little of the active ingredient, the
tablet may not be effective. If there is too much, the tablet may be harm-
ful. When the tablets are manufactured, the active ingredient needs to be
weighed in bulk. When the tablets are tested, however, to ensure that they
contain the right amount of the active ingredient, chemists need to know
how many molecules of the substance are present. How do chemists
group particles so that they know how many are present in a given mass
of substance?
On its own, the mass of a chemical is not very useful to a chemist.
The chemical reactions that take place depend on the number of atoms
present, not on their masses. Since atoms are far too small and numerous
to count, you need a way to relate the numbers of atoms to masses that
can be measured.
Chapter 5  Counting Atoms and Molecules: The Mole • MHR 171
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
When many items in a large set need to be counted, it is often useful
to work with groups of items rather than individual items. When you hear
the word “dozen,” you think of the number 12. It does not matter what
the items are. A dozen refers to the quantity 12 whether the items are eggs
or pencils or baseballs. Table 5.1 lists some common quantities that we
use to deal with everyday items.
Table 5.1 Some Common Quantities
Item
gloves
pair
Quantity
Amount
soft drinks
six-pack
eggs
pens
paper
dozen
gross (12 dozen)
ream
2
6
12
144
500
You do not buy eggs one at a time. You purchase them in units of a dozen.
Similarly, your school does not order photocopy paper by the sheet. The
paper is purchased in bundles of 500 sheets, called a ream. It would be
impractical to sell sheets of paper individually.
Certain items,
Figure 5.6
because of their size, are often
handled in bulk. Would you
rather count reams of paper or
individual sheets?
Language
LINK
The term mole is an
abbreviation of another word.
What do you think this other
word is? Check your guess by
consulting a dictionary.
The Deﬁnition of the Mole
Convenient, or easily measurable, amounts of elements contain huge num-
bers of atoms. Therefore chemists use a quantity that is much larger than a
dozen or a ream to group atoms and molecules together. This quantity is
the mole (symbol mol).
• One mole (1 mol) of a substance contains 6.022 141 99 × 1023 particles
of the substance. This value is called the Avogadro constant. Its symbol
is NA.
• The mole is deﬁned as the amount of substance that contains as many
elementary entities (atoms, molecules, or formula units) as exactly 12 g
of carbon-12.
172 MHR • Unit 2  Chemical Quantities
For example, one mole of carbon contains 6.02 × 1023 atoms of C. One
mole of sodium chloride contains 6.02 × 1023 formula units of NaCl.
One mole of hydroﬂuoric acid contains 6.02 × 1023 molecules of HF.
The Avogadro constant is an experimentally determined quantity.
Chemists continually devise more accurate methods to determine how
many atoms are in exactly 12 g of carbon-12. This means that the accepted
value has changed slightly over the years since it was ﬁrst deﬁned.
The Chemist’s Dozen
The mole is literally the chemist’s dozen. Just as egg farmers and grocers
use the dozen (a unit of 12) to count eggs, chemists use the mole (a much
larger number) to count atoms, molecules, or formula units. When farmers
think of two dozen eggs, they are also thinking of 24 eggs.
(2 dozen) ×
= 24 eggs
(cid:2)
(cid:3)
12 eggs
dozen
Chemists work in a similar way. As you have learned above, 1 mol
has 6.02 × 1023 particles. Thus 2 mol of aluminum atoms contain
12.0 × 1023 atoms of Al.
2 mol × (6.02 × 1023 atoms
mol
) = 1.20 × 1024 atoms of Al
How Big Is the Avogadro Constant?
The Avogadro constant is a huge number. Its magnitude becomes easier
to visualize if you imagine it in terms of ordinary items. For example,
suppose that you created a stack of 6.02 × 1023 loonies, as in Figure 5.7.
To determine the height of the stack, you could determine the height of
one loonie and multiply by 6.02 × 1023. The Avogadro constant needs to
be this huge to group single atoms into convenient amounts. What does
1 mol of a substance look like? Figure 5.8 shows some samples of elements.
Each sample contains 6.02 × 1023 atoms. Notice that each sample has a
different mass. You will learn why in section 5.3. Examine the following
Sample Problem to see how to work with the Avogadro constant.
Web
LINK
www.school.mcgrawhill.ca/
resources/
Chemists have devised
various ways to determine the
Avogadro constant. To learn
more about how this constant
has been found in the past
and how it is found today, go
to the web site above. Go to
Science Resources, then to
Chemistry 11 to ﬁnd out where
to go next. What are some
methods that chemists have
used to determine the number
of particles in a mole? How
has the accepted value of the
Avogadro constant changed
over the years?
Measure the height
Figure 5.7
of a pile of ﬁve loonies. How tall,
in kilometres, would a stack of
6.02 × 1023 loonies be?
Each sample contains 1.00 mol, or
Figure 5.8
6.02 × 1023 atoms. Why do you think the mass of
each sample is different?
Chapter 5  Counting Atoms and Molecules: The Mole • MHR 173
Math
LINK
Suppose that you invested
$6.02 × 1023 so that it earned
1% compound interest
annually. How much money
would you have at the end
of ten years?
Toronto’s SkyDome
Figure 5.9
cost about $500 million to build.
Spending $6.02 × 1023 at the rate
of one billion dollars per second
is roughly equivalent to building
two SkyDomes per second for
over 19 million years.
Sample Problem
Using the Avogadro Constant
Problem
The distance “as the crow ﬂies” from St. John’s in Newfoundland
to Vancouver in British Columbia is 5046 km. Suppose that you had
1 mol of peas, each of diameter 1 cm. How many round trips could
be made between these cities, laying the peas from end to end?
What Is Required?
You need to ﬁnd the number of round trips from St. John’s to
Vancouver (2 × 5046 km) that can be made by laying 6.02 × 1023
peas end to end.
What Is Given?
Each round trip is 2 × 5046 km or 10 092 km. A pea has a diameter
of 1 cm.
Plan Your Strategy
First convert the round trip distance from kilometres to centimetres.
Since each pea has a diameter of 1 cm, a line of 6.02 × 1023 peas is
6.02 × 1023 cm in length. Divide the length of the line of peas by the
round-trip distance to ﬁnd the number of round trips.
Act on Your Strategy
Converting the round-trip distance from kilometres to
centimetres gives
(10 092 km) × (105 cm/km) = 1.01 × 109 cm
Number of round trips =
6.02 × 1023 cm
(1.01 × 109 cm/round trip)
= 5.96 × 1014 round trips
About 596 trillion round trips between St. John’s and Vancouver
could be made by laying one mole of peas end to end.
Check Your Solution
Looking at the magnitude of the numbers, you have 1023 ÷ 109.
This accounts for 1014 in the answer.
Practice Problems
9. The length of British Columbia’s coastline is 17 856 km. If you
laid 6.02 × 1023 metre sticks end to end along the coast of BC,
how many rows of metre sticks would you have?
10. The area of Nunavut is 1 936 113 km2. Suppose that you had
6.02 × 1023 sheets of pastry, each with the dimensions 30 cm × 30
cm. How many times could you cover Nunavut completely with
pastry?
Continued ...
174 MHR • Unit 2  Chemical Quantities
Technology
LINK
Scientiﬁc calculators are
made to accommodate scien-
tiﬁc notation easily. To enter
the Avogadro constant, for
example, type 6.02, followed by
the key labelled “EE” or “EXP.”
(The label on the key depends
on the make of calculator you
have.) Then enter 23. The 23
will appear at the far right
of the display, without the
exponential base of 10. Your
calculator understands the
number to be in scientiﬁc
notation.
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 174
11. If you drove for 6.02 × 1023 days at a speed of 100 km/h, how far
would you travel?
12. If you spent $6.02 × 1023 at a rate of $1.00/s, how long, in years,
would the money last? Assume that every year has 365 days.
Converting Moles to Number of Particles
In the Thought Lab below, you can practise working with the mole by
relating the Avogadro constant to familiar items. Normally the mole is
used to group atoms and compounds. For example, chemists know that
1 mol of barium contains 6.02 × 1023 atoms of Ba. Similarly, 2 mol of
barium sulfate contain 2 × (6.02 × 1023) = 12.0 × 1023 molecules of BaSO4.
number of moles
Multiply by
6.02 × 10   23
number of particles
(atoms, molecules,
formula units)
The mole is used to help us “count” atoms and molecules. The relation-
ship between moles, number of particles, and the Avogadro constant is
N = number of particles
n = number of moles
NA = Avogadro constant
N = n × NA
Try the next Sample Problem to learn how the number of moles of a
substance relates to the number of particles in the substance.
ThoughtLab
The Magnitude of the Avogadro Constant
This activity presents some challenges related
to the magnitude of the Avogadro constant.
These questions are examples of Fermi problems,
which involve large numbers (like the Avogadro
constant) and give approximate answers. The
Italian physicist, Enrico Fermi, liked to pose and
solve these types of questions.
Procedure
Work in small groups. Use any reference
materials, including materials supplied by your
teacher and information on the Internet. For each
question, brainstorm to determine the required
information. Obtain this information, and answer
the question. Be sure to include units throughout
your calculation, along with a brief explanation.
Analysis
1. If you covered Canada’s land mass with
1.00 mol of golf balls, how deep would the
layer of golf balls be?
2. Suppose that you put one mole of ﬁve-dollar
bills end to end. How many round trips from
Earth to the Moon would they make?
3. If you could somehow remove 6.02 × 1023
teaspoons of water from the world’s oceans,
would you completely drain the oceans?
Explain.
4. What is the mass of one mole of apples? How
does this compare with the mass of Earth?
5. How many planets would we need for one
mole of people, if each planet’s population
were limited to the current population of
Earth?
Chapter 5  Counting Atoms and Molecules: The Mole • MHR 175
Language
LINK
The term order of magnitude
refers to the size of a
number—speciﬁcally to
its exponent when in scientiﬁc
notation. For example, a
scientist will say that 50 000
(5 × 104) is two orders of
magnitude (102 times) larger
than 500 (5 × 102). How many
orders of magnitude is the
Avogadro constant greater
than one billion?
Sample Problem
Moles to Atoms
Problem
A sample contains 1.25 mol of nitrogen dioxide, NO2.
(a) How many molecules are in the sample?
(b) How many atoms are in the sample?
What Is Required?
You need to ﬁnd the number of atoms and molecules in the sample.
What Is Given?
The sample consists of 1.25 mol of nitrogen dioxide molecules.
Each nitrogen dioxide molecule is made up of three atoms:
1 N atom + 2 O atoms.
NA = 6.02 × 1023 molecules/mol
Plan Your Strategy
(a) A molecule of NO2 contains three atoms. Find the number
of NO2 molecules in 1.25 mol of nitrogen dioxide.
(b) Multiply the number of molecules by 3 to arrive at the total
number of atoms in the sample.
Act on Your Strategy
(a) Number of molecules of NO2
= (1.25 mol) ×
(cid:2)
6.02 × 1023 molecules
(cid:3)
mol
= 7.52 × 1023 molecules
Therefore there are 7.52 × 1023 molecules in 1.25 mol of NO2.
(b) (7.52 × 1023 molecules) ×
3
= 2.26 × 1024 atoms
(cid:2)
(cid:3)
atoms
molecule
Therefore there are 2.26 × 1024 atoms in 1.25 mol of NO2.
Check Your Solution
Work backwards.  One mol contains 6.02 × 1023 atoms. How many
moles represent 2.2 × 1024 atoms?
2.2 × 1024 atoms ×
1 mol
6.02 × 1023 atoms
= 3.7 mol
There are 3 atoms in each molecule of NO2
3.7 mol atoms × 1 mol molecule
3 mol atoms
= 1.2 molecules
This is close to the value of 1.25 mol of molecules, given in the
question.
Continued ...
176 MHR • Unit 2  Chemical Quantities
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 176
Practice Problems
13. A small pin contains 0.0178 mol of iron, Fe. How many atoms of
iron are in the pin?
14. A sample contains 4.70 × 10−4 mol of gold, Au. How many atoms
of gold are in the sample?
15. How many formula units are contained in 0.21 mol of magnesium
nitrate, Mg(NO3)2?
16. A litre of water contains 55.6 mol of water. How many molecules
of water are in this sample?
17. Ethyl acetate, C4H8O2, is frequently used in nail polish remover.
A typical bottle of nail polish remover contains about 2.5 mol of
ethyl acetate.
(a) How many molecules are in the bottle of nail polish remover?
(b) How many atoms are in the bottle?
(c) How many carbon atoms are in the bottle?
18. Consider a 0.829 mol sample of sodium sulfate, Na2SO4.
(a) How many formula units are in the sample?
(b) How many sodium ions, Na+, are in the sample?
Converting Number of Particles to Moles
Chemists very rarely express the amount of a substance in number of
particles. As you have seen, there are far too many particles to work with
conveniently. For example, you would never say that you had dissolved
3.21 × 1023 molecules of sodium chloride in water. You might say, howev-
er, that you had dissolved 0.533 mol of sodium chloride in water. When
chemists communicate with each other about amounts of substances,
they usually use units of moles (see Figure 5.10). To convert the number
of particles in a substance to the number of moles, rearrange the equation
you learned previously.
N = NA × n
n = N
NA
To learn how many moles are in a substance when you know how many
particles are present, ﬁnd out how many times the Avogadro constant goes
into the number of particles.
Try the next Sample Problem to practise converting the number of
atoms, formula units, or molecules in a substance to the number of moles.
Electronic Learning Partner
Go to the Chemistry 11
Electronic Learning Partner
for a video clip that describes
the principles behind the
Avogadro constant and
the mole.
Chemists rarely
Figure 5.10
use the number of particles to
communicate how much of a
substance they have. Instead,
they use moles.
Chapter 5  Counting Atoms and Molecules: The Mole • MHR 177
History
LINK
The Avogadro constant is
named to honour the Italian
chemist Amedeo Avogadro.
In 1811, Avogadro postulated
what is now known as
Avogadro’s law: Equal volumes
of gases, at equal tempera-
tures and pressures, contain
the same number of molecules.
You will learn more about
Avogadro’s law in Unit 4.
Sample Problem
Molecules to Moles
Problem
How many moles are present in a sample of carbon dioxide, CO2,
made up of 5.83 × 1024 molecules?
What Is Required?
You need to ﬁnd the number of moles in 5.83 × 1024 molecules
of carbon dioxide.
What Is Given?
You are given the number of molecules in the sample.
NA = 6.02 × 1023 molecules CO2/mol CO2
Plan Your Strategy
n = N
NA
Act on Your Strategy
Web
LINK
www.school.mcgrawhill.ca/
resources/
The International System of
Units (SI) is based on seven
base units for seven quantities.
(One of these quantities is the
mole.) The quantities are
assumed to be all independent
of each other. To learn about
the seven base quantities, go
to the web site above. Go to
Science Resources, then to
Chemistry 11 to ﬁnd out where
to go next. All other SI units are
derived from the seven base
units.
n =
5.83 × 1024 molecules CO2
(cid:5)
(cid:4)
6.02 × 1023 molecules CO2/mol CO2
= 9.68 mol CO2
There are 9.68 mol of CO2 in the sample.
Check Your Solution
5.83 × 1024 molecules is approximately equal to 6 × 1024 molecules.
Since the number of molecules is about ten times larger than the
Avogadro constant, it makes sense that there are about 10 mol in
the sample.
Practice Problems
19. A sample of bauxite ore contains 7.71 × 1024 molecules of
aluminum oxide, Al2O3. How many moles of aluminum oxide
are in the sample?
20. A vat of cleaning solution contains 8.03 × 1026 molecules of
ammonia, NH3. How many moles of ammonia are in the vat?
21. A sample of cyanic acid, HCN, contains 3.33 × 1022 atoms. How
many moles of cyanic acid are in the sample? Hint: Find the
number of molecules of HCN ﬁrst.
22. A sample of pure acetic acid, CH3COOH, contains 1.40 × 1023
carbon atoms. How many moles of acetic acid are in the sample?
178 MHR • Unit 2  Chemical Quantities
Section Wrap-up
In section 5.1, you learned about the average atomic mass of an element.
Then, in section 5.2, you learned how chemists group particles using the
mole. In the ﬁnal section of this chapter, you will learn how to use the
average atomic masses of the elements to determine the mass of a mole of
any substance. You will learn about a relationship that will allow you to
relate the mass of a sample to the number of particles it contains.
Section Review
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
K/U
In your own words, deﬁne the mole. Use three examples.
I
Imagine that $6.02 × 1023 were evenly distributed among six billion
people. How much money would each person receive?
I
A typical adult human heart beats an average of 60 times per
minute. If you were allotted a mole of heartbeats, how long, in years,
could you expect to live? You may assume each year has 365 days.
I
I
Calculate the number of atoms in 3.45 mol of iron, Fe.
A sample of carbon dioxide, CO2, contains 2.56 × 1024 molecules.
(a) How many moles of carbon dioxide are present?
(b) How many moles of atoms are present?
I
A balloon is ﬁlled with 0.50 mol of helium. How many atoms of
helium are in the balloon?
I
A sample of benzene, C6H6, contains 5.69 mol.
(a) How many molecules are in the sample?
(b) How many hydrogen atoms are in the sample?
8
I
Aluminum oxide, Al2O3, forms a thin coating on aluminum when
aluminum is exposed to the oxygen in the air. Consider a sample
made up of 1.17 mol of aluminum oxide.
(a) How many molecules are in the sample?
(b) How many atoms are in the sample?
(c) How many oxygen atoms are in the sample?
9
C
Why do you think chemists chose to deﬁne the mole the way
they did?
10
I
A sample of zinc oxide, ZnO, contains 3.28 × 1024 molecules of
zinc oxide. A sample of zinc metal contains 2.78 mol of zinc atoms.
Which sample contains more zinc: the compound or the element?
Unit Investigation Prep
In your Unit Investigation,
you will need to determine
the amount of several pure
substances in a mixture. Do
you think it will be more
convenient for you to work
with quantities expressed
in moles or molecules?
Chapter 5  Counting Atoms and Molecules: The Mole • MHR 179
5.3
Molar Mass
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
explain the relationship
between the average atomic
mass of an element and its
molar mass
solve problems involving
number of moles, number
of particles, and mass
calculate the molar mass
of a compound
communicate your under-
standing of the following
term: molar mass
Table 5.2 Average Atomic
Mass and Molar Mass of
Four Elements
Average
atomic
mass (u)
Molar
mass
(g)
Element
hydrogen, H
1.01
1.01
oxygen, O
16.00
16.00
sodium, Na
22.99
22.99
argon, Ar
39.95
39.95
In section 5.2, you explored the relationship between the number of atoms
or particles and the number of moles in a sample. Now you are ready to
relate the number of moles to the mass, in grams. Then you will be able to
determine the number of atoms, molecules, or formula units in a sample
by ﬁnding the mass of the sample.
Mass and the Mole
You would never express the mass of a lump of gold, like the one in
Figure 5.11, in atomic mass units. You would express its mass in grams.
How does the mole relate the number of atoms to measurable quantities
of a substance? The deﬁnition of the mole pertains to relative atomic
mass, as you learned in section 5.1. One atom of carbon-12 has a mass of
exactly 12 u. Also, by deﬁnition, one mole of carbon-12 atoms (6.02 × 1023
carbon-12 atoms) has a mass of exactly 12 g.
The Avogadro constant is the factor that converts the relative mass of
individual atoms or molecules, expressed in atomic mass units, to mole
quantities, expressed in grams.
How can you use this relationship to relate mass and moles? The
periodic table tells us the average mass of a single atom in atomic mass
units (u). For example, zinc has an average atomic mass of 65.39 u. One
mole of an element has a mass expressed in grams numerically equivalent
to the element’s average atomic mass expressed in atomic mass units. One
mole of zinc atoms has a mass of 65.39 g. This relationship allows
chemists to use a balance to count atoms. You can use the periodic table
to determine the mass of one mole of an element.
What is Molar Mass?
The mass of one mole of any element, expressed in grams, is numerically
equivalent to the average atomic mass of the element, expressed in atomic
mass units. The mass of one mole of a substance is called its molar mass
(symbol M ). Molar mass is expressed in g/mol. For example, the average
atomic mass of gold, as given in the periodic table, is 196.97 u. Thus the
mass of one mole of gold atoms, gold’s molar mass, is 196.97 g. Table 5.2
gives some additional examples of molar masses.
197
79
Au
The Avogadro
Figure 5.11
constant is a factor that converts
from atomic mass to molar mass.
180 MHR • Unit 2  Chemical Quantities
Express mass in
atomic mass units.
Express mass in grams.
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
Finding the Molar Mass of Compounds
While you can ﬁnd the molar mass of an element just by looking at the
periodic table, you need to do some calculations to ﬁnd the molar mass
of a compound. For example, 1 mol of beryllium oxide, BeO, contains
1 mol of beryllium and 1 mol of oxygen. To ﬁnd the molar mass of BeO,
add the mass of each element that it contains.
MBeO = 9.01 g/mol + 16.00 g/mol
= 25.01 g/mol
Examine the following Sample Problem to learn how to determine the
molar mass of a compound. Following Investigation 5-A on the next page,
there are some Practice Problems for you to try.
C H E M
FA C T
The National Institute of
Standards and Technology
(NIST) and most other stan-
dardization bodies use M to
represent molar mass. You
may see other symbols, such
as mm, used to represent
molar mass.
Sample Problem
Molar Mass of a Compound
Problem
What is the mass of one mole of calcium phosphate, Ca3(PO4)2?
What Is Required?
You need to ﬁnd the molar mass of calcium phosphate.
What Is Given?
You know the formula of calcium phosphate. You also know, from
the periodic table, the average atomic mass of each atom that makes
up calcium phosphate.
Plan Your Strategy
Find the total mass of each element to determine the molar mass
of calcium phosphate. Find the mass of 3 mol of calcium, the mass
of 2 mol of phosphorus, and the mass of 8 mol of oxygen. Then add
these masses together.
Act on Your Strategy
MCa × 3 = (40.08 g/mol) × 3 = 120.24 g/mol
MP × 2 = (30.97 g/mol) × 2 = 61.94 g/mol
MO × 8 = (16.00 g/mol) × 8 = 128.00 g/mol
MCa3(PO4)2
= 120.24 g/mol + 61.94 g/mol + 128.00 g/mol
= 310.18 g/mol
Therefore the molar mass of calcium phosphate is 310.18 g/mol.
Check Your Solution
Using round numbers for a quick check, you get
(40 × 3) + (30 × 2) + (15 × 8) = 300
This estimate is close to the answer of 310.18 g/mol.
PROBLEM TIP
Once you are used to
calculating molar masses,
you will want to do the four
calculations at left all at once.
Try solving the Sample
Problem using only one
line of calculations.
Continued ...
ON PAGE 184
Chapter 5  Counting Atoms and Molecules: The Mole • MHR 181
S K I L L   F O C U S
Modelling concepts
Analyzing and interpreting
Communicating results
Part 2  Counting Objects Based on Their
Relative Masses
Materials
electronic balance
10 small metal nuts (to represent the ﬁctitious
element nutium)
10 washers (to represent the ﬁctitious element
washerium)
2 opaque ﬁlm canisters with lids
Procedure
1. Measure the mass of 10 nuts (nutium atoms).
Then measure the mass of 10 washers
(washerium atoms).
2. Calculate the average mass of a single “atom”
of nutium and washerium.
3. Determine the mass ratio of nutium to
washerium.
4. Obtain, from your teacher, a sealed ﬁlm
canister containing an unknown number
of nutium atoms. Your teacher will tell you
the mass of the empty ﬁlm canister and lid.
5. Find the mass of the unknown number of
nutium atoms.
6. You know that you need an equal number of
washerium atoms to react with the unknown
number of nutium atoms. What mass of
washerium atoms do you need?
Modelling Mole and
Mass Relationships
Chemists use the mole to group large numbers
of atoms and molecules into manageable, macro-
scopic quantities. In this way, they can tell how
many atoms or molecules are in a given sample,
even though the particles are too small to see. In
this investigation, you will explore how to apply
this idea to everyday objects such as grains of
rice and nuts and bolts.
Question
How can you use what you know about the mole
and molar mass to count large numbers of tiny
objects using mass, and to relate numbers of
objects you cannot see based on their masses?
Part 1  Counting Grains of Rice
Materials
electronic balance
40 mL dry rice
50 mL beaker
Procedure
1. Try to measure the mass of a grain of rice.
Does the balance register this mass?
2. Count out 20 grains of rice. Measure and
record their mass.
3. Find the mass of the empty beaker. Add the
rice to the beaker. Find the mass of the beaker
and the rice. Determine the mass of the rice.
4. Calculate the number of grains of rice in the
40 mL sample. Report your answer to the
number of signiﬁcant digits that reﬂects the
precision of your calculation.
182 MHR • Unit 2  Chemical Quantities
Analysis
1. Was it possible to get an accurate mass for an
individual grain of rice? How did you solve
this problem?
2. How did you avoid having to count every
single grain of rice in order to determine how
many there were in the sample?
3. Using your data, how many grains of rice
would be in 6.5 × 103 g of rice?
4. A mole of helium atoms weighs 4.00 g.
(a) How many atoms are in 23.8 g of helium?
(b) What known relationship did you use to
ﬁnd your answer to part (a)?
(c) What analogous relationship did you set up
in order to calculate the number of grains
of rice based on the mass of the rice?
5. You know the relative mass of nuts and wash-
ers. Suppose that you are given some washers
in a sealed container. You know that you have
the same number of nuts in another sealed
container.
(a) Can you determine how many washers are
in the container without opening either
container? Why or why not?
(b) What, if any, additional information do
you need?
6. The molar mass of carbon is 12.0 g. The
molar mass of molecular oxygen is 32.0 g.
Equal numbers of carbon atoms and oxygen
molecules react to form carbon dioxide.
(a) If you have 5.8 g of carbon, what mass of
oxygen will react?
(b) How does part (a) relate to step 6 in the
Procedure for Part 2?
Conclusion
7. How do chemists use the mole and molar
masses to count numbers and relative num-
bers of atoms and molecules? Relate your
answer to the techniques you used to count
rice, nuts, and washers.
Applications
8. Think about your answer to Analysis
question 5(a). Did you need to use the
Avogadro constant in your calculation?
Explain why or why not.
9. Chemists rarely use the Avogadro constant
directly in their calculations. What
relationship do they use to avoid working
with such a large number?
Chapter 5  Counting Atoms and Molecules: The Mole • MHR 183
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 181
Practice Problems
23. State the molar mass of each element.
(a) xenon, Xe
(b) osmium, Os
(c) barium, Ba
(d) tellurium, Te
24. Find the molar mass of each compound.
(a) ammonia, NH3
(b) glucose, C6H12O6
(c) potassium dichromate, K2Cr2O7
(d) iron(III) sulfate, Fe2(SO4)3
25. Strontium may be found in nature as celestite, SrSO4. Find the
molar mass of celestite.
26. What is the molar mass of the ion [Cu(NH3)4]2+ ?
Counting Particles Using Mass
Using the mole concept and the periodic table, you can determine the
mass of one mole of a compound. You know, however, that one mole
represents 6.02 × 1023 particles. Therefore you can use a balance to count
atoms, molecules, or formula units!
For example, consider carbon dioxide, CO2. One mole of carbon
dioxide has a mass of 44.0 g and contains 6.02 × 1023 molecules. You can
set up the following relationship:
6.02 × 1023 molecules of CO2 → 1 mol of CO2 → 44.0 g of CO2
How can you use this relationship to ﬁnd the number of molecules and
the number of moles in 22.0 g of carbon dioxide?
MASS (g)
of element
MASS (g)
of compound
M (g/mol)
M (g/mol)
AMOUNT (mol)
of element
AMOUNT (mol)
of compound
chemical
formula
AMOUNT (mol)
of elements
in compound
The molar mass
Figure 5.12
relates the amount of an element
or a compound, in moles, to its
mass. Similarly, the Avogadro
constant relates the number of
particles to the molar amount.
Avogadro
constant
(atoms/mol)
ATOMS
of element
Avogadro
constant
(molecules/mol)
MOLECULES
(or formula units)
of compound
A
For an element
B
For a compound
184 MHR • Unit 2  Chemical Quantities
Converting from Moles to Mass
Suppose that you want to carry out a reaction involving ammonium
sulfate and calcium chloride. The ﬁrst step is to obtain one mole of each
chemical. How do you decide how much of each chemical you need?
You convert the molar amount to mass. Then you use a balance to
determine the mass of the proper amount of each chemical.
The following equation can be used to solve problems involving mass,
molar mass, and number of moles:
Mass = Number of moles × Molar mass
m = n × M
moles (mol)
Multiply by
molar mass (g/mol).
mass (g)
Write the chemical formulas
for calcium chloride and
ammonium sulfate. Predict
what kind of reaction will
occur between them. Write a
balanced chemical equation
to show the reaction. Ionic
compounds containing the
ammonium ion are soluble.
Ammonium sulfate is soluble,
but barium chloride is not.
Sample Problem
Moles to Mass
Problem
A ﬂask contains 0.750 mol of carbon dioxide gas, CO2. What mass of
carbon dioxide gas is in this sample?
What Is Required?
You need to ﬁnd the mass of carbon dioxide.
What Is Given?
The sample contains 0.750 mol. You can determine the molar mass
of carbon dioxide from the periodic table.
Plan Your Strategy
In order to convert moles to grams, you need to determine the molar
mass of carbon dioxide from the periodic table.
Multiply the molar mass of carbon dioxide by the number of moles
of carbon dioxide to determine the mass.
m = n × M
Act on Your Strategy
MCO2
= 2 × (16.00 g/mol) + 12.01 g/mol
= 44.01 g/mol
m = (0.750 mol) × (44.01 g/mol)
= 33.0 g
The mass of 0.75 mol of carbon dioxide is 33.0 g.
Check Your Solution
1 mol of carbon dioxide has a mass of 44 g. You need to determine
the mass of 0.75 mol, or 75% of a mole. 33 g is equal to 75% of 44 g.
Continued ...
Chapter 5  Counting Atoms and Molecules: The Mole • MHR 185
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 185
Practice Problems
27. Calculate the mass of each molar quantity.
(a) 3.90 mol of carbon, C
(b) 2.50 mol of ozone, O3
(c) 1.75 × 107 mol of propanol, C3H8O
(d) 1.45 × 10−5 mol of ammonium dichromate, (NH4)2Cr2O7
28. For each group, which sample has the largest mass?
(a) 5.00 mol of C, 1.50 mol of Cl2, 0.50 mol of C6H12O6
(b) 7.31 mol of O2, 5.64 mol of CH3OH, 12.1 mol of H2O
29. A litre, 1000 mL, of water contains 55.6 mol. What is the mass of
a litre of water?
30. To carry out a particular reaction, a chemical engineer needs
255 mol of styrene, C8H8. How many kilograms of styrene does
the engineer need?
You might ﬁnd the triangle shown in Figure 5.13 useful for problems
involving number of moles, number of particles, and molar mass. To
use it, cover the quantity that you need to ﬁnd. The required operation—
multiplication or division—will be obvious from the position of the
remaining variables. For example, if you want to ﬁnd the mass of a
sample, cover the m in the triangle. You can now see that
Mass = Number of moles × Molar mass.
Be sure to check that your units cancel.
Converting from Mass to Moles
In the previous Sample Problem, you saw how to convert moles to mass.
Often, however, chemists know the mass of a substance but are more
interested in knowing the number of moles. Suppose that a reaction
produces 223 g of iron and 204 g of aluminum oxide. The masses of
the substances do not tell you very much about the reaction. You know,
however, that 223 g of iron is 4 mol of iron. You also know that 204 g of
aluminum oxide is 2 mol of aluminum oxide. You may conclude that
the reaction produces twice as many moles of iron as it does moles of
aluminum oxide. You can perform the reaction many times to test your
conclusion. If your conclusion is correct, the mole relationship between
the products will hold. To calculate the number of moles in a sample, ﬁnd
out how many times the molar mass goes into the mass of the sample.
moles (mol)
Divide by
molar mass (g/mol).
mass (g)
m
(mass of
sample)
n
(number of
moles)
M
(molar mass)
Use this triangle
Figure 5.13
for problems involving number
of moles, mass of sample, and
molar mass. For what other
scientiﬁc relationships might
you use a triangle like this?
Number of moles =
Mass
Molar mass
n = m
M
The following Sample Problem explains how to convert from the mass
of a sample to the number of moles it contains.
186 MHR • Unit 2  Chemical Quantities
Sample Problem
Mass to Moles
Problem
How many moles of acetic acid, CH3COOH, are in a 23.6 g sample?
What Is Required?
You need to ﬁnd the number of moles in 23.6 g of acetic acid.
What Is Given?
You are given the mass of the sample.
Plan Your Strategy
To obtain the number of moles of acetic acid, divide the mass of
acetic acid by its molar mass.
Act on Your Strategy
The molar mass of CH3COOH is
(12.01 × 2) + (16.00 × 2) + (1.01 × 4) = 60.06 g.
n =
n mol CH3COOH =
m
MCH3COOH
23.6 g
60.06 g/mol
= 0.393 mol
Therefore there are 0.393 mol of acetic acid in 23.6 g of acetic acid.
Check Your Solution
Work backwards. There are 60.06 g in each mol of acetic acid. So in
0.393 mol of acetic acid, you have 0.393 mol × 60.06 g/mol = 23.6 g
of acetic acid. This value matches the question.
Practice Problems
31. Calculate the number of moles in each sample.
(a) 103 g of Mo
(b) 1.32 × 104 g of Pd
(c) 0.736 kg of Cr
(d) 56.3 mg of Ge
32. How many moles of compound are in each sample?
(a) 39.2 g of silicon dioxide, SiO2
(b) 7.34 g of nitrous acid, HNO2
(c) 1.55 × 105 kg of carbon tetraﬂuoride, CF4
(d) 8.11 × 10−3 mg of 1-iodo-2,3-dimethylbenzene C8H9I
33. Sodium chloride, NaCl, can be used to melt snow. How many
moles of sodium chloride are in a 10 kg bag?
34. Octane, C8H18, is a principal ingredient of gasoline. Calculate the
number of moles in a 20.0 kg sample of octane.
Chapter 5  Counting Atoms and Molecules: The Mole • MHR 187
Chemistry Bulletin
Chemical Amounts in Vitamin Supplements
Vitamins and minerals (micronutrients) help
to regulate your metabolism. They are the
building blocks of blood and bone, and they
maintain muscles and nerves. In Canada, a
standard called Recommended Nutrient Intake
(RNI) outlines the amounts of micronutrients
that people should ingest each day. Eating a
balanced diet is the best way to achieve your
RNI. Sometimes, however, you may need to
take multivitamin supplements when you are
unable to attain your RNI through diet alone.
The label on a bottle of supplements lists
all the vitamins and minerals the supplements
contain. It also lists the form and source of
each vitamin and mineral, and the amount
of each. The form of a mineral is especially
important to know because it affects the
quantity your body can use. For example, a
supplement may claim to contain 650 mg of
calcium carbonate, CaCO3 , per tablet. This
does not mean that there is 650 mg of calcium.
The amount of actual calcium, or elemental
calcium, in calcium carbonate is only 260 mg.
Calcium carbonate has more elemental calcium
than the same amount of calcium gluconate,
which only has 58 mg for every 650 mg of the
compound. Calcium gluconate may be easier
for your body to absorb, however.
Quality Control
Multivitamin manufacturers employ chemists,
or analysts, to ensure that the products they
make have the right balance of micronutrients.
Manufacturers have departments devoted
to quality control (QC). QC chemists analyze
all the raw materials in the supplements, using
standardized tests. Most manufacturers use
tests approved by a “standardization body,”
such as the US Pharmacopoeia. Such standard-
ization bodies have developed testing guide-
lines to help manufacturers ensure that their
products contain what the labels claim, within
strict limits.
To test for quality, QC chemists prepare
samples of the raw materials from which they
188 MHR • Unit 2  Chemical Quantities
will make the supplements. They label the
samples according to the “lot” of materials
from which the samples were taken. They pow-
der and weigh the samples. Then they extract
the vitamins. At the same time, they prepare
standard solutions containing a known amount
of each vitamin.
Next the chemists compare the samples to
the standards by subjecting both to the same
tests. One test that is used is high-performance
liquid chromatography (HPLC). HPLC produces
a spectrum, or “ﬁngerprint,” that identiﬁes
each compound. Analysts compare the
spectrum that is produced by the samples to
the spectrum that is produced by the standard.
Analysts test tablets and capsules for
dissolution and disintegration properties. The
analyst may use solutions that simulate the
contents of the human stomach or intestines
for these tests. Only when the analysts are sure
that the tablets pass all the necessary require-
ments are the tablets shipped to retail stores.
Making Connections
1. Why might consuming more of the daily
RNI of a vitamin or mineral be harmful?
2. The daily RNI of calcium for adolescent
females is 700 to 1100 mg. A supplement
tablet contains 950 mg of calcium citrate.
Each gram of calcium citrate contains
5.26 × 10−3 mol calcium.  How many tablets
would a 16-year-old female have to take to
meet her daily RNI?
An analyst tests whether tablets will
sufﬁciently dissolve within a given time limit.
Converting Between Moles, Mass, and Number of Particles
You can use what you now know about the mole to carry out calculations
involving molar mass and the Avogadro constant. One mole of any
compound or element contains 6.02 × 1023 particles. The compound or
element has a mass, in grams, that is determined from the periodic table.
Now that you have learned how the number of particles, number of
moles, and mass of a substance are related, you can convert from one
value to another. Usually chemists convert from moles to mass and from
mass to moles. Mass is a property that can be measured easily. The
following graphic shows the factors used to convert between particles,
moles, and mass. Moles are a convenient way to communicate the amount
of a substance.
number of
particles
Avogadro
constant
moles (mol)
molar
mass
(g/mol)
mass (g)
For example, suppose that you need 2.3 mol of potassium chloride to
carry out a reaction. You need to convert the molar amount to mass so
that you can measure the correct amount with a balance.
To be certain you understand the relationship among particles, moles,
and mass, examine the following Sample Problem.
Sample Problem
Particles to Mass
Problem
What is the mass of 5.67 × 1024 molecules of cobalt(II) chloride,
CoCl2?
What Is Required?
You need to ﬁnd the mass of 5.67 × 1024 molecules of cobalt(II)
chloride.
What Is Given?
You are given the number of molecules.
Plan Your Strategy
Convert the number of molecules into moles by dividing by the
Avogadro constant. Then convert the number of moles into grams
by multiplying by the molar mass of cobalt(II) chloride.
Act on Your Strategy
Number of molecules CoCl2
Number of molecules CoCl2/mol CoCl2
× mass CoCl2/mol CoCl2
=
5.67 × 1024 molecules CoCl2
6.02 × 1023 molecules CoCl2/mol CoCl2
× 129.84 g CoCl2/mol CoCl2
= 1.22 × 103 g CoCl2
Math
LINK
Average atomic mass values
in some periodic tables can
have ﬁve or more signiﬁcant
digits. How do you know how
many signiﬁcant digits to use?
When you enter values, such
as average atomic mass, into
your calculator, be sure that
you use at least one more
signiﬁcant digit than is
required in your answer.
Continued ...
Chapter 5  Counting Atoms and Molecules: The Mole • MHR 189
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 189
Check Your Solution
5.67 × 1024 molecules is roughly 10 times the Avogadro constant.
This means that you have about 10 mol of cobalt(II) chloride. The
molar mass of cobalt(II) chloride is about 130 g, and 10 times 130 g
is 1300 g.
Practice Problems
35. Determine the mass of each sample.
(a) 6.02 × 1024 formula units of ZnCl2
(b) 7.38 × 1021 formula units of Pb3(PO4)2
(c) 9.11 × 1023 molecules of C15H21N3O15
(d) 1.20 × 1029 molecules of N2O5
36. What is the mass of lithium in 254 formula units of lithium
chloride, LiCl?
37. Express the mass of a single atom of titanium, Ti, in grams.
38. Vitamin B2, C17H20N4O6, is also called riboﬂavin. What is the
mass, in grams, of a single molecule of riboﬂavin?
What if you wanted to compare amounts of substances, and you only
knew their masses? You would probably convert their masses to moles.
The Avogadro constant relates the molar amount to the number of
particles. Examine the next Sample Problem to learn how to convert
mass to number of particles.
Sample Problem
Mass to Particles
Problem
Chlorine gas, Cl2, can react with iodine, I2, to form iodine chloride,
ICl. How many molecules of iodine chloride are contained in a
2.74 × 10−1 g sample?
What Is Required?
You need to ﬁnd the number of molecules in 2.74 × 10−1 g of iodine.
What Is Given?
You are given the mass of the sample.
Continued ...
190 MHR • Unit 2  Chemical Quantities
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 190
Plan Your Strategy
First convert the mass to moles, using the molar mass of iodine.
Multiplying the number of moles by the Avogadro constant will
yield the number of molecules.
Act on Your Strategy
The molar mass of ICl is 162.36 g.
Dividing the given mass of ICl by the molar mass gives
n = 2.74 × 10−1 g
162.36 g/mol
= 1.69 × 10
−3 mol
Now multiply the number of moles by the Avogadro constant. This
gives the number of molecules in the sample.
(1.69 × 10−3 mol) × (6.02 × 1023 molecules)
= 1.01 × 1021 molecules
1 mol
Therefore there are 1.01 × 1021 molecules in 2.74 × 10−1 g of
iodine chloride.
Check Your Solution
Work backwards. Each mole of iodine chloride has a mass of
162.36 g/mol. Therefore 1.01 × 1021 molecules of iodine chloride
have a mass of:
1.01 × 1021 molecules ×
= 2.72 × 10
−1 g
1 mol
6.02 × 1023 molecules
× 162.36 g
1 mol
The answer is close to the value given in the question. Your answer
is reasonable.
Practice Problems
39. Determine the number of molecules or formula units in
each sample.
(a) 10.0 g of water, H2O
(b) 52.4 g of methanol, CH3OH
(c) 23.5 g of disulfur dichloride, S2Cl2
(d) 0.337 g of lead(II) phosphate, Pb3(PO4)2
40. How many atoms of hydrogen are in 5.3 × 104 molecules of
sodium glutamate, NaC5H8NO4?
41. How many molecules are in a 64.3 mg sample of tetraphosphorus
decoxide, P4O10?
42. (a) How many formula units are in a 4.35 × 10−2 g sample of
potassium chlorate, KClO3?
(b) How many ions (chlorate and potassium) are in this sample?
Chapter 5  Counting Atoms and Molecules: The Mole • MHR 191
Concept Organizer
Relationships Among Particles, Moles, and Mass
Number of
particles
divide by the
Avogadro constant
multiply by the
Avogadro constant
Moles
multiply by
molar mass
divide by
molar mass
Mass of
substance
Section Wrap-up
In this chapter, you have learned about the relationships among the
number of particles in a substance, the amount of a substance in moles,
and the mass of a substance. Given the mass of any substance, you can
now determine how many moles and particles make it up.  In the next
chapter, you will explore the mole concept further. You will learn how
the mass proportions of elements in compounds relate to their formulas.
Section Review
Unit Investigation Prep
Before you design your
experiment to determine the
composition of a mixture,
be sure you understand the
relationship between moles
and mass.
1
2
C
Draw a diagram that shows the relationship between the atomic
mass and molar mass of an element and the Avogadro constant.
I
Consider a 78.6 g sample of ammonia, NH3.
(a) How many moles of ammonia are in the sample?
(b) How many molecules of ammonia are in the sample?
3
I
Use your understanding of the mole to answer the
following questions.
(a) What is the average mass, in grams, of a single atom of silicon, Si?
(b) What is the mass, in atomic mass units, of a mole of silicon atoms?
4
I
Consider a 0.789 mol sample of sodium chloride, NaCl.
(a) What is the mass of the sample?
(b) How many formula units of sodium chloride are in the sample?
(c) How many ions are in the sample?
5
6
I
A 5.00 carat diamond has a mass of 1.00 g. How many carbon
atoms are in a 5.00 carat diamond?
I
A bottle of mineral supplement tablets contains 100 tablets and
200 mg of copper. The copper is found in the form of cupric oxide.
What mass of cupric oxide is contained in each tablet?
192 MHR • Unit 2  Chemical Quantities
Review
Reﬂecting on Chapter 5
Summarize this chapter in the format of your
choice. Here are a few ideas to use as guidelines:
• Describe the relationships among isotopic
abundance, isotopic masses, and average
atomic mass.
• Explain why you need to use a weighted average
to calculate average atomic mass.
• Calculate isotopic abundance based on isotopic
masses and average atomic mass.
• Explain how chemists use a mass spectrometer
to determine isotopic abundance and the masses
of different isotopes.
• Describe how and why chemists group atoms
and molecules into molar amounts.
• Explain how chemists deﬁne the mole and why
this deﬁnition is useful.
• Use the Avogadro constant to convert between
moles and particles.
• Explain the relationship between average atomic
mass and the mole.
• Find a compound’s molar mass using the
periodic table.
• Convert between particles, moles, and mass.
Reviewing Key Terms
For each of the following terms, write a sentence
that shows your understanding of its meaning.
average atomic mass
Avogadro constant
isotopic abundance
mass spectrometer
mole
molar mass
weighted average
Knowledge/Understanding
1. Distinguish between atomic mass and average
atomic mass. Give examples to illustrate each
term.
2. Explain why you use a weighted average, based
on the masses and abundances of the isotopes,
to calculate the average atomic mass of an
element.
3. The periodic table lists the average atomic mass
of chlorine as 35.45 u. Are there any chlorine
atoms that have a mass of 35.45 u? Explain
your answer.
4. Explain how the Avogadro constant, average
atomic mass, and molar mass are related.
5. Explain how a balance allows a chemist to
count atoms or molecules indirectly.
6. (a) Describe the relationship between the mole,
the Avogadro constant, and carbon-12.
(b) Why do chemists use the concept of the
mole to deal with atoms and molecules?
7. How is the molar mass of an element related to
average atomic mass?
8. Explain what the term molar mass means for
each of the following, using examples.
(a) a metallic element
(b) a diatomic element
(c) a compound
Inquiry
9. The isotopes of argon have the following
relative abundances: Ar-36, 0.34%; Ar-38,
0.06%; and Ar-40, 99.66%. Estimate the
average atomic mass of argon.
10. The isotopes of gallium have the following
relative abundances: Ga-69, 60.0%; and Ga-71,
40.0%. Estimate the average atomic mass of
gallium using the mass numbers of the isotopes.
11. Estimate the average atomic mass of
germanium, given its isotopes with their
relative abundances: Ge-70 (20.5%), Ge-72
(27.4%), Ge-73 (7.8%), Ge-74 (36.5%), and
Ge-76 (7.8%).
12. Potassium exists as two naturally occurring
isotopes: K-39 and K-41. These isotopes have
atomic masses of 39.0 u and 41.0 u respectively.
If the average atomic mass of potassium is
39.10 u, calculate the relative abundance of
each isotope.
13. How many moles of the given substance are
present in each sample below?
(a) 0.453 g of Fe2O3
(b) 50.7 g of H2SO4
(c) 1.24 × 10−2 g of Cr2O3
(d) 8.2 × 102 g of C2Cl3F3
(e) 12.3 g of NH4Br
Chapter 5  Counting Atoms and Molecules: The Mole • MHR 193
14. Convert each quantity to an amount in moles.
(a) 4.27 × 1021 atoms of He
(b) 7.39 × 1023 molecules of ICl
(c) 5.38 × 1022 molecules of NO2
(d) 2.91 × 1023 formula units of Ba(OH)2
(e) 1.62 × 1024 formula units of KI
(f) 5.58 × 1020 molecules of C3H8
15. Copy the following table into your notebook
and complete it.
23. How many nitrate ions are in a solution that
contains 3.76 × 10−1 mol of calcium nitrate,
Ca(NO3)2?
24. Ethanol, C2H5OH, is frequently used as the
fuel in wick-type alcohol lamps. One molecule
of C2H5OH requires three molecules of O2 for
complete combustion. What mass of O2 is
required to react completely with 92.0 g of
C2H5OH?
Sample
Molar mass (g/mol) Mass of sample (g)
58.4
58.4
24.8
9.67 × 10−1
NaCl
NH3
H2O
Mn2O3
K2CrO4
C8H8O3
Al(OH)3
Formula units
or molecules
6.02 × 1023
5.28 × 1022
7.90 × 1024
Amount of
molecules (mol)
Amount of atoms
(mol)
1.00
2.00
0.332
8.54 × 102
16. Calculate the molar mass of each compound.
(c) Na2SO4
(e) Ca3(PO4)2
(d) (NH4)2Cr2O7 (f) Cl2O7
(a) PtBr2
(b) C3H5O2H
17. Express each quantity as a mass in grams.
(a) 3.70 mol of H2O
(b) 8.43 × 1023 molecules of PbO2
(c) 14.8 mol of BaCrO4
(d) 1.23 × 1022 molecules of Cl2
(e) 9.48 × 1023 molecules of HCl
(f) 7.74 × 1019 molecules of Fe2O3
25. Bromine exists as two isotopes: Br-79 and
Br-81. Calculate the relative abundance of each
isotope. You will need to use information from
the periodic table.
26. Examine the following double displacement
reaction.
NaCl(aq) + AgNO3(aq) → AgCl(s) + NaNO3(aq)
In this reaction, one formula unit of NaCl reacts
with one formula unit of AgNO3.
(a) How many moles of NaCl react with one
18. How many atoms of C are contained in 45.6 g
mole of AgNO3?
of C6H6?
(b) What mass of AgNO3 reacts with 29.2 g of
19. How many atoms of F are contained in
NaCl?
0.72 mol of BF3?
20. Calculate the following.
(a) the mass (u) of one atom of xenon
(b) the mass (g) of one mole of xenon atoms
(c) the mass (g) of one atom of xenon
(d) the mass (u) of one mole of xenon atoms
(e) the number of atomic mass units in one gram
21. How many atoms of C are in a mixture contain-
ing 0.237 mol of CO2 and 2.38 mol of CaC2?
22. How many atoms of H are in a mixture of
3.49 × 1023 molecules of H2O and 78.1 g of
CH3OH?
194 MHR • Unit 2  Chemical Quantities
27. The planet Zoltan is located in a solar system
in the Andromeda galaxy. On Zoltan, the
standard unit for the amount of substance is
the wog and the standard unit for mass is the
wibble. The Zoltanians, like us, chose carbon-
12 to deﬁne their standard unit for the amount
of substance. By deﬁnition, one wog of C-12
atoms contains 2.50 × 1021 atoms. It has a mass
of exactly 12 wibbles.
(a) What is the mass, in wibbles, of 1 wog of
nitrogen atoms?
(b) What is the mass, in wibbles, of 5.00 × 10−1
wogs of O2?
(c) What is the mass, in grams, of 1 wog of
hydrogen atoms?
Communication
28. Use the deﬁnition of the Avogadro constant
to explain why its value must be determined
by experiment.
29. Why is carbon-12 the only isotope with an
atomic mass that is a whole number?
30. Draw a concept map for the conversion of mass
(g) of a sample to amount (mol) of a sample to
number of molecules in a sample to number of
atoms in a sample. Be sure to include proper
units.
31. Explain why 1 mol of carbon dioxide contains
6.02 × 1023 molecules and not 6.02 × 1023 atoms.
Making Connections
32. The RNI (Recommended Nutrient Intake) of
iron for women is listed as 14.8 mg per day.
Ferrous gluconate, Fe(C6H11O7)2 is often used
as an iron supplement for those who do not get
enough iron in their diet because it is relatively
easy for the body to absorb. Some iron-fortiﬁed
breakfast cereals contain elemental iron metal
as their source of iron.
(a) Calculate the number of moles of elemental
iron, Fe, required by a woman, according to
the RNI.
(b) What mass, in milligrams, of ferrous
gluconate, would satisfy the RNI for iron?
(c) The term bioavailability refers to the extent
that the body can absorb a certain vitamin or
mineral supplement. There is evidence to
suggest that the elemental iron in these
iron-fortiﬁed cereals is absorbed only to a
small extent. If this is the case, should cereal
manufacturers be allowed to add elemental
iron at all? How could cereal manufacturers
assure that the consumer absorbs an appro-
priate amount of iron? Would adding more
elemental iron be a good solution? List the
pros and cons of adding more elemental
iron, then propose an alternative solution.
33. Vitamin B3, also known as niacin, helps main-
tain the normal function of the skin, nerves,
and digestive system. The disease pellagra
results from a severe niacin deﬁciency. People
with pellagra experience mouth sores, skin
irritation, and mental deterioration. Niacin has
the following formula: C6H5NO2. Often vitamin
tablets contain vitamin B3 in the form of niaci-
namide, C6H6N2O, which is easier for the body
to absorb.
(a) A vitamin supplement tablet contains
100 mg of niacinamide. What mass of niacin
contains an equivalent number of moles as
100 mg of niacinamide?
(b) Do some research to ﬁnd out how much
niacin an average adult should ingest
each day.
(c) Do some research to ﬁnd out what kinds of
food contain niacin.
(d) What are the consequences of ingesting too
much niacin?
(e) Choose another vitamin to research. Find
out its chemical formula, its associated
recommended nutrient intake, and where
it is found in our diet. Prepare a poster to
communicate your ﬁndings.
Answers to Practice Problems and
Short Answers to Section Review Questions
Practice Problems: 1. 10.81 u  2. 28.09 u  3. 63.55 u
4. 207.2  5. 99.8%, 0.2%  6. very low,  7. 72%
8. 99.8%, 0.2%  9. 3.37 × 1016 rows  10. 2.80 × 1014
11. 1.44 × 1027 km  12. 1.91 × 1016 a  13. 1.07 × 1022
14. 2.83 × 1020 15. 1.3 × 1023 16. 3.35 × 1025
17.(a) 1.5 × 1024 (b) 2.1 × 1025 (c) 6.0 × 1024
18.(a) 4.99 × 1023 (b) 9.98 × 1023 19. 12.8 mol
20. 1.33 × 103 mol  21. 1.84 × 10−2 mol  22. 1.16 × 10−1 mol
23.(a) 131.29 g/mol (b) 190.23 g/mol (c) 137.33 g/mol
(d) 127.60 g/mol  24.(a) 17.04 g/mol (b) 180.2 g/mol
(c) 294.2 g/mol (d) 399.9 g/mol  25. 183.68 g/mol
26. 131.7 g/mol  27.(a) 46.8 g (b) 1.20 × 102 g (c) 1.05 × 109
(d) 3.66 × 10−3 28.(a) 1.5 mol Cl2 (b) 7.31 mol O2
29. 1.00 × 103 g 30. 26.6 kg  31.(a) 1.07 mol (b) 1.24 × 102 mol
(c) 14.2 mol (d) 7.75 × 10−4 mol 32.(a) 0.652 mol
(b) 0.156 mol (c) 1.76 × 106 (d) 3.49 × 10−8 33. 1.7 × 102
mol  34. 1.75 × 102 mol  35.(a) 1.36 × 103 g (b) 9.95 g
(c) 7.32 × 102 g (d) 2.15 × 107 36. 2.93 × 10−21 g
37. 7.95 × 10−23 g 38. 6.25 × 10−22 g 39.(a) 3.34 × 1023 mole-
cules (b) 9.84 × 1023 molecules (c) 1.05 × 1023 molecules
(d) 2.50 × 1020 formula units  40. 4.2 × 105 atoms
41. 1.36 × 1020 42.(a) 2.14 × 1020 (b) 4.27 × 1020
Section Review:  5.1: 2. 24.31 u  3. No  5.2: 2. $1.00 × 1014
3. 1.9 × 1016 years  4. 2.08 × 1024 atoms  5.(a) 4.25 mol
(b) 12.8 mol  6. 3.0 × 1023 atoms  7.(a) 3.43 × 1024 mole-
cules (b) 2.06 × 1025 atoms  8.(a) 7.04 × 1023 molecules
(b) 3.52 × 1024 atoms (c) 2.11 × 1024 atoms  10. Compound
5.3: 2.(a) 4.61 mol (b) 2.78 × 1024 3.(a) 4.67 × 10−23 g
(b) 1.69 × 1025 u  4.(a) 46.1 g (b) 4.75 × 1023 formula units
(c) 9.50 × 1023 5. 5.01 × 1022 atoms  6. 2.50 × 10−3 g
Chapter 5  Counting Atoms and Molecules: The Mole • MHR 195
196
Chemical Proportions
in Compounds
How do chemists use what they know about molar masses? In Chapter 5,
you learned how to use the periodic table and the mole to relate the mass
of a compound to the number of particles in the compound. Chemists can
use their understanding of molar mass to ﬁnd out important information
about compounds.
Sometimes chemists analyze a compound that is found in nature to
learn how to produce it more cheaply in a laboratory. For example, con-
sider the ﬂavour used in vanilla ice cream, which may come from natural
or artiﬁcial vanilla extract. Natural vanilla extract is made from vanilla
seed pods, shown on the left. The seed pods must be harvested and
processed before being sold as vanilla extract. The scent and ﬂavour of
synthetic vanilla come from a compound called vanillin, which can be
produced chemically in bulk. Therefore its production is much cheaper.
Similarly, many medicinal chemicals that are found in nature can be
produced more cheaply and efﬁciently in a laboratory.
Suppose that you want to synthesize a compound such as vanillin
in a laboratory. You must ﬁrst determine the elements in the compound.
Then you need to know the proportion of each element that is present.
This information, along with your understanding of molar mass, will help
you determine the chemical formula of the compound. Once you know
the chemical formula, you are on your way to ﬁnding out how to produce
the compound.
In this chapter, you will learn about the relationships between chemi-
cal formulas, molar masses, and the masses of elements in compounds.
The chemical formula of
vanillin is C8H8O3. How did
chemists use information
about the masses of carbon,
hydrogen, and oxygen in the
compound to determine this
formula?
C h a p t e r   P r e v i e w
6.1 Percentage Composition
6.2 The Empirical Formula of
a Compound
6.3 The Molecular Formula of
a Compound
6.4 Finding Empirical and
Molecular Formulas by
Experiment
C o n c e p t s   a n d   S k i l l s
Yo u   W i l l   N e e d
Before you begin this chapter,
review the following concepts
and skills:
naming chemical
compounds (Chapter 3,
section 3.5)
understanding the mole
(Chapter 5, section 5.2)
explaining the relationship
between the mole and
molar mass (Chapter 5,
section 5.3)
solving problems involving
number of moles, number
of particles, and mass
(Chapter 5, section 5.3)
Chapter 6  Chemical Proportions in Compounds • MHR 197
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
6.1
Percentage Composition
When you calculate and use the molar mass of a compound, such as
water, you are making an important assumption. You are assuming that
every sample of water contains hydrogen and oxygen in the ratio of two
hydrogen atoms to one oxygen atom. Thus you are also assuming that the
masses of hydrogen and oxygen in pure water always exist in a ratio of
2 g:16 g. This may seem obvious to you, because you know that the
molecular formula of water is always H2O, regardless of whether it comes
from any of the sources shown in Figure 6.1. When scientists ﬁrst discov-
ered that compounds contained elements in ﬁxed mass proportions, they
did not have the periodic table. In fact, the discovery of ﬁxed mass pro-
portions was an important step toward the development of atomic theory.
The Law of Deﬁnite Proportions
In the late eighteenth century, Joseph Louis Proust, a French chemist,
analyzed many samples of copper(II) carbonate, CuCO3. He found
that the samples contained the same proportion of copper, carbon, and
oxygen, regardless of the source of the copper(II) carbonate. This discov-
ery led Proust to propose the law of deﬁnite proportions: the elements
in a chemical compound are always present in the same proportions
by mass.
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
explain the law of deﬁnite
proportions
calculate the percentage
composition of a compound
using the formula and the
relative atomic masses of
the elements
communicate your under-
standing of the following
terms: law of deﬁnite pro-
portions, mass percent,
percentage composition
If a bicycle factory has 1000
wheels and 400 frames, how
many bicycles can be made?
How many wheels does each
bicycle have? Is the number
of wheels per bicycle affected
by any extra wheels that the
factory may have in stock?
Relate these questions to the
law of deﬁnite proportions.
Suppose that you
Figure 6.1
distil pure water from each of
these sources to purify it. Are
the distilled water samples the
same or different? What is the
molar mass of the distilled water
from each source?
198 MHR • Unit 2  Chemical Quantities
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
The mass of an element in a compound, expressed as a percent of the total
mass of the compound, is the element’s mass percent. The mass percent
of hydrogen in water from any of the sources shown in Figure 6.1 is
11.2%. Similarly, the mass percent of oxygen in water is always 88.8%.
Whether the water sample is distilled from a lake, an ice ﬂoe, or a drink-
ing fountain, the hydrogen and oxygen in pure water are always present
in these proportions.
Different Compounds from the Same Elements
The law of deﬁnite proportions does not imply that elements in com-
pounds are always present in the same relative amounts. It is possible to
have different compounds made up of different amounts of the same ele-
ments. For example, water, H2O, and hydrogen peroxide, H2O2, are both
made up of hydrogen and oxygen. Yet, as you can see in Figure 6.2, each
compound has unique properties. Each compound has a different mass
percent of oxygen and hydrogen. You may recognize hydrogen peroxide
as a household chemical. It is an oxidizing agent that is used to bleach
hair and treat minor cuts. It is also sold as an alternative to chlorine bleach.
Figure 6.3 shows a molecule of benzene, C6H6. Benzene contains
7.76% hydrogen and 92.2% carbon by mass. Octane, C8H18, is a major
component of the fuel used for automobiles. It contains 84.1% carbon
and 15.9% hydrogen.
C H E M
FA C T
Chemical formulas such as CO
and CO2 reﬂect an important
law called the law of multiple
proportions. This law applies
when two elements (such as
carbon and oxygen) combine
to form two or more different
compounds. In these cases,
the masses of the element
(such as O2 in CO and CO2)
that combine with a ﬁxed
amount of the second element
are in ratios of small whole
numbers. For example, two
moles of carbon can combine
with one mole of oxygen to
form carbon monoxide, or with
two moles of oxygen to form
carbon dioxide. The ratio of the
two different amounts of
oxygen that combine with the
ﬁxed amount of carbon is 1:2.
Water contains hydrogen and oxygen, but it does not decompose in the
Figure 6.2
presence of manganese dioxide. Hydrogen peroxide is also composed of hydrogen
and oxygen. It is fairly unstable and decomposes vigorously in the presence of
manganese(IV) oxide.
Similarly, carbon monoxide, CO, and carbon dioxide, CO2, are both
made up of carbon and oxygen. Yet each compound is unique, with its
own physical and chemical properties. Carbon dioxide is a product of
cellular respiration and the complete combustion of fossil fuels. Carbon
monoxide is a deadly gas formed when insufﬁcient oxygen is present
during the combustion of carbon-containing compounds. Carbon
monoxide always contains 42.88% carbon by mass. Carbon dioxide
always contains 27.29% carbon by mass.
Benzene C6H6, is
Figure 6.3
made up of six carbon atoms and
six hydrogen atoms. Why does
benzene not contain 50% of each
element by mass?
Chapter 6  Chemical Proportions in Compounds • MHR 199
H
5.3%
O
31.6%
C
63.1%
This pie graph
Figure 6.4
shows the percentage composi-
tion of vanillin.
Does the unknown compound
in the Sample Problem contain
any elements other than zinc
and sulfur? How do you know?
Use the periodic table to pre-
dict the formula of the com-
pound. Does the percentage
composition support your
prediction?
Percentage Composition
Carbon dioxide and carbon monoxide contain the same elements but have
different proportions of these elements. In other words, they are composed
differently. Chemists express the composition of compounds in various
ways. One way is to describe how many moles of each element make up a
mole of a compound. For example, one mole of carbon dioxide contains
one mole of carbon and two moles of oxygen. Another way is to describe
the percent mass of each element in a compound.
The percentage composition of a compound refers to the relative mass
of each element in the compound. In other words, percentage composition
is a statement of the values for mass percent of every element in the com-
pound. For example, the compound vanillin, C8H8O3, has a percentage
composition of 63.1% carbon, 5.3% hydrogen, and 31.6% oxygen, as
shown in Figure 6.4.
A compound’s percentage composition is an important piece of
information. For example, percentage composition can be determined
experimentally, and then used to help identify the compound.
Examine the following Sample Problem to learn how to calculate the
percentage composition of a compound from the mass of the compound
and the mass of the elements that make up the compound. Then do the
Practice Problems to try expressing the composition of substances as
mass percents.
Sample Problem
Percentage Composition from Mass Data
Problem
A compound with a mass of 48.72 g is found to contain 32.69 g of
zinc and 16.03 g of sulfur. What is the percentage composition of
the compound?
What Is Required?
You need to ﬁnd the mass percents of zinc and sulfur in
the compound.
What Is Given?
You know the mass of the compound. You also know the mass of
each element in the compound.
Mass of compound = 48.72 g
Mass of Zn = 32.69 g
Mass of S = 16.03 g
Plan Your Strategy
To ﬁnd the percentage composition of the compound, ﬁnd the mass
percent of each element. To do this, divide the mass of each element
by the mass of the compound and multiply by 100%.
Continued ...
200 MHR • Unit 2  Chemical Quantities
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 200
Act on Your Strategy
Mass percent of Zn =
Mass of Zn
Mass of compound
× 100%
× 100%
= 32.69 g
48.72 g
= 67.10%
Mass percent of S =
Mass of S
Mass of compound
× 100%
× 100%
= 16.03 g
48.72 g
= 32.90%
The percentage composition of the compound is 67.10% zinc and
32.90% sulfur.
Check Your Solution
The mass of zinc is about 32 g per 50 g of the compound. This is
roughly 65%, which is close to the calculated value.
Practice Problems
1. A sample of a compound is analyzed and found to contain
0.90 g of calcium and 1.60 g of chlorine. The sample has a mass
of 2.50 g. Find the percentage composition of the compound.
2. Find the percentage composition of a pure substance that contains
7.22 g nickel, 2.53 g phosphorus, and 5.25 g oxygen only.
3. A sample of a compound is analyzed and found to contain
carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen. The mass of the sample is
650 mg, and the sample contains 257 mg of carbon and
50.4 mg of hydrogen. What is the percentage composition of
the compound?
4. A scientist analyzes a 50.0 g sample and ﬁnds that it contains
13.3 g of potassium, 17.7 g of chromium, and another element.
Later the scientist learns that the sample is potassium dichromate,
K2Cr2O7. Potassium dichromate is a bright orange compound
that is used in the production of safety matches. What is the
percentage composition of potassium dichromate?
It is important to understand clearly the difference between percent
by mass and percent by number. In the Thought Lab that follows, you
will investigate the distinction between these two ways of describing
composition.
Iron is commonly found as
two oxides, with the general
formula FexOy. One oxide is
77.7% iron. The other oxide
is 69.9% iron. Use the periodic
table to predict the formula
of each oxide. Match the given
values for the mass percent
of iron to each compound.
How can you use the molar
mass of iron and the molar
masses of the two iron oxides
to check the given values for
mass percent?
Web
LINK
www.school.mcgrawhill.ca/
resources/
Vitamin C is the common name
for ascorbic acid, C6H8O6. To
learn about this vitamin, go to
the web site above. Go to
Science Resources, then to
Chemistry 11 to ﬁnd out where
to go next. Do you think there
is a difference between natural
and synthetic vitamin C?
Both are ascorbic acid.
Natural vitamin C comes from
foods we eat, especially citrus
fruits. Synthetic vitamin C is
made in a laboratory. Why do
the prices of natural and
synthetic products often differ?
Make a list to show the pros
and cons of vitamins from
natural and synthetic sources.
Chapter 6  Chemical Proportions in Compounds • MHR 201
ThoughtLab
Percent by Mass and Percent by Number
A company manufactures gift boxes that contain
two pillows and one gold brick. The gold brick
has a mass of 20 kg. Each pillow has a mass
of 1.0 kg.
Procedure
1. You are a quality control specialist at the gift
box factory. You need to know the following
information:
(a) What is the percent of pillows, in terms of
the number of items, in the gift box?
(b) What is the percent of pillows, by mass, in
the gift box?
(c) What is the percent of gold, by mass, in the
gift box?
2. You have a truckload of gift boxes to inspect.
You now need to know this information:
(a) What is the percent of pillows, in terms of
the number of items, in the truckload of gift
boxes?
(b) What is the percent of pillows, by mass, in
the truckload of gift boxes?
(c) What is the percent of gold, by mass, in the
truckload of gift boxes?
Analysis
1. The truckload of gift boxes, each containing
2 light pillows and 1 heavy gold brick, can be
used to represent a pure substance, water,
containing 2 mol of a “light” element, such as
hydrogen, and 1 mol of a “heavy” element,
such as oxygen.
(a) What is the percent of hydrogen, in terms
of the number of atoms, in 1 mol of water?
(b) What is the mass percent of hydrogen in
1 mol of water?
(c) What is the mass percent of oxygen in
1 mol of water?
2. Would the mass percent of hydrogen or
oxygen in question 1 change if you had 25 mol
of water? Explain.
3. Why do you think chemists use mass percent
rather than percent by number of atoms?
Calculating Percentage Composition from a Chemical Formula
In the previous Practice Problems, you used mass data to calculate
percentage composition. This skill is useful for interpreting experimental
data when the chemical formula is unknown. Often, however, the
percentage composition is calculated from a known chemical formula.
This is useful when you are interested in extracting a certain element
from a compound. For example, many metals, such as iron and mercury,
exist in mineral form. Mercury is most often found in nature as
mercury(II) sulﬁde, HgS. Knowing the percentage composition of HgS
helps a metallurgist predict the mass of mercury that can be extracted
from a sample of HgS.
When determining the percentage composition by mass of a
homogeneous sample, the size of the sample does not matter. According
to the law of deﬁnite proportions, there is a ﬁxed proportion of each
element in the compound, no matter how much of the compound you
have. This means that you can choose a convenient sample size when
calculating percentage composition from a formula.
If you assume that you have one mole of a compound, you can use the
molar mass of the compound, with its chemical formula, to calculate its
percentage composition. For example, suppose that you want to ﬁnd the
202 MHR • Unit 2  Chemical Quantities
History
LINK
Before AD 1500, many
alchemists thought that
matter was composed of
two “elements”: mercury and
sulfur. To impress their patrons,
they performed an experiment
with mercury sulﬁde, also
called cinnabar, HgS. They
heated the red cinnabar, which
drove off the sulfur and left the
shiny liquid mercury. On further
heating, the mercury reacted
to form a red compound again.
Alchemists wrongly thought
that the mercury had been
converted back to cinnabar.
What Hg(II) compound do you
think was really formed when
the mercury was heated in the
air? What is the mass percent
of mercury in this new com-
pound? What is the mass per-
cent of mercury in cinnabar?
percentage composition of HgS. You can assume that you have one mole
of HgS and ﬁnd the mass percents of mercury and sulfur in one mole of
the compound.
Mass percent of Hg in HgS = Mass of Hg in 1 mol of HgS
Mass of 1 mol of HgS
× 100%
× 100%
= 200.6 g
228.68 g
= 87.7%
Mercury(II) sulﬁde is 87.7% mercury by mass. Since there are only two
elements in HgS, you can subtract the mass percent of mercury from
100 percent to ﬁnd the mass percent of sulfur.
Mass percent of S in HgS = 100% − 87.7% = 12.3%
Therefore, the percentage composition of mercury(II) sulﬁde is
87.7% mercury and 12.3% sulfur.
Sometimes there are more than two elements in a compound, or
more than one atom of each element. This makes determining percentage
composition more complex than in the example above. Work through
the Sample Problem below to learn how to calculate the percentage
composition of a compound from its molecular formula.
Sample Problem
Finding Percentage Composition
from a Chemical Formula
Problem
Cinnamaldehyde, C9H8O , is responsible for the characteristic odour
of cinnamon. Determine the percentage composition of cinnamal-
dehyde by calculating the mass percents of carbon, hydrogen, and
oxygen.
What Is Required?
You need to ﬁnd the mass percents of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen
in cinnamaldehyde.
What Is Given?
The molecular formula of cinnamaldehyde is C9H8O.
Molar mass of C = 12.01 g/mol
Molar mass of H = 1.01 g/mol
Molar mass of O = 16.00 g/mol
Plan Your Strategy
From the molar masses of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen, calculate
the molar mass of cinnamaldehyde.
Then ﬁnd the mass percent of each element. To do this, divide
the mass of each element in 1 mol of cinnamaldehyde by the molar
mass of cinnamaldehyde, and multiply by 100%. Remember that
Continued ...
Chapter 6  Chemical Proportions in Compounds • MHR 203
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 203
there are 9 mol carbon, 8 mol hydrogen, and 1 mol oxygen in each
mole of cinnamaldehyde.
Act on Your Strategy
MC9H8O
= (9 × Mc) + (8 × MH) + (MO)
= (9 × 12.01 g) + (8 × 1.01 g) + 16.00 g
= 132 g
Mass percent of C = 9 × MC
MC9H8O
× 100%
= 9 × 12.01 g/mol
132 g/mol
× 100%
= 81.9%
Mass percent of H = 8 × MH
MC9H8O
× 100%
= 8 × 1.01 g/mol
132 g/mol
× 100%
= 6.12%
Mass percent of O = 1 × MO
MC9H8O
× 100%
= 1 × 16.00 g/mol
132 g/mol
× 100%
= 12.1%
The percentage composition of cinnamaldehyde is 81.9% carbon,
6.12% hydrogen, and 12.1% oxygen.
Check Your Solution
The mass percents add up to 100%.
Practice Problems
5. Calculate the mass percent of nitrogen in each compound.
(a) N2O
(b) Sr(NO3)2
(c) NH4NO3
(d) HNO3
6. Sulfuric acid, H2SO4, is an important acid in laboratories and
industries. Determine the percentage composition of sulfuric acid.
7. Potassium nitrate, KNO3, is used to make ﬁreworks. What is the
mass percent of oxygen in potassium nitrate?
8. A mining company wishes to extract manganese metal from
pyrolusite ore, MnO2.
(a) What is the percentage composition of pyrolusite ore?
(b) Use your answer from part (a) to calculate the mass of
pure manganese that can be extracted from 250 kg of
pyrolusite ore.
When it is heated, solid
potassium nitrate reacts to
form solid potassium oxide,
gaseous nitrogen, and gaseous
oxygen. Write a balanced
chemical equation for this
reaction. What type of
reaction is it?
204 MHR • Unit 2  Chemical Quantities
Section Wrap-up
In this section, you learned that you can calculate percentage composition
using a chemical formula. Often, however, chemists do not know the
chemical formula of the compound they are analyzing, as in Figure 6.5.
Through experiment, they can determine the masses of the elements that
make up the compound. Then they can use the masses to calculate the
percentage composition. (You will learn about one example of this kind of
experimental technique in section 6.4.) From the percentage composition,
chemists can work backward to determine the formula of the unknown
compound. In section 6.2, you will learn about the ﬁrst step in using the
percentage composition of a compound to determine its chemical formula.
You know that both elements
and compounds are pure
substances. Write a statement,
using the term “percentage
composition,” to distinguish
between elements and
compounds.
Figure 6.5
How could a chemist use percentage composition to ﬁnd out which is which?
One of these compounds is vanillin, C8H803, and one is glucose, C6H12O6.
Section Review
1
C
Acetylene, C2H2, is the fuel in a welder’s torch. It contains an equal
Unit Investigation Prep
number of carbon and hydrogen atoms. Explain why acetylene is not
50% carbon by mass.
2
K/U
When determining percentage composition, why is it acceptable
to work with either molar quantities, expressed in grams, or average
molecular (or atomic or formula unit) quantities, expressed in atomic
mass units?
3
I
Indigo, C16H10N2O2, is the common name of the dye that gives blue
jeans their characteristic colour. Calculate the mass of oxygen in 25.0 g
of indigo.
Before you design your experi-
ment to ﬁnd the composition of
a mixture, think about using
mass percents in analysis. If
you wanted to determine the
percent by mass of each com-
ponent in a mixture, what
would you need to do ﬁrst?
Compare this situation to ﬁnd-
ing percentage composition of
a pure substance.
Chapter 6  Chemical Proportions in Compounds • MHR 205
4
5
6
7
8
I
Potassium perchlorate, KClO4, is used extensively in explosives.
Calculate the mass of oxygen in a 24.5 g sample of potassium
perchlorate.
I
18.4 g of silver oxide, Ag2O, is decomposed into silver and oxygen
by heating. What mass of silver will be produced?
MC
The label on a box of baking soda (sodium hydrogen carbonate,
NaHCO3) claims that there are 137 mg of sodium per 0.500 g of baking
soda. Comment on the validity of this claim.
I
A typical soap molecule consists of a polyatomic anion associated
with a cation. The polyatomic anion contains hydrogen, carbon, and
oxygen. One particular soap molecule has 18 carbon atoms. It contains
70.5% carbon, 11.5% hydrogen, and 10.4% oxygen by mass. It also
contains one alkali metal cation. Identify the cation.
I
Examine the photographs below. When concentrated sulfuric acid
is added to sucrose, C12H22O11, a column of pure carbon is formed, as
well as some water vapour and other gases. How would you ﬁnd the
mass percent of carbon in sucrose using this reaction? You may
assume that all the carbon in the sucrose is converted to carbon.
Design an experiment to determine the mass percent of carbon in
sucrose, based on this reaction. Do not try to perform this experiment.
What difﬁculties might you encounter?
A
B
C
206 MHR • Unit 2  Chemical Quantities
The Empirical Formula
of a Compound
As part of his atomic theory, John Dalton stated that atoms combine with
one another in simple whole number ratios to form compounds. For
example, the molecular formula of benzene, C6H6, indicates that one
molecule of benzene contains 6 carbon atoms and 6 hydrogen atoms. The
empirical formula (also known as the simplest formula) of a compound
shows the lowest whole number ratio of the elements in the compound.
The molecular formula (also known as the actual formula) describes the
number of atoms of each element that make up a molecule or formula
unit. Benzene, with a molecular formula of C6H6, has an empirical
formula of CH. Table 6.1 shows the molecular formulas of several
compounds, along with their empirical formulas.
Table 6.1 Comparing Molecular Formulas and Empirical Formulas
Name of compound
Molecular (actual)
formula
Empirical (simplest)
formula
Lowest ratio
of elements
hydrogen peroxide
H2O2
glucose
benzene
acetylene (ethyne)
aniline
water
C6H12 O6
C6H6
C2H2
C6H7N
H2O
HO
H2 OC
CH
CH
C6H7N
H2O
1:1
1:2:1
1:1
1:1
6:7:1
2:1
It is possible for different compounds to have the same empirical formula,
as you can see in Figure 6.6. For example, benzene and acetylene both
have the empirical formula CH. Each, however, is a unique compound.
Benzene, C6H6, is a clear liquid with a molar mass of 78 g/mol and a boil-
ing point of 80˚C. Acetylene, C2H2, has a molar mass of 26 g/mol. It is a
highly ﬂammable gas, commonly used in a welder’s torch. There is, in
fact, no existing compound with the molecular formula CH. The empirical
formula of a compound shows the lowest whole
number ratio of the atoms in the compound. It
does not express the composition of a molecule.
Many compounds have molecular formulas
that are the same as their empirical formulas.
One example is ammonia, NH3. Try to think of
three other examples.
6.2
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
perform an experiment to
determine the percentage
composition and the
empirical formula of a
compound
calculate the empirical
formula of a compound
using percentage
composition
communicate your
understanding of the
following terms:
empirical formula,
molecular formula
Language
LINK
The word “empirical” comes
from the Greek word
empeirikos, meaning, roughly,
“by experiment.” Why do you
think the simplest formula of a
compound is called its
empirical formula?
The same empirical formula can represent
Figure 6.6
more than one compound. These two compounds are
different—at room temperature, one is a gas and one is
a liquid. Yet they have the same empirical formula.
Chapter 6  Chemical Proportions in Compounds • MHR 207
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
Math
LINK
is equivalent to 4x. A ratio
In mathematics, you frequently
need to reduce an expression
to lowest terms. For example,
4x 2
x
of 5:10 is equivalent to 1:2. In
chemistry, however, the
“lowest terms” version of a
chemical formula is not equiv-
alent to its “real” molecular
formula. Why not?
How do the molar masses
of C6H6 and C2H2 compare
with the molar mass of their
empirical formula? How does
the molar mass of water com-
pare with the molar mass of its
empirical formula? Describe
the relationship between the
molar mass of a compound
and the molar mass of the
empirical formula of the
compound.
The relationship between the molecular formula of a compound and
its empirical formula can be expressed as
Molecular formula subscripts = n × Empirical formula subscripts,
where n = 1, 2, 3...
This relationship shows that the molecular formula of a compound is
the same as its empirical formula when n = 1. What information do you
need in order to determine whether the molecular formula of a compound
is the same as its empirical formula?
Determining a Compound’s Empirical Formula
In the previous section, you learned how to calculate the percentage com-
position of a compound from its chemical formula. Now you will do the
reverse. You will use the percentage composition of a compound, along
with the concept of the mole, to calculate the empirical formula of the
compound. Since the percentage composition can often be determined by
experiment, chemists use this calculation when they want to identify
a compound.
The following Sample Problem illustrates how to use percentage com-
position to obtain the empirical formula of a compound.
Sample Problem
Finding a Compound‘s Empirical Formula
from Percentage Composition: Part A
Problem
Calculate the empirical formula of a compound that is 85.6% carbon
and 14.4% hydrogen.
What Is Required?
You need to ﬁnd the empirical formula of the compound.
What Is Given?
You know the percentage composition of the compound. You have
access to a periodic table.
Plan Your Strategy
Since you know the percentage composition, it is convenient to
assume that you have 100 g of the compound. This means that you
have 85.6 g of carbon and 14.4 g of hydrogen. Convert each mass to
moles. The number of moles can then be converted into a lowest
terms ratio of the elements to get the empirical formula.
Act on Your Strategy
Number of moles of C in 100 g sample =
Number of moles of H in 100 g sample =
85.6 g
12.01 g/mol
14.4 g
1.01 g/mol
= 7.13 mol
= 14.3 mol
Continued ...
208 MHR • Unit 2  Chemical Quantities
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 208
Now determine the lowest whole number ratio. Divide both molar
amounts by the lowest molar amount.
C 7.13
7.13
→ C1.00H2.01 → CH2
H 14.3
7.13
Alternatively, you can set up your solution as a table.
Element
Mass
percent (%)
Grams per
100 g
sample (g)
Molar mass
(g/mol)
Number of
moles
(mol)
C
H
85.6
14.4
85.6
14.4
12.01
1.01
7.13
14.3
The empirical formula of the compound is CH2.
Molar amount
÷ lowest
molar amount
7.13
7.13
14.3
7.13
= 2.01
= 1
PROBLEM TIP
The fact that 2.01 was rounded
to 2 in CH2 is ﬁne. The percent-
age composition is often
determined by experiment, so
it is unlikely to be exact.
Check Your Solution
Work backward. Calculate the percentage composition of CH2.
Mass percent of C = 12.01 g/mol
14.03 g/mol
× 100%
= 85.6%
Mass percent of H = 2 × 1.01 g/mol
14.03 g/mol
× 100%
= 14.0%
The percentage composition calculated from the empirical formula
closely matches the given data. The formula is reasonable.
Practice Problems
9. A compound consists of 17.6% hydrogen and 82.4% nitrogen.
Determine the empirical formula of the compound.
10. Find the empirical formula of a compound that is 46.3% lithium
and 53.7% oxygen.
11. What is the empirical formula of a compound that is 15.9% boron
and 84.1% ﬂuorine?
12. Determine the empirical formula of a compound made up of
52.51% chlorine and 47.48% sulfur.
Tips for Solving Empirical Formula Problems
In the Sample Problem above, the numbers were rounded at each step to
simplify the calculation. To calculate an empirical formula successfully,
however, you should not round the numbers until you have completed
the calculation. Use the maximum number of signiﬁcant digits that your
calculator will allow, throughout the calculation. Rounding too soon when
calculating an empirical formula may result in getting the wrong answer.
Chapter 6  Chemical Proportions in Compounds • MHR 209
Table 6.2 Converting Subscripts
in Empirical Formulas
When you see
this decimal...
Try multiplying
all subscripts by...
x.80 ( 4
5
x.75 ( 3
4
x.67 ( 2
3
x.60 ( 3
5
x.40 ( 2
5
x.50 ( 1
2
x.33 ( 1
3
x.25 ( 1
4
x.20 ( 1
5
x.17 ( 1
6
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
5
4
3
5
5
2
3
4
5
6
Often only one step is needed to determine the number of moles in an
empirical formula. This is not always the case, however. Since you must
divide by the lowest number of moles, initially one of your ratio terms
will always be 1. If your other terms are quite close to whole numbers,
as in the last Sample Problem, you can round them to the closest whole
numbers. If your other terms are not close to whole numbers, you will
need to do some additional steps. This is because empirical formulas
do not always contain the subscript 1. For example, Fe2O3 contains the
subscripts 2 and 3.
Decimals such as 0.95 to 0.99 can be rounded up to the nearest
whole number. Decimals such as 0.01 to 0.05 can be rounded down to the
nearest whole number. Other decimals require additional manipulation.
What if you have the empirical formula C1.5H3O1? To convert all sub-
scripts to whole numbers, multiply each subscript by 2. This gives you
the empirical formula C3H6O2. Thus, a ratio that involves a decimal
ending in 0.5 must be doubled. What if a decimal ends in 0.45 to 0.55?
Round the decimal so that it ends in .5, and then double the ratio.
Table 6.2 gives you some strategies for converting subscripts to whole
numbers. The variable x stands for any whole number. Examine the
following Sample Problem to learn how to convert the empirical formula
subscripts to the lowest possible whole numbers.
Sample Problem
Finding a Compound‘s Empirical Formula
from Percentage Composition: Part B
Problem
The percentage composition of a fuel is 81.7% carbon and
18.3% hydrogen. Find the empirical formula of the fuel.
What Is Required?
You need to determine the empirical formula of the fuel.
What Is Given?
You know the percentage composition of the fuel. You have access to
a periodic table.
Plan Your Strategy
Convert mass percent to mass, then to number of moles. Then ﬁnd
the lowest whole number ratio.
Act on Your Strategy
Element
Mass
percent (%)
Grams per
100 g
sample (g)
Molar mass
(g/mol)
Number of
moles
(mol)
Molar amount
÷ lowest
molar amount
C
H
81.7
18.3
81.7
18.3
12.0
1.01
6.81
18.1
6.81
6.81
18.1
6.81
= 1
= 2.66
210 MHR • Unit 2  Chemical Quantities
Continued ...
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 210
You now have the empirical formula C1H2.66. Convert the subscript
2.66 (8
3 ) to a whole number. C1 × 3H2.66 × 3 = C3H8.
Check Your Solution
Work backward. Calculate the percentage composition of C3H8.
Mass percent of C = 3 × 12.01 g/mol
44.09 g/mol
× 100%
= 81.7%
Mass percent of H = 8 × 1.008 g/mol
44.09 g/mol
= 18.3%
× 100%
The percentage composition calculated from the empirical formula
matches the percentage composition given in the problem.
Practice Problems
13. An oxide of chromium is made up of 68.4% chromium and
31.6% oxygen. What is the empirical formula of this oxide?
14. Phosphorus reacts with oxygen to give a compound that
is 43.7% phosphorus and 56.4% oxygen. What is the empirical
formula of the compound?
15. An inorganic salt is composed of 17.6% sodium, 39.7%
chromium, and 42.8% oxygen. What is the empirical formula of
this salt?
16. Compound X contains 69.9% carbon, 6.86% hydrogen, and
23.3% oxygen. Determine the empirical formula of compound X.
Determining the Empirical Formula by Experiment
In practice, you can determine a compound’s empirical formula by analyz-
ing its percentage composition. There are several different ways to do this.
One way is to use a synthesis reaction in which a sample of an element
with a known mass reacts with another element to form a compound.
Since you know the mass of one of the elements and you can measure
the mass of the compound produced, you can calculate the percentage
composition.
For example, copper reacts with the oxygen in air to form the
green compound copper oxide. Many buildings in Canada, such as the
Parliament buildings in Ottawa, have green roofs that contain some
copper(II) oxide. (See Figure 6.7.) Imagine you have a 5.0 g sample of
copper shavings. You allow the copper shavings to react completely with
oxygen. If the resulting compound has a mass of 6.3 g, you know that the
compound contains 5.0 g copper and 1.3 g oxygen. Although you can use
the periodic table to predict that the formula for copper(II) oxide is CuO,
the masses help you conﬁrm your prediction. Try converting the masses
given above into an empirical formula.
In Investigation 6-A, you will use a synthesis reaction to determine
the empirical formula of magnesium oxide by experiment.
PROBLEM TIP
Notice that Table 6.2 suggests
multiplying by 3 when you
obtain a subscript ending in
.67, which is very close to .66.
Although this green
Figure 6.7
roof may contain some copper(II)
oxide, it is mostly composed
of basic copper sulfates and
carbonates that form when the
copper reacts with acid
precipitation.
Chapter 6  Chemical Proportions in Compounds • MHR 211
S K I L L   F O C U S
Predicting
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
Communicating results
Determining the Empirical
Formula of Magnesium Oxide
When magnesium metal is heated over a ﬂame, it
reacts with oxygen in the air to form magnesium
oxide, MgxOy:
Mg(s) + O2(g) → MgxOy(s)
In this investigation, you will  react a strip
of pure magnesium metal with oxygen, O2, in
the air to form magnesium oxide. Then you will
measure the mass of the magnesium oxide pro-
duced to determine the percentage composition
of magnesium oxide. You will use this percentage
composition to calculate the empirical formula
of magnesium oxide.
Do not perform
this investigation unless welder’s goggles are
available.
CAUTION
Question
What is the percentage composition and
empirical formula of magnesium oxide?
Predictions
Using what you have learned about writing
formulas, predict the molecular formula and
percentage composition of magnesium oxide.
Materials
electronic balance
small square of sandpaper or emery paper
8 cm strip of magnesium ribbon
laboratory burner
sparker
retort stand
ring clamp
clay triangle
clean crucible with lid
crucible tongs
ceramic pad
distilled water
wash bottle
disposal beaker
welder’s goggles
Note: Make sure that the mass of the magnesium
ribbon is at least 0.10 g.
ring clamp
retort
stand
crucible
with lid
clay triangle
laboratory
burner
Safety Precautions
• Do not look directly at the burning magnesium.
• Do not put a hot crucible on the bench or
the balance.
Procedure
1. Make a table like the one below.
Observations
Mass of clean, empty crucible and lid
Mass of crucible, lid, and magnesium
Mass of crucible and magnesium oxide
2. Assemble the apparatus as shown in the
diagram.
3. Obtain a strip of magnesium, about 8 cm long,
from your teacher. Clean the magnesium strip
with sandpaper or emery paper to remove any
oxide coating.
4. Measure and record the mass of the empty
crucible and lid. Add the strip of cleaned
magnesium to the crucible. Record the mass
of the crucible, lid, and magnesium.
212 MHR • Unit 2  Chemical Quantities
5. With the lid off, place the crucible containing
the magnesium on the clay triangle. Heat the
crucible with a strong ﬂame. Using the cru-
cible tongs, hold the lid of the crucible nearby.
When the magnesium ignites, quickly
CAUTION
cover the crucible with the lid. Continue
heating for about 1 min.
6. Carefully remove the lid.
CAUTION
Heat the
crucible until the magnesium ignites once
more. Again, quickly cover the crucible.
Repeat this heating and covering of the cru-
cible until the magnesium no longer ignites.
Heat for a further 4 to 5 min with the lid off.
7. Using the crucible tongs, put the crucible on
the ceramic pad to cool.
8. When the crucible is cool enough to touch, put
it on the bench. Carefully grind the product
into small particles using the glass rod. Rinse
any particles on the glass rod into the crucible
with distilled water from the wash bottle.
9. Add enough distilled water to the crucible to
thoroughly wet the contents. The white prod-
uct is magnesium oxide. The yellowish-orange
product is magnesium nitride.
10. Return the crucible to the clay triangle. Place
the lid slightly ajar. Heat the crucible gently
until the water begins to boil. Continue heat-
ing until all the water has evaporated, and the
product is completely dry. Allow the crucible
to cool on the ceramic pad.
11. Using the crucible tongs, carry the crucible
and lid to the balance. Measure and record the
mass of the crucible and lid.
12. Do not put the magnesium oxide in the
garbage or in the sink. Put it in the disposal
beaker designated by your teacher.
Analysis
1. (a) What mass of magnesium did you use in
the reaction?
(b) What mass of magnesium oxide was
produced?
(c) Calculate the mass of oxygen that reacted
with the magnesium.
(d) Use your data to calculate the percentage
composition of magnesium oxide.
(e) Determine the empirical formula of
magnesium oxide. Remember to round your
empirical formula to the nearest whole
number ratio, such as 1:1, 1:2, 2:1, or 3:3.
2. (a) Verify your empirical formula with your
teacher. Use the empirical formula of
magnesium oxide to determine the mass
percent of magnesium in magnesium oxide.
(b) Calculate your percent error (PE) by ﬁnding
the difference between the experimental
mass percent (EP) of magnesium and the
actual mass percent (AP) of magnesium.
Then you divide the difference by the
actual mass percent of magnesium and
multiply by 100%.
PE = EP − AP
AP
× 100%
3. Why did you need to round the empirical for-
mula you obtained to a whole number ratio?
Conclusion
4. Compare the empirical formula you obtained
with the empirical formula you predicted.
Applications
5. Write a balanced chemical equation for the
reaction of magnesium with oxygen gas, O2.
6. (a) Suppose that you had allowed some
magnesium oxide smoke to escape during
the investigation. How would the Mg:O
ratio have been affected? Would the ratio
have increased, decreased, or remained
unchanged? Explain using sample
calculations.
(b) How would your calculated value for the
empirical formula of magnesium oxide
have been affected if all the magnesium in
the crucible had not burned? Support your
answer with sample calculations.
(c) Could either of the situations mentioned in
parts (a) and (b) have affected your results?
Explain.
Chapter 6  Chemical Proportions in Compounds • MHR 213
Section Wrap-up
In section 6.2, you learned how to calculate the empirical formula of a
compound based on percentage composition data obtained by experiment.
In section 6.3, you will learn how chemists use the empirical formula of a
compound and its molar mass to determine the molecular formula of a
compound.
Section Review
1
(a)
K/U
Why is the empirical formula of a compound also referred to as
its simplest formula?
(b)
K/U
Explain how the empirical formula of a compound is related to
its molecular formula.
2
I
Methyl salicylate, or oil of wintergreen, is produced by the winter-
green plant. It can also be prepared easily in a laboratory. Methyl sali-
cylate is 63.1% carbon, 5.31% hydrogen, and 31.6% oxygen. Calculate
the empirical formula of methyl salicylate.
3
I
Determine the empirical formula of the compound that is formed
by each of the following reactions.
(a) 0.315 mol chlorine atoms react completely with 1.1 mol
oxygen atoms
(b) 4.90 g silicon react completely with 24.8 g chlorine
4
I
Muscle soreness from physical activity is caused by a buildup
of lactic acid in muscle tissue. Analysis of lactic acid reveals it to be
40.0% carbon, 6.71% hydrogen, and 53.3% oxygen by mass. Calculate
the empirical formula of lactic acid.
5
MC
Imagine that you are a lawyer. You are representing a client
charged with possession of a controlled substance. The prosecutor
introduces, as forensic evidence, the empirical formula of the
substance that was found in your client’s possession. How would
you deal with this evidence as a lawyer for the defence?
6
7
I
Olive oil is used widely in cooking. Oleic acid, a component
of olive oil, contains 76.54% carbon, 12.13% hydrogen and 11.33%
oxygen by mass. What is the empirical formula of oleic acid?
I
Phenyl valerate is a colourless liquid that is used as a ﬂavour
and odorant. It contains 74.13% carbon, 7.92% hydrogen and 17.95%
oxygen by mass. Determine the empirical formula of phenyl valerate.
8
I
Ferrocene is the common name given to a unique compound that
consists of one iron atom sandwiched between two rings containing
hydrogen and carbon. This orange, crystalline solid is added to fuel
oil to improve combustion efﬁciency and eliminate smoke. As well,
it is used as an industrial catalyst and a high-temperature lubricant.
(a) Elemental analysis reveals ferrocene to be 64.56% carbon, 5.42%
hydrogen and 30.02% iron by mass. Determine the empirical
formula of ferrocene.
(b) Read the description of ferrocene carefully. Does this description
provide enough information for you to determine the molecular
formula of ferrocene? Explain your answer.
214 MHR • Unit 2  Chemical Quantities
The Molecular Formula
of a Compound
Determining the identity of an unknown compound is important in all
kinds of research. It can even be used to solve crimes. Forensic scientists
specialize in analyzing evidence for criminal and legal cases. To under-
stand why forensic scientists might need to ﬁnd out the molecular
formula of a compound, consider the following example.
Suppose that a suspect in a theft investigation is a researcher in a biol-
ogy laboratory. The suspect frequently works with formaldehyde, CH2O.
Police ofﬁcers ﬁnd traces of a substance at the crime scene, and send sam-
ples to the Centre for Forensic Science. The forensic analysts ﬁnd that the
substance contains a compound that has an empirical formula of CH2O.
Will this evidence help to convict the suspect? Not necessarily.
As you can see from Table 6.3, there are many compounds that have
the empirical formula CH2O. The substance might be formaldehyde, but it
could also be lactic acid (found in milk) or acetic acid (found in vinegar).
Neither lactic acid nor acetic acid connect the theft to the suspect. Further
information is required to prove that the substance is formaldehyde.
Analyzing the physical properties of the substance would help to discover
whether it is formaldehyde. Another important piece of information is the
molar mass of the substance. Continue reading to ﬁnd out why.
6.3
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
determine the molecular
formula of a compound,
given the empirical formula
of the compound and some
additional information
identify real-life situations in
which the analysis of
unknown substances is
important
communicate your under-
standing of the following
terms: forensic scientists
Table 6.3 Six Compounds with the Empirical Formula CH2O
Name
Molecular formula
Whole-number
multiple
Μ
(g/mol)
Use or function
formaldehyde
acetic acid
lactic acid
erythrose
ribose
glucose
CH2O
C2H4O2
C3H6O3
C4H8O4
C5H10O5
C6H12O6
1
2
3
4
5
6
30.03
disinfectant; biological preservative
60.05
acetate polymers; vinegar (5% solution)
90.08
causes milk to sour; forms in muscles during exercise
120.10
forms during sugar metabolism
150.13
component of many nucleic acids and vitamin B2
180.16
major nutrient for energy in cells
CH2O
C2H4O2
C3H6O3
C4H8O4
C5H10O5
C6H12O6
Determining a Molecular Formula
Recall the equation
Molecular formula subscripts = n × Empirical formula subscripts,
where n = 1, 2, 3...
Additional information is required to obtain the molecular formula of a
compound, given its empirical formula. We can use the molar mass and
build on the above equation, as follows:
Molar mass of compound = n × Molar mass of empirical formula,
where n = 1, 2, 3...
Chapter 6  Chemical Proportions in Compounds • MHR 215
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
Careers
in Chemistry
Analytical Chemistry
Ben Johnson, Steve Vezina, Eric Lamaze—all
of these athletes tested positive for performance -
enhancing substances that are banned by the
International Olympic Committee (IOC). Who
conducts the tests for these substances? Meet
Dr. Christiane Ayotte, head of Canada’s Doping
Control Laboratory since 1991.
The Doping Control Lab
What happens to a urine sample after it arrives at
the doping control lab? Technicians and scientists
must be careful to ensure careful handling of the
sample. Portions of the sample are taken for six
different analytical procedures. More than 150
substances are banned by the IOC. These sub-
stances are grouped according to their physical
and chemical properties. There are two main
steps for analyzing a sample:
1. puriﬁcation, which involves steps such as
ﬁltration and extraction using solvents, and
2. analysis by either gas chromatography, mass
spectrometry, or high-performance liquid
chromatography. Chromatography refers to
certain methods by which chemists separate
mixtures into pure substances.
For most substances, just their presence in a
urine sample means a positive result. Other
substances must be present in an amount higher
than a certain threshold. According to Dr. Ayotte,
a male athlete would have to consume “10 very
strong French coffees within 15 min” to go over
the 12 mg/L limit for caffeine. Ephedrines and
pseudoephedrines, two decongestants that are
found in cough remedies and that act as stimu-
lants, have a cut-off level. This allows athletes
to take them up to one or two days before a
competition.
Challenges
Dr. Ayotte and her team face many challenges.
They look for reliable tests for natural substances,
develop new analytical techniques, and deter-
mine the normal levels of banned substances
for male and female athletes. Dr. Ayotte must
defend her tests in hearings and with the press,
especially when high-proﬁle athletes get positive
results. Her dreams include an independent
international doping control agency and better
drug-risk education for athletes.
For Dr. Ayotte, integrity and a logical mind
are essential aspects of being a good scientist.
Make Career Connections
1. For information about careers in analytical
chemistry, contact university and college
chemistry departments.
2. For information about doping control and
the movement for drug-free sport, contact
the Canadian Centre for Ethics in Sport
(CCES), the World Anti-Doping Agency
(WADA), and the Centre for Sport and Law.
Thus, the molar mass of a compound is a whole number multiple of the
“molar mass” of the empirical formula.
Chemists can use a mass spectrometer to determine the molar mass of a
compound. They can use the molar mass, along with the “molar mass” of a
known empirical formula, to determine the compound’s molecular formula.
For example, the empirical formula CH has a “molar mass” of 13 g/mol. We
know, however, that acetylene, C2H2, and benzene, C6H6, both have the
empirical formula CH. Suppose it is determined, through mass spectrometry,
216 MHR • Unit 2  Chemical Quantities
that a sample has a molar mass of 78 g/mol. We know that the compound
is C6H6, since 6 × 13 g = 78 g, as shown in Table 6.4.
Table 6.4 Relating Molecular
and Empirical Formulas
Examine the Sample Problem and Practice Problems that follow
to learn how to ﬁnd the molecular formula of a compound using the
empirical formula and the molar mass of the compound.
Sample Problem
Determining a Molecular Formula
Problem
The empirical formula of ribose (a sugar) is CH2O. In a separate
experiment, using a mass spectrometer, the molar mass of ribose
was determined to be 150 g/mol. What is the molecular formula
of ribose?
What Is Required?
You need to ﬁnd the molecular formula of ribose.
What Is Given?
You know the empirical formula and the molar mass of ribose.
Plan Your Strategy
Divide the molar mass of ribose by the “molar mass” of the empirical
formula. The answer you get is the factor by which you multiply the
empirical formula.
Act on Your Strategy
The “molar mass” of the empirical formula CH2O, determined using
the periodic table, is
12 g/mol + 2(1) g/mol + 16 g/mol = 30 g/mol
The molar mass of ribose is 150 g/mol.
150 g/mol
30 g/mol
= 5
Molecular formula subscripts = 5 × Empirical formula subscripts
Therefore, the molecular formula of ribose is C5H10O5.
= C1 × 5H2 × 5O1 × 5
= C5H10O5
Check Your Solution
Work backward by calculating the molar mass of C5H10O5.
(5 × 12.01 g/mol) + (10 × 1.01 g/mol) + (5 × 16.00 g/mol) = 150 g/mol
The calculated molar mass matches the molar mass that is given in
the problem. The answer is reasonable.
Molar
Mass
(g)
78
13
Ratio
78
13
= 6
Formula
C6H6
molecular
CH
empirical
C H E M
FA C T
Three classiﬁcations of food
are proteins, fats, and
carbohydrates. Many
carbohydrates have the
empirical formula CH2O. This
empirical formula looks like a
hydrate of carbon, hence the
name “carbohydrate.”
Glucose, fructose, galactose,
mannose, and sorbose all have
the empirical formula CH2O
since they all have the same
molecular formula, C6H12O6.
What makes these sugars
different is the way in which
their atoms are bonded to one
another. In Chapter 13, you
will learn more about different
compounds with the same
formulas.
Continued ...
Chapter 6  Chemical Proportions in Compounds • MHR 217
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 217
Practice Problems
C H E M
FA C T
Codeine is a potent pain reliev-
er. It acts on the pain centre in
the brain, rather than interrupt-
ing pain messages from, for
example, a headache or a
sore arm. It is potentially
habit-forming and classiﬁed
as a narcotic.
17. The empirical formula of butane, the fuel used in disposable
lighters, is C2H5. In an experiment, the molar mass of butane
was determined to be 58 g/mol. What is the molecular formula
of butane?
18. Oxalic acid has the empirical formula CHO2. Its molar mass is
90 g/mol. What is the molecular formula of oxalic acid?
19. The empirical formula of codeine is C18H21NO3. If the molar mass
of codeine is 299 g/mol, what is its molecular formula?
20. A compound’s molar mass is 240.28 g/mol. Its percentage
composition is 75.0% carbon, 5.05% hydrogen, and 20.0%
oxygen. What is the compound’s molecular formula?
Section Wrap-up
How do chemists obtain the data they use to identify compounds? In
Investigation 6-A, you explored one technique for ﬁnding the percentage
composition, and hence the empirical formula, of a compound containing
magnesium and oxygen. In section 6.4, you will learn about another tech-
nique that chemists use to determine the empirical formula of compounds
containing carbon and hydrogen. You will learn how chemists combine
this technique with mass spectrometry to determine the compound’s
molecular formula. You will also learn about a new type of compound
and perform an experiment to determine the molecular formula of one
of these compounds.
Section Review
Unit Investigation Prep
Before you design your experi-
ment to ﬁnd the composition
of a mixture, think about the
relationships between different
compounds. Suppose you have
5.0 g of copper. This copper
reacts to form copper(II)
chloride, also containing 5.0 g
of copper. How can you
determine the mass of
copper(II) chloride formed?
1
2
3
4
K/U
Explain the role that a mass spectrometer plays in determining
the molecular formula of an unknown compound.
I
Tartaric acid, also known as cream of tartar, is used in baking.
Its empirical formula is C2H3O3. If 1.00 mol of tartaric acid contains
3.61 × 1024 oxygen atoms, what is the molecular formula of
tartaric acid?
MC
Why is the molecular formula of a compound much more useful to
a forensic scientist than the empirical formula of the compound?
K/U
Vinyl acetate, C4H6O2, is an important industrial chemical. It is
used to make some of the polymers in products such as adhesives,
paints, computer discs, and plastic ﬁlms.
(a) What is the empirical formula of vinyl acetate?
(b) How does the molar mass of vinyl acetate compare with the molar
mass of its empirical formula?
5
I
A compound has the formula C6xH5xOx, where x is a whole num-
ber. Its molar mass is 186 g/mol; what is its molecular formula?
218 MHR • Unit 2  Chemical Quantities
Finding Empirical and Molecular
Formulas by Experiment
6.4
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
identify real-life situations in
which the analysis of
unknown substances is
important
determine the empirical for-
mula of a hydrate through
experimentation
explain how a carbon-
hydrogen analyzer can be
used to determine the empir-
ical formula of a compound
communicate your under-
standing of the following
terms: carbon-hydrogen
combustion analyzer,
hydrate, anhydrous
You have learned how to calculate the percentage composition of a
compound using its formula. Often, however, the formula of a compound
is not known. Chemists must determine the percentage composition
and molar mass of an unknown compound through experimentation.
Then they use this information to determine the molecular formula of
the compound. Determining the molecular formula is an important step in
understanding the properties of the compound and developing a way to
synthesize it in a laboratory.
In Investigation 6-A, you reacted a known mass of magnesium with
oxygen and found the mass of the product. Then you determined the per-
centage composition and empirical formula of magnesium oxide. This is
just one method for determining percentage composition. It is suitable for
analyzing simple compounds that react in predictable ways. Chemists
have developed other methods for analyzing different types of
compounds, as you will learn in this section.
The Carbon-Hydrogen Combustion Analyzer
A large number of important chemicals are composed of hydrogen,
carbon, and oxygen. The carbon-hydrogen combustion analyzer is a
useful instrument for analyzing these chemicals. It allows chemists to
determine the percentage composition of compounds that are made up
of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen. The applications of this instrument
include forensic science, food chemistry, pharmaceuticals and academic
research — anywhere that an unknown compound needs to be analyzed.
The carbon-hydrogen combustion analyzer works because we know
that compounds containing carbon and hydrogen will burn in a stream of
pure oxygen, O2, to yield only carbon dioxide and water. If we can ﬁnd
the mass of the carbon dioxide and water separately, we can determine
the mass percent of carbon and hydrogen in the compound.
Examine Figure 6.8 to see how a carbon-hydrogen combustion analyz-
er works. A sample, made up of only carbon and hydrogen, is placed in a
furnace. The sample is heated and simultaneously reacted with a stream
sample of compound containing
C, H, and other elements
H2O absorber
CO2 absorber
other substances not absorbed
stream of O2
furnace
A schematic diagram of a carbon-hydrogen combustion analyzer. After the
Figure 6.8
combustion, all the carbon in the sample is contained in the carbon dioxide. All the
hydrogen in the sample is contained in the water.
Chapter 6  Chemical Proportions in Compounds • MHR 219
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
Carbon dioxide reacts with
sodium hydroxide to form
sodium carbonate and water.
Write a balanced chemical
equation for this reaction.
P R O B E W A R E
If you have access to
probeware, do the Chemistry
11 lab, Determining Molecular
Mass, or a similar lab available
from a probeware company.
of oxygen. Eventually the sample is completely combusted to yield only
water vapour and carbon dioxide.
The water vapour is collected by passing it through a tube that con-
tains magnesium perchlorate, Mg(ClO4)2. The magnesium perchlorate
absorbs all of the water. The mass of the tube is determined before and
after the reaction. The difference is the mass of the water that is produced
in the reaction. We know that all the hydrogen in the sample is converted
to water. Therefore, we can use the percentage composition of hydrogen
in water to determine the mass of the hydrogen in the sample.
The carbon dioxide is captured in a second tube, which contains
sodium hydroxide, NaOH. The mass of this tube is also measured before
and after the reaction. The increase in the mass of the tube corresponds
to the mass of the carbon dioxide that is produced. We know that all the
carbon in the sample reacts to form carbon dioxide. Therefore, we can use
the percentage composition of carbon in carbon dioxide to determine the
mass of the carbon in the sample.
The carbon-hydrogen combustion analyzer can also be used to ﬁnd
the empirical formula of a compound that contains carbon, hydrogen,
and one other element, such as oxygen. The difference between the mass
of the sample and the mass of the hydrogen and carbon produced is the
mass of the third element.
Examine the following Sample Problem to learn how to determine the
empirical formula of a compound based on carbon-hydrogen combustion
data.
If you have a compound con-
taining carbon, hydrogen, and
oxygen, what two instruments
would you need to determine
its molecular formula?
Sample Problem
Carbon-Hydrogen Combustion
Analyzer Calculations
Problem
A 1.000 g sample of a pure compound, containing only carbon and
hydrogen, was combusted in a carbon-hydrogen combustion analyz-
er. The combustion produced 0.6919 g of water and 3.338 g of carbon
dioxide.
(a) Calculate the masses of the carbon and the hydrogen
in the sample.
(b) Find the empirical formula of the compound.
What Is Required?
You need to ﬁnd
(a) the mass of the carbon and the hydrogen in the sample
(b) the empirical formula of the compound
What Is Given?
You know the mass of the sample. You also know the masses of
the water and the carbon dioxide produced in the combustion of
the sample.
Continued ...
220 MHR • Unit 2  Chemical Quantities
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 220
Plan Your Strategy
All the hydrogen in the sample was converted to water. Multiply the
mass percent (as a decimal) of hydrogen in water by the mass of the
water to get the mass of the hydrogen in the sample.
Similarly, all the carbon in the sample has been incorporated
into the carbon dioxide. Multiply the mass percent (as a decimal) of
carbon in carbon dioxide by the mass of the carbon dioxide to get
the mass of carbon in the sample. Convert to moles and determine
the empirical formula.
Act on Your Strategy
(a) Mass of H in sample
2.02 g H2
18.02 g H2O
=
× 0.6919 g H2O = 0.077 56 g H2
Mass of C in sample = 12.01 g C
44.01 g CO2
× 3.338 g CO2 = 0.9109 g C
The sample contained 0.077 56 g of hydrogen and 0.9109 g of
carbon.
(b) Moles of H in sample = 0.07756 g
1.008 g/mol
= 0.07694 mol
Moles of C in sample =
0.9109 g
12.01 g/mol
= 0.07584 mol
Empirical formula = C 0.07584
0.07584
= C1.0H1.0
= CH
H 0.07584
0.07694
Check Your Solution
The sum of the masses of carbon and hydrogen is 0.077 56 g +
0.9109 g = 0.988 46 g. This is close to the mass of the sample.
Therefore your answers are reasonable.
Practice Problems
21. A 0.539 g sample of a compound that contained only carbon and
hydrogen was subjected to combustion analysis. The combustion
produced 1.64 g of carbon dioxide and 0.807 g of water. Calculate
the percentage composition and the empirical formula of the
sample.
22. An 874 mg sample of cortisol was subjected to carbon-hydrogen
combustion analysis. 2.23 g of carbon dioxide and 0.652 g of
water were produced. The molar mass of cortisol was found to be
362 g/mol using a mass spectrometer. If cortisol contains carbon,
hydrogen, and oxygen, determine its molecular formula.
C H E M
FA C T
Cortisol is an important steroid
hormone. It helps your body
synthesize protein. Cortisol can
also reduce inﬂammation, and
is used to treat allergies and
rheumatoid arthritis.
Chapter 6  Chemical Proportions in Compounds • MHR 221
Chemistry Bulletin
Accident or Arson?
All chemists who try to identify unknown
compounds are like detectives. Forensic
chemists, however, actually work with investi-
gators. They use their chemical knowledge to
help explain evidence. Forensic chemists are
especially helpful in an arson investigation.
Investigating Arson
One of the main jobs of the investigator in a
possible arson case is to locate and sample
residual traces of accelerants. Accelerants are
ﬂammable substances that are used to quickly
ignite and spread a ﬁre. They include com-
pounds called hydrocarbons, which contain
hydrogen and carbon. Examples of hydrocar-
bons include petrol, kerosene and diesel.
Portable instruments called sniffers can be
used to determine the best places to collect
samples. These sniffers, however, are not able
to determine the type of hydrocarbon present.
As well, they can be set off by vapours from
burnt plastics. Deciding whether or not a sub-
stance is an accelerant is best done by a
chemist in a laboratory, using a technique
called gas chromatography (GC).
222 MHR • Unit 2  Chemical Quantities
In the Forensic Laboratory
In the laboratory, the sample residue must be
concentrated on charcoal or another material.
Then the sample is ready for GC analysis. GC
is used to separate and detect trace amounts of
volatile hydrocarbons and separate them from
a mixture. Most accelerants are complex
mixtures. They have many components, in
different but speciﬁc ratios.
GC involves taking the concentrated
residue and passing it through a gas column.
As the sample residue moves through the col-
umn, the different components separate based
on their boiling points. The compound with
the lowest boiling point emerges from the
column and onto a detector ﬁrst. The other
components follow as they reach their boiling
points. It is possible to identify each compo-
nent of a mixture based on the time that it
emerges from the column. A detector records
this information on a chromatogram. Each
component is represented by a peak on a
graph. The overall pattern of peaks is always
the same for a speciﬁc type of accelerant.
Therefore, accelerants are identiﬁed by their
components and the relative proportions of
their components.
Only trace amounts of an accelerant need
to be collected because current analytical tools
are extremely sensitive. If an accelerant is used
to start a ﬁre, it is highly likely that there will
be trace amounts left over after the ﬁre. The
presence of an accelerant at a ﬁre scene strongly
suggests that the ﬁre was started intentionally.
Making Connections
1. What other types of crime could be solved
by a forensic chemist? Brainstorm a list.
2. What other instruments might a forensic
chemist use to identify compounds? Using
the Internet or reference books, do some
research to ﬁnd out.
Hydrated Ionic Compounds
You have learned how to ﬁnd the molecular formula of a compound that
contains only hydrogen, carbon, and oxygen. When chemists use this
method, they usually have no mass percent data for the compound when
they begin. In some cases, however, chemists know most of the molecular
formula of a compound, but one signiﬁcant piece of information is
missing.
For example, many ionic compounds crystallize from a water solution
with water molecules incorporated into their crystal structure, forming a
hydrate. Hydrates have a speciﬁc number of water molecules chemically
bonded to each formula unit. A chemist may know the formula of the
ionic part of the hydrate but not how many water molecules are present
for each formula unit.
Epsom salts, for example, consist of crystals of magnesium sulfate
heptahydrate, MgSO4·7H2O . Every formula unit of magnesium sulfate has
seven molecules of water weakly bonded to it. A raised dot in a chemical
formula, in front of one or more water molecules, denotes a hydrated
compound. Note that the dot does not include multiplication, but rather a
weak bond between an ionic compound and one or more water molecules.
Some other examples of hydrates are shown in Table 6.4.
Compounds that have no water molecules incorporated into them
are called anhydrous to distinguish them from their hydrated forms. For
example, a chemist might refer to CaSO4 as anhydrous calcium sulfate.
This is because it is often found in hydrated form as calcium sulfate
dihydrate, shown in Figure 6.9.
Table 6.4  Selected Hydrates
Formula
CaSO4·2H2O
CaCl2·2H2O
LiCl2·4H2O
MgSO4·7H2O
Chemical name
calcium sulfate dihydrate (gypsum)
calcium chloride dihydrate
lithium chloride tetrahydrate
magnesium sulfate heptahydrate (Epsom salts)
Ba(OH)2·8H2O
barium hydroxide octahydrate
Na2CO3·10H2O
sodium carbonate decahydrate
KAl(SO4)2·12H2O
potassium aluminum sulfate dodecahydrate (alum)
The molar mass of a hydrated compound must include the mass of any
water molecules that are in the compound. For example, the molar mass
of magnesium sulfate heptahydrate includes the mass of 7 mol of water.
It is very important to know whether a compound exists as a hydrate. For
example, if a chemical reaction calls for 0.25 mol of copper(II) chloride,
you need to know whether you are dealing with anhydrous copper(II)
chloride or with copper(II) chloride dihydrate, shown in Figure 6.10. The
mass of 0.25 mol of CuCl2 is 33.61 g. The mass of 0.25 mol of CuCl2·2H2O
is 38.11 g.
Calculations involving hydrates involve using the same techniques
you have already practised for determining percent by mass, empirical
formulas, and molecular formulas.
The following Sample Problem shows how to ﬁnd the percent by mass
of water in a hydrate. It also shows how to determine the formula
of a hydrate based on an incomplete chemical formula.
Suppose there is MgSO4·7H2O
in the chemistry prep room.
The experiment you want to
do, however, calls for MgSO4.
How do you think you might
remove the water from
MgSO4·7H2O ?
Alabaster is a
Figure 6.9
compact form of gypsum often
used in sculpture. Gypsum is the
common name for calcium sulfate
dihydrate, CaSO4·2H2O.
Chapter 6  Chemical Proportions in Compounds • MHR 223
Sample Problem
Determining the Formula of a Hydrate
Problem
A hydrate of barium hydroxide, Ba(OH)2·xH2O, is used to make
barium salts and to prepare certain organic compounds. Since it
reacts with CO2 from the air to yield barium carbonate, BaCO3 , it
must be stored in tightly stoppered bottles.
(a) A 50.0 g sample of the hydrate contains 27.2 g of Ba(OH)2.
Calculate the percent, by mass, of water in Ba(OH)2·xH2O.
(b) Find the value of x in Ba(OH)2·xH2O.
If you need 5 mol
Figure 6.10
of CuCI2 , how much of the com-
pound above would you use?
What Is Required?
(a) You need to calculate the percent, by mass, of water in the
hydrate of barium hydroxide.
(b) You need to ﬁnd how many water molecules are bonded to each
formula unit of Ba(OH)2.
What Is Given?
The formula of the sample is Ba(OH)2·xH2O.
The mass of the sample is 50.0 g.
The sample contains 27.2 g of Ba(OH)2.
Plan Your Strategy
(a) To ﬁnd the mass of water in the hydrate, ﬁnd the difference
between the mass of barium hydroxide and the total mass of the
sample. Divide by the total mass of the sample and multiply by
100%.
(b) Find the number of moles of barium hydroxide in the sample.
Then ﬁnd the number of moles of water in the sample. To ﬁnd out
how many water molecules bond to each formula unit of
barium hydroxide, divide each answer by the number of moles of
barium hydroxide.
Act on Your Strategy
(a) Mass percent of water in Ba(OH)2·xH2O
= (Total mass of sample) − (Mass of Ba(OH)2 in sample)
(Total mass of sample)
× 100%
= 50.0 g − 27.2 g
50.0 g
× 100%
= 45.6%
(b) Moles of Ba(OH)2
=
=
Mass of Ba(OH)2
Molar mass of Ba(OH)2
27.2 g
171.3 g/mol
= 0.159 mol Ba(OH)2
Continued ...
224 MHR • Unit 2  Chemical Quantities
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 224
Moles of H2O =
Mass of H2O
Molar mass of H2O
= 50.0 g − 27.2 g
18.02 g/mol
= 1.27 mol H2O
0.159
0.159
mol Ba(OH)2 :
1.27
0.159
mol H2O = 1.0 mol Ba(OH)2 : 8.0 mol H2O
The value of x in Ba(OH)2·xH2O is 8.
Therefore, the molecular formula of the hydrate is Ba(OH)2·8H2O.
PROBLEM TIP
This step is similar to ﬁnding
an empirical formula based on
percentage composition.
Check Your Solution
Work backward.
According to the formula, the percent by mass of water in
Ba(OH)2·8H2O is:
144.16 g/mol
315.51 g/mol
× 100% = 45.7%
According to the question,  the percent by mass of water in the
hydrate of Ba(OH)2 is:
(50.0 g − 27.2 g)
50.0 g
× 100% = 45.6%
Therefore, your answer is reasonable.
Practice Problems
23. What is the percent by mass of water in magnesium sulﬁte
hexahydrate, MgSO3·6H2O ?
24. A 3.34 g sample of a hydrate has the formula SrS2O3·xH2O,
and contains 2.30 g of SrS2O3. Find the value of x.
25. A hydrate of zinc chlorate, Zn(ClO3)2·xH2O, contains 21.5% zinc
by mass. Find the value of x.
Determining the Molecular Formula of a Hydrate
As you have just discovered, calculations involving hydrates usually
involve comparing the anhydrous form of the ionic compound to the
hydrated form. Many chemicals are available in hydrated form. Usually
chemists are only interested in how much of the ionic part of the hydrate
they are working with. This is because, in most reactions involving
hydrates, the water portion of the compound does not take part in the
reaction. Only the ionic portion does.
How do chemists determine how many water molecules are bonded to
each ionic formula unit in a hydrate? One method is to heat the com-
pound in order to convert it to its anhydrous form. The bonds that join
the water molecules to the ionic compound are very weak compared with
the strong ionic bonds within the ionic compound. Heating a hydrate usu-
ally removes the water molecules, leaving the anhydrous compound
behind. In Investigation 6-B, you will heat a hydrate to determine
its formula.
Write an equation that shows
what happens when you heat
magnesium sulfate hexahy-
drate enough to convert it to
its anhydrous form.
Electronic Learning Partner
A video clip describing
hydrated ionic compounds can
be found on the Chemistry 11
Electronic Learning Partner.
Chapter 6  Chemical Proportions in Compounds • MHR 225
S K I L L   F O C U S
Predicting
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
Communicating results
Determining the Chemical
Formula of a Hydrate
Many ionic compounds exist as hydrates. Often
you can convert hydrates to anhydrous ionic
compounds by heating them. Thus, hydrates are
well suited to determining percentage composi-
tion experimentally.
In this investigation, you will ﬁnd the mass
percent of water in a hydrate of copper(II) sulfate
hydrate, CuSO4·xH2O.You will use copper(II) sul-
fate hydrate for an important reason: The
crystals of the hydrate are blue, while anhydrous
copper(II) sulfate is white.
Question
What is the molecular formula of the hydrate of
copper(II) sulfate, CuSO4·xH2O?
Prediction
Predict what reaction will occur when you heat
the hydrate of copper(II) sulfate.
Materials
400 mL beaker (if hot plate is used)
tongs
scoopula
electronic balance
glass rod
hot pad
3 g to 5 g hydrated copper(II) sulfate
Safety Precautions
Heat the hydrate at a low to medium
temperature only.
Procedure
Note: If you are using a hot plate as your heat
source, use the 400 mL beaker. If you are using a
laboratory burner, use the porcelain evaporating
dish.
1. Make a table like the one below, for recording
your observations.
Observations
Mass of empty beaker or evaporating dish
Mass of beaker or evaporating dish
+ hydrated copper(II) sulfate
Mass of beaker or evaporating dish
+ anhydrous copper(II) sulfate
A hydrate of copper(II) sulfate (far left) is light blue.
It loses its colour on heating.
226 MHR • Unit 2  Chemical Quantities
2. Measure the mass of the beaker and stirring
rod. Record the mass in your table.
Conclusion
3. Based on your observations, determine the
3. Add 3 g to 5 g hydrated copper(II) sulfate to
molecular formula of CuSO4·xH2O.
the beaker.
4. Measure the mass of the beaker with the
hydrated copper(II) sulfate. Record the mass
in your table.
5. If you are using a hot plate, heat the beaker
with the hydrated copper(II) sulfate until
the crystals lose their blue colour. You may
need to stir occasionally with the glass rod.
Be sure to keep the heat at a medium setting.
Otherwise, the beaker may break.
6. When you see the colour change, stop heating
the beaker. Turn off or unplug the hot plate.
Remove the beaker with the beaker tongs.
Allow the beaker and crystals to cool on a
hot pad.
7. Find the mass of the beaker with the white
crystals. Record the mass in your table.
8. Return the anhydrous copper(II) sulfate to
your teacher when you are ﬁnished. Do not
put it in the sink or in the garbage.
Analysis
1. (a) Determine the percent by mass of water in
your sample of hydrated copper(II) sulfate.
Show your calculations clearly.
(b) Do you expect the mass percent of water
that you determined to be similar to
the mass percents that other groups
determined? Explain.
2. (a) On the chalkboard, write the mass of your
sample of hydrated copper(II) sulfate, the
mass of the anhydrous copper(II) sulfate,
and the mass percent of water that you
calculated.
(b) How do your results compare with other
groups’ results?
Applications
4. Suppose that you heated a sample of a hydrat-
ed ionic compound in a test tube. What might
you expect to see inside the test tube, near the
mouth of the test tube? Explain.
5. You obtained the mass percent of water in the
copper sulfate hydrate.
(a) Using your observations, calculate the
percentage composition of the copper
sulfate hydrate.
(b) In the case of a hydrate, and assuming you
know the formula of the associated
anhydrous ionic compound, do you think it
is more useful to have the mass percent
of water in the hydrate or the percentage
composition? Explain your answer.
6. Compare the formula that you obtained for
the copper sulfate hydrate with the formulas
that other groups obtained. Are there any
differences? How might these differences
have occurred?
7. Suppose that you did not completely convert
the hydrate to the anhydrous compound.
Explain how this would affect
(a) the calculated percent by mass of water in
the compound
(b) the molecular formula you determined
8. Suppose the hydrate was heated too quickly
and some of it was lost as it spattered out of
the container. Explain how this would affect
(a) the calculated percent by mass of water in
the compound
(b) the molecular formula you determined
9. Suggest a source of error (not already
mentioned) that would result in a value of x
that is
(a) higher than the actual value
(b) lower than the actual value
Chapter 6  Chemical Proportions in Compounds • MHR 227
Section Wrap-up
In section 6.4, you learned several practical methods for determining
empirical and molecular formulas of compounds. You may have noticed
that these methods work because compounds react in predictable ways.
For example, you learned that a compound containing carbon and
hydrogen reacts with oxygen to produce water and carbon dioxide. From
the mass of the products, you can determine the amount of carbon and
hydrogen in the reactant. You also learned that a hydrate decomposes
when it is heated to form water and an anhydrous compound. Again, the
mass of one of the products of this reaction helps you identify the reactant.
In Chapter 7, you will learn more about how to use the information from
chemical reactions in order to do quantitative calculations.
Section Review
1
K/U
Many compounds that contain carbon and hydrogen also contain
nitrogen. Can you ﬁnd the nitrogen content by carbon-hydrogen
analysis, if the nitrogen does not interfere with the combustion
reaction? If so, explain how. If not, explain why not.
2
3
I
What would be the mass of a bag of anhydrous magnesium sulfate,
MgSO4, if it contained the same amount of magnesium as a 1.00 kg bag
of Epsom salts, MgSO4·7H2O? Give your answer in grams.
K/U
A compound that contains carbon, hydrogen, chlorine, and oxy-
gen is subjected to carbon-hydrogen analysis. Can the mass percent of
oxygen in the compound be determined using this method? Explain
your answer.
4
C
Imagine that you are an analytical chemist. You are presented with
an unknown compound, in the form of a white powder, for analysis.
Your job is to determine the molecular formula of the compound.
Create a ﬂow chart that outlines the questions that you would ask and
the analyses you would carry out. Brieﬂy explain why each question or
analysis is needed.
5
6
MC
A carbon-hydrogen analyzer uses a water absorber (which
contains magnesium perchlorate, Mg(ClO4)2) and a carbon dioxide
absorber (which contains sodium hydroxide, NaOH). The water
absorber is always located in front of the carbon dioxide absorber.
What does this suggest about the sodium hydroxide that is contained
in the CO2 absorber?
I
A hydrate of zinc nitrate has the formula Zn(NO3)2·xH2O. If the
mass of 1 mol of anhydrous zinc nitrate is 63.67% of the mass of 1 mol
of the hydrate, what is the value of x?
7
K/U
A 2.524 g sample of a compound contains carbon, hydrogen, and
oxygen. The sample is subjected to carbon-hydrogen analysis. 3.703 g
of carbon dioxide and 1.514 g of water are collected.
(a) Determine the empirical formula of the compound.
(b) If one molecule of the compound contains 12 atoms of hydrogen,
what is the molecular formula of the compound?
228 MHR • Unit 2  Chemical Quantities
Review
Reﬂecting on Chapter 6
Summarize this chapter in the format of your
choice. Here are a few ideas to use as guidelines:
• Determine the mass percent of each element
in a compound.
• Predict the empirical formula of a compound
using the periodic table, and test your prediction
through experimentation.
• Use experimental data to determine the empiri-
cal (simplest) formula of a compound.
• Use the molar mass and empirical formula of a
compound to determine the molecular (actual)
formula of the compound.
• Determine experimentally the percent by mass
of water in a hydrate. Use this information to
determine its molecular formula.
• Explain how a carbon-hydrogen combustion
analyzer can be used to determine the mass
percent of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen in a
compound.
Reviewing Key Terms
For each of the following terms, write a sentence
that shows your understanding of its meaning.
anhydrous
carbon-hydrogen combustion analyzer
empirical formula
forensic scientists
hydrate
law of deﬁnite proportions
mass percent
molecular formula
percentage composition
Knowledge/Understanding
1. When determining the percentage composition
of a compound from its formula, why do you
base your calculations on a one mole sample?
2. The main engines of the space shuttle burn
hydrogen and oxygen, with water as the prod-
uct. Is this synthetic (human-made) water the
same as water found in nature? Explain.
3. (a) What measurements need to be taken during
a carbon-hydrogen combustion analysis?
(b) Acetylene, C2H2, and benzene, C6H6, both
have the same empirical formula. How
would their results compare in a carbon-
hydrogen combustion analysis? Explain
your answer.
4. If you know the molar mass of a substance, and
the elements that make up the substance, can
you determine its molecular formula? Explain
your answer.
Inquiry
5. A 5.00 g sample of borax (sodium tetraborate
decahydrate, Na2B4O7·10H2O) was thoroughly
heated to remove all the water of hydration.
What mass of anhydrous sodium tetraborate
remained?
6. Determine the percentage composition of
each compound.
(a) freon-12, CCl2F2
(b) white lead, Pb3(OH)2(CO3)2
7. (a) What mass of water is present in 25.0 g of
MgCl2·2H2O ?
(b) What mass of manganese is present in 5.00 g
of potassium permanganate, KMnO4?
8. Silver nitrate, AgNO3, can be used to test
for the presence of halide ions in solution. It
combines with the halide ions to form a silver
halide precipitate. In medicine, it is used as
an antiseptic and an antibacterial agent. Silver
nitrate drops are placed in the eyes of newborn
babies to protect them against an eye disease.
(a) Calculate the mass percent of silver in silver
nitrate.
(b) What mass of pure silver is contained in
2.00 × 102 kg of silver nitrate?
9. Barium sulfate, BaSO4, is opaque to X-rays. For
this reason, it is sometimes given to patients
before X-rays of their intestines are taken. What
mass of barium is contained in 45.8 g of barium
sulfate?
10. Bismuth nitrate, Bi(NO3)2 , is used in the pro-
duction of some luminous paints. How many
grams of pure bismuth are in a 268 g sample of
bismuth nitrate?
11. The molar mass of a compound is approxi-
mately 121 g. The empirical formula of the
Chapter 6  Chemical Proportions in Compounds • MHR 229
compound is CH2O. What is the molecular
formula of the compound?
12. A complex organic compound, with the name
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenza-para-dioxin, belongs
to a family of toxic compounds called dioxins.
The empirical formula of a certain dioxin is
C6H2OCl2. If the molar mass of this dioxin is
322 g/mol, what is its molecular formula?
13. A student obtains an empirical formula of
C1H2.67 for a gaseous compound.
(a) Why is this not a valid empirical formula?
(b) Use the student’s empirical formula to
determine the correct empirical formula.
14. Progesterone, a hormone, is made up of 80.2%
carbon, 10.18% oxygen, and 9.62% hydrogen.
Determine the empirical formula of
progesterone.
15. An inorganic salt is composed of 17.6%
sodium, 39.7% chromium, and 42.8% oxygen.
What is the empirical formula of this salt?
16. What is the empirical formula of a compound
that contains 67.6% mercury, 10.8% sulfur, and
21.6% oxygen?
17. (a) An inorganic salt is made up of 38.8%
calcium, 20.0% phosphorus, and 41.2%
oxygen. What is the empirical formula of
this salt?
(b) On further analysis, each formula unit of this
salt is found to contain two phosphate ions.
Predict the molecular formula of this salt.
18. Capsaicin is the compound that is responsible
for the “hotness” of chili peppers. Chemical
analysis reveals capsaicin to contain 71.0%
carbon, 8.60% hydrogen, 15.8% oxygen, and
4.60% nitrogen.
(a) Determine the empirical formula of
capsaicin.
(b) Each molecule of capsaicin contains one
atom of nitrogen. What is the molecular
formula of capsaicin?
19. A compound has the formula X2O5, where
X is an unknown element. The compound is
44.0% oxygen by mass. What is the identity
of element X?
20. A 1.254 g sample of an organic compound that
contains only carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen
reacts with a stream of chlorine gas, Cl2(g). After
230 MHR • Unit 2  Chemical Quantities
the reaction, 4.730 g of HCl and 9.977 g of CCl4
are obtained. Determine the empirical formula
of the organic compound.
21. A 2.78 g sample of hydrated iron(II) sulfate,
FeSO4·xH2O , was heated to remove all the
water of hydration. The mass of the anhydrous
iron(II) sulfate was 1.52 g. Calculate the
number of water molecules associated with
each formula unit of FeSO4.
22. Citric acid is present in citrus fruits. It is
composed of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen.
When a 0.5000 g sample of citric acid was
subjected to carbon-hydrogen combustion
analysis, 0.6871 g of carbon dioxide and
0.1874 g of water were produced. Using a
mass spectrometer, the molar mass of citric
acid was determined to be 192 g/mol.
(a) What are the percentages of carbon,
hydrogen, and oxygen in citric acid?
(b) What is the empirical formula of citric acid?
(c) What is the molecular formula of citric acid?
23. Methanol, CH3OH (also known as methyl
alcohol), is a common laboratory reagent. It can
be purchased at a hardware store under the
name “methyl hydrate” or “wood alcohol.”
If 1.00 g of methanol is subjected to carbon-
hydrogen combustion analysis, what masses
of carbon dioxide and water are produced?
24. Copper can form two different oxides:
copper(II) oxide, CuO, and copper(I) oxide,
Cu2O. Suppose that you ﬁnd a bottle labelled
“copper oxide” in the chemistry prep room.
You call this mystery oxide CuxO. Design an
experiment to determine the empirical formula
of CuxO. Assume that you have a fully
equipped chemistry lab at your disposal. Keep
in mind the following information:
• Both CuO and Cu2O react with carbon to
produce solid copper and carbon
dioxide gas:
CuxO(s) + C(s) → Cu(s) + CO2(g)
This reaction proceeds with strong heating.
• Carbon reacts with oxygen to produce carbon
dioxide gas:
C(s) + O2(g) → CO2(g)
This reaction also proceeds with
strong heating.
• Carbon is available in the form of activated
charcoal.
(a) State at least one safety precaution that you
would take.
(b) State the materials required, and sketch your
apparatus.
(c) Outline your procedure.
(d) What data do you need to collect?
(e) State any assumptions that you would make.
25. Magnesium sulfate, MgSO4, is available as
anhydrous crystals or as a heptahydrate.
Assume that you are given a bottle of MgSO4,
but you are not sure whether or not it is
the hydrate.
(a) What method could you use, in a laboratory,
to determine whether this is the hydrate?
(b) If it is the hydrate, what results would you
expect to see?
(c) If it is the anhydrous crystals, what results
would you expect to see?
Communication
26. Draw a concept map to relate the following
terms: molar mass of an element, molar mass
of a compound, percentage composition, empir-
ical formula, and molecular formula. Use an
example for each term.
27. Draw a schematic diagram of a carbon-hydro-
gen combustion analyzer. Write a few sentences
to describe each stage of the analysis as
dimethyl ether, C2H6O, passes through the
apparatus.
Making Connections
28. For many years, tetraethyl lead, Pb(C2H5)4,
a colourless liquid, was added to gasoline to
improve engine performance. Over the last
20 years it has been replaced with
non-lead-containing additives due to health
risks associated with exposure to lead.
Tetraethyl lead was added to gasoline up to
2.0 mL per 3.8 L (1.0 US gallon) of gasoline.
(a) Calculate the mass of tetraethyl lead in 1.0 L
of gasoline. The density of Pb(C2H5)4 is
1.653 g/mL.
(b) Calculate the mass of elemental lead in 1.0 L
of gasoline.
29. Natron is the name of the mixture of salts that
was used by the ancient Egyptians to dehydrate
corpses before mummiﬁcation. Natron is com-
posed of Na2CO3 , NaHCO3, NaCl, and CaCl2.
The Na2CO3 absorbs water from tissues to
form Na2CO3·7H2O.
(a) Name the compound Na2CO3·7H2O.
(b) Calculate the mass percent of water
in Na2CO3·7H2O.
(c) What mass of anhydrous Na2CO3 is required
to dessicate (remove all the water) from an
80 kg body that is 78% water by mass?
30. Imagine that you are an analytical chemist at
a pharmaceutical company. One of your jobs
is to determine the purity of the acetylsalicylic
acid (ASA), C9H8O4. ASA is prepared by react-
ing salicylic acid (SA), C7H6O3, with acetic
anhydride, C4H6O3. Acetic acid, C2H3O2H, is
also produced
C7H6O3 + C4H6O3 → C9H8O4 + C2H3O2H
SA
acetic acid
ASA
acetic
anhydride
ASA often contains unreacted SA. Since it is
not acceptable to sell ASA contaminated with
SA, one of your jobs is to analyze the ASA
to check purity. Both ASA and SA are white
powders.
(a) You analyze a sample that you believe to be
pure ASA, but which is actually contaminat-
ed with some SA. How will this affect the
empirical formula that you determine for the
sample?
(b) Another sample contains ASA contaminated
with 0.35 g SA. The mass of the sample is
5.73 g. What empirical formula will you
obtain?
Answers to Practice Problems and
Short Answers to Section Review Questions:
Practice Problems: 1. 36% Ca; 64% Cl  2. 48.1% Ni; 16.9%
P; 35.0% O  3. 39.5% C; 7.8% H; 52.7% O
4. 26.6% K; 35.4% Cr; 38.0% O  5.(a) 63.65% N
(b) 13.24% N  (c) 35.00% N  (d) 22.23% N
6. 2.06% H; 32.69% S; 62.25% O  7. 47.47% O
8.(a) 63.19% Mn; 36.81% O  (b) 158 g  9. NH3
10. Li2O 11. BF3 12. SCl  13. Cr2O3 14. P2O5 15. Na2Cr2O7
16. C12H14O3 17. C4H10 18. C2H2O4 19. C18H21NO3
20. C15H12O3 21. C5H12; 83.3% C; 16.7% H.  22. C21H30O5
23. 50.9%  24. 5  25. 4
Section Review: 6.1: 3. 3.05 g  4. 11.3 g 5. 17.1 g.  7. Na+
6.2: 2. C8H8O3 3.(a) Cl2O7 (b) SiCl4 4. CH2O 6. C9H17O
7. C11H14O2 8.(a) FeC10H10 (b) Yes.  6.3:  2. C4H6O6
4.(a) C2H3O (b) Double  5. C12H10O2 6.4:  1. Yes  2. 488 g
4. No  6. 6 7.(a) CH2O (b) C6H12O6 8.(a) CH2 (b) CH12H2
Chapter 6  Chemical Proportions in Compounds • MHR 231
232
Quantities in
Chemical Reactions
A spacecraft, such as the space shuttle on the left, requires a huge
amount of fuel to supply the thrust needed to launch it into orbit.
Engineers work very hard to minimize the launch mass of a spacecraft
because each kilogram requires additional fuel. As well, each kilogram
costs thousands of dollars to launch.
In 1969, the Apollo 11 space mission was the ﬁrst to land astronauts
on the Moon. The engineers on the project faced a challenge when decid-
ing on a fuel for the lunar module. The lunar module took the astronauts
from the Moon, back to the command module that was orbiting the Moon.
The engineers chose a fuel consisting of hydrazine, N2H4, and dinitrogen
tetroxide, N2O4. These compounds, when mixed, reacted instantaneously
and produced the energy needed to launch the lunar module from
the Moon.
How do engineers know how much of each reactant they need for
a chemical reaction? In this chapter, you will use the concept of the
mole to calculate the amounts of reactants that are needed to produce
given amounts of products. You will learn how to predict the amounts
of products that will be produced in a chemical reaction. You will also
learn how to apply this knowledge to any chemical reaction for which
you know the balanced chemical equation. Finally, you will learn how
calculated amounts deviate from the amounts in real-life situations.
How can you use the balanced equation
below to calculate the amount of fuel
needed to propel a lunar module back
to a command module?
2N2H4((cid:2)) + N2O4((cid:2)) → 3N2(g) + 4H2O(g)
C h a p t e r   P r e v i e w
7.1 Stoichiometry
7.2 The Limiting Reactant
7.3 Percentage Yield
C o n c e p t s   a n d   S k i l l s
Yo u   W i l l   N e e d
Before you begin this chapter,
review the following concepts
and skills:
balancing chemical equa-
tions (Chapter 4, section 4.1)
understanding the Avogadro
constant and the mole
(Chapter 5, section 5.2)
explaining the relationship
between the mole and
molar mass (Chapter 5,
section 5.3)
solving problems involving
number of moles, number
of particles, and mass
(Chapter 5, section 5.3)
Chapter 7  Quantities in Chemical Reactions • MHR 233
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
7.1
Stoichiometry
Balanced chemical equations are essential for making calculations related
to chemical reactions. To understand why, consider the following analogy.
Imagine that you are making salads. You need one head of lettuce, two
cucumbers, and ﬁve radishes for each salad. Figure 7.1 shows how you
can express this as an equation.
1 head of lettuce
2 cucumbers
5 radishes
1 salad
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
explain quantitative
relationships in a chemical
equation, in moles, grams,
atoms, or molecules
perform laboratory
experiments to determine
the meaning of the
coefﬁcients in a balanced
chemical equation
calculate, for any given
reactant or product in a
chemical equation, the
corresponding mass or
quantity of any other
reactant or product
demonstrate an awareness
of the importance of quanti-
tative chemical relationships
in the home or in industry
communicate your under-
standing of the following
terms: mole ratios,
stoichiometry
2 heads of lettuce
4 cucumbers
10 radishes
2 salads
Figure 7.1
A salad analogy showing how equations can be multiplied
Now imagine that you are making two salads. How much of each
ingredient do you need? You need twice the amount that you used
to make one salad, as shown in Figure 7.1.
How many salads can you make if you have three heads of lettuce,
six cucumbers, and 15 radishes? According to the salad equation, you can
make three salads.
You can get the same kind of information from a balanced chemical
equation. In Chapter 4, you learned how to classify chemical reactions
and balance the chemical equations that describe them. In Chapters 5 and
6, you learned how chemists relate the number of particles in a substance
to the amount of the substance in moles and grams. In this section, you
will use your knowledge to interpret the information in a chemical equa-
tion, in terms of particles, moles, and mass. Try the following Express Lab
to explore the molar relationships between products and reactants.
234 MHR • Unit 2  Chemical Quantities
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
ExpressLab
Mole Relationships in a Chemical Reaction
The following balanced equation shows the reac-
tion between sodium hydrogen carbonate,
NaHCO3, and hydrochloric acid, HCl.
NaHCO3(s) + HCl(aq) → CO2(g) + H2O((cid:2)) + NaCl(aq)
In this Express Lab, you will determine the mole
relationships between the products and reactants
in the reaction. Then you will compare the mole
relationships with the balanced chemical
equation.
Safety Precautions
Be careful when using concentrated
hydrochloric acid. It burns skin and clothing.
Do not inhale its vapour.
Procedure
1. Obtain a sample of sodium hydrogen
carbonate that is approximately 1.0 g.
2. Place a 24-well microplate on a balance.
Measure and record its mass.
3. Place all the sodium hydrogen carbonate in
well A4 of the microplate. Measure and record
the mass of the microplate and sample.
4. Fill a thin-stem pipette with 8 mol/L
hydrochloric acid solution.
5. Wipe the outside of the pipette. Stand it,
stem up, in well A3.
6. Measure and record the total mass of the
microplate and sample.
7. Add the hydrochloric acid from the pipette
to the sodium hydrogen carbonate in well A4.
Allow the gas to escape after each drop.
8. Continue to add the hydrochloric acid until all
the sodium hydrogen carbonate has dissolved
and the solution produces no more bubbles.
9. Return the pipette, stem up, to well A3. Again
ﬁnd the total mass of the microplate and
samples.
10. Dispose of the reacted chemicals as directed
by your teacher.
Analysis
1. Calculate the number of moles of sodium
hydrogen carbonate used.
2. Find the difference between the total mass of
the microplate and samples before and after
the reaction. This difference represents the
mass of carbon dioxide gas produced.
3. Calculate the number of moles of carbon
dioxide produced.
4. Express your answers to questions 1 and 3 as
a mole ratio of mol NaHCO3:mol CO2.
5. According to the balanced equation,
how many molecules of sodium hydrogen
carbonate react to form one molecule of
carbon dioxide?
(a) Express your answer as a ratio.
(b) Compare this ratio to your mole ratio in
question 4.
6. How many moles of carbon dioxide do you
think would be formed from 4.0 mol of sodium
hydrogen carbonate?
You can use your understanding of the relationship between moles
and number of particles to see how chemical equations communicate
information about how many moles of products and reactants are
involved in a reaction.
Particle Relationships in a Balanced Chemical Equation
As you learned in Chapter 4, the coefﬁcients in front of compounds and
elements in chemical equations tell you how many atoms and molecules
participate in a reaction. A chemical equation can tell you much more,
however. Consider, for example, the equation that describes the produc-
tion of ammonia. Ammonia is an important industrial chemical. Several
of its uses are shown in Figure 7.2 on the following page.
Chapter 7  Quantities in Chemical Reactions • MHR 235
Ammonia can be
Figure 7.2
applied directly to the soil as
a fertilizer. An aqueous (water)
solution of ammonia can be
used as a household cleaner.
Figure 7.3
nitrogen gas with hydrogen gas.
The reaction of
Ammonia can be prepared industrially from its elements, using a process
called the Haber Process. The Haber Process is based on the balanced
chemical equation below.
N2(g) + 3H2(g) → 2NH3(g)
This equation tells you that one molecule of nitrogen gas reacts with
three molecules of hydrogen gas to form two molecules of ammonia gas.
As you can see in Figure 7.3, there is the same number of each type
of atom on both sides of the equation.
You can use a ratio to express the numbers of atoms in the equation,
as follows:
1 molecule N2 : 3 molecules H2 : 2 molecules NH3
What happens if you multiply the ratio by 2? You get
2 molecules N2 : 6 molecules H2 : 4 molecules NH3
This means that two molecules of nitrogen gas react with six molecules of
hydrogen gas to produce four molecules of ammonia gas. Multiplying the
original ratio by one dozen gives the following relationship:
1 dozen molecules N2 : 3 dozen molecules H2 : 2 dozen molecules NH3
Suppose that you want to produce 20 molecules of ammonia. How
many molecules of nitrogen do you need? You know that you need one
molecule of nitrogen for every two molecules of ammonia produced. In
other words, the number of molecules of nitrogen that you need is one
half the number of molecules of ammonia that you want to produce.
20 molecules NH3 × 1 molecule N2
2 molecules NH3
= 10 molecules N2
236 MHR • Unit 2  Chemical Quantities
Try the following problems to practise working with ratios in balanced
chemical equations.
Practice Problems
1. Consider the following reaction.
2H2(g) + O2(g) → 2H2O((cid:2))
(a) Write the ratio of H2 molecules: O2 molecules: H2O molecules.
(b) How many molecules of O2 are required to react with
100 molecules of H2, according to your ratio in part (a)?
(c) How many molecules of water are formed when 2478 molecules
of O2 react with H2?
(d) How many molecules of H2 are required to react completely with
6.02 × 1023 molecules of O2?
2. Iron reacts with chlorine gas to form iron(III) chloride, FeCl3 .
2Fe(s) + 3Cl2(g) → 2FeCl3(s)
(a) How many atoms of Fe are needed to react with three molecules
of Cl2?
(b) How many molecules of FeCl3 are formed when 150 atoms of
Fe react with sufﬁcient Cl2?
(c) How many Cl2 molecules are needed to react with 1.204 × 1024
atoms of Fe?
(d) How many molecules of FeCl3 are formed when 1.806 × 1024
molecules of Cl2 react with sufﬁcient Fe?
3. Consider the following reaction.
Ca(OH)2(aq) + 2HCl(aq) → CaCl2 + 2H2O((cid:2))
(a) How many formula units of calcium chloride, CaCl2, would be
produced by 6.7 × 1025 molecules of hydrochloric acid, HCl?
(b) How many molecules of water would be produced in the reaction
in part (a)?
Mole Relationships in Chemical Equations
Until now, you have assumed that the coefﬁcients in a chemical equation
represent particles. They can, however, also represent moles. Consider the
following ratio to ﬁnd out why.
1 molecule N2 : 3 molecules H2 : 2 molecules NH3
You can multiply the above ratio by the Avogadro constant to obtain
1 × NA molecules N2 : 3 × NA molecules H2 : 2 × NA molecules NH3
This is the same as
1 mol N2 : 3 mol H2 : 2 mol NH3
So the chemical equation N2(g) + 3H2(g) → 2NH3(g) also means that
1 mol of nitrogen molecules reacts with 3 mol of hydrogen molecules to
form 2 mol of ammonia molecules. The relationships between moles in a
balanced chemical equation are called mole ratios. For example, the mole
ratio of nitrogen to hydrogen in the equation above is 1 mol N2 :3 mol H2.
The mole ratio of hydrogen to ammonia is 3 mol H2 :2 mol NH3.
Chapter 7  Quantities in Chemical Reactions • MHR 237
You can manipulate mole ratios in the same way that you can manip-
ulate ratios involving molecules. For example, suppose that you want to
know how many moles of ammonia are produced by 2.8 mol of hydrogen.
You know that you can obtain 2 mol of ammonia for every 3 mol of
hydrogen. Therefore, you multiply the number of moles of hydrogen by
the mole ratio of ammonia to hydrogen. Another way to think about this
is to equate the known mole ratio of hydrogen to ammonia to the
unknown mole ratio of hydrogen to ammonia and solve for the unknown.
unknown ratio
known ratio
= 2 mol NH3
3 mol H2
= (2.8 mol H 2)
n mol NH3
2.8 mol H2
n mol NH3
2.8 mol H2
n mol NH3 = 1.9 mol NH3
2 mol NH3
3 mol H2
(2.8 mol H2)
Try the following Practice Problems to work with mole ratios.
Practice Problems
4. Aluminum bromide can be prepared by reacting small pieces of
aluminum foil with liquid bromine at room temperature. The
reaction is accompanied by ﬂashes of red light.
2Al(s) + 3Br2((cid:2)) → 2AlBr3(s)
How many moles of Br2 are needed to produce 5 mol of AlBr3, if
sufﬁcient Al is present?
5. Hydrogen cyanide gas, HCN(g), is used to prepare clear, hard plas-
tics, such as Plexiglas. Hydrogen cyanide is formed by reacting
ammonia, NH3, with oxygen and methane, CH4.
2NH3(g) + 3O2(g) + 2CH4(g) → 2HCN(g) + 6H2O(g)
(a) How many moles of O2 are needed to react with 1.2 mol of NH3?
(b) How many moles of H2O can be expected from the reaction of
12.5 mol of CH4? Assume that sufﬁcient NH3 and O2 are present.
6. Ethane gas, C2H6, is present in small amounts in natural gas.
It undergoes complete combustion to produce carbon dioxide
and water.
2C2H6(g) + 7O2(g) → 4CO2(g) + 6H2O(g)
(a) How many moles of O2 are required to react with 13.9 mol
of C2H6?
(b) How many moles of H2O would be produced by 1.40 mol of O2
and sufﬁcient ethane?
7. Magnesium nitride reacts with water to produce magnesium
hydroxide and ammonia gas, NH3 according to the balanced
chemical equation
Mg3N2(s) + 6H2O((cid:2)) → 3Mg(OH)2(s) + 2NH3(g)
a) How many molecules of water are required to react with 2.3 mol
Mg3N2 ?
b) How many molecules of Mg(OH)2 will be expected in part (a)?
C H E M
FA C T
Because the coefﬁcients of a
balanced chemical equation
can represent moles, it is
acceptable to use fractions in
an equation. For example, you
can write the equation
2H2(g) + O2(g) → 2H2O((cid:2))
as
H2(g) + 1
O2(g) → H2O((cid:2))
2
Half an oxygen molecule is an
oxygen atom, which does not
accurately reﬂect the reaction.
Half a mole of oxygen mole-
cules, however, makes sense.
238 MHR • Unit 2  Chemical Quantities
Different Ratios of Reactants
The relative amounts of reactants are important. Different mole ratios of
the same reactants can produce different products. For example, carbon
can combine with oxygen in two different ratios, forming either carbon
monoxide or carbon dioxide. In the following reaction, the mole ratio of
carbon to oxygen is 2 mol C:1 mol O2.
2C(s) + O2(g) → 2CO(g)
In the next reaction, the mole ratio of carbon to oxygen is
1 mol C:1 mol O2.
C(s) + O2(g) → CO2(g)
Thus, carbon dioxide forms if carbon and oxygen are present in a mole
ratio of about 1 mol C:1 mol O2. Carbon dioxide is a product of cellular
respiration in animals and humans, and it is a starting material for photo-
synthesis. It is also one of the products of the complete combustion of a
hydrocarbon fuel.
If there is a relative shortage of oxygen, however, and the mole ratio
of carbon to oxygen is closer to 2 mol C:1 mol O, carbon monoxide forms.
Carbon monoxide is colourless, tasteless, and odourless. It is a highly
poisonous gas, that is responsible for the deaths of hundreds of people
in Canada and the United States every year. Carbon monoxide can escape
from any fuel-burning appliance: furnace, water heater, ﬁreplace, wood
stove, or space heater. If you have one of these appliances in your home,
make sure that it has a good supply of oxygen to avoid the formation of
carbon monoxide.
There are many reactions in which different mole ratios of the reactants
result in different products. The following Sample Problem will help you
understand how to work with these reactions.
Technology
LINK
In many areas, it is mandatory
for every home to have a car-
bon monoxide detector, like the
one shown below. If you do not
have a carbon monoxide
detector in your home, you can
buy one at a hardware store
for a modest price. It could end
up saving your life.
A carbon monoxide detector
emits a sound when the level
of carbon monoxide exceeds a
certain limit. Find out how a
carbon monoxide detector
works, and where it should
be placed. Present your
ﬁndings as a public service
announcement.
Sample Problem
Mole Ratios of Reactants
Problem
Vanadium can form several different compounds with oxygen,
including V2O5, VO2, and V2O3. Determine the number of moles of
oxygen that are needed to react with 0.56 mol of vanadium to form
divanadium pentoxide, V2O5.
What Is Required?
You need to ﬁnd the number of moles of oxygen that are needed to
react with 0.56 mol of vanadium to form divanadium pentoxide.
What Is Given?
Reactant: vanadium, V → 0.56 mol
Reactant: oxygen, O2
Product: divanadium pentoxide, V2O5
Continued ...
Chapter 7  Quantities in Chemical Reactions • MHR 239
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 239
Plan Your Strategy
Write a balanced chemical equation for the formation of
vanadium(V) oxide. Use the known mole ratio of vanadium to
oxygen to calculate the unknown amount of oxygen.
Act on Your Strategy
The balanced equation is 4V(s) + 5O2(g) → 2V2O5(s)
To determine the number of moles of oxygen required, equate the
known ratio of oxygen to vanadium from the balanced equation to
the unknown ratio from the question.
unknown ratio
n mol O2
0.56 mol V
known ratio
= 5 mol O2
4 mol V
Multiply both sides of the equation by 0.56 mol V.
(0.56 mol V)
n mol O2
0.56 mol V
= (0.56 mol V)
n mol O2 = (0.56 mol V)
= 0.70 mol O2
5 mol O2
4 mol V
5 mol O2
4 mol V
Check Your Solution
The units are correct. The mole ratio of vanadium to oxygen is 4 mol
V:5 mol O2. Multiply 0.70 mol by 4/5, and you get 0.56 mol. The
answer is therefore reasonable.
Practice Problems
8. Refer to the Sample Problem above.
(a) How many moles of V are needed to produce 7.47 mol of VO2?
Assume that sufﬁcient O2 is present.
(b) How many moles of V are needed to react with 5.39 mol of O2
to produce V2O3?
9. Nitrogen, N2, can combine with oxygen, O2, to form several differ-
ent oxides of nitrogen. These oxides include NO2, NO, and N2O.
(a) How many moles of O2 are required to react with 9.35 × 10−2
moles of N2 to form N2O?
(b) How many moles of O2 are required to react with 9.35 × 10−2
moles of N2 to form NO2?
10. When heated in a nickel vessel to 400˚C, xenon can be made
to react with ﬂuorine to produce colourless crystals of xenon
tetraﬂuoride.
a) How many moles of ﬂuorine gas, F2 , would be required to react
with 3.54 × 10−1 mol of xenon?
b) Under somewhat similar reaction conditions, xenon hexaﬂuo-
ride can also be obtained. How many moles of ﬂuorine would
be required to react with the amount of xenon given in part (a)
to produce xenon hexaﬂuoride?
Do you think that xenon could
be made to react with bromine
or iodine under the same
conditions outlined in Practice
Problem 10? Explain why or
why not, using your under-
standing of periodic trends.
240 MHR • Unit 2  Chemical Quantities
Mass Relationships in Chemical Equations
As you have learned, the coefﬁcients in a balanced chemical equation rep-
resent moles as well as particles. Therefore, you can use the molar masses
of reactants and products to determine the mass ratios for a reaction. For
example, consider the equation for the formation of ammonia:
N2(g) + 3H2(g) → 2NH3(g)
You can ﬁnd the mass of each substance using the equation m = M × n
as follows:
1 mol N2 × 28.0 g/mol N2
3 mol H2 × 2.02 g/mol H2
2 mol NH3 × 17.0 g/mol NH3
= 28.0 g N2
= 6.1 g H2
= 34.1 g NH3
Refer back to Chapter 5.
Calculate the molar mass
of N2, H2, and NH3.
In Table 7.1, you can see how particles, moles, and mass are related in a
chemical equation. Notice that the mass of the product is equal to the
total mass of the reactants. This conﬁrms the law of conservation of mass.
Table 7.1 What a Balanced Chemical Equation Tells You
N2(g) + 3H2(g)
1 molecule N2 + 3 molecules H2
Balanced equation
Number of particles
(molecules)
2NH3(g)
2 molecules NH3
Amount (mol)
1 mol N2 + 3 mol H2
Mass (g)
28.0 g N2 + 6.1 g H2
Total mass (g)
34.1 g reactants
2 mol NH3
34.1 g  NH3
34.1 g  product
Stoichiometric Mass Calculations
You now know what a balanced chemical equation tells you in terms
of number of particles, number of moles, and mass of products and
reactants. How do you use this information? Because reactants and
products are related by a ﬁxed ratio, if you know the number of moles
of one substance, the balanced equation tells you the number of moles
of all the other substances. In Chapters 5 and 6, you learned how to
convert between particles, moles, and mass. Therefore, if you know the
amount of one substance in a chemical reaction (in particles, moles, or
mass), you can calculate the amount of any other substance in the
reaction (in particles, moles, or mass), using the information in the
balanced chemical equation.
You can see that a balanced chemical equation is a powerful tool. It
allows chemists to predict the amount of products that will result from a
reaction involving a known amount of reactants. As well, chemists can
use a balanced equation to calculate the amount of reactants they will
need to produce a desired amount of products. They can also use it to
predict the amount of one reactant they will need to react completely
with another reactant.
Chapter 7  Quantities in Chemical Reactions • MHR 241
Language
LINK
The word “stoichiometry” is
derived from two Greek words:
stoikheion, meaning “element,”
and metron, meaning “to
measure.” What other words
might be derived from the
Greek word metron?
Stoichiometry is the study of the relative quantities of reactants and
products in chemical reactions. Stoichiometric calculations are used
for many purposes. One purpose is determining how much of a reactant is
needed to carry out a reaction. This kind of knowledge is useful for any
chemical reaction, and it can even be a matter of life or death.
In a spacecraft, for example, carbon dioxide is produced as the astro-
nauts breathe. To maintain a low level of carbon dioxide, air in the cabin
is passed continuously through canisters of lithium hydroxide granules.
The carbon dioxide reacts with the lithium hydroxide in the following
way:
CO2(g) + 2LiOH(s) → Li2CO3(s) + H2O(g)
The canisters are changed periodically as the lithium hydroxide reacts.
Engineers must calculate the amount of lithium hydroxide needed to
ensure that the carbon dioxide level is safe. As you learned earlier, every
kilogram counts in space travel. Therefore, a spacecraft cannot carry much
more than the minimum amount.
History
LINK
The concept of stoichiometry
was ﬁrst described in 1792 by
the German scientist Jeremias
Benjamin Richter (1762–1807).
He stated that “stoichiometry
is the science of measuring
the quantitative proportions or
mass ratios in which chemical
elements stand to one anoth-
er.” Can you think of another
reason why Richter was
famous?
Figure 7.4
account when engineers design systems to keep the air breathable.
A spacecraft is a closed system. All chemical reactions must be taken into
To determine how much lithium hydroxide is needed, engineers need to
ask and answer two important questions:
• How much carbon dioxide is produced per astronaut each day?
• How much lithium hydroxide is needed per kilogram of carbon
dioxide?
Engineers can answer the ﬁrst question by experimenting. To answer the
second question, they need to do stoichiometric calculations. Examine the
following Sample Problems to see how these calculations would be done.
242 MHR • Unit 2  Chemical Quantities
Sample Problem
Mass to Mass Calculations for Reactants
Problem
Carbon dioxide that is produced by astronauts can be removed with
lithium hydroxide. The reaction produces lithium carbonate and
water. An astronaut produces an average of 1.00 × 103 g of carbon
dioxide each day. What mass of lithium hydroxide should engineers
put on board a spacecraft, per astronaut, for each day?
What Is Required?
You need to ﬁnd the mass of lithium hydroxide that is needed to
react with 1.00 × 103 g of carbon dioxide.
What Is Given?
Reactant: carbon dioxide, CO2 → 1.00 × 103 g
Reactant: lithium hydroxide, LiOH
Product: lithium carbonate, Li2CO3
Product: water, H2O
Plan Your Strategy
Step 1 Write a balanced chemical equation.
Step 2 Convert the given mass of carbon dioxide to the number
of moles of carbon dioxide.
Step 3 Calculate the number of moles of lithium hydroxide based
on the mole ratio of lithium hydroxide to carbon dioxide.
Step 4 Convert the number of moles of lithium hydroxide to grams.
Act on Your Strategy
The balanced chemical equation is
1
CO2(g)
+
22.7 mol
2LiOH(s)
45.4 mol
Li2CO3(s)
+
H2O(g)
3
(22.7 mol CO2)
unknown ratio
known ratio
n mol LiOH
22.7 mol CO2
n mol LiOH
22.7 mol CO2
= 2 mol LiOH
1 mol CO2
= 2 mol LiOH
1 mol CO2
(22.7 mol CO2)
n mol LiOH  =  45.4 mol LiOH
2
1.00 × 103 g CO2
44.0 g mol
= 22.7 mol CO2
1.00 × 103 g CO2
4
45.4 mol LiOH
× 23.9 g/mol LiOH
= 1.09 × 103 g LiOH
1.09 × 103 g LiOH
Continued ...
Chapter 7  Quantities in Chemical Reactions • MHR 243
C H E M
FA C T
The Group 18 elements in the
periodic table are currently
called the noble gases. In the
past, however, they were
referred to as the inert gases.
They were believed to be
totally unreactive. Scientists
have found that this is not true.
Some of them can be made to
react with reactive elements,
such as ﬂuorine, under the
proper conditions. In 1962, the
synthesis of the ﬁrst compound
that contained a noble gas was
reported. Since then, a number
of noble gas compounds have
been prepared, mostly from
xenon. A few compounds of
krypton, radon, and argon have
also been prepared.
In the early 1960s, Neil
Bartlett, of the University of
British Columbia, synthesized
the ﬁrst compound that
contained a noble gas.
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 243
Therefore, 1.09 × 103 g LiOH are required.
Check Your Solution
The units are correct. Lithium hydroxide has a molar mass that is
about half of carbon dioxide’s molar mass, but there are twice as
many moles of lithium hydroxide. Therefore it makes sense that the
mass of lithium hydroxide required is about the same as the mass of
carbon dioxide produced.
Practice Problems
11. Ammonium sulfate, (NH4)2SO4, is used as a source of nitrogen in
some fertilizers. It reacts with sodium hydroxide to produce
sodium sulfate, water and ammonia.
(NH4)2SO4(s) + 2NaOH(aq) → Na2SO4(aq) + 2NH3(g) + 2H2O((cid:2))
What mass of sodium hydroxide is required to react completely
with 15.4 g of (NH4)2SO4?
12. Iron(III) oxide, also known as rust, can be removed from iron by
reacting it with hydrochloric acid to produce iron(III) chloride
and water.
Fe2O3(s) + 6HCl(aq) → 2FeCl3(aq) + 3H2O((cid:2))
What mass of hydrogen chloride is required to react with
1.00 × 102 g of rust?
13. Iron reacts slowly with hydrochloric acid to produce iron(II)
chloride and hydrogen gas.
Fe(s) + 2HCl(aq) → FeCl2(aq) + H2(g)
What mass of HCl is required to react with 3.56 g of iron?
14. Dinitrogen pentoxide is a white solid. When heated it
decomposes to produce nitrogen dioxide and oxygen.
2N2O5(s) → 4NO2(g) + O2(g)
How many grams of oxygen gas will be produced in this reaction
when 2.34 g of NO2 are made?
Sample Problem
Mass to Mass Calculations
for Products and Reactants
Problem
In the Chapter 7 opener, you learned that a fuel mixture consisting
of hydrazine, N2H4, and dinitrogen tetroxide, N2O4, was used to
launch a lunar module. These two compounds react to form nitrogen
gas and water vapour. If 50.0 g of hydrazine reacts with sufﬁcient
dinitrogen tetroxide, what mass of nitrogen gas is formed?
Continued ...
244 MHR • Unit 2  Chemical Quantities
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 244
What Is Required?
You need to ﬁnd the mass of nitrogen gas that is formed from 50.0 g
of hydrazine.
What Is Given?
Reactant: hydrazine, N2H4 → 150.0 g
Reactant: dinitrogen tetroxide, N2O4
Product: nitrogen, N2
Product: water, H2O
Plan Your Strategy
Step 1 Write a balanced chemical equation.
Step 2 Convert the mass of hydrazine to the number of moles of
hydrazine.
Step 3 Calculate the number of moles of nitrogen, using the mole
ratio of hydrazine to nitrogen.
Step 4 Convert the number of moles of nitrogen to grams.
Electronic Learning Partner
Go to your Chemistry 11
Electronic Learning Partner
for a video clip showing
an experiment that uses
stoichiometry.
3N2(g)
+
4H2O(g)
7.019 mol
Act on Your Strategy
The balanced chemical equation is
1
2N2H4(  )(cid:2)
+
N2O4(  )(cid:2)
4.679 mol
3
(4.679 mol N2H4)
unknown ratio
n mol N2
4.680 mol N2H4
n mol N2
4.679 mol N2H4
2
150.0 g N2H4
32.06 g/mol
=
4.6 mol
=
known ratio
3 mol N2
2 mol N2H4
3 mol N2
2 mol N2H4
=  7.019 mol N2
=
(4.679 mol N2H4)
4
7.019 mol N2
× 28.01 g/mol N2
= 196.6 g
150.0 g N2H4
196.6 g N2
Therefore, 196.6 g of nitrogen are formed.
Check Your Solution
The units are correct. Nitrogen has a molar mass that is close to
hydrazine’s molar mass. Therefore, to estimate the amount of nitro-
gen from the mass of hydrazine, multiply the mole ratio of nitrogen
to hydrazine (3:2) by hydrazine’s mass (150 g) to get 225 g, which is
close to the calculated answer, 196.6 g. The answer is reasonable.
Chapter 7  Quantities in Chemical Reactions • MHR 245
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 245
Practice Problems
15. Powdered zinc reacts rapidly with powdered sulfur in a highly
exothermic reaction.
8Zn(s) + S8(s) → 8ZnS(s)
What mass of zinc sulﬁde is expected when 32.0 g of S8 reacts
with sufﬁcient zinc?
16. The addition of concentrated hydrochloric acid to manganese(IV)
oxide leads to the production of chlorine gas.
4HCl(aq) + MnO2(g) → MnCl2(aq) + Cl2(g) + 2H2O((cid:2))
What mass of chlorine can be obtained when 4.76 × 10−2 g of HCl
react with sufﬁcient MnO2?
17. Aluminum carbide, Al4C3, is a yellow powder that reacts with
water to produce aluminum hydroxide and methane.
Al4C3(s) + 12H2O((cid:2)) → 4Al(OH)3(s) + 3CH4(g)
What mass of water is required to react completely with 25.0 g of
aluminum carbide?
18. Magnesium oxide reacts with phosphoric acid, H3PO4, to produce
magnesium phosphate and water.
3MgO(s) + 2H3PO4(aq) → Mg3(PO4)2(s) + 3H2O((cid:2))
How many grams of magnesium oxide are required to react
completely with 33.5 g of phosphoric acid?
Canadians
in Chemistry
As a chemist with Environment Canada’s
Atmospheric Science Division in Dartmouth,
Nova Scotia, Dr. Stephen Beauchamp studies
toxic chemicals, such as mercury. Loons in Nova
Scotia’s Kejimkujik National Park are among the
living creatures that he studies. Kejimkujik loons
have higher blood mercury levels (5 µg Hg/1 g
blood) than any other North American loons
(2 µg Hg/1 g blood). Mercury is also found in high
levels in the ﬁsh the loons eat. Mercury causes
behavioural problems in the loons. As well, it
may affect the loons’ reproductive success and
immune function.
Bacteria convert environmental mercury into
methyl mercury, CH3Hg. This is the form that is
most easily absorbed into living organisms.
Beauchamp examines forms and concentrations
of mercury in the air, soil, and water.
246 MHR • Unit 2  Chemical Quantities
Mercury emission sources include electrical
power generation, manufacturing, and municipal
waste incineration. Sources such as these, how-
ever, do not totally account for the high mercury
levels found in Kejimkujik loons and other area
wildlife. Beauchamp is working to discover what
other factors are operating so that he will be able
to recommend ways to improve the situation.
Dr. Stephen Beauchamp in Halifax Harbour. The ﬂux
chamber beside him helps him measure the changing
concentrations of mercury in the air and water.
A General Process for Solving Stoichiometric Problems
You have just solved several stoichiometric problems. In these problems,
masses of products and reactants were given, and masses were also
required for the answers. Chemists usually need to know what mass
of reactants they require and what mass of products they can expect.
Sometimes, however, a question requires you to work with the number
of moles or particles. Use the same process for solving stoichiometric
problems, whether you are working with mass, moles, or particles:
Step 1 Write a balanced chemical equation.
Step 2 If you are given the mass or number of particles of a substance,
convert it to the number of moles.
Step 3 Calculate the number of moles of the required substance based
on the number of moles of the given substance, using the
appropriate mole ratio.
Step 4 Convert the number of moles of the required substance to mass
or number of particles, as directed by the question.
Examine the following Sample Problem to see how to work with mass
and particles.
Sample Problem
Mass and Particle Stoichiometry
Problem
Passing chlorine gas through molten sulfur produces liquid disulfur
dichloride. How many molecules of chlorine react to produce 50.0 g
of disulfur dichloride?
What Is Required?
You need to determine the number of molecules of chlorine gas that
produce 50.0 g of disulfur dichloride.
What Is Given?
Reactant: chlorine, Cl2
Reactant: sulfur, S
Product: disulfur dichloride, S2Cl2 → 50.0 g
Plan Your Strategy
Step 1 Write a balanced chemical equation.
Step 2 Convert the given mass of disulfur dichloride to the number
of moles.
Step 3 Calculate the number of moles of chlorine gas using the mole
ratio of chlorine to disulfur dichloride.
Step 4 Convert the number of moles of chlorine gas to the number
of particles of chlorine gas.
Continued ...
Chapter 7  Quantities in Chemical Reactions • MHR 247
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 247
Act on Your Strategy
1
Cl2(g)
0.370 mol
+
3
(0.370 mol S2Cl2)
2S(  )(cid:2)
unknown ratio
amount Cl2
=
0.370 mol S2Cl2
amount Cl2
0.370 mol S2Cl2
=
known ratio
1 mol Cl2
1 mol S2Cl2
(0.370 mol S2Cl2)
1 mol Cl2
1 mol S2Cl2
S2Cl2(  )(cid:2)
0.370 mol
amount Cl2  =  0.370 mol Cl2
4
0.370 mol Cl2 × 6.02 × 1023 molecules Cl2
= 2.22 × 1023 molecules Cl2
mol Cl2
2
50.0 g S2Cl2
135 g/mol
= 0.370 mol S2Cl2
2.22 × 1023  molecules Cl2
50.0 g S2Cl2
Therefore, 2.22 × 1023 molecules of chlorine gas are required.
Check Your Solution
The units are correct. 2.0 × 1023 is about 1/3 of a mole, or 0.33 mol.
One-third of a mole of disulfur dichloride has a mass of 45 g, which
is close to 50 g. The answer is reasonable.
Practice Problems
19. Nitrogen gas is produced in an automobile air bag. It is generated
by the decomposition of sodium azide, NaN3.
2NaN3(s) → 3N2(g) + 2Na(s)
(a) To inﬂate the air bag on the driver’s side of a certain car, 80.0 g
of N2 is required. What mass of NaN3 is needed to produce
80.0 g of N2?
(b) How many atoms of Na are produced when 80.0 g of N2 are
generated in this reaction?
20. The reaction of iron(III) oxide with powdered aluminum is known
as the thermite reaction.
2Al(s) + Fe2O3(s) → Al2O3(s) + 2Fe((cid:2))
(a) Calculate the mass of aluminum oxide, Al2O3, that is produced
when 1.42 × 1024 atoms of Al react with Fe2O3.
(b) How many formula units of Fe2O3 are needed to react with
0.134 g of Al?
Continued ...
The thermite reaction generates
enough heat to melt the elemental
iron that is produced.
248 MHR • Unit 2  Chemical Quantities
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 248
21. The thermal decomposition of ammonium dichromate is an
impressive reaction. When heated with a Bunsen burner or
propane torch, the orange crystals of ammonium dichromate
slowly decompose to green chromium(III) oxide in a volcano-like
display. Colourless nitrogen gas and water vapour are also
given off.
(NH4)2Cr2O7(s) → Cr2O3(s) + N2(g) + 4H2O(g)
(a) Calculate the number of molecules of Cr2O3 that is produced
from the decomposition of 10.0 g of (NH4)2Cr2O7 .
(b) In a different reaction, 16.9 g of N2 is produced when a
sample of (NH4)2Cr2O7 is decomposed. How many water
molecules are also produced in this reaction?
(c) How many formula units of (NH4)2Cr2O7 are needed to produce
1.45 g of H2O?
22. Ammonia gas reacts with oxygen to produce water and nitrogen
oxide. This reaction can be catalyzed, or sped up, by Cr2O3,
produced in the reaction in problem 21.
4NH3(g) + 5O2(g) → 4NO(g) + 6H2O((cid:2))
(a) How many molecules of oxygen are required to react with
34.0 g of ammonia?
(b) What mass of nitrogen oxide is expected from the reaction of
8.95 × 1024 molecules of oxygen with sufﬁcient ammonia?
Section Wrap-up
You have learned how to do stoichiometric calculations, using balanced
chemical equations to ﬁnd amounts of reactants and products. In these
calculations, you assumed that the reactants and products occurred in the
exact molar ratios shown by the chemical equation. In real life, however,
reactants are often not present in these exact ratios. Similarly, the amount
of product that is predicted by stoichiometry is not always produced.
In the next two sections, you will learn how chemists deal with these
challenges.
Section Review
1
2
K/U
Why is a balanced chemical equation needed to solve stoichio-
metric calculations?
K/U
The balanced chemical equation for the formation of water from
its elements is sometimes written as
H2(g) + 1
2
O2(g) → H2O((cid:2))
Explain why it is acceptable to use fractional coefﬁcients in a balanced
chemical equation.
Chapter 7  Quantities in Chemical Reactions • MHR 249
Unit Investigation Prep
3
C
In the following reaction, does 1.0 g of sodium react completely
Before you design your quanti-
tative analysis investigation at
the end of Unit 2, decide how
you will make use of the
concepts you learned in this
section. Assume that you know
the identity of reactants and
you know what products will
be formed in the reaction. If
you can measure how much
product is formed in the reac-
tion, can you determine how
much reactant was initially
present? Explain how, using
an example.
with 0.50 g of chlorine? Explain your answer.
Cl2(g) → NaCl
Na(s) + 1
2
4
K/U
Sulfur and oxygen can combine to form sulfur dioxide, SO2, and
sulfur trioxide, SO3.
(a) Write a balanced chemical equation for the formation of SO2 from
S and O2.
(b) Write a balanced chemical equation for the formation of SO3.
(c) How many moles of O2 must react with 1 mol of S to form 1 mol
of SO3?
(d) What mass of O2 is needed to react with 32.1 g of S to form SO3?
5
K/U
The balanced chemical equation for the combustion of propane is
C3H8(g) + 5O2(g) → 3CO2(g) + 4H2O(g)
(a) Write the mole ratios for the reactants and products in the
combustion of propane.
(b) How many moles of O2 are needed to react with 0.500 mol of C3H8?
(c) How many molecules of O2 are needed to react with 2.00 mol
of C3H8?
(d) If 3.00 mol of C3H8 burn completely in O2, how many moles of CO2
are produced?
6
I
Phosphorus pentachloride, PCl5 , reacts with water to form
phosphoric acid, H3PO4, and hydrochloric acid, HCl.
PCl5(s) + 4H2O((cid:2)) → H3PO4(aq) + 5HCl(aq)
(a) What mass of PCl5 is needed to react with an excess quantity of H2O
to produce 23.5 g of H3PO4?
(b) How many molecules of H2O are needed to react with 3.87 g
of PCl5 ?
7
I
A chemist has a beaker containing lead nitrate, Pb(NO3)2, dissolved
in water. The chemist adds a solution containing sodium iodide, NaI,
and a bright yellow precipitate is formed. The chemist continues to add
NaI until no further yellow precipitate is formed. The chemist ﬁlters the
precipitate, dries it in an oven, and ﬁnds it has a mass of 1.43 g.
(a) Write a balanced chemical equation to describe what happened in
this experiment. Hint: compounds with sodium ions are always
soluble.
(b) Use the balanced chemical equation to determine what mass of
lead nitrate, Pb(NO3)2, was dissolved in the water in the beaker.
8
MC
The Apollo-13 mission overcame an astonishing number of
difﬁculties on its return to Earth. One problem the astronauts
encountered was removing carbon dioxide from the air they were
breathing. Do some research to ﬁnd out:
(a) What happened to lead to an unexpected accumulation of carbon
dioxide?
(b) What did the astronauts do to overcome this difﬁculty?
250 MHR • Unit 2  Chemical Quantities
The Limiting Reactant
A balanced chemical equation shows the mole ratios of the reactants
and products. To emphasize this, the coefﬁcients of equations are some-
times called stoichiometric coefﬁcients. Reactants are said to be present
in stoichiometric amounts when they are present in a mole ratio that
corresponds exactly to the mole ratio predicted by the balanced chemical
equation. This means that when a reaction is complete, there are no
reactants left. In practice, however, there often are reactants left.
In the previous section, you looked at an “equation” for making a
salad. You looked at situations in which you had the right amounts of
ingredients to make one or more salads, with no leftover ingredients.
1 head of lettuce + 2 cucumbers + 5 radishes → 1 salad
What if you have two heads of lettuce, 12 cucumbers, and 25 radishes,
as in Figure 7.5? How many salads can you make? Because each salad
requires two heads of lettuce, you can make only two salads. Here the
amount of lettuce limits the number of salads you can make. Some of the
other two ingredients are left over.
excess ingredients
7.2
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
calculate, for any given
reactant or product in a
chemical equation, the cor-
responding mass or quantity
(in moles or molecules)
of any other reactant or
product
perform an investigation to
determine the limiting reac-
tant in a chemical reaction
assess the importance of
determining the limiting
reactant
solve problems involving
percentage yield and limiting
reactants
communicate your under-
standing of the following
terms: stoichiometric
coefﬁcients, stoichiometric
amounts, limiting reactant,
excess reactant
Figure 7.5
Which ingredient limits how many salads can be made?
Chemical reactions often work in the same way. For example, consider
the ﬁrst step in extracting zinc from zinc oxide:
ZnO(s) + C(s) → Zn(s) + CO(g)
If you were carrying out this reaction in a laboratory, you could obtain
samples of zinc oxide and carbon in a 1:1 mole ratio. In an industrial
setting, however, it is impractical to spend time and money ensuring that
zinc oxide and carbon are present in stoichiometric amounts. It is also
unnecessary. In an industrial setting, engineers add more carbon, in the
form of charcoal, than is necessary for the reaction. All the zinc oxide
reacts, but there is carbon left over.
Chapter 7  Quantities in Chemical Reactions • MHR 251
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
Having one or more reactants in excess is very common.
Another example is seen in gasoline-powered vehicles. Their
operation depends on the reaction between fuel and oxygen.
Normally, the fuel-injection system regulates how much air
enters the combustion chamber, and oxygen is the limiting
reactant. When the fuel is very low, however, fuel becomes
the limiting reactant and the reaction cannot proceed, as in
Figure 7.6.
In nature, reactions almost never have reactants in
stoichiometric amounts. Think about respiration, represented
by the following chemical equation:
C6H12O6(s) + 6O2(g) → 6CO2(g) + 6H2O((cid:2))
When an animal carries out respiration, there is an unlimit-
ed amount of oxygen in the air. The amount of glucose,
however, depends on how much food the animal has eaten.
All the gasoline in this car’s tank has
Figure 7.6
reacted. Thus, even though there is still oxygen
available in the air, the combustion reaction cannot
proceed.
ThoughtLab
The Limiting Item
Imagine that you are in the business of producing
cars. A simpliﬁed “equation” for making a car is
1 car body + 4 wheels + 2 wiper blades →1 car
(b) Which items are present in excess amounts?
(c) How much of each “excess” item remains
after the “reaction”?
Procedure
Analysis
1. Assume that you have 35 car bodies, 120
1. Does the amount that an item is in excess
wheels, and 150 wiper blades in your factory.
How many complete cars can you make?
affect the quantity of the product that is made?
Explain.
2. (a) Which item “limits” the number of
complete cars that you can make? Stated
another way, which item will “run out” ﬁrst?
2. There are fewer car bodies than wheels and
wiper blades. Explain why car bodies are not
the limiting item, in spite of being present in
the smallest amount.
1 car body
4 wheels
2 wiper
blades
1 complete car
Determining the Limiting Reactant
The reactant that is completely used up in a chemical reaction is called
the limiting reactant. In other words, the limiting reactant determines
how much product is produced. When the limiting reactant is used up,
the reaction stops. In real-life situations, there is almost always a limiting
reactant.
A reactant that remains after a reaction is over is called the excess
reactant. Once the limiting reactant is used, no more product can be
made, regardless of how much of the excess reactants may be present.
252 MHR • Unit 2  Chemical Quantities
When you are given amounts of two or more reactants to solve a
stoichiometric problem, you ﬁrst need to identify the limiting reactant.
One way to do this is to ﬁnd out how much product would be produced
by each reactant if the other reactant were present in excess. The reactant
that produces the least amount of product is the limiting reactant.
Examine the following Sample Problem to see how to use this approach to
identify the limiting reactant.
Sample Problem
Identifying the Limiting Reactant
Problem
Lithium nitride reacts with water to form ammonia and lithium
hydroxide, according to the following balanced chemical equation:
Li3N(s) + 3H2O((cid:2)) → NH3(g) + 3LiOH(aq)
If 4.87 g of lithium nitride reacts with 5.80 g of water, ﬁnd the
limiting reactant.
What Is Required?
You need to determine whether lithium nitride or water is the
limiting reactant.
What Is Given?
Reactant: lithium nitride, Li3N → 4.87 g
Reactant: water, H2O → 5.80 g
Product: ammonia, NH3
Product: lithium hydroxide, LiOH
Plan Your Strategy
Convert the given masses into moles. Use the mole ratios of reactants
and products to determine how much ammonia is produced by
each amount of reactant. The limiting reactant is the reactant that
produces the smaller amount of product.
Act on Your Strategy
n mol Li3N = 4.87 g Li3N
34.8 g/mol
= 0.140 mol Li3N
n mol H2O = 5.80 g H2O
18.0 g/mol
= 0.322 mol H2O
Calculate the amount of NH3 produced, based on the amount of Li3N.
n mol of NH3 = 1 mol NH3
1 mol Li3N
= 0.140 mol NH3
(0.140 mol Li3N)
Calculate the amount of NH3 produced, based on the amount of H2O.
PROBLEM TIP
To determine the limiting
reactant, you can calculate
how much of either ammonia
or lithium hydroxide would be
produced by the reactants. In
this problem, ammonia was
chosen because only one
mole is produced, simplifying
the calculation.
Continued ...
Chapter 7  Quantities in Chemical Reactions • MHR 253
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 253
n mol NH3 = 1 mol NH3
3 mol H2O
= 0.107 mol NH3
× (0.322 mol H2O)
The water would produce less ammonia than the lithium nitride.
Therefore, the limiting reactant is water. Notice that there is more
water than lithium nitride, in terms of mass and moles. Water is the
limiting reactant, however, because 3 mol of water are needed to
react with 1 mol of lithium nitride.
Check Your Solution
According to the balanced chemical equation, the ratio of lithium
nitride to water is 1/3. The ratio of lithium nitride to water, based
on the mole amounts calculated, is 0.14:0.32. Divide this ratio by
0.14 to get 1.0:2.3. For each mole of lithium nitride, there are only
2.3 mol water. However, 3 mol are required by stoichiometry.
Therefore, water is the limiting reactant.
Practice Problems
23. The following balanced chemical equation shows the reaction of
aluminum with copper(II) chloride. If 0.25 g of aluminum reacts
with 0.51 g of copper(II) chloride, determine the limiting reactant.
2Al(s) + 3CuCl2(aq) → 3Cu(s) + 2AlCl3(aq)
24. Hydrogen ﬂuoride, HF, is a highly toxic gas. It is produced by the
double displacement reaction of calcium ﬂuoride, CaF2, with
concentrated sulfuric acid, H2SO4.
CaF2(s) + H2SO4((cid:2)) → 2HF(g) + CaSO4(s)
Determine the limiting reactant when 10.0 g of CaF2 reacts with
15.5 g of H2SO4.
25. Acrylic, a common synthetic ﬁbre, is formed from acrylonitrile,
C3H3N . Acrylonitrile can be prepared by the reaction of
propylene, C3H6, with nitric oxide, NO.
4C3H6(g) + 6NO(g) → 4C3H3N(g) + 6H2O(g) + N2(g)
What is the limiting reactant when 126 g of C3H6 reacts with
175 g of NO?
26. 3.76 g of zinc reacts with 8.93 × 1023 molecules of hydrogen
chloride. Which reactant is present in excess?
You now know how to use a balanced chemical equation to ﬁnd the
limiting reactant. Can you ﬁnd the limiting reactant by experimenting?
You know that the limiting reactant is completely consumed in a reaction,
while any reactants in excess remain after the reaction is ﬁnished. In
Investigation 7-A, you will observe a reaction and identify the limiting
reactant, based on your observations.
254 MHR • Unit 2  Chemical Quantities
Limiting and
Excess Reactants
In this investigation, you will predict and
observe a limiting reactant. You will use the
single replacement reaction of aluminum with
aqueous copper(II) chloride:
2Al(s) + 3CuCl2(aq) → 3Cu(s) + 2AlCl3(aq)
Note that copper(II) chloride, CuCl2, is light blue
in aqueous solution. This is due to the Cu2+
ion. Aluminum chloride, AlCl3(aq) , is colourless
in aqueous solution.
(aq)
Question
How can observations tell you which is the
limiting reactant in the reaction of aluminum
with aqueous copper(II) chloride?
Prediction
Your teacher will give you a beaker that contains
a 0.25 g piece of aluminum foil and 0.51 g of
copper(II) chloride. Predict which one of these
reactants is the limiting reactant.
Materials
100 mL beaker or 125 mL Erlenmeyer ﬂask
stirring rod
0.51 g CuCl2
0.25 g Al foil
Safety Precautions
The reaction mixture may get hot. Do not
hold the beaker as the reaction proceeds.
Procedure
1. To begin the reaction, add about 50 mL
of water to the beaker that contains the
aluminum foil and copper(II) chloride.
2. Record the colour of the solution and any
metal that is present at the beginning of the
reaction.
S K I L L   F O C U S
Predicting
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
Communicating results
3. Record any colour changes as the reaction pro-
ceeds. Stir occasionally with the stirring rod.
4. When the reaction is complete, return the
beaker, with its contents, to your teacher for
proper disposal. Do not pour anything down
the drain.
Analysis
1. According to your observations, which reac-
tant was present in excess? Which reactant
was the limiting reactant?
2. How does your prediction compare with your
observations?
3. Do stoichiometric calculations to support your
observations of the limiting reactant. Refer to
the previous ThoughtLab if you need help.
4. If your prediction of the limiting reactant was
incorrect, explain why.
Conclusions
5. Write a conclusion to explain how your
experimental observation supported your
theoretical calculations.
Applications
6. Magnesium (Mg(s)) and hydrogen chloride
(HCl(aq)) react according to the following
skeleton equation:
Mg(s) + HCl(aq) → MgCl2(aq) + H2(g)
(a) Balance the skeleton equation.
(b) Examine the equation carefully. What
evidence would you have that a reaction
was taking place between the hydrochloric
acid and the magnesium?
(c) You have a piece of magnesium of unknown
mass, and a beaker of water in which is
dissolved an unknown amount of hydrogen
chloride. Design an experiment to determine
which reactant is the limiting reactant.
Chapter 7  Quantities in Chemical Reactions • MHR 255
Write a balanced chemical equation.
Identify the limiting reactant.
Express it as an amount in moles.
Calculate the amount of the
required substance based on the
amount of the limiting reactant.
Convert the amount of the
required substance to mass or
number of particles, as directed
by the question.
Be sure to determine
Figure 7.7
the limiting reactant in any
stoichiometric problem before
you solve it.
P R O B E W A R E
If you have access to probe-
ware, do the Chemistry 11 lab,
Stoichiometry, now.
The Limiting Reactant in Stoichiometric Problems
You are now ready to use what you know about ﬁnding the limiting reac-
tant to predict the amount of product that is expected in a reaction. This
type of prediction is a routine part of a chemist’s job, both in academic
research and industry. To produce a compound, for example, chemists
need to know how much product they can expect from a given reaction.
In analytical chemistry, chemists often analyze an impure substance by
allowing it to react in a known reaction. They predict the expected mass
of the product(s) and compare it with the actual mass of the product(s)
obtained. Then they can determine the purity of the compound.
Since chemical reactions usually occur with one or more of the
reactants in excess, you often need to determine the limiting reactant
before you carry out stoichiometric calculations. You can incorporate
this step into the process you have been using to solve stoichiometric
problems, as shown in Figure 7.7.
Sample Problem
The Limiting Reactant
in a Stoichiometric Problem
Problem
White phosphorus consists of a molecule made up of four phospho-
rus atoms. It burns in pure oxygen to produce tetraphosphorus
decaoxide.
P4(s) + 5O2(g) → P4O10(s)
A 1.00 g piece of phosphorus is burned in a ﬂask ﬁlled with
2.60 × 1023 molecules of oxygen gas. What mass of tetraphosphorus
decaoxide is produced?
What Is Required?
You need to ﬁnd the mass of tetraphosphorus decaoxide that is
produced.
What Is Given?
You know the balanced chemical equation. You also know the mass
of phosphorus and the number of oxygen molecules that reacted.
Plan Your Strategy
First convert each reactant to moles and ﬁnd the limiting reactant.
Using the mole to mole ratio of the limiting reactant to the product,
determine the number of moles of tetraphosphorus decaoxide that is
expected. Convert this number of moles to grams.
Act on Your Strategy
n mol P4 =
1.00 g P4
123.9 g/mol P4
= 8.07 × 10
−3 mol P4
256 MHR • Unit 2  Chemical Quantities
Continued ...
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 256
n mol O2 =
2.60 × 1023 molecules
6.02 × 1023 molecules/mol
= 0.432 mol O2
Calculate the amount of P4O10 that would be produced by the P4 .
(8.07 × 10
−3 mol P4)
n mol P4O10
8.07 × 10−3 mol P4
n mol P4O10
8.07 × 10−3 mol P4
= 1 mol P4O10
1 mol P4
= 1 mol P4O10
1 mol P4
(8.07 × 10−3 mol P4)
= 8.07 × 10
−3 mol P4O10
Calculate the amount of P4O10 that would be produced by the O2.
(0.432 mol O2)
n mol P4O10
0.432 mol O2
n mol P4O10
0.432 mol O2
= 1 mol P4O10
5 mol O2
= 1 mol P4O10
5 mol O2
(0.432 mol O2)
= 8.64 × 10
−2 mol P4O10
Since P4 would produce less P4O10 than O2 would, P4 is the limiting
reactant.
P4(s)
0.00807 mol
+
[FIGURE 7-22: CALCULATIONS FOR THIS
SAMPLE PROBLEM
5O2(g)
P4O10(s)
0.00807 mol
(0.00807 mol P4)
unknown ratio
023(7)1222/TA
n mol P4O10
0.00807 mol P4
n mol P4O10
0.00807 mol P4
=
=
known ratio
1 mol P4O10
1 mol P4
(0.00807 mol P4)
1 mol P4O10
1 mol P4
=  0.00807 mol P4O10
0.00807 mol P4O10
× 284 g/mol P4O10
2.29 g P4O10
Check Your Solution
There were more than 5 times as many moles of O2 as moles of P4 ,
so it makes sense that P4 was the limiting reactant. An expected
mass of 2.29 g of tetraphosphorus decaoxide is reasonable. It is
formed in a 1:1 ratio from phosphorus. It has a molar mass that is
just over twice the molar mass of phosphorus.
Practice Problems
27. Chloride dioxide, ClO2, is a reactive oxidizing agent. It is used to
purify water.
6ClO2(g) + 3H2O((cid:2)) → 5HClO3(aq) + HCl(aq)
(a) If 71.00 g of ClO2 is mixed with 19.00 g of water, what is the
limiting reactant?
(b) What mass of HClO3 is expected in part (a)?
(c) How many molecules of HCl are expected in part (a)?
Continued ...
Chapter 7  Quantities in Chemical Reactions • MHR 257
C O U R S E
C H A L L E N G E
You will use the concepts of
stoichiometry and limiting
reactants in the Chemistry
Course Challenge. If you have
two reactants and you want to
use up all of one reactant,
which is the limiting reactant?
C H E M
FA C T
Carbon disulﬁde, CS2, is an
extremely volatile and ﬂamma-
ble substance. It is so ﬂamma-
ble that it can ignite when
exposed to boiling water!
Because carbon disulﬁde
vapour is more than twice as
dense as air, it can “blanket”
the ﬂoor of a laboratory. There
have been cases where the
spark from an electrical motor
has ignited carbon disulﬁde
vapour in a laboratory, causing
considerable damage. For this
reason, specially insulated
electrical motors are required
in laboratory refrigerators and
equipment.
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 257
28. Hydrazine, N2H4, reacts exothermically with hydrogen peroxide,
H2O2
N2H4((cid:2)) + 7H2O2(aq) → 2HNO3(g) + 8H2O(g)
(a) 120 g of N2H4 reacts with an equal mass of H2O2. Which is the
limiting reactant?
(b) What mass of HNO3 is expected?
(c) What mass, in grams, of the excess reactant remains at the end
of the reaction?
29. In the textile industry, chlorine is used to bleach fabrics. Any
of the toxic chlorine that remains after the bleaching process is
destroyed by reacting it with a sodium thiosulfate solution,
Na2S2O3(aq).
Na2S2O3(aq) + 4Cl2(g) + 5H2O((cid:2)) → 2NaHSO4(aq) + 8HCl(aq)
135 kg of Na2S2O3 reacts with 50.0 kg of Cl2 and 238 kg of water.
How many grams of NaHSO4 are expected?
30. Manganese(III) ﬂuoride can be formed by the reaction of
manganese(II) iodide with ﬂuorine.
2MnI2(s) + 13F2(g) → 2MnF3(s) + 4IF5((cid:2))
(a) 1.23 g of MnI2 reacts with 25.0 g of F2 . What mass of MnF3
is expected?
(b) How many molecules of IF5 are produced in part (a)?
(c) What reactant is in excess? How much of it remains at the
end of the reaction?
Section Wrap-up
You now know how to identify a limiting reactant. This allows you to
predict the amount of product that will be formed in a reaction. Often,
however, your prediction will not accurately reﬂect reality. When a
chemical reactions occurs — whether in a laboratory, in nature, or in
industry — the amount of product that is formed is often different from
the amount that was predicted by stoichiometric calculations. You will
learn why this happens, and how chemists deal with it, in section 7.3.
Section Review
1
C
Why do you not need to consider reactants that are present in
excess amounts when carrying out stoichiometric calculations? Use
an everyday analogy to explain the idea of excess quantity.
2
(a)
C
Magnesium reacts with oxygen gas, O2, from the air. Which
reactant do you think will be present in excess?
258 MHR • Unit 2  Chemical Quantities
(b)
C
Gold is an extremely unreactive metal. Gold does react, however,
with aqua regia (a mixture of concentrated nitric acid, HNO3(aq), and
−, as well as NO2
hydrochloric acid, HCl(aq)). The complex ion AuCl4
and H2O, are formed. This reaction is always carried out with aqua
regia in excess. Why would a chemist not have the gold in excess?
(c)
C
In general, what characteristics or properties of a chemical
compound or atom make it suitable to be used as an excess reactant?
3
I
Copper is a relatively inert metal. It is unreactive with most acids.
It does, however, react with nitric acid.
3Cu(s) + 8HNO3(aq) → 3Cu(NO3)2(aq) + 2NO(g) + 4H2O((cid:2))
What mass of NO is produced when 57.4 g of Cu reacts with 165 g
of HNO3?
4
I
Iron can be produced when iron(III) oxide reacts with carbon
monoxide gas.
Fe2O3(s) + 3CO(g) → 2Fe(s) + 3CO2(g)
11.5 g of Fe2O3 reacts with 2.63 × 1024 molecules of CO. What
mass of Fe is expected?
5
6
I
The reaction of an aqueous solution of iron(III) sulfate with
aqueous sodium hydroxide produces aqueous sodium sulfate and a
solid precipitate, iron(III) hydroxide.
Fe2(SO4)3(aq) + 6NaOH(aq) → 3Na2SO4(aq) + 2Fe(OH)3(s)
What mass of Fe(OH)3 is produced when 10.0 g of Fe2(SO4)3 reacts
with an equal mass of NaOH?
I
Carbon disulﬁde is used as a solvent for water-insoluble
compounds, such as fats, oils, and waxes. Calculate the mass of
carbon disulﬁde that is produced when 17.5 g of carbon reacts with
225 g of sulfur dioxide according to the following equation:
5C(s) + 2SO2(g) → CS2((cid:2)) + 4CO(g)
7
I
A chemist adds some zinc shavings to a beaker containing a blue
solution of copper chloride. The contents of the beaker are stirred.
After about an hour, the chemist observes that the blue colour has not
completely disappeared.
(a) Write a balanced chemical equation to describe this reaction.
(b) What other observations would you expect the chemist to make?
(c) According to the chemist’s observations, which reactant was the
limiting reactant?
(d) The beaker contained 3.12 g of copper chloride dissolved in water.
What does this tell you, quantitatively, about the amount of zinc that
was added?
Nitric acid reacts with copper
metal to produce poisonous,
brown nitrogen dioxide, NO2, gas.
Unit Investigation Prep
Consider what you have
learned about limiting reac-
tants when you design your
quantitative analysis experi-
ment at the end of Unit 2.
Imagine you add one reactant
(A) to an unknown amount of a
second reactant (B). You intend
to analyze the products (C) in
order to calculate the amount
of B. In this case, which reac-
tant should be the limiting
reactant, A or B? How do you
know which reactant is the
limiting reactant when you
do not know the amount of
reactant B?
Chapter 7  Quantities in Chemical Reactions • MHR 259
7.3
Percentage Yield
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
solve problems involving
percentage yield and limiting
reactants
compare, using laboratory
results, the theoretical yield
of a reaction with the actual
yield
calculate the percentage
yield of a reaction, and
suggest sources of experi-
mental error
solve stoichiometric
problems involving the
percentage purity of the
reactants
communicate your under-
standing of the following
terms: theoretical yield,
actual yield, competing
reaction, percentage yield,
percentage purity
C H E M
FA C T
Actual yield is a measured
quantity. Theoretical yield is a
calculated quantity.
When you write an examination, the highest grade that you can earn
is usually 100%. Most people, however, do not regularly earn a grade of
100%. A percentage on an examination is calculated using the following
equation:
Percentage grade =
Marks earned
Maximum possible marks
× 100%
Similarly, a batter does not succeed at every swing. A batter’s success rate
is expressed as a decimal fraction. The decimal can be converted to a per-
cent by multiplying by 100%, as shown in Figure 7.8. In this section, you
will learn about a percentage that chemists use to predict and express the
“success” of reactions.
A baseball player’s batting average is calculated as hits/attempts. For
Figure 7.8
example, a player with 6 hits for 21 times at bat has a batting average of 6/21 = 0.286.
This represents a success rate of 28.6%.
Theoretical Yield and Actual Yield
Chemists use stoichiometry to predict the amount of product that can
be expected from a chemical reaction. The amount of product that is
predicted by stoichiometry is called the theoretical yield. This predicted
yield, however, is not always the same as the amount of product that is
actually obtained from a chemical reaction. The amount of product that
is obtained in an experiment is called the actual yield.
Why Actual Yield and Theoretical Yield Are Often Different
The actual yield of chemical reactions is usually less than the theoretical
yield. This is caused by a variety of factors. For example, sometimes less
than perfect collection techniques contribute to a lower than expected
yield.
A reduced yield may also be caused by a competing reaction: a
reaction that occurs at the same time as the principal reaction and
involves its reactants and/or products. For example, phosphorus reacts
with chlorine to form phosphorus trichloride. Some of the phosphorus
trichloride, however, can then react with chlorine to form phosphorus
pentachloride.
260 MHR • Unit 2  Chemical Quantities
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
Here are the chemical equations for these competing reactions:
2P(s) + 3Cl2(g) → 2PCl3((cid:2))
PCl3((cid:2)) + Cl2(g) → PCl5(s)
Therefore, not all the phosphorus is converted to phosphorus
trichloride. So the actual yield of phosphorus trichloride is less than
the theoretical yield.
Experimental design and technique may affect the actual yield, as
well. For example, suppose that you need to obtain a product by ﬁltration.
Some of the product may remain in solution and therefore not be caught
on the ﬁlter paper.
Another common cause of reduced yield is impure reactants. The
theoretical yield is calculated based on the assumption that reactants are
pure. You will learn about the effects of impure reactants on page 265.
Calculating Percentage Yield
The percentage yield of a chemical reaction compares the mass of product
obtained by experiment (the actual yield) with the mass of product
determined by stoichiometric calculations (the theoretical yield). It is
calculated as follows:
Percentage yield =
(cid:2)
Actual yield
Theoretical yield
(cid:3)
× 100%
In section 7.1, you looked at the reaction of hydrogen and nitrogen
to produce ammonia. You assumed that all the nitrogen and hydrogen
reacted. Under certain conditions of temperature and pressure, this is a
reasonable assumption. When ammonia is produced industrially, how-
ever, temperature and pressure are manipulated to maximize the speed
of production. Under these conditions, the actual yield is much less than
the theoretical yield. Examine the next Sample Problem to learn how to
calculate percentage yield.
Sample Problem
Calculating Percentage Yield
Problem
Ammonia can be prepared by reacting nitrogen gas, taken from the
atmosphere, with hydrogen gas.
N2(g) + 3H2(g) → 2NH3(g)
When 7.5 × 101 g of nitrogen reacts with sufﬁcient hydrogen, the
theoretical yield of ammonia is 9.10 g. (You can verify this by doing
the stoichiometric calculations.) If 1.72 g of ammonia is obtained by
experiment, what is the percentage yield of the reaction?
What Is Required?
You need to ﬁnd the percentage yield of the reaction.
What Is Given?
actual yield = 1.72 g
theoretical yield = 9.10 g
Continued ...
Chapter 7  Quantities in Chemical Reactions • MHR 261
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 261
Plan Your Strategy
Divide the actual yield by the theoretical yield, and multiply
by 100%.
Act on Your Strategy
Percentage yield =
Actual yield
Theoretical yield
× 100%
× 100%
= 1.72 g
9.10 g
= 18.9%
The percentage yield of the reaction is 18.9%.
Check Your Solution
By inspection, you can see that 1.72 g is roughly 20% of 9.10 g.
Practice Problems
31. 20.0 g of bromic acid, HBrO3 , is reacted with excess HBr.
HBrO3(aq) + 5HBr(aq) → 3H2O((cid:2)) + 3Br2(aq)
(a) What is the theoretical yield of Br2 for this reaction?
(b) If 47.3 g of Br2 is produced, what is the percentage yield of Br2?
32. Barium sulfate forms as a precipitate in the following reaction:
Ba(NO3)2(aq) + Na2SO4(aq) → BaSO4(s) + 2NaNO3(aq)
When 35.0 g of Ba(NO3)2 is reacted with excess Na2SO4, 29.8 g
of BaSO4 is recovered by the chemist.
(a) Calculate the theoretical yield of BaSO4.
(b) Calculate the percentage yield of BaSO4.
33. Yeasts can act on a sugar, such as glucose, C6H12O6, to produce
ethyl alcohol, C2H5OH, and carbon dioxide.
C6H12O6 → 2C2H5OH + 2CO2
If 223 g of ethyl alcohol are recovered after 1.63 kg of glucose
react, what is the percentage yield of the reaction?
Sometimes chemists know what percentage yield to expect from a
chemical reaction. This is especially true of an industrial reaction, where
a lot of experimental data are available. As well, the reaction has usually
been carried out many times, with large amounts of reactants. Examine
the next Sample Problem to learn how to predict the actual yield of a
reaction from a known percentage yield.
262 MHR • Unit 2  Chemical Quantities
Sample Problem
Predicting Actual Yield
Based on Percentage Yield
Problem
Calcium carbonate can be thermally decomposed to calcium oxide
and carbon dioxide.
CaCO3(s) → CaO(s) + CO2(g)
Under certain conditions, this reaction proceeds with a 92.4% yield
of calcium oxide. How many grams of calcium oxide can the chemist
expect to obtain if 12.4 g of calcium carbonate is heated?
What Is Required?
You need to calculate the amount of calcium oxide, in grams, that
will be formed in the reaction.
What Is Given?
Percentage yield CaO = 92.4%
m CaCO3 = 12.4 g
Plan Your Strategy
Calculate the theoretical yield of calcium oxide using stoichiometry.
Then multiply the theoretical yield by the percentage yield to
predict the actual yield.
Act on Your Strategy
1
CaCO3(s)
CaO(s )
+
0.124 mol
CO2(g)
0.124 mol
[FIGURE 7-25: CALCULATIONS. SEE FIGURE
MANUSCRIPT [STACK FRACTIONS.]
unknown ratio
3
amount CaCO
0.124 mol CaCO3
amount CaO
0.124 mol CaCO3
026(7)1222/TA
(0.124 mol CaCO3)
known ratio
1 mol CaO
1 mol CaO3
(0.124 mol CaCO3)
1 mol CaO
1 mol CaO3
=
=
=  0.124 mol CaO
2
12.4 g CaCO3
100 g CaCO3/mol CaCO3
= 0.124 mol CaCO3
4
0.124 mol CaO
× 56.1 g CaO/mol CaO
= 6.95 g CaO
12.4 g CaCO3
5
Actual yield = 6.95 g CaO × 92.4
100
= 6.42 g CaO
6.95 g CaO
Check Your Solution
92.5% of 6.95 g is about 6.4 g. The answer is reasonable.
Continued ...
Chapter 7  Quantities in Chemical Reactions • MHR 263
You hear a great deal about
the fuel consumption of
automobiles. What about air
consumption? Your challenge
is to determine the information
you need to answer the follow-
ing question: What mass of
air does an automobile require
to travel from Thunder Bay,
Ontario, to Smooth Rock Falls,
Ontario? This is a distance of
670 km.
When you are ﬁnished, go to
question 23 on page 273. You
can check your answer and
solve the problem, too.
C O U R S E
C H A L L E N G E
How would you determine the
percentage yield of a double
displacement reaction that
produces a precipitate?
Consider this question to
prepare for your Chemistry
Course Challenge.
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 263
Practice Problems
34. The following reaction proceeds with a 70% yield.
C6H6((cid:2)) + HNO3(aq) → C6H5NO2((cid:2)) + H2O((cid:2))
Calculate the mass of C6H5NO2 expected if 12.8 g of C6H6 reacts
with excess HNO3.
35. The reaction of toluene, C7H8, with potassium permanganate,
KMnO4, gives less than a 100% yield.
C7H8((cid:2)) + 2KMnO4(aq) → KC7H5O2(aq) + 2MnO2(s) + KOH(aq) + H2O((cid:2))
(a) 8.60 g of C7H8 is reacted with excess KMnO4. What is the
theoretical yield, in grams, of KC7H5O2 ?
(b) If the percentage yield is 70.0%, what mass of KC7H5O2 can
be expected?
(c) What mass of C7H8 is needed to produce 13.4 g of KC7H5O2 ,
assuming a yield of 60%?
36. Marble is made primarily of calcium carbonate. When calcium
carbonate reacts with hydrogen chloride, it reacts to form calcium
chloride, carbon dioxide and water. If this reaction occurs with
81.5% yield, what mass of carbon dioxide will be collected if
15.7 g of CaCO3 is added to sufﬁcient hydrogen chloride?
37. Mercury, in its elemental form or in a chemical compound is
highly toxic. Water-soluble mercury compounds, such as mercu-
ry(II) nitrate, can be removed from industrial wastewater by
adding sodium sulﬁde to the water, which forms a precipitate of
mercury(II) sulﬁde, which can then be ﬁltered out.
Hg(NO3)2(aq) + Na2S(aq) → HgS(s) + 2NaNO3(aq)
If 3.45 × 1023 formula units of Hg(NO3)2 are reacted with excess
Na2S, what mass of HgS can be expected if this process occurs
with 97.0% yield?
Applications of Percentage Yield
The percentage yield of chemical reactions is extremely important in
industrial chemistry and the pharmaceutical industry. For example, the
synthesis of certain drugs involves many sequential chemical reactions.
Often each reaction has a low percentage yield. This results in a tiny
overall yield. Research chemists, who generally work with small quanti-
ties of reactants, may be satisﬁed with a poor yield. Chemical engineers,
on the other hand, work with very large quantities. They may use hun-
dreds or even thousands of kilograms of reactants! A difference of 1%
in the yield of a reaction can translate into thousands of dollars.
The work of a chemist in a laboratory can be likened to making
spaghetti for a family. The work of a chemical engineer, by contrast, is like
making spaghetti for 10 000 people! Learn more about chemical engineers
in Careers in Chemistry on the next page. Then perform an investigation
to determine the percentage yield of a reaction on page 266.
264 MHR • Unit 2  Chemical Quantities
Careers
in Chemistry
Chemical Engineer
Chemical engineers are sometimes described
as “universal engineers” because of their unique
knowledge of math, physics, engineering, and
chemistry. This broad knowledge allows them
to work in a variety of areas, from designing
paint factories to developing better tasting, more
nutritious foods. Canadian chemical engineers
are helping to lead the world in making cheap,
long-lasting, and high-quality CDs and DVDs.
In addition to designing and operating commer-
cial plants, chemical engineers can be found
in university labs, government agencies, and
consulting ﬁrms.
Producing More for Less
Once chemists have developed a product in a lab-
oratory, it is up to chemical engineers to design
a process to make the product in commercial
quantities as efﬁciently as possible. “Scaling up”
production is not just a matter of using larger
beakers. Chemical engineers break down the
chemical process into a series of smaller “unit
operations” or processes and techniques.
They use physics, chemistry, and complex
mathematical models. For example, making liquid
pharmaceutical products (such as syrups, solu-
tions, and suspensions) on a large scale involves
adding speciﬁc amounts of raw materials to large
mixing tanks. Then the raw materials are heated
to a set temperature and mixed at a set speed
for a given amount of time. The ﬁnal product is
ﬁltered and stored in holding tanks. Chemical
engineers ensure that each process produces
the maximum amount of product.
Becoming a Chemical Engineer
To become a chemical engineer, you need a
bachelor’s degree in chemical engineering. Most
provinces also require a Professional Engineer
(P. Eng.) designation. Professional engineers
must have at least four years of experience and
must pass an examination. As well, they must
commit to continuing their education to keep up
with current developments. Chemical engineers
must be able to work well with people and to
communicate well.
Make Career Connections
1. Discuss engineering studies and careers with
working engineers, professors, and engineer-
ing students. Look for summer internship
programs and job shadowing opportunities.
Browse the Internet. Contact your provincial
engineering association, engineering societies,
and universities for more information.
2. Participate in National Engineering Week in
Canada in March of each year. This is when
postsecondary institutions, companies, science
centres, and other organizations hold special
events, including engineering contests and
workshops.
Percentage Purity
Often impure reactants are the cause of a percentage yield of less than
100%. Impurities cause the mass data to be incorrect. For example, sup-
pose that you have 1.00 g of sodium chloride and you want to carry out a
reaction with it. You think that the sodium chloride may have absorbed
some water, so you do not know exactly how much pure sodium chloride
you have. If you calculate a theoretical yield for your reaction based on
1.00 g of sodium chloride, your actual yield will be less. There is not
1.00 g of sodium chloride in the sample.
Chapter 7  Quantities in Chemical Reactions • MHR 265
S K I L L   F O C U S
Predicting
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
Determining the Percentage
Yield of a Chemical Reaction
Procedure
1. Label a clean, dry 250 mL beaker with your
initials. Use a glass marker, or write with
pencil on the frosted area of the beaker. Do
not use tape, since the beaker will be dried
in an oven later.
2. Copy the table below into your notebook.
Record the mass of the labelled beaker in
your table.
Observations
Mass of empty beaker
Mass of steel wool
Mass of beaker containing clean, dry copper
3. Put about 50 mL of distilled water in the
beaker. Add 5.00 g of CuCl2·2H2O to the
water. Stir to dissolve.
4. Record the mass of the steel wool in your
table.
5. Add the steel wool to the CuCl2 solution in
the beaker. Allow it to sit until all the steel
wool has reacted. This could take up to
20 min.
6. When the reaction is complete, decant the
solution into a 250 mL beaker, as shown in
the diagram.
The percentage yield of a reaction is determined
by numerous factors: The nature of the reaction
itself, the conditions under which the reaction
was carried out, and the nature of the reactants
used.
In this investigation, you will determine the
percentage yield of the following chemical
reaction:
Fe(s) + CuCl2(aq) → FeCl2(aq) + Cu(s)
You will use steel wool, since it is virtually
pure iron.
Question
What is the percentage yield of the reaction of
iron and copper chloride when steel wool and
copper chloride dihydrate are used as reactants?
Predictions
Predict the mass of copper that will be produced
if 1.00 g of iron (steel wool) reacts completely
with a solution containing excess CuCl2. Also
predict the maximum possible yield.
Materials
2 beakers (250 mL)
stirring rod
electronic balance, accurate to two decimal places
distilled water
wash bottle with distilled water
drying oven or heat lamp
about 1.00 g rust-free, degreased steel wool
5.00 g copper chloride dihydrate, CuCl2·2H2O
15 mL 1 mol/L  hydrochloric acid, HCl
Safety Precautions
If you get either CuCl2 or the HCl solution on
your skin, ﬂush with plenty of cold water.
266 MHR • Unit 2  Chemical Quantities
S K I L L   F O C U S
Predicting
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
Communicating results
Analysis
1. (a) Using the mass of the iron (steel wool) you
used, calculate the theoretical yield of the
copper, in grams.
(b) How does the mass of the copper you
collected compare with the expected
theoretical yield?
2. Based on the amount of iron that you used,
prove that the 5.00 g of CuCl2·2H2O was
the excess reactant.
Conclusion
3. Calculate the percentage yield for this
reaction.
Applications
4. If your percentage yield was not 100%,
suggest sources of error.
5. How would you attain an improved percent-
age yield if you performed this reaction again?
Consider your technique and materials.
6. Do some research to ﬁnd out the percent by
mass of iron in steel wool. Predict what your
percentage yield would be if you had used
pure iron in this reaction. Would it make a
difference?
stirring rod
beaker
Pouring down a stirring rod ensures that no liquid
dribbles down the outside of the beaker. The glove in
this illustration is omitted so you can clearly see where
to place your ﬁngers. Always wear gloves when handling
chemicals in the laboratory.
7. Using a wash bottle, rinse the copper several
times with distilled water. Decant the water as
shown in the diagram.
8. Add 10 to 15 mL of 1 mol/L HCl to further
wash the copper. Decant the HCl, and wash
the copper again with distilled water. (If the
copper is still not clean, wash it again with
the HCl. Remember to do a ﬁnal wash with
distilled water.)
9. Place your labelled reaction beaker,
containing the cleaned copper, in a drying
oven overnight.
10. Find the mass of the beaker containing the
dry copper.
11. Return the beaker, containing the copper, to
your teacher for proper disposal.
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 265
In the mining industry, metals are usually
recovered in the form of an ore. An ore is a
naturally occurring rock that contains a high
concentration of one or more metals. Whether an ore can be
proﬁtably mined depends on several factors: the cost of
mining and reﬁning the ore, the price of the extracted metal,
and the cost of any legal and environmental issues related to
land use. The inaccurate chemical analysis of an ore sample
can cost investors millions of dollars if the ore deposit does
not yield what was expected.
The percentage purity of a sample describes what
proportion, by mass, of the sample is composed of a speciﬁc
compound or element. For example, suppose that a sample
of gold has a percentage purity of 98%. This means that
every 100 g of the sample contains 98 g of gold and 2 g of
impurities.
You can apply your knowledge of stoichiometry and
percentage yield to solve problems related to percentage
purity.
Copper is removed
Figure 7.9
from mines like this one in the
form of an ore. There must be
sufﬁcient copper in the ore to
make the mine economically
viable.
Sample Problem
Finding Percentage Purity
Problem
Iron pyrite, FeS2, is known as “fool’s gold” because it looks similar
to gold. Suppose that you have a 13.9 g sample of impure iron pyrite.
(The sample contains a non-reactive impurity.) You heat the sample
in air to produce iron(III) oxide, Fe2O3, and sulfur dioxide, SO2.
4FeS2(s) + 11O2(g) → 2Fe2O3(s) + 8SO2(g)
If you obtain 8.02 g of iron(III) oxide, what was the percentage of
iron pyrite in the original sample? Assume that the reaction proceeds
to completion. That is, all the available iron pyrite reacts completely.
What Is Required?
You need to determine the percentage purity of the iron pyrite sample.
What Is Given?
The mass of Fe2O3 is 8.02 g. The reaction proceeds to completion.
You can assume that sufﬁcient oxygen is present.
Plan Your Strategy
Steps 1–4 Use your stoichiometry problem-solving skills to ﬁnd the
Step 5
mass of Fe2S expected to have produced 8.02 g Fe2O3.
Determine percentage purity of the Fe2S using the following
formula:
theoretical mass (g)
sample size (g)
× 100%
Continued ...
268 MHR • Unit 2  Chemical Quantities
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 268
Act on Your Strategy
1
4FeS2(s)
0.100 mol
+
3
)
(0.0502 mol Fe2O3
4
0.100 mol FeS2 × 120 g/mol
= 12.0 g FeS2
11O2(g)
2Fe2O3(s)
+
8SO2(g)
0.0502 mol
unknown ratio
n mol FeS2
0.0502 mol Fe2O3
n mol FeS2
(0.0502 mol
Fe2O3
)
known ratio
= 4 mol FeS2
2 mol Fe2O3
= 4 mol FeS2
2 mol Fe2O3
= 0.100 mol FeS2
(0.0502 mol Fe2O3)
2
8.02 g Fe2O3
160 g/mol
= 0.0502 mol Fe2O3
12.0 g FeS2
5
Percentage purity = Theoretical m FeS2
Sample size
FeS2
× 100%
8.02 g Fe2O3
× 100%
= 12.0 g
13.9 g
= 86.3%
Therefore, the percentage purity of the iron pyrite is 86.3%.
Check Your Solution
The units are correct. The molar mass of iron pyrite is 3/4 the
molar mass of iron(III) oxide. Mutiplying this ratio by the mole
ratio of iron pyrite to iron(III) oxide (4/2) and 8 g gives 12 g. The
answer is reasonable.
Practice Problems
38. An impure sample of silver nitrate, AgNO3, has a mass 0.340 g.
It is dissolved in water and then treated with excess hydrogen
chloride, HCl(aq). This results in the formation of a precipitate of
silver chloride, AgCl.
AgNO3(aq) + HCl(aq) → AgCl(s) + HNO3(aq)
The silver chloride is ﬁltered, and any remaining hydrogen chlo-
ride is washed away. Then the silver chloride is dried. If the mass
of the dry silver chloride is measured to be 0.213 g, what mass of
silver nitrate was contained in the original (impure) sample?
39. Copper metal is mined as one of several copper-containing ores.
One of these ores contains copper in the form of malachite.
Malachite exists as a double salt, Cu(OH)2·CuCO3. It can be
thermally decomposed at 200˚C to yield copper(II) oxide, carbon
dioxide gas, and water vapour.
Cu(OH)2·CuCO3(s) → 2CuO(s) + CO2(g) + H2O(g)
Continued ...
Chapter 7  Quantities in Chemical Reactions • MHR 269
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 269
(a) 5.000 kg of malachite ore, containing 5.20% malachite,
Cu(OH)2·CuCO3, is thermally decomposed. Calculate the mass
of copper(II) oxide that is formed. Assume 100% reaction.
(b) Suppose that the reaction had a 78.0% yield, due to incomplete
decomposition. How many grams of CuO would be produced?
40. Ethylene oxide, C2H4O , is a multi-purpose industrial chemical
used, among other things, as a rocket propellant. It can be pre-
pared by reacting ethylene bromohydrin, C2H5OBr, with sodium
hydroxide.
C2H5OBr + NaOH → C2H4O + NaBr + H2O
If this reaction proceeds with an 89% yield, what mass of C2H4O
can be obtained when 3.61 × 1023 molecules of C2H5OBr react
with excess sodium hydroxide?
Section Wrap-up
In this section, you have learned how the amount of products formed
by experiment relates to the theoretical yield predicted by stoichiometry.
You have learned about many factors that affect actual yield, including the
nature of the reaction, experimental design and execution, and the purity
of the reactants. Usually, when you are performing an experiment in a
laboratory, you want to maximize your percentage yield. To do this, you
need to be careful not to contaminate your reactants or lose any products.
Either might affect your actual yield.
Section Review
1
2
3
4
K/U
When calculating the percentage yield of a reaction, what units
should you use: grams, moles, or number of particles? Explain.
I
Methyl salicylate, otherwise known as oil of wintergreen, is
produced by the wintergreen plant. It can also be synthesized by
heating salicylic acid, C7H6O3, with methanol, CH3OH.
C7H6O3(s) + CH3OH((cid:2)) → C8H8O3((cid:2)) + H2O((cid:2))
A chemist reacts 3.50 g of salicylic acid with excess methanol. She
calculates the theoretical yield of methyl salicylate to be 3.86 g. If
2.84 g of methyl salicylate are recovered, what is the percentage yield
of the reaction?
C
Unbeknownst to a chemist, the limiting reactant in a certain
chemical reaction is impure. How will this affect the percentage yield
of the reaction? Explain.
I
You have a sample of copper that is impure, and you wish to
determine its purity. You have some silver nitrate, AgNO3, at your
disposal. You also have some copper that you know is 100% pure.
(a) Design an experiment to determine the purity of the copper sample.
(b) Even with pure copper, the reaction may not proceed with 100%
yield. How will you address this issue?
270 MHR • Unit 2  Chemical Quantities
Review
Reﬂecting on Chapter 7
Summarize this chapter in the format of your
choice. Here are a few ideas to use as guidelines:
• Use the coefﬁcients of a balanced chemical
equation to determine the mole ratios between
reactants and products.
• Predict quantities required or produced in a
chemical reaction.
• Calculate the limiting reactant in cases where
the amount of various reactants was given.
• Calculate the percentage yield of a chemical
reaction based on the amount of product(s)
obtained relative to what was predicted by
stoichiometry.
• Use the percentage yield of a reaction to predict
the amount of product(s) formed.
• Determine the percentage purity of a reactant
based on the actual yield of a reaction.
Reviewing Key Terms
For each of the following terms, write a sentence
that shows your understanding of its meaning.
actual yield
excess reactant
mole ratios
percentage yield
stoichiometric
coefﬁcients
competing reaction
limiting reactant
percentage purity
stoichiometric amounts
stoichiometry
theoretical yield
Knowledge/Understanding
1. Explain the different interpretations of the
Inquiry
6. A freshly exposed aluminum surface reacts
with oxygen to form a tough coating of
aluminum oxide. The aluminum oxide
protects the metal from further corrosion.
4Al(s) + 3O2(g) → 2Al2O3(s)
How many grams of oxygen are needed to react
with 0.400 mol of aluminum?
7. Calcium metal reacts with chlorine gas to
produce calcium chloride.
Ca(s) + Cl2(g) → CaCl2(s)
How many formula units of CaCl2 are expected
from 5.3 g of calcium and excess chlorine?
8. Propane is a gas at room temperature, but it
exists as a liquid under pressure in a propane
tank. It reacts with oxygen in the air to form
carbon dioxide and water vapour.
C3H8((cid:2)) + 5O2(g) → 3CO2(g) + 4H2O(g)
What mass of carbon dioxide gas is expected
when 97.5 g of propane reacts with sufﬁcient
oxygen?
9. Powdered zinc and sulfur react in an extremely
rapid, exothermic reaction. The zinc sulﬁde
that is formed can be used in the phosphor
coating on the inside of a television tube.
Zn(s) + S(s) → ZnS(s)
A 6.00 g sample of Zn is allowed to react with
3.35 g of S.
(a) Determine the limiting reactant.
(b) Calculate the mass of ZnS expected.
(c) How many grams of the excess reactant will
coefﬁcients in a balanced chemical equation.
remain after the reaction?
2. Why is a balanced chemical equation needed
for stoichiometric calculations?
3. In what cases would it not be necessary
to determine the limiting reactant before
beginning any stoichiometric calculations?
4. Why was the concept of percentage yield
introduced?
5. A student is trying to determine the mass
of aluminum oxide that is produced when
aluminum reacts with excess oxygen.
4Al(s) + 3O2(g) → 2Al2O3(s)
The student states that 4 g of aluminum reacts
with 3 g of oxygen to produce 2 g of aluminum
oxide. Is the student’s reasoning correct?
Explain your answer.
10. Titanium(IV) chloride reacts violently with
water vapour to produce titanium(IV) oxide
and hydrogen chloride gas. Titanium(IV) oxide,
when ﬁnely powdered, is extensively used in
paint as a white pigment.
TiCl4(s) + H2O((cid:2)) → TiO2(s) + 4HCl(g)
The reaction has been used to create smoke
screens. In moist air, the TiCl4 reacts to
produce a thick smoke of suspended TiO2
particles. What mass of TiO2 can be expected
when 85.6 g of TiCl4 is reacted with excess
water vapour?
Chapter 7  Quantities in Chemical Reactions • MHR 271
11. Silver reacts with hydrogen sulﬁde gas, which
is present in the air. (Hydrogen sulﬁde has the
odour of rotten eggs.) The silver sulﬁde, Ag2S,
that is produced forms a black tarnish on
the silver.
4Ag(s) + 2H2S(g) + O2(g) → 2Ag2S(s) + 2H2O(g)
How many grams of silver sulﬁde are formed
when 1.90 g of silver reacts with 0.280 g of
hydrogen sulﬁde and 0.160 g of oxygen?
12. 20.8 g of calcium phosphate, Ca3(PO4)2, 13.3 g
of silicon dioxide, SiO2, and 3.90 g of carbon
react according to the following equation:
2Ca3(PO4)2(s) + 6SiO2(s) + 10C(s) →
P4(s) + 6CaSiO3(s) + 10CO(g)
Determine the mass of calcium silicate, CaSiO3,
that is produced.
13. 1.56 g of As2S3, 0.140 g of H2O, 1.23 g
of HNO3, and 3.50 g of NaNO3 are reacted
according to the equation below:
3As2S3(s) + 4H2O((cid:2)) + 10HNO3(aq) + 18NaNO3(aq)
→ 9Na2SO4(aq) + 6H3AsO4(aq) + 28NO(g)
What mass of H3AsO4 is produced?
14. 2.85 × 102 g of pentane, C5H12, reacts with
3.00 g of oxygen gas, according to the following
equation:
C5H12((cid:2)) + 8O2(g) → 5CO2(g) + 6H2O((cid:2))
What mass of carbon dioxide gas, is produced?
15. Silica (also called silicon dioxide), along with
other silicates, makes up about 95% of Earth’s
crust— the outermost layer of rocks and soil.
Silicon dioxide is also used to manufacture
transistors. Silica reacts with hydroﬂuoric acid
to produce silicon tetraﬂuoride and water
vapour.
SiO2(s) + 4HF(aq) → SiF4(g) + 2H2O(g)
(a) 12.2 g of SiO2 is reacted with a small excess
of HF. What is the theoretical yield, in
grams, of H2O?
(b) If the actual yield of water is 2.50 g, what
is the percentage yield of the reaction?
(c) Assuming the yield obtained in part (b),
what mass of SiF4 is formed?
16. An impure sample of barium chloride, BaCl2,
with a mass of 4.36 g, is added to an aqueous
solution of sodium sulfate, Na2SO4.
BaCl2(s) + Na2SO4(aq) → BaSO4(s) + 2NaCl(aq)
272 MHR • Unit 2  Chemical Quantities
After the reaction is complete, the solid barium
sulfate, BaSO4, is ﬁltered and dried. Its mass
is found to be 2.62 g. What is the percentage
purity of the original barium chloride?
17. Benzene reacts with bromine to form
bromobenzene, C6H5Br.
C6H6((cid:2)) + Br2((cid:2)) → C6H5Br((cid:2)) + HBr(g)
(a) What is the maximum amount of C6H5Br that
can be formed from the reaction of 7.50 g of
C6H6 with excess Br2?
(b) A competing reaction is the formation of
dibromobenzene, C6H4Br2.
C6H6((cid:2)) + 2Br2((cid:2)) → C6H4Br2((cid:2)) + 2HBr(g)
If 1.25 g of C6H4Br2 was formed by the
competing reaction, how much C6H6 was
not converted to C6H5Br?
(c) Based on your answer to part (b), what was
the actual yield of C6H5Br? Assume that all
the C6H5Br that formed was collected.
(d) Calculate the percentage yield of C6H5Br.
18. Refer to Practice Problem 39. Design an
experiment to determine the mole to mole ratio
of pure malachite to copper(II) oxide. Include
an outline of the procedure and any safety
precautions. Clearly indicate which data need
to be recorded.
19. A chemist wishes to prepare a compound
called compound E. The molar mass of
compound E is 100 g/mol. The synthesis
requires four consecutive reactions, each
with a yield of 60%.
A → B
B → C
C → D
D → E
(a) The chemist begins the synthesis with 50 g
of starting material, called compound A. If
the molar mass of compound A is 200 g/mol,
how many grams of compound E will be
produced?
(b) How many grams of compound A are needed
to produce 70 g of compound E?
Communication
20. Develop a new analogy for the concept of
limiting and excess reactant.
21. Examine the balanced chemical “equation”
2A + B → 3C + D
Using a concept map, explain how to calculate
the number of grams of C that can be obtained
when a given mass of A reacts with a certain
number of molecules of B. Assume that you
know the molar mass of A and C. Include
proper units. For simplicity, assume that A
is limiting, but don’t forget to show how to
determine the limiting reactant.
22. Assume that your friend has missed several
chemistry classes and that she has asked you
to help her prepare for a stoichiometry test.
Unfortunately, because of other commitments,
you do not have time to meet face to face. You
agree to email your friend a set of point-form
instructions on how to solve stoichiometry
problems, including those that involve a limit-
ing reactant. She also needs to understand the
concept of percentage yield. Write the text of
this email. Assume that your friend has a good
understanding of the mole concept.
Making Connections
23. How many grams of air are required for an
automobile to travel from Thunder Bay,
Ontario, to Smooth Rock Falls, Ontario? This is
a distance of 670 km. Assume the following:
• Gasoline is pure octane, C8H18. (Gasoline is
actually a mixture of hydrocarbons.)
• The average fuel consumption is 10 L per
100 km.
• Air has a density of 1.21 g/L.
• Air is 21% O2 (v/v).
• 1.00 mol of any gas occupies 24 L at 20˚C
and 100 kPa.
• The density of the gasoline is 0.703 g/mL.
The balanced chemical equation for the
complete combustion of octane is
2C8H18((cid:2)) + 25O2(g) → 16CO2(g) + 18H2O(g)
24. You must remove mercury ions present as
mercury(II) nitrate in the waste water of an
industrial facility. You have decided to use
sodium sulﬁde in the reaction below. Write a
short essay that addresses the following points.
Include a well-organized set of calculations
where appropriate.
Hg(NO3)2(aq) + Na2S(aq) → HgS(s) + 2NaNO3(aq)
(a) Explain why the chemical reaction above
can be used to remove mercury ions from the
waste water. What laboratory technique must
be used in order that this reaction is as effec-
tive as possible for removing mercury from
the waste stream?
(b) Why is mercury(II) sulﬁde less of an envi-
ronmental concern than mercury(II) nitrate?
(c) What assumptions are being made regarding
the toxicity of sodium sulﬁde and sodium
nitrate relative to either mercury nitrate or
mercury sulﬁde?
(d) Every litre of waste water contains approxi-
mately 0.03 g of Hg(NO3)2. How many kg of
Na2S will be required to remove the soluble
mercury ions from 10 000 L of waste water?
(e) What factors would a company need to
consider in adopting any method of cleaning
its wastewater?
Answers to Practice Problems and
Short Answers to Section Review Questions
Practice Problems: 1.(a) 2:1:2 (b) 50 (c) 4956 (d) 1.20 × 1024
2.(a) 2 (b) 150 (c) 1.806 × 1024 (d) 1.204 × 1024
3.(a) 3.4 × 1025 (b) 6.7 × 1025 4. 7.5 mol  5.(a) 1.8 mol
(b) 37.5 mol  6.(a) 48.7 mol (b) 1.20 mol  7.(a) 8.3 × 1024
(b) 4.2 × 1024 8.(a) 7.47 mol (b) 7.19 mol
9.(a) 4.68 × 10−2 mol (b) 0.187 mol  10.(a) 0.708 mol
(b) 1.06 mol  11. 9.32 g  12. 137 g  13. 4.65 g  14. 0.814 g
15. 97.2 g  16. 2.31 × 10−2 g  17. 37.6 g  18. 20.7 g  19.(a) 124 g
(b) 1.14 × 1024 20.(a) 120 g (b) 1.49 × 1021 21.(a) 2.39 × 1022
(b) 1.45 × 1024 (c) 1.21 × 1022 22.(a) 1.50 × 1024 (b) 357 g
23. CuCl2 24. CaF2 25. C3H6 26. HCl  27.(a) ClO2 (b) 74.1 g
(c) 1.06 × 1023 28.(a) H2O2 (b) 63.5 g (c) 104 g
29. 4.23 × 104 g  30.(a) 0.446 g (b) 4.80 × 1021 (c) F2, 24.0 g
31.(a) 74.4 g (b) 63.6%  32.(a) 31.3 g (b) 95.2%  33. 26.7%
34. 14.1 g  35.(a) 15.0 g (b) 10.5 g (c) 12.8 g  36. 5.63 g
37. 129 g  38. 0.252 g  39.(a) 187 g (b) 146 g  40. 23.5 g
Section Review: 7.1: 4.(a) S + O2 → SO2
(b) 2S + 3O2 → 2SO3 (c) 1.5 mol (d) 48.0 g  5.(a) 1:5:3:4
(b) 2.50 mol (c) 6.02 × 1024 (d) 9.00 mol  6.(a) 49.9 g
(b) 4.48 × 1022
7.(a) Pb(NO3)2(aq) + 2NaI(aq) → PbI2(s) + 2NaNO3(aq)
(b) 1.03 g  7.2: 2.(a) oxygen  3. 18.1 g  4. 8.04 g  5. 5.34 g
6. 22.2 g  7.(a) Zn(s) + CuCl2(aq) → ZnCl2(aq) + Cu(s)
(b) zinc gone (c) zinc (d) less than 1.52 g Zn  7.3: 2. 73.6%
Chapter 7  Quantities in Chemical Reactions • MHR 273
S K I L L   F O C U S
Initiating and planning
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
Communicating results
You will need to use the following double
displacement reaction. This reaction produces
a precipitate of barium sulfate.
BaCl2(aq) + Na2SO4(aq) → BaSO4(s) + 2NaCl(aq)
To design your procedure, carefully consider
the physical and chemical properties of the two
substances in the mixture.
Question
How can you determine the percent by mass
of barium chloride and the percent by mass of
sodium chloride in the sand?
Hypothesis
Formulate a hypothesis in response to the
question above.
Materials
electronic balance
retort stand
ring clamp
filter funnel
filter paper (to fit filter funnel)
glass rod
3 beakers (250 mL)
drying oven (optional)
wash bottle with distilled water
sample of sand containing BaCl2 and NaCl
solid sodium sulfate, Na2SO4
Safety Precautions
• Be careful not to inhale grains of the sodium
sulfate, Na2SO4.
• Wear gloves at all times. Wash your hands
thoroughly after you have finished the
investigation.
Analyzing a Mixture
Using Stoichiometry
Background
Analytical chemists are employed in industrial
research, academic research, and forensic sci-
ence. Their job usually involves two different
types of work: qualitative analysis and quantita-
tive analysis. A qualitative analysis determines
which substances are present. A quantitative
analysis determines how much of a specific
substance is present.
Many other chemists also need to use the
principles of analytical chemistry. An environ-
mental chemist, for example, tests water or soil
for the presence and amounts of impurities. In
this investigation, you will design a procedure
to analyze a sample of contaminated sand.
This analyst is collecting run-off water for testing.
Pre-Lab Focus
A shipment of sand has become contaminated
with barium chloride, BaCl2, and sodium
chloride, NaCl. As an analytical chemist, your
job is to design a procedure to determine the
percent by mass of each substance in the sand.
274 MHR • Unit 2  Chemical Quantities
Assessment
After you complete this investigation:
Assess your procedure by having a classmate
try to duplicate your results.
Use the rubric you developed to assess the
success of your experimental design.
List ways you would improve your procedure
if you were to perform this investigation again.
Assess your presentation based on the clarity
of chemical concepts to be conveyed.
Conclusion
7. Write a statement that gives the percent by
mass of barium chloride, BaCl2, and the
percent by mass of sodium chloride, NaCl,
in the sample of contaminated sand.
Procedure
1. Design a rubric, an assessment checklist,
or some other means of assessing your
experimental design and procedure.
2. Using the materials, design a procedure that
will help you solve the problem. Remember
that you will need to perform several trials.
3. Before beginning your procedure, show it to
your teacher for approval.
4. Obtain a sample of the mixture from your
teacher. Record the number of the sample.
Carry out your procedure.
5. When you have finished, dispose of the
materials as directed by your teacher.
6. Use the following questions to write a
complete laboratory report. Include all the
equations and calculations that you used.
Analysis
Here are some questions that you will need
to answer in your laboratory report.
1. What mass of sand was in the sample? What
property of sand did you use to determine
this mass?
2. Explain why you used sodium sulfate,
Na2SO4, in your procedure.
3. What physical and chemical properties of
the reactants and products did you use in
your procedure?
4. What assumption did you make about the
reactivity of sodium chloride with sodium
sulfate?
5. What possible sources of error did your proce-
dure introduce? How might they have affected
your results?
6. Would your procedure have worked if you
had used contaminated sugar instead of
contaminated sand? Explain. How could you
have changed your procedure?
Unit 2 Design Your Own Investigation • MHR 275
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
Review
Knowledge/Understanding
14. The molar mass of a compound with the
True/False
In your notebook, indicate whether each statement
is true or false. If a statement is false, rewrite it to
make it true.
1. The molecular formula of a compound is the
same as its empirical formula.
2. A 2.02 g sample of hydrogen, H2, contains
the same number of molecules as 32.0 g of
oxygen, O2.
3. The average atomic mass of an element is equal
to the mass of its most abundant isotope.
4. The numerical value of the molar mass of a
compound (expressed in atomic mass units)
is the same as its molar mass (expressed in
grams).
5. The fundamental unit for chemical quantity
is the gram.
6. The mass of 1.00 mol of any chemical
compound is always the same.
7. 1.00 mol of any chemical compound or element
contains 6.02 × 1023 particles.
8. The value of the Avogadro constant depends on
temperature.
9. The empirical formula of an unknown
compound must be determined by experiment.
10. The actual yield of most chemical reactions is
less than 100%.
11. The theoretical yield of a chemical reaction
must be determined by experiment.
12. Stoichiometric calculations are used to
determine the products of a chemical reaction.
Multiple Choice
In your notebook, write the letter for the best
answer to each question.
13. The number of molecules in 2.0 mol of
nitrogen gas, N2(g), is
(a) 1.8 × 1024
(b) 2.4 × 1023
(c) 1.2 × 1024
(d) 1.2 × 1023
(e) 4.0 × 1023
276 MHR • Unit 2  Chemical Quantities
empirical formula CH2O has a mass of approxi-
mately 121 g. What is the molecular formula of
the compound?
(a) C4H8O4
(b) C2H6O2
(c) C3H3O6
(d) C3H6O3
(e) CH6O
15. Read the following statements about balancing
chemical equations. Which of these statements
is true?
(a) To be balanced, an equation must have the
same number of moles on the left side and
the right side.
(b) A chemical formula may be altered in order
to balance a chemical equation.
(c) To be balanced, a chemical equation must
have the same number of each type of atom
on both sides.
(d) It is unacceptable to use fractional coeffi-
cients when balancing a chemical equation.
(e) A skeleton equation contains all the
spectator ions.
16. What is the molar mass of ammonium
dichromate, (NH4)2Cr2O7 ?
(a) 248 g/mol
(b) 234 g/mol
(c) 200 g/mol
(d) 252 g/mol
(e) 200 g/mol
17. A sample of benzene, C6H6, contains 3.0 × 1023
molecules of benzene. How many atoms are in
the sample?
(a) 36 × 1024
(b) 1.8 × 1023
(c) 3.6 × 1024
(d) 2.5 × 1022
(e) 3.0 × 1023
18. What is the molar mass of zinc sulfate
heptahydrate, ZnSO4·7H2O?
(a) 161 g/mol
(b) 288 g/mol
(c) 182 g/mol
(d) 240 g/mol
(e) 312 g/mol
19. The molecular formula of citric acid monohy-
drate is C6H8O7·H2O . Its molecular mass is
as follows:
(a) 192 g/mol
(b) 210 g/mol
(c) 188 g/mol
(d) 206 g/mol
(e) 120 g/mol
20. The relative mass of one isotope of sulfur is
31.9721 u. Its abundance is 95.02%. Naturally
occurring elemental sulfur has a relative atomic
mass of 32.066. The mass number of the one
other isotope of sulfur is
(a) 31
(b) 32
(c) 33
(d) 34
(e) 35
21. A sample of ethane, C2H6, has a mass of 9.3 g.
It contains the same number of atoms as
(a) 23.0 g of sodium, Na
(b) 32.0 g of oxygen, O2
(c) 48.0 g of ozone, O3
(d) 30.0 g of formaldehyde, CH2O
(e) 14.0 g of nitrogen gas, N2
22. A sample of ozone, O3, has a mass of 48.0 g.
It contains the same number of atoms as
(a) 58.7 g of nickel
(b) 27.0 g of aluminum
(c) 38.0 g of fluorine
(d) 3.02 g of hydrogen
(e) 32.0 g of oxygen
23. Which substance contains 9.03 × 1023 atoms?
(a) 16.0 g of oxygen, O2
(b) 4.00 g of helium, He
(c) 28.0 g of nitrogen, N2
(d) 22.0 g of carbon dioxide, CO2
(e) 8.0 g of methane, CH4
24. Examine the following formulas. Which
formula is an empirical formula?
(a) C2H4
(b) C6H6
(c) C2H2
(d) H2O2
(e) Na2Cr2O7
25. A sample of sulfur trioxide, SO3, has a mass of
20 g. How many moles are in the sample?
(a) 0.20
(b) 0.25
(c) 0.50
(d) 0.75
(e) 0.80
26. How many molecules are in 1.00 mg of glucose,
C6H12O6?
(a) 2.18 × 1018
(b) 3.34 × 1018
(c) 2.18 × 1021
(d) 3.34 × 1021
(e) 3.34 × 1020
27. A sample that contains carbon, hydrogen,
and oxygen is analyzed in a carbon-hydrogen
combustion analyzer. All the oxygen in the
sample is
(a) converted to the oxygen in carbon dioxide
(b) converted to oxygen in water
(c) mixed with the excess oxygen used to
combust the sample
(d) converted to oxygen in carbon dioxide
and/or water
(e) both (c) and (d)
28. A compound that contains carbon, hydrogen,
and oxygen is going to be analyzed in a
carbon-hydrogen combustion analyzer. Before
beginning the analysis, which of the following
steps must be carried out?
I. Find the mass of the unknown sample.
II. Add the precise amount of oxygen that is
needed for combustion.
III. Find the mass of the carbon dioxide and
water absorbers.
(a) I only
(b) I and II only
(c) I, II, and III
(d) I and III only
(e) none of the above
Unit 2 Review • MHR 277
Short Answer
29. Answer the following questions, related to the
concept of the mole.
(a) How many N2 molecules are in a 1.00 mol
sample of N2? How many N atoms are in this
sample?
3− ions are in 2.5 mol of
(b) How many PO4
Ca3(PO4)2?
(c) How many O atoms are in 0.47 mol of
Ca3(PO4)2?
30. Explain how a balanced chemical equation
follows the law of conservation of mass. Use
an example to illustrate your explanation.
31. List all the information that can be obtained
from a balanced chemical equation.
32. Answer the following questions, related to the
limiting reactant.
(a) Explain the concept of the limiting reactant.
Use a real-life analogy that is not used in
this textbook.
(b) What is the opposite of a limiting reactant?
(c) Explain why, in many chemical reactions,
the reactants are not present in stoichiomet-
ric amounts.
33. Consider a 7.35 g sample of propane, C3H8.
(a) How many moles of propane are in this
sample?
(b) How many molecules of propane are in
this sample?
(c) How many atoms of carbon are in this
sample?
34. How many atoms are in 10.0 g of white
phosphorus, P4 ?
35. A 2.00 g sample of the mineral troegerite,
(UO2)3(AsO4)2·12H2O, has 1.38 × 1021 uranium
atoms. How many oxygen atoms are present in
2.00 g of troegerite?
36. Fuels that contain hydrogen can be classified
according to their mass percent of hydrogen.
Which of the following compounds has the
greatest mass percent of hydrogen: ethanol,
C2H5OH, or cetyl palmitate, C32H64O2? Explain
your answer.
37. Methyl tertiary butyl ether, or MTBE, is
currently used as an octane booster in gasoline.
It has replaced the environmentally unsound
278 MHR • Unit 2  Chemical Quantities
tetraethyl lead. MTBE has the formula C5H12O.
What is the percentage composition of each
element in MTBE?
38. Ammonia can be produced in the laboratory
by heating ammonium chloride with calcium
hydroxide.
2NH4Cl(s) + Ca(OH)2(s)
→ CaCl2(s) + 2NH3(g) + 2H2O(g)
8.93 g of ammonium chloride is heated with
7.48 g of calcium hydroxide. What mass of
ammonia, NH3, can be expected? Assume that
the reaction has 100% yield.
Inquiry
39. Design an experiment to determine the value of
x in sodium thiosulfate, Na2S2O3·xH2O. Include
an outline of your procedure. Describe the data
that you need to collect. What assumptions do
you need to make?
40. Design an experiment to determine the
mole-to-mole ratio of lead(II) nitrate, Pb(NO3)2,
to potassium iodide, KI, in the reaction:
Pb(NO3)2(aq) + KI(aq) → PbI2(s) + KNO3(aq)
Assume that you have solutions of lead(II)
nitrate and potassium iodide. Both of these
solutions contain 0.0010 mol of solute per
10 mL of solution.
41. The following reaction can be used to obtain
lead(II) chloride, PbCl2. Lead(II) chloride is
moderately soluble in warm water.
Pb(NO3)2(aq) + 2NaCl(aq) → PbCl2(s) + 2NaNO3(aq)
Explain why carrying out this reaction in a
warm aqueous solution is unlikely to produce
a 100% yield of lead(II) chloride.
42. Imagine that you are given a sheet of aluminum
foil that measures 10.0 cm × 10.0 cm. It has a
mass of 0.40 g.
(a) The density of aluminum is 2.70 g/cm3.
Determine the thickness of the aluminum
foil, in millimeters.
(b) Using any of the above information, deter-
mine the radius of an aluminum atom, in
nanometers. Assume that each aluminum
atom is cube-shaped.
(c) How will your answer to part (b) change
if you assume that each aluminum atom
is spherical?
(d) What question(s) do your answers to parts
(b) and (c) raise?
43. Consider the double displacement reaction
below.
CaCl2(aq) + Na2SO4(aq) → CaCO3(s) + 2NaCl(aq)
(a) Design an experiment to determine the
percentage yield of this reaction. Clearly
indicate the measurements that need to
be taken, along with suggested amounts.
(b) How could the skills of a chemist influence
the outcome of this experiment?
Communication
44. It is impossible for a single atom of neon,
with a mass of exactly 20.18 u, to exist.
Explain why.
45. The molecular mass of a compound is meas-
ured in atomic mass units but its molar mass is
measured in grams. Explain why this
is true.
46. Explain the relationship between an empirical
formula and a molecular formula. Use sodium
tartrate, Na2C4H4O6, and cyanocolabamin,
C63H88C·N14O14P (vitamin B12), to illustrate
your answer.
47. Explain why an empirical formula can
represent many different molecules.
48. Chemists need to know the percentage yield of
a reaction. Why is this true, particularly for
industrial reactions?
49. Examine the following reaction. List the steps
needed to calculate the number of grams of C
that can be expected when a given mass of A
reacts with a given mass of B. Include proper
units for each step. Express the answer in terms
of A, B, C, and/or D as necessary.
2A + 3B → 4C + D
Making Connections
50. Reread the Unit 2 opener.
(a) Suppose that you ate a dessert containing
poppy seeds. As a result, you tested positive
for opiates when you applied for a summer
job. What can you do?
(b) Now suppose that you are a policy-writer for
a manufacturing company that uses large,
dangerous machines. What do you need to
consider when you write a policy that deals
with employee drug testing? What factors
influence whether drug testing is warranted,
how often it is warranted, and what sub-
stances should be tested for? How will you
decide on levels that are acceptable? Do the
federal and provincial Human Rights
Commissions have anything to say about
these issues?
51. The combustion of gasoline in an automobile
engine can be represented by the equation
2C8H18(g) + 25O2(g) → 16CO2(g) + 18H2O(g)
(a) In a properly tuned engine with a full
tank of gas, what reactant do you think
is limiting? Explain your reasoning.
(b) A car that is set to run properly at sea level
will run poorly at higher altitudes, where
the air is less dense. Explain why.
(c) The reaction of atmospheric oxygen with
atmospheric nitrogen to form nitrogen
monoxide, NO, occurs along with the
combustion of fuel.
N2(g) + O2(g) → 2NO(g)
What adjustments need to be made to a
vehicle’s carburetor or fuel injectors (which
control the amount of fuel and air that are
mixed) to compensate for this reaction?
Explain your answer.
C O U R S E
C H A L L E N G E
Planet Unknown
Consider the following as you continue to plan for your
Chemistry Course Challenge:
• In a reaction that produces a precipitate that you
want to recover, what techniques would you use to
maximize your percentage yield?
• When you have a given amount of one reactant and
you decide the amount of a second reactant, which
reactant should be the limiting reactant if you want
to maximize your percentage yield?
• Write a balanced chemical equation for the
reaction between sodium phosphate and
calcium nitrate. Recall that ionic compounds con-
taining sodium are soluble.
Unit 2 Review • MHR 279
Solutions
and Solubility
U N I T   3   C O N T E N T S
CHAPTER  8
Solutions and Their Concentrations
CHAPTER  9
Aqueous Solutions
CHAPTER  10
Acids and Bases
UNIT  3  ISSUE
Island at Risk
UNIT 3 OVERALL  EXPECTATIONS
What are the properties of
solutions, and what methods
are used to describe their
concentrations?
What skills are involved in
working experimentally with
solutions, and in solving quan-
titative solution problems?
How can a scientiﬁc under-
standing of solutions help us
interpret and make decisions
about environmental issues
involving solutes and solvents?
Unit Issue Prep
Look ahead to the issue at the end
of Unit 3. Start preparing for this
issue now by listing the kinds of
questions you will need to address,
and the ways in which you may like
to present your responses.
280
K eeping ﬁsh as pets seems like a
simple and straightforward task. You
start off with a suitable ﬁsh tank,
some water, and some ﬁsh. Once
you have added a few water-plants
for decoration, all you have to do is
feed the ﬁsh daily. It sounds simple.
In fact, providing a safe, life-
sustaining environment for ﬁsh
involves a variety of complex,
interdependent factors. Many of
these are directly related to chem-
istry. For example, the presence of
ammonia, NH3, is one of the most
common causes of death in poorly
maintained ﬁsh tanks. Ammonia is
produced when uneaten ﬁsh food
decays. This compound dissolves
readily in water. It is toxic to ﬁsh
in even minute concentrations.
Chlorine is another chemical
that can harm ﬁsh when it is
dissolved in the tank water.
Unfortunately, almost all tap water
is treated with chlorine. Other factors
that affect the quality of water for
ﬁsh include its acidity (pH), its
hardness, and its temperature. For
example, warm water contains too
little dissolved oxygen. This will
cause the ﬁsh to suffocate.
Water quality is essential to
every living thing. In this unit, you
will ﬁnd out more about water qual-
ity. You will learn to identify impor-
tant solutions in your life, and how
to calculate their concentrations.
You will also investigate what can
happen when acids and bases inter-
act with water and with each other.
282
Solutions and
Their Concentrations
Your environment is made up of many important solutions, or
homogeneous mixtures. The air you breathe and the liquids you drink are
solutions. So are many of the metallic objects that you use every day. The
quality of a solution, such as tap water, depends on the substances that
are dissolved in it. “Clean” water may contain small amounts of dissolved
substances, such as iron and chlorine. “Dirty” water may have dangerous
chemicals dissolved in it.
The difference between clean water and undrinkable water often
depends on concentration: the amount of a dissolved substance in a
particular quantity of a solution. For example, tap water contains a low
concentration of ﬂuoride to help keep your teeth healthy. Water with a
high concentration of ﬂuoride, however, could be harmful to your health.
Water is a good solvent for many substances. You may have noticed,
however, that grease-stained clothing cannot be cleaned by water alone.
Grease is one substance that does not dissolve in water. Why doesn’t it
dissolve? In this chapter, you will ﬁnd out why. You will learn how
solutions form. You will explore factors that affect a substance’s ability
to dissolve. You will ﬁnd out more about the concentration of solutions,
and you will have a chance to prepare your own solutions as well.
As water runs
through soil and
rocks, it dissolves
minerals such as
iron, calcium, and
magnesium. What
makes water such
a good solvent?
C h a p t e r   P r e v i e w
8.1 Types of Solutions
8.2 Factors That Affect
Rate of Dissolving
and Solubility
8.3 The Concentration of
Solutions
8.4 Preparing Solutions
C o n c e p t s   a n d   S k i l l s
Yo u   W i l l   N e e d
Before you begin this chapter,
review the following concepts
and skills:
classifying mixtures
(Chapter 1, section 1.3)
predicting molecular
polarity (Chapter 3,
section 3.3)
distinguishing between
intermolecular and
intramolecular forces
(Chapter 3, section 3.2)
describing the shape and
bonding of the water
molecule (Chapter 3,
section 3.3)
calculating molar mass
(Chapter 5, section 5.3)
calculating molar
amounts (Chapter 5,
section 5.3)
Chapter 8  Solutions and Their Concentrations • MHR 283
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
8.1
Types of Solutions
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
explain solution formation,
referring to polar and non-
polar solvents
identify examples of solid,
liquid, and gas solutions
from everyday life
communicate your under-
standing of the following
terms: solution, solvent,
solutes, variable composi-
tion, aqueous solution,
miscible, immiscible, alloys,
solubility, saturated solution,
unsaturated solution
As stated in the chapter opener, a solution is a homogeneous mixture. It
is uniform throughout. If you analyze any two samples of a solution, you
will ﬁnd that they contain the same substances in the same relative
amounts. The simplest solutions contain two substances. Most common
solutions contain many substances.
A solvent is any substance that has other substances dissolved in it.
In a solution, the substance that is present in the largest amount (whether
by volume, mass, or number of moles) is usually referred to as the solvent.
The other substances that are present in the solution are called the solutes.
Pure substances (such as pure water, H2O) have ﬁxed composition.
You cannot change the ratio of hydrogen, H, to oxygen, O, in water
without producing an entirely new substance. Solutions, on the other
hand, have variable composition. This means that different ratios of
solvent to solute are possible. For example, you can make a weak or a
strong solution of sugar and water, depending on how much sugar you
add. Figure 8.1 shows a strong solution of tea and water on the left, and a
weak solution of tea and water on the right. The ratio of solvent to solute
in the strong solution is different from the ratio of solvent to solute in the
weak solution.
C O U R S E
C H A L L E N G E
How can you ﬁnd out what
solutes are dissolved in a
sample of water? What physi-
cal properties might be useful?
You will need answers to these
questions when you do your
Chemistry Course Challenge.
Figure 8.1
How can a solution have variable composition yet be uniform throughout?
When a solute dissolves in a solvent, no chemical reaction occurs.
Therefore, the solute and solvent can be separated using physical
properties, such as boiling point or melting point. For example, water
and ethanol have different boiling points. Using this property, a solution
of water and ethanol can be separated by the process of distillation. Refer
back to Chapter 1, section 1.2. What physical properties, besides boiling
point, can be used to separate the components of solutions and other
mixtures?
284 MHR • Unit 3  Solutions and Solubility
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
Figure 8.2
Can you identify the components of some of these solutions?
A solution can be a gas, a liquid, or a solid. Figure 8.2 shows some
examples of solutions. Various combinations of solute and solvent states
are possible. For example, a gas can be dissolved in a liquid, or a solid
can be dissolved in another solid. Solid, liquid, and gaseous solutions
are all around you. Steel is a solid solution of carbon in iron. Juice is
a liquid solution of sugar and ﬂavouring dissolved in water. Air is an
example of a gaseous solution. The four main components of dry air are
nitrogen (78%), oxygen (21%), argon (0.9%), and carbon dioxide (0.03%).
Table 8.1 lists some other common solutions.
Table 8.1 Types of Solutions
Original state of solute
Solvent
Examples
gas
gas
gas
liquid
liquid
liquid
solid
solid
solid
gas
liquid
solid
gas
air; natural gas; oxygen-acetylene
mixture used in welding
carbonated drinks; water in rivers
and lakes containing oxygen
hydrogen in platinum
water vapour in air; gasoline-air
mixture
liquid
alcohol in water; antifreeze in water
solid
gas
liquid
solid
amalgams, such as mercury in silver
mothballs in air
sugar in water; table salt in water;
amalgams
alloys, such as the copper-nickel alloy
used to make coins
Take another look at the four
components of dry air. Which
component would you call the
solvent? Which components
are the solutes?
Chapter 8  Solutions and Their Concentrations • MHR 285
Electronic Learning Partner
Your Chemistry 11 Electronic
Learning Partner can help
you learn more about the
properties of water.
C H E M
FA C T
An alloy that is made of a
metal dissolved in mercury is
called an amalgam. A tradition-
al dental amalgam, used to ﬁll
cavities in teeth, contains 50%
mercury. Due to concern over
the use of mercury, which is
toxic, dentists now use other
materials, such as ceramic
materials, to ﬁll dental cavities.
You are probably most familiar with liquid solutions, especially
aqueous solutions. An aqueous solution is a solution in which water is
the solvent. Because aqueous solutions are so important, you will focus
on them in the next two sections of this chapter and again in Chapter 9.
Some liquids, such as water and ethanol, dissolve readily in each
other in any proportion. That is, any amount of water dissolves in any
amount of ethanol. Similarly, any amount of ethanol dissolves in any
amount of water. Liquids such as these are said to be miscible with
each other. Miscible liquids can be combined in any proportions. Thus,
either ethanol or water can be considered to be the solvent. Liquids that
do not readily dissolve in each other, such as oil and water, are said to
be immiscible.
As you know from Chapter 4, solid solutions of metals are called
alloys. Adding even small quantities of another element to a metal
changes the properties of the metal. Technological advances throughout
history have been linked closely to the discovery of new alloys. For
example, bronze is an alloy of copper and tin. Bronze contains only
about 10% tin, but it is much stronger than copper and more resistant to
corrosion. Also, bronze can be melted in an ordinary ﬁre so that castings
can be made, as shown in Figure 8.3.
Solubility and Saturation
The ability of a solvent to dissolve a solute depends on the forces of
attraction between the particles. There is always some attraction between
solvent and solute particles, so some solute always dissolves. The
solubility of a solute is the amount of solute that dissolves in a given
quantity of solvent, at a certain temperature. For
example, the solubility of sodium chloride in water
at 20˚C is 36 g per 100 mL of water.
A saturated solution is formed when no more
solute will dissolve in a solution, and excess solute is
present. For example, 100 mL of a saturated solution
of table salt (sodium chloride, NaCl) in water at 20˚C
contains 36 g of sodium chloride. The solution is
saturated with respect to sodium chloride. If more
sodium chloride is added to the solution, it will not
dissolve. The solution may still be able to dissolve
other solutes, however.
An unsaturated solution is a solution that is not
yet saturated. Therefore, it can dissolve more solute.
For example, a solution that contains 20 g of sodium
chloride dissolved in 100 mL of water at 20˚C is unsat-
urated. This solution has the potential to dissolve
another 16 g of salt, as Figure 8.4 demonstrates.
286 MHR • Unit 3  Solutions and Solubility
Figure 8.3
led to the production of better-quality tools and weapons.
The introduction of the alloy bronze around 3000 BCE
A
C
B
Figure 8.4
is 36 g/100 mL.
At 20˚C, the solubility of table salt in water
A 20 g of NaCl dissolve to form an unsaturated solution.
B 36 g of NaCl dissolve to form a saturated solution.
C 40 g of NaCl are added to 100 mL of water. 36 g
dissolve to form a saturated solution. 4 g of
undissolved solute are left.
Suppose that a solute is described as soluble in a particular solvent.
This generally means that its solubility is greater than 1 g per 100 mL of
solvent. If a solute is described as insoluble, its solubility is less than 0.1 g
per 100 mL of solvent. Substances with solubility between these limits are
called sparingly soluble, or slightly soluble. Solubility is a relative term,
however. Even substances such as oil and water dissolve in each other to
some extent, although in very tiny amounts.
The general terms that are used to describe solubility for solids and
liquids do not apply to gases in the same way. For example, oxygen is
described as soluble in water. Oxygen from the air dissolves in the water
of lakes and rivers. The solubility of oxygen in fresh water at 20˚C is only
9 mg/L, or 0.0009 g/100 mL. This small amount of oxygen is enough to
ensure the survival of aquatic plants and animals. A solid solute with the
same solubility, however, would be described as insoluble in water.
Identifying Suitable Solvents
Water is a good solvent for many compounds, but it is a poor solvent for
others. If you have grease on your hands after adjusting a bicycle chain,
you cannot use water to dissolve the grease and clean your hands. You
need to use a detergent, such as soap, to help dissolve the grease in the
water. You can also use another solvent to dissolve the grease. How can
you ﬁnd a suitable solvent? How can you predict whether a solvent will
dissolve a particular solute? Try the Thought Lab on the next page to ﬁnd
out for yourself.
Imagine that you are given a
ﬁltered solution of sodium
chloride. How can you decide
whether the solution is
saturated or unsaturated?
Electronic Learning Partner
Go to your Chemistry 11
Electronic Learning Partner
to ﬁnd out more about the
properties of two solvents:
water and benzene.
Chapter 8  Solutions and Their Concentrations • MHR 287
ThoughtLab
Matching Solutes and Solvents
kerosene
water
kerosene
A
B
water
Although there is a solvent for every solute,
not all mixtures produce a solution. Table salt
dissolves in water but not in kerosene. Oil
dissolves in kerosene but not in water. What
properties must a solvent and a solute share in
order to produce a solution?
In an investigation, the bottom of a Petri dish
was covered with water, as shown in photo A. An
equal amount of kerosene was added to a second
Petri dish. When a crystal of iodine was added
to the water, it did not dissolve. When a second
crystal of iodine was added to the kerosene,
however, it did dissolve.
Procedure
Classify each compound as ionic (containing
ions), polar (containing polar molecules), or
non-polar (containing non-polar molecules).
(a) iodine, I2
(b) cobalt(II) chloride, CoCl2
(c) sucrose, C12H22O11 (Hint: Sucrose contains
8 O–H bonds.)
In photo B, the same experiment was repeated
with crystals of cobalt(II) chloride. This time, the
crystal dissolved in the water but not in the
kerosene.
Analysis
1. Water is a polar molecule. Therefore, it acts
as a polar solvent.
(a) Think about the compounds you classiﬁed
in the Procedure. Which compounds are
soluble in water?
(b) Assume that the interaction between solutes
and solvents that you examine here applies
to a wide variety of substances. Make a
general statement about the type of solute
that dissolves in polar solvents.
2. Kerosene is non-polar. It acts as a non-polar
solvent.
(a) Which of the compounds you classiﬁed in
the Procedure is soluble in kerosene?
(b) Make a general statement about the type of
solute that dissolves in non-polar solvents.
Section Wrap-up
In this section, you learned the meanings of several important terms,
such as solvent, solute, saturated solution, unsaturated solution, aqueous
solution, and solubility. You need to know these terms in order
to understand the material in the rest of the chapter. In section 8.2, you
will examine the factors that affect the rate at which a solute dissolves in
a solvent. You will also learn about factors that affect solubility.
288 MHR • Unit 3  Solutions and Solubility
Section Review
1
2
3
4
K/U
Name the two basic components of a solution.
K/U
Give examples of each type of solution.
(a) solid solution
(b) liquid solution
(c) gaseous solution (at room temperature)
K/U
Explain the term “homogeneous mixture.”
C
How do the properties of a homogeneous mixture differ from the
properties of a heterogeneous mixture, or mechanical mixture? Use
diagrams to explain.
5
K/U
Give examples of each type of mixture.
(a) homogeneous mixture
(b) mechanical mixture (heterogeneous mixture)
6
7
8
9
10
11
K/U
Distinguish between the following terms: soluble, miscible, and
immiscible.
K/U
Distinguish between an alloy and an amalgam. Give one example
of each.
K/U
What type of solute dissolves in a polar solvent, such as water?
Give an example.
I
Potassium bromate, KBrO3, is sometimes added to bread dough to
make it easier to work with. Suppose that you are given an aqueous
solution of potassium bromate. How can you determine if the solution
is saturated or unsaturated?
K/U
Two different clear, colourless liquids were gently heated in
an evaporating dish. Liquid A left no residue, while liquid B left a
white residue. Which liquid was a solution, and which was a pure
substance? Explain your answer.
I
You are given three liquids. One is a pure substance, and the second
is a solution of two miscible liquids. The third is a solution composed
of a solid solute dissolved in a liquid solvent. Describe the procedure
you would follow to distinguish between the three solutions.
12
MC
In 1989, the oil tanker Exxon Valdez struck a reef in Prince
William Sound, Alaska. The accident released 40 million litres of
crude oil. The oil eventually covered 26 000 km2 of water.
(a) Explain why very little of the spilt oil dissolved in the water.
(b) The density of crude oil varies. Assuming a value of 0.86 g/mL,
estimate the average thickness of the oil slick that resulted from
the Exxon Valdez disaster.
(c) How do you think most of the oil from a tanker accident is
dispersed over time? Why would this have been a slow process
in Prince William Sound?
13
MC
Food colouring is often added to foods such as candies, ice cream,
and icing. Are food colouring dyes more likely to be polar or non-polar
molecules? Explain your answer.
Chapter 8  Solutions and Their Concentrations • MHR 289
8.2
Factors That Affect Rate of
Dissolving and Solubility
As you learned in section 8.1, the solubility of a solute is the amount of
solute that dissolves in a given volume of solvent at a certain temperature.
Solubility is determined by the intermolecular attractions between solvent
and solute particles. You will learn more about solubility and the factors
that affect it later in this section. First, however, you will look at an
important property of a solution: the rate of dissolving, or how quickly a
solute dissolves in a solvent.
The rate of dissolving depends on several factors, including tempera-
ture, agitation, and particle size. You have probably used these factors
yourself when making solutions like the fruit juice shown in Figure 8.5.
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
explain some important
properties of water
explain solution formation in
terms of intermolecular
forces between polar, ionic,
and non-polar substances
describe the relationship
between solubility and
temperature for solids,
liquids, and gases
communicate your under-
standing of the following
terms: rate of dissolving,
dipole, dipole-dipole
attraction, hydrogen bond-
ing, ion-dipole attractions,
hydrated, electrolyte,
non-electrolytes
Figure 8.5
however, will take a long time to dissolve. Why?
Fruit juice is soluble in water. The concentrated juice in this photograph,
Factors That Affect the Rate of Dissolving
You may have observed that a solute, such as sugar, dissolves faster in
hot water than in cold water. In fact, for most solid solutes, the rate of
dissolving is greater at higher temperatures. At higher temperatures, the
solvent molecules have greater kinetic energy. Thus, they collide with the
undissolved solid molecules more frequently. This increases their rate of
dissolving.
Suppose that you are dissolving a spoonful of sugar in a cup of hot
coffee. How can you make the sugar dissolve even faster? You can stir
the coffee. Agitating a mixture by stirring or by shaking the container
increases the rate of dissolving. Agitation brings fresh solvent into contact
with undissolved solid.
Finally, you may have noticed that a large lump of solid sugar
dissolves more slowly than an equal mass of powdered sugar. Decreasing
the size of the particles increases the rate of dissolving. When you break
up a large mass into many smaller masses, you increase the surface area
that is in contact with the solvent. This allows the solid to dissolve faster.
Figure 8.6 shows one way to increase the rate of dissolving.
Chemists often grind
Figure 8.6
solids into powders using a mortar
and pestle. This increases the rate
of dissolving.
290 MHR • Unit 3  Solutions and Solubility
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
Solubility and Particle Attractions
By now, you are probably very familiar with the process of dissolving.
You already know what it looks like when a solid dissolves in a liquid.
Why, however, does something dissolve? What is happening at the
molecular level?
The reasons why a solute may or may not dissolve in a solvent are
related to the forces of attraction between the solute and solvent particles.
These forces include the attractions between two solute particles, the
attractions between two solvent particles, and the attractions between a
solute particle and a solvent particle. When the forces of attraction
between different particles in a mixture are stronger than the forces of
attraction between like particles in the mixture, a solution forms. The
strength of each attraction inﬂuences the solubility, or the amount of a
solute that dissolves in a solvent.
To make this easier to understand, consider the following three steps
in the process of dissolving a solid in a liquid.
The Process of Dissolving at the Molecular Level
Step 1 The forces between the particles in the solid must be broken.
This step always requires energy. In an ionic solid, the forces
that are holding the ions together must be broken. In a molecu-
lar solid, the forces between the molecules must be broken.
Step 2 Some of the intermolecular forces between the particles in the
liquid must be broken. This step also requires energy.
Step 3 There is an attraction between the particles of the solid and the
particles of the liquid. This step always gives off energy.
The solid is more likely to dissolve in the liquid if the energy change in
step 3 is greater than the sum of the energy changes in steps 1 and 2.
(You will learn more about energy and dissolving in Unit 5.)
Polar and Non-Polar Substances
In the Thought Lab in section 8.1, you observed that solid iodine is
insoluble in water. Only a weak attraction exists between the non-polar
iodine molecules and the polar water molecules. On the other hand, the
intermolecular forces between the water molecules are very strong. As a
result, the water molecules remain attracted to each other rather than
attracting the iodine molecules.
You also observed that iodine is soluble in kerosene. Both iodine
and kerosene are non-polar substances. The attraction that iodine and
kerosene molecules have for each other is greater than the attraction
between the iodine molecules in the solid and the attraction between the
kerosene molecules in the liquid.
The Concept Organizer shown on the next page summarizes the
behaviour of polar and non-polar substances in solutions. You will learn
more about polar and non-polar substances later in this section.
Math
LINK
Calculate the surface area
of a cube with the dimensions
5.0 cm × 5.0 cm × 5.0 cm.
Now imagine cutting this
cube to form smaller cubes
with the dimensions
1.0 cm × 1.0 cm × 1.0 cm.
How many smaller cubes could
you make? Calculate their total
surface area.
Remember that the rate at
which a solute dissolves is
different from the solubility of
the solute. In your notebook,
explain brieﬂy and clearly the
difference between rate of
dissolving and solubility.
Chapter 8  Solutions and Their Concentrations • MHR 291
Concept Organizer
Polar and Non-Polar Compounds
Polar compounds
e.g. sucrose, C12H22O11
dissolve
in
Polar solvents
e.g. water, H2O((cid:2))
do not
dissolve
in
Non-Polar compounds
e.g. iodine, l2(s)
dissolve
in
Non-Polar solvents
e.g. benzene, C6H6((cid:2))
Solubility and Intermolecular Forces
You have learned that solubility depends on the forces between particles.
Thus, polar substances dissolve in polar solvents, and non-polar
substances dissolve in non-polar solvents. What are these forces that act
between particles?
In Chapter 3, section 3.3, you learned that a water molecule is polar.
It has a relatively large negative charge on the oxygen atom, and positive
charges on both hydrogen atoms. Molecules such as water, which have
charges separated into positive and negative regions, are said to have a
permanent dipole. A dipole consists of two opposite charges that are sepa-
rated by a short distance. Figure 8.7 shows the dipole of a water molecule.
Dipole-Dipole Attractions
The attraction between the opposite charges on two different polar mole-
cules is called a dipole-dipole attraction. Dipole-dipole attractions are
intermolecular. This means that they act between molecules. Usually they
are only about 1% as strong as an ionic or covalent bond. In water, there
is a special dipole-dipole attraction called hydrogen bonding. It occurs
between the oxygen atom on one molecule and the hydrogen atoms on a
nearby molecule. Hydrogen bonding is much stronger than an ordinary
dipole-dipole attraction. It is much weaker, however, than the covalent
bond between the oxygen and hydrogen atoms in a water molecule.
Figure 8.8 illustrates hydrogen bonding between water molecules.
H
x
O
104.5˚
x
H
The bent shape and
Figure 8.7
polar bonds of a water molecule
give it a permanent dipole.
Electronic Learning Partner
Go to the Chemistry 11
Electronic Learning Partner
to ﬁnd out how hydrogen
bonding leads to water’s
amazing surface tension.
Hydrogen bonding
Figure 8.8
between water molecules is
shown as dotted lines. The H
atoms on each molecule are
attracted to O atoms on other
water molecules.
292 MHR • Unit 3  Solutions and Solubility
Cl–
Na+
Figure 8.9
very ordered structures.
Ionic crystals have
Ion-dipole attrac-
Figure 8.10
tions help to explain why sodium
chloride dissolves in water.
Ion-Dipole Attractions
Ionic crystals consist of repeating patterns of oppositely charged ions, as
shown in Figure 8.9. What happens when an ionic compound comes in
contact with water? The negative end of the dipole on some water mole-
cules attracts the cations on the surface of the ionic crystal. At the same
time, the positive end of the water dipole attracts the anions. These attrac-
tions are known as ion-dipole attractions: attractive forces between an ion
and a polar molecule. If ion-dipole attractions can replace the ionic bonds
between the cations and anions in an ionic compound, the compound
will dissolve. Generally an ionic compound will dissolve in a polar
solvent. For example, table salt (sodium chloride, NaCl) is an ionic
compound. It dissolves well in water, which is a polar solvent.
When ions are present in an aqueous solution, each ion is hydrated.
This means that it is surrounded by water molecules. Hydrated ions can
move through a solution and conduct electricity. A solute that forms an
aqueous solution with the ability to conduct electricity is called an
electrolyte. Figure 8.10 shows hydrated sodium chloride ions, which
are electrolytes.
hydrated
ions
Na+ ion
water molecules
Cl– ion
An Exception: Insoluble Ionic Compounds
Although most ionic compounds are soluble in water, some are not very
soluble at all. The attraction between ions is difﬁcult to break. As a result,
compounds with very strong ionic bonds, such as silver chloride, tend to
be less soluble in water than compounds with weak ionic bonds, such as
sodium chloride.
Predicting Solubility
You can predict the solubility of a binary compound, such as mercury(II)
sulﬁde, HgS, by comparing the electronegativity of each element in the
compound. If there is a large difference in the two electronegativities, the
bond between the elements is polar or even ionic. This type of compound
probably dissolves in water. If there is only a small difference in the two
electronegativities, the bond is not polar or ionic. This type of compound
probably does not dissolve in water. For example, the electronegativity of
mercury is 1.9. The electronegativity of sulfur is 2.5. The difference in
these two electronegativities is small, only 0.6. Therefore, you can predict
that mercury(II) sulﬁde is insoluble in water. In Chapter 9, you will learn
another way to predict the solubility of ionic compounds in water.
Chapter 8  Solutions and Their Concentrations • MHR 293
Look back at the Concept
Organizer on page 292. Where
do ionic compounds belong in
this diagram?
Electronic Learning Partner
The Chemistry 11 Electronic
Learning Partner contains a
video clip describing how
water dissolves ionic and
some covalent compounds.
This will be useful if you are
having difﬁculty visualizing
particle attractions.
A sucrose mole-
Figure 8.11
cule contains several O–H atom
connections. The O–H bond
is highly polar, with the H atom
having the positive charge.
The negative charges on water
molecules form hydrogen bonds
with a sucrose molecule, as
shown by the dotted lines.
The Solubility of Covalent Compounds
Many covalent compounds do not have negative and positive charges to
attract water molecules. Thus they are not soluble in water. There are
some exceptions, however. Methanol (a component of windshield washer
ﬂuid), ethanol (the “alcohol” in alcoholic beverages), and sugars (such as
sucrose) are examples of covalent compounds that are extremely soluble
in water. These compounds dissolve because their molecules contain
polar bonds, which are able to form hydrogen bonds with water.
For example, sucrose molecules have a number of sites that can
form a hydrogen bond with water to replace the attraction between the
sucrose molecules. (See Figure 8.11.) The sucrose molecules separate and
become hydrated, just like dissolved ions. The molecules remain neutral,
however. As a result, sucrose and other soluble covalent compounds do
not conduct electricity when dissolved in water. They are non-electrolytes.
H
H
O
H
H
H
O
O
H
C
O
H
H
O
H
O
H
C
O
H
C
O
H
O
CH2
C
H
C
H
H
H
O
H
H
H
O
O H
CH2
C
C
C
H
H
H
C
O
H
O
H
O
O
H
O
C
H
H
C
CH2
H
HO
H
O
H
Insoluble Covalent Compounds
The covalent compounds that are found in oil and grease are insoluble
in water. They have no ions or highly polar bonds, so they cannot form
hydrogen bonds with water molecules. Non-polar compounds tend to be
soluble in non-polar solvents, such as benzene or kerosene. The forces
between the solute molecules are replaced by the forces between the
solute and solvent molecules.
In general, ionic solutes and polar covalent solutes both dissolve in
polar solvents. Non-polar solutes dissolve in non-polar solvents. The
phrase like dissolves like summarizes these observations. It means that
solutes and solvents that have similar properties form solutions.
If a compound has both polar and non-polar components, it may
dissolve in both polar and non-polar solvents. For example, acetic acid,
CH3COOH, is a liquid that forms hydrogen bonds with water. It is fully
miscible with water. Acetic acid also dissolves in non-polar solvents,
such as benzene and carbon tetrachloride, because the CH3 component
is non-polar.
294 MHR • Unit 3  Solutions and Solubility
Factors That Affect Solubility
You have taken a close look at the attractive forces between solute and
solvent particles. Now that you understand why solutes dissolve, it is
time to examine the three factors that affect solubility: molecule size,
temperature, and pressure. Notice that these three factors are similar to
the factors that affect the rate of dissolving. Be careful not to confuse them.
Molecule Size and Solubility
Small molecules are often more soluble than larger molecules. Methanol,
CH3OH, and ethanol, CH3CH2OH, are both completely miscible with
water. These compounds have OH groups that form hydrogen bonds with
water. Larger molecules with the same OH group but more carbon atoms,
such as pentanol, CH3CH2CH2CH2CH2OH , are far less soluble. All three
compounds form hydrogen bonds with water, but the larger pentanol
is less polar overall, making it less soluble. Table 8.2 compares ﬁve
molecules by size and solubility.
Table 8.2 Solubility and Molecule Size
Name of compound
methanol
ethanol
propanol
butanol
pentanol
Chemical formula
CH3OH
CH3CH2OH
CH3CH2CH2OH
Solubility
infinitely soluble
infinitely soluble
very soluble
CH3(CH2)3OH
9 g/100 mL (at 25°C)
CH3(CH2)4OH
3 g/100 mL (at 25°C)
Temperature and Solubility
At the beginning of this section, you learned that temperature affects
the rate of dissolving. Temperature also affects solubility. You may have
noticed that solubility data always include temperature. The solubility
of a solute in water, for example, is usually given as the number of grams
of solute that dissolve in 100 mL of water at a speciﬁc temperature. (See
Table 8.2 for two examples.) Specifying temperature is essential, since the
solubility of a substance is very different at different temperatures.
When a solid dissolves in a liquid, energy is needed to break the
strong bonds between particles in the solid. At higher temperatures, more
energy is present. Thus, the solubility of most solids increases with tem-
perature. For example, caffeine’s solubility in water is only 2.2 g/100 mL
at 25˚C. At 100˚C, however, caffeine’s solubility increases to 40 g/100 mL.
The bonds between particles in a liquid are not as strong as the bonds
between particles in a solid. When a liquid dissolves in a liquid, addition-
al energy is not needed. Thus, the solubility of most liquids is not greatly
affected by temperature.
Gas particles move quickly and have a great deal of kinetic energy.
When a gas dissolves in a liquid, it loses some of this energy. At higher
temperatures, the dissolved gas gains energy again. As a result, the gas
comes out of solution and is less soluble. Thus, the solubility of gases
decreases with higher temperatures.
In the next investigation, you will observe and graph the effect
of temperature on the solubility of a solid dissolved in a liquid solvent,
water. As you have learned, most solid solutes become more soluble at
higher temperatures. By determining the solubility of a solute at various
temperatures, you can make a graph of solubility against temperature. The
curve of best ﬁt, drawn through the points, is called the solubility curve.
You can use a solubility curve to determine the solubility of a solute at
any temperature in the range shown on the graph.
C H E M
FA C T
The link between cigarette
smoking and lung cancer is
well known. Other cancers are
also related to smoking. It is
possible that a smoker who
consumes alcohol may be at
greater risk of developing
stomach cancer. When a
person smokes, a thin ﬁlm of
tar forms inside the mouth and
throat. The tar from cigarette
smoke contains many carcino-
genic (cancer-causing) com-
pounds. These compounds are
non-polar and do not dissolve
in saliva. They are more solu-
ble in alcohol, however. As a
result, if a smoker drinks
alcohol, carcinogenic com-
pounds can be washed into
the stomach.
Chapter 8  Solutions and Their Concentrations • MHR 295
S K I L L   F O C U S
Predicting
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
Plotting Solubility Curves
In this investigation, you will determine the tem-
perature at which a certain amount of potassium
nitrate is soluble in water. You will then dilute
the solution and determine the solubility again.
By combining your data with other students’
data, you will be able to plot a solubility curve.
Question
What is the solubility curve of KNO3?
Prediction
Draw a sketch to show the shape of the curve
you expect for the solubility of a typical solid
dissolving in water at different temperatures.
Plot solubility on the y-axis and temperature
on the x-axis.
Safety Precautions
• Before lighting the Bunsen burner, check that
there are no ﬂammable solvents nearby. If you
are using a Bunsen burner, tie back long hair
and loose clothing. Be careful of the open ﬂame.
• After turning it on, be careful not to touch the
hot plate.
Materials
large test tube
balance
stirring wire
two-hole stopper to ﬁt the test tube, with a
thermometer inserted in one hole
400 mL beaker
graduated cylinder or pipette or burette
hot plate or Bunsen burner with ring clamps
and wire gauze
retort stand and thermometer clamp
potassium nitrate, KNO3
distilled water
Procedure
1. Read through the steps in this Procedure.
Prepare a data table to record the mass of
the solute, the initial volume of water, the
total volume of water after step 9, and the
temperatures at which the solutions begin
to crystallize.
2. Put the test tube inside a beaker for support.
Place the beaker on a balance pan. Set the
reading on the balance to zero. Then measure
14.0 g of potassium nitrate into the test tube.
3. Add one of the following volumes of distilled
water to the test tube, as assigned by your
teacher: 10.0 mL, 15.0 mL, 20.0 mL, 25.0 mL,
30.0 mL. (If you use a graduated cylinder,
remember to read the volume from the bottom
of the water meniscus. You can make a more
accurate volume measurement using either a
burette or a pipette.)
4. Pour about 300 mL of tap water into the
beaker. Set up a hot-water bath using a hot
plate, retort stand, and thermometer clamp.
Alternatively, use a Bunsen burner, retort
stand, ring clamp, thermometer clamp, and
wire gauze.
5. Put the stirring wire through the second
hole of the stopper. Insert the stopper,
thermometer, and wire into the test tube.
Make sure that the thermometer bulb is
below the surface of the solution. (Check
the diagram on the next page to make sure
that you have set up the apparatus properly
thus far.)
6. Place the test tube in the beaker. Secure the
test tube and thermometer to the retort stand,
using clamps. Begin heating the water bath
gently.
7. Using the stirring wire, stir the mixture until
the solute completely dissolves. Turn the heat
source off, and allow the solution to cool.
296 MHR • Unit 3  Solutions and Solubility
thermometer
stirring wire
large test tube
stopper
hot water bath
water
undissolved
solid
hot plate
8. Continue stirring. Record the temperature at
which crystals begin to appear in the solution.
9. Remove the stopper from the test tube.
Carefully add 5.0 mL of distilled water. The
solution is now more dilute and therefore
more soluble. Crystals will appear at a lower
temperature.
10. Put the stopper, with the thermometer and
stirring wire, back in the test tube. If crystals
have already started to appear in the solution,
begin warming the water bath again. Repeat
steps 7 and 8.
11. If no crystals are present, stir the solution
while the water bath cools. Record the
temperature at which crystals ﬁrst begin
to appear.
12. Dispose of the aqueous solutions of potassium
nitrate into the labelled waste container.
Analysis
1. Use the volume of water assigned by your
teacher to calculate how much solute
dissolved in 100 mL of water. Use the
following equation to help you:
x g
100 mL
=
14.0 g
your volume
This equation represents the solubility of
KNO3 at the temperature at which you
recorded the ﬁrst appearance of crystals.
Repeat your calculation to determine the solu-
bility after the solution was diluted. Your
teacher will collect and display all the class
data for this investigation.
2. Some of your classmates were assigned the
same volume of water that you were assigned.
Compare the temperatures they recorded for
their solutions with the temperatures you
recorded. Comment on the precision of the
data. Should any data be removed before
averaging?
3. Average the temperatures at which crystal
formation occurs for solutions that contain
the same volume of water. Plot these data on
graph paper. Set up your graph sideways on
the graph paper (landscape orientation). Plot
solubility on the vertical axis. (The units are
grams of solute per 100 mL of water.) Plot
temperature on the horizontal axis.
4. Draw the best smooth curve through the
points. (Do not simply join the points.) Label
each axis. Give the graph a suitable title.
Conclusions
5. Go back to the sketch you drew to predict the
solubility of a typical solid dissolving in
water at different temperatures. Compare the
shape of your sketch with the shape of your
graph.
6. Use your graph to interpolate the solubility of
potassium nitrate at
(a) 60˚C
(b) 40˚C
7. Use your graph to extrapolate the solubility of
potassium nitrate at
(a) 80˚C
(b) 20˚C
Application
8. At what temperature can 40 mL of water
dissolve the following quantities of
potassium nitrate?
(a) 35.0 g
(b) 20.0 g
Chapter 8  Solutions and Their Concentrations • MHR 297
Heat Pollution: A Solubility Problem
For most solids, and almost all ionic substances, solubility increases as
the temperature of the solution increases. Gases, on the other hand,
always become less soluble as the temperature increases. This is why a
refrigerated soft drink tastes ﬁzzier than the same drink at room tempera-
ture. The warmer drink contains less dissolved carbon dioxide than the
cooler drink.
This property of gases makes heat pollution a serious problem. Many
industries and power plants use water to cool down overheated machin-
ery. The resulting hot water is then returned to local rivers or lakes.
Figure 8.12 shows steam rising from a “heat-polluted” river. Adding
warm water into a river or lake does not seem like actual pollution. The
heat from the water, however, increases the temperature of the body of
water. As the temperature increases, the dissolved oxygen in the water
decreases. Fish and other aquatic wildlife and plants may not have
enough oxygen to breathe.
The natural heating of water in rivers and lakes can pose problems,
too. Fish in warmer lakes and rivers are particularly vulnerable in the
summer. When the water warms up even further, the amount of dissolved
oxygen decreases.
This image shows
Figure 8.12
the result of heat pollution.
Warmer water contains less
dissolved oxygen.
ExpressLab
The Effect of Temperature on Soda Water
In this Express Lab, you will have a chance to
see how a change in temperature affects the
dissolved gas in a solution. You will be looking
at the pH of soda water. A low pH (1–6) indicates
that the solution is acidic. You will learn more
about pH in Chapter 10.
Safety Precautions
• If using a hot plate, avoid touching it when it
is hot.
• If using a Bunsen burner, check that there are
no ﬂammable solvents nearby.
Procedure
1. Open a can of cool soda water. (Listen for the
sound of excess carbon dioxide escaping.)
Pour about 50 mL into each of two 100 mL
beakers. Note the rate at which bubbles form.
Record your observations.
2. Add a few drops of universal indicator to both
beakers. Record the colour of the solutions.
Then estimate the pH.
3. Measure and record the mass of each beaker.
Measure and record the temperature of the
soda water.
4. Place one beaker on a heat source. Heat it to
about 50˚C. Compare the rate of formation of
the bubbles with the rate of formation in the
beaker of cool soda water. Record any change
in colour in the heated solution. Estimate
its pH.
5. Allow the heated solution to cool. Again
record any change in colour in the solution.
Estimate its pH.
6. Measure and record the masses of both
beakers. Determine any change in mass by
comparing the ﬁnal and initial masses.
Analysis
1. Which sample of soda water lost the most
mass? Explain your observation.
2. Did the heated soda water become more or
less acidic when it was heated? Explain why
you think this change happened.
298 MHR • Unit 3  Solutions and Solubility
Pressure and Solubility
The ﬁnal factor that affects solubility is pressure. Changes in pressure
have hardly any effect on solid and liquid solutions. Such changes do
affect the solubility of a gas in a liquid solvent, however. The solubility of
the gas is directly proportional to the pressure of the gas above the liquid.
For example, the solubility of oxygen in lake water depends on the air
pressure above the lake.
When you open a carbonated drink, you can observe the effect of pres-
sure on solubility. Figure 8.13 shows this effect. Inside a soft drink bottle,
the pressure of the carbon dioxide gas is very high: about 400 kPa. When
you open the bottle, you hear the sound of escaping gas as the pressure is
reduced. Carbon dioxide gas escapes quickly from the bottle, since the
pressure of the carbon dioxide in the atmosphere is much lower: only
about 0.03 kPa. The solubility of the carbon dioxide in the liquid soft
drink decreases greatly. Bubbles begin to rise in the liquid as gas comes
out of solution and escapes. It takes a while for all the gas to leave the
solution, so you have time to enjoy the taste of the soft drink before it
goes “ﬂat.”
Figure 8.14 illustrates another example of dissolved gases and
pressure. As a scuba diver goes deeper underwater, the water pressure
increases. The solubility of nitrogen gas, which is present in the lungs,
also increases. Nitrogen gas dissolves in the diver’s blood. As the diver
returns to the surface, the pressure acting on the diver decreases. The
nitrogen gas in the blood comes out of solution. If the diver surfaces too
quickly, the effect is similar to opening a soft drink bottle. Bubbles of
nitrogen gas form in the blood. This leads to a painful and sometimes
fatal condition known as “the bends.” You will learn more about gases
and deep-sea diving in Chapter 11.
Figure 8.14
dissolved nitrogen gas in their blood. They must surface slowly to avoid “the bends.”
Scuba divers must heed the effects of decreasing water pressure on
What happens
Figure 8.13
when the pressure of the carbon
dioxide gas in a soft drink bottle
is released? The solubility of the
gas in the soft drink solution
decreases.
C H E M
FA C T
Do you crack your knuckles?
The sound you hear is
another example of the effect
of pressure on solubility. Joints
contain ﬂuid. When a joint is
suddenly pulled or stretched,
the cavity that holds the ﬂuid
gets larger. This causes the
pressure to decrease. A
bubble of gas forms, making
the sound you hear. You cannot
repeatedly crack your knuckles
because it takes some time for
the gas to re-dissolve.
Chapter 8  Solutions and Their Concentrations • MHR 299
Chemistry Bulletin
Solvents and Coffee: What’s the Connection?
The story of coffee starts with the coffee berry.
First the pulp of the berry is removed. This
leaves two beans, each containing 1% to 2%
caffeine. The beans are soaked in water and
natural enzymes to remove the outer parch-
ment husk and to start a slight fermentation
process. Once the beans have been fermented,
they are dried and roasted. Then the coffee is
ready for grinding. Grinding increases the sur-
face area of the coffee. Thus, ﬁner grinds make
it easier to dissolve the coffee in hot water.
Decaffeinated coffee satisﬁes people who
like the smell and taste of coffee but cannot
tolerate the caffeine. How is caffeine removed
from coffee?
All the methods of extracting caffeine take
place before the beans are roasted. Caffeine and
the other organic compounds that give coffee
its taste are mainly non-polar. (Caffeine does
contain some polar bonds, however, which
allows it to dissolve in hot water.) Non-polar
solvents, such as benzene and trichloroethene,
were once used to dissolve and remove
caffeine from the beans. These chemicals are
now considered to be too hazardous. Today
most coffee manufacturers use water or carbon
dioxide as solvents.
In the common Swiss Water Process,
coffee beans are soaked in hot water. This
dissolves the caffeine and the ﬂavouring
compounds from the beans. The liquid is
passed through activated carbon ﬁlters. The
ﬁlters retain the caffeine, but let the ﬂavouring
compounds pass through. The ﬁltered liquid,
now caffeine-free, is sprayed back onto the
beans. The beans reabsorb the ﬂavouring
compounds. Now they are ready for roasting.
Carbon dioxide gas is a normal component
of air. In the carbon dioxide decaffeination
process, the gas is raised to a temperature of at
least 32˚C. Then it is compressed to a pressure
of about 7400 kPa. At this pressure, it resem-
bles a liquid but can ﬂow like a gas. The
carbon dioxide penetrates the coffee beans
and dissolves the caffeine. When the pressure
returns to normal, the carbon dioxide reverts
to a gaseous state. The caffeine is left behind.
What happens to the caffeine that is
removed by decaffeination? Caffeine is so
valuable that it is worth more than the cost of
taking it out of the beans. It is extensively used
in the pharmaceutical industry, and for colas
and other soft drinks.
Making Connections
1. As you have read, water is a polar liquid
and the soluble fractions of the coffee
grounds are non-polar. Explain, in chemical
terms, how caffeine and the coffee ﬂavour
and aroma are transferred to hot coffee.
2. Why does hot water work better in the
brewing process than cold water?
3. In chemical terms, explain why ﬁne grinds
of coffee make better coffee.
How can caffeine form
hydrogen bonds with
water?
300 MHR • Unit 3  Solutions and Solubility
Section Wrap-up
In this section, you examined the factors that affect the rate of dissolving:
temperature, agitation, and particle size. Next you looked at the forces
between solute and solvent particles. Finally, you considered three main
factors that affect solubility: molecule size, temperature, and pressure. In
section 8.3, you will learn about the effects of differing amounts of solute
dissolved in a certain amount of solvent.
Section Review
1
2
3
4
5
6
K/U
Describe the particle attractions that occur as sodium chloride
dissolves in water.
K/U
When water vaporizes, which type of attraction, intramolecular
or intermolecular, is broken? Explain.
K/U
Describe the effect of increasing temperature on the solubility of
(a) a typical solid in water
(b) a gas in water
K/U
Sugar is more soluble in water than salt. Why does a salt solution
(brine) conduct electricity, while a sugar solution does not?
K/U
Dissolving a certain solute in water releases heat. Dissolving
a different solute in water absorbs heat. Explain why.
I
The graph below shows the solubility of various substances
plotted against the temperature of the solution.
(a) Which substance decreases in solubility as the
temperature increases?
(b) Which substance is least soluble at room
temperature? Which substance is most soluble
at room temperature?
(c) The solubility of which substance is least affected
by a change in temperature?
(d) At what temperature is the solubility of potassium
chlorate equal to 40 g/100 g of water?
(e) 20 mL of a saturated solution of potassium nitrate
at 50˚C is cooled to 20˚C. Approximately what mass
of solid will precipitate from the solution? Why is
it not possible to use the graph to interpolate an
accurate value?
)
O
2
H
g
0
0
1
/
g
(
y
t
i
l
i
b
u
l
o
S
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
NaNO3
KNO3
KCI
NaCI
KCIO3
0
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
Ce2(SO3)3
Temperature (˚C)
7
I
A saturated solution of potassium nitrate was
prepared at 70˚C and then cooled to 55˚C. Use your
graph from Investigation 8-A to predict the fraction of the dissolved
solute that crystallized out of the solution.
8
MC
Would you expect to ﬁnd more mineral deposits near a thermal
spring or near a cool mountain spring? Explain.
Unit Issue Prep
Think about how the properties
of water affect its behaviour in
the environment. Look ahead
to the Unit 3 Issue. How could
water’s excellent ability as a
solvent become a problem?
Chapter 8  Solutions and Their Concentrations • MHR 301
8.3
The Concentration of Solutions
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
solve problems involving the
concentration of solutions
express concentration as
grams per 100 mL, mass and
volume percents, parts per
million and billion, and moles
per litre
communicate your under-
standing of the following
terms: concentration,
mass/volume percent,
mass/mass percent,
volume/volume percent,
parts per million, parts per
billion, molar concentration
Material Safety Data Sheet
Component Name
PHENOL, 100% Pure
CAS Number
108952
SECTION III: Hazards Identiﬁcation
• Very hazardous in case of ingestion, inhalation,
skin contact, or eye contact.
• Product is corrosive to internal membranes when
ingested.
• Inhalation of vapours may damage central nervous
system. Symptoms: nausea, headache, dizziness.
• Skin contact may cause itching and blistering.
• Eye-contact may lead to corneal damage or
blindness.
• Severe over-exposure may lead to lung-damage,
choking, or coma.
Figure 8.15
banned from drugstores?
Should phenol be
Phenol is a hazardous liquid, especially when it is at room temperature.
It is a volatile chemical. Inhaling phenol adversely affects the central
nervous system, and can lead to a coma. Inhalation is not the only danger.
Coma and death have been known to occur within 10 min after phenol has
contacted the skin. Also, as little as 1 g of phenol can be fatal if swallowed.
Would you expect to ﬁnd such a hazardous chemical in over-the-
counter medications? Check your medicine cabinet at home. You may
ﬁnd phenol listed as an ingredient in throat sprays and in lotions to
relieve itching. You may also ﬁnd it used as an antiseptic or disinfectant.
Is phenol a hazard or a beneﬁcial ingredient in many medicines? This
depends entirely on concentration: the amount of solute per quantity of
solvent. At high concentrations, phenol can kill. At low concentrations,
it is a safe component of certain medicines.
Modern analytical tests allow chemists to detect and measure almost
any chemical at extremely low concentrations. In this section, you will
learn about various ways that chemists use to express the concentration
of a solution. As well, you will ﬁnd the concentration of a solution by
experiment.
Concentration as a Mass/Volume Percent
Recall that the solubility of a compound at a certain temperature is often
expressed as the mass of the solute per 100 mL of solvent. For example,
you know that the solubility of sodium chloride is 36 g/100 mL of water at
room temperature. The ﬁnal volume of the sodium chloride solution may
or may not be 100 mL. It is the volume of the solvent that is important.
Chemists often express the concentration of an unsaturated solution
as the mass of solute dissolved per volume of the solution. This is differ-
ent from solubility. It is usually expressed as a percent relationship. A
mass/volume percent gives the mass of solute dissolved in a volume of
solution, expressed as a percent. The mass/volume percent is also referred
to as the percent (m/v).
302 MHR • Unit 3  Solutions and Solubility
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
Mass/volume percent =
Mass of solute (in g)
Volume of solution (in mL)
× 100%
Suppose that a hospital patient requires an intravenous drip to replace
lost body ﬂuids. The intravenous ﬂuid may be a saline solution that
contains 0.9 g of sodium chloride dissolved in 100 mL of solution, or
0.9% (m/v). Notice that the number of grams of solute per 100 mL of
solution is numerically equal to the mass/volume percent. Explore this
idea further in the following problems.
P R O B E W A R E
If you have access to probe-
ware, do the Chemistry 11 lab,
“Concentration of Solutions”
now.
Sample Problem
Solving for a Mass/Volume Percent
Problem
A pharmacist adds 2.00 mL of distilled water to 4.00 g of a powdered
drug. The ﬁnal volume of the solution is 3.00 mL. What is the
concentration of the drug in g/100 mL of solution? What is the
percent (m/v) of the solution?
What Is Required?
You need to calculate the concentration of the solution, in grams of
solute dissolved in 100 mL of solution. Then you need to express
this concentration as a mass/volume percent.
What Is Given?
The mass of the dissolved solute is 4.00 g. The volume
of the solution is 3.00 mL.
Plan Your Strategy
There are two possible methods for solving this problem.
Method 1
Use the formula
Mass/volume percent =
Mass of solute (in g)
Volume of solution (in mL)
× 100%
Method 2
Let x represent the mass of solute dissolved in 100 mL of solution.
The ratio of the dissolved solute, x, in 100 mL of solution must be
the same as the ratio of 4.00 g of solute dissolved in 3.00 mL of
solution. The concentration, expressed in g/100 mL, is numerically
equal to the percent (m/v) of the solution.
Act on Your Strategy
Method 1
Percent (m/v) = 4.00 g
3.00 mL
= 133%
× 100%
Continued ...
Chapter 8  Solutions and Their Concentrations • MHR 303
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 303
Method 2
x
100 mL
x
100 mL
= 4.00 g
3.00 mL
= 1.33 g/mL
x = 100 mL × 1.33 g/mL
= 133 g
The concentration of the drug is 133 g/100 mL of solution,
or 133% (m/v).
Check Your Solution
The units are correct. The numerical answer is large, but this
is reasonable for an extremely soluble solute.
Sample Problem
Finding Mass for an (m/v) Concentration
Problem
Many people use a solution of trisodium phosphate, Na3PO4
(commonly called TSP), to clean walls before putting up wallpaper.
The recommended concentration is 1.7% (m/v). What mass of TSP
is needed to make 2.0 L of solution?
What Is Required?
You need to ﬁnd the mass of TSP needed to make 2.0 L of solution.
What Is Given?
The concentration of the solution should be 1.7% (m/v). The volume
of solution that is needed is 2.0 L.
Plan Your Strategy
There are two different methods you can use.
Method 1
Use the formula for (m/v) percent. Rearrange the formula to solve for
mass. Then substitute in the known values.
Method 2
The percent (m/v) of the solution is numerically equal to the
concentration in g/100 mL. Let x represent the mass of TSP dis-
solved in 2.0 L of solution. The ratio of dissolved solute in 100 mL
of solution must be the same as the ratio of the mass of solute, x,
dissolved in 2.0 L (2000 mL) of solution.
Continued ...
304 MHR • Unit 3  Solutions and Solubility
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 304
Act on Your Strategy
Method 1
(m/v) percent =
Mass of solute (in g)
Volume of solution (in mL)
× 100%
∴ Mass of solute  = (m/v) percent × Volume of solution
= 1.7% × 2000 mL
100%
100%
= 34 g
Method 2
A TSP solution that is 1.7% (m/v) contains 1.7 g of solute dissolved
in 100 mL of solution.
=
1.7 g
100 mL
0.017 g/mL =
x
2000 mL
x
2000 mL
x = 0.017 g/mL × 2000 mL
= 34 g
Therefore, 34 g of TSP are needed to make 2.0 L of cleaning solution.
Check Your Solution
The units are appropriate for the problem. The answer appears
to be reasonable.
Practice Problems
1. What is the concentration in percent (m/v) of each solution?
(a) 14.2 g of potassium chloride, KCl (used as a salt substitute),
dissolved in 450 mL of solution
(b) 31.5 g of calcium nitrate, Ca(NO3)2 (used to make explosives),
dissolved in 1.80 L of solution
(c) 1.72 g of potassium permanganate, KMnO4 (used to bleach
stone-washed blue jeans), dissolved in 60 mL of solution
2. A solution of hydrochloric acid was formed by dissolving 1.52 g of
hydrogen chloride gas in enough water to make 24.1 mL of solution.
What is the concentration in percent (m/v) of the solution?
3. At 25˚C, a saturated solution of carbon dioxide gas in water has a
concentration of 0.145% (m/v). What mass of carbon dioxide is
present in 250 mL of the solution?
4. Ringer’s solution contains three dissolved salts in the same
proportions as they are found in blood. The salts and their
concentrations (m/v) are as follows: 0.86% NaCl, 0.03% KCl, and
0.033% CaCl2. Suppose that a patient needs to receive 350 mL of
Ringer’s solution by an intravenous drip. What mass of each salt
does the pharmacist need to make the solution?
Chapter 8  Solutions and Their Concentrations • MHR 305
Concentration as a Mass/Mass Percent
The concentration of a solution that contains a solid solute dissolved in
a liquid solvent can also be expressed as a mass of solute dissolved in a
mass of solution. This is usually expressed as a percent relationship.
A mass/mass percent gives the mass of a solute divided by the mass of
solution, expressed as a percent. The mass/mass percent is also referred to
as the percent (m/m), or the mass percent. It is often inaccurately referred
to as a weight (w/w) percent, as well. Look at your tube of toothpaste, at
home. The percent of sodium ﬂuoride in the toothpaste is usually given as
a w/w percent. This can be confusing, since weight (w) is not the same as
mass (m). In fact, this concentration should be expressed as a mass/mass
percent.
Mass/mass percent = Mass of solute (in g)
Mass of solution (in g)
× 100%
For example, 100 g of seawater contains 0.129 g of magnesium ion
(along with many other substances). The concentration of Mg2+ in
seawater is 0.129 (m/m). Notice that the number of grams of solute
per 100 g of solution is numerically equal to the mass/mass percent.
The concentration of a solid solution, such as an alloy, is usually
expressed as a mass/mass percent. Often the concentration of a particular
alloy may vary. Table 8.3 gives typical compositions of some common
alloys.
Table 8.3 The Composition of Some Common Alloys
Alloy
Uses
brass
ornaments, musical instruments
bronze
statues, castings
cupronickel
“silver”  coins
dental amalgam
dental fillings
duralumin
aircraft parts
pewter
ornaments
stainless steel
cutlery, knives
sterling silver
jewellery
Typical percent (m/m)
composition
Cu (85%)
Zn (15%)
Cu (80%)
Zn (10%)
Sn (10%)
Cu (75%)
Ni (25%)
Hg (50%)
Ag (35%)
Sn (15%)
Al (93%)
Cu (5%)
other (2%)
Sn (85%)
Cu (7%)
Bi (6%)
Sb ((2%)
Fe (78%)
Cr (15%)
Ni (7%)
Ag (92.5%)
Cu (7.5%)
Figure 8.16, on the following page, shows two objects made from brass
that have distinctly different colours. The difference in colours reﬂects the
varying concentrations of the copper and zinc that make up the objects.
306 MHR • Unit 3  Solutions and Solubility
Figure 8.16
15% to 50% zinc. As a result, two objects made of brass can look very different.
Brass can be made using any percent from 50% to 85% copper, and from
Sample Problem
Solving for a Mass/Mass Percent
Problem
Calcium chloride, CaCl2, can be used instead of road salt to melt
the ice on roads during the winter. To determine how much calcium
chloride had been used on a nearby road, a student took a sample of
slush to analyze. The sample had a mass of 23.47 g. When the solu-
tion was evaporated, the residue had a mass of 4.58 g. (Assume that
no other solutes were present.) What was the mass/mass percent of
calcium chloride in the slush? How many grams of calcium chloride
were present in 100 g of solution?
What Is Required?
You need to calculate the mass/mass percent of calcium chloride in
the solution (slush). Then you need to use your answer to ﬁnd the
mass of calcium chloride in 100 g of solution.
What Is Given?
The mass of the solution is 23.47 g. The mass of calcium chloride
that was dissolved in the solution is 4.58 g.
Plan Your Strategy
There are two methods that you can use to solve this problem.
Method 1
Use the formula for mass/mass percent.
Mass/mass percent = Mass of solute (in g)
Mass of solution (in g)
× 100%
Continued ...
Chapter 8  Solutions and Their Concentrations • MHR 307
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 307
The mass of calcium chloride in 100 g of solution will
be numerically equal to the mass/mass percent.
Method 2
Use ratios, as in the previous Sample Problems.
Act on Your Strategy
Method 1
Mass/mass percent = 4.58 g
23.47 g
= 19.5%
× 100%
Method 2
x g
100 g
x g
100 g
= 4.58 g
23.47 g
= 0.195
x = 19.5%
The mass/mass percent was 19.5% (m/m). 19.5 g of calcium chloride
was dissolved in 100 g of solution.
Check Your Solution
The mass units divide out properly. The ﬁnal answer has the correct
number of signiﬁcant digits. It appears to be reasonable.
Practice Problems
5. Calculate the mass/mass percent of solute for each solution.
(a) 17 g of sulfuric acid in 65 g of solution
(b) 18.37 g of sodium chloride dissolved in 92.2 g of water
Hint: Remember that a solution consists of both solute
and solvent.
(c) 12.9 g of carbon tetrachloride dissolved in 72.5 g of benzene
6. If 55 g of potassium hydroxide is dissolved in 100 g of water,
what is the concentration of the solution expressed as mass/mass
percent?
7. Steel is an alloy of iron and about 1.7% carbon. It also contains
small amounts of other materials, such as manganese and
phosphorus. What mass of carbon is needed to make a 5.0 kg
sample of steel?
8. Stainless steel is a variety of steel that resists corrosion. Your
cutlery at home may be made of this material. Stainless steel
must contain at least 10.5% chromium. What mass of chromium
is needed to make a stainless steel fork with a mass of 60.5 g?
9. 18-carat white gold is an alloy. It contains 75% gold, 12.5% silver,
and 12.5% copper. A piece of jewellery, made of 18-carat white
gold, has a mass of 20 g. How much pure gold does it contain?
308 MHR • Unit 3  Solutions and Solubility
Concentration as a Volume/Volume Percent
When mixing two liquids to form a solution, it is easier to measure their
volumes than their masses. A volume/volume percent gives the volume
of solute divided by the volume of solution, expressed as a percent. The
volume/volume percent is also referred to as the volume percent concen-
tration, volume percent, percent (v/v), or the percent by volume. You can
see this type of concentration on a bottle of rubbing alcohol from a drug-
store. (See Figure 8.17.)
Volume/volume percent = Volume of solute (in mL)
Volume of solution (in mL)
× 100%
Read through the Sample Problem below, and complete the Practice
Problems that follow. You will then have a better understanding of how
to calculate the volume/volume percent of a solution.
Sample Problem
Solving for a Volume/Volume Percent
Problem
Rubbing alcohol is commonly used as an antiseptic for small cuts. It is
sold as a 70% (v/v) solution of isopropyl alcohol in water. What vol-
ume of isopropyl alcohol is used to make 500 mL of rubbing alcohol?
What Is Required?
You need to calculate the volume of isopropyl alcohol (the solute)
used to make 500 mL of solution.
What Is Given?
The volume/volume percent is 70% (v/v). The ﬁnal volume of the
solution is 500 mL.
Plan Your Strategy
Method 1
Rearrange the following formula to solve for the volume of the
solute. Then substitute the values that you know into the rearranged
formula.
Volume/volume percent = Volume of solute
Volume of solution
× 100%
Method 2
Use ratios to solve for the unknown volume.
The concentration
Figure 8.17
of this solution of isopropyl
alcohol in water is expressed
as a volume/volume percent.
C H E M
FA C T
Archaeologists can learn a lot
about ancient civilizations by
chemically analyzing the con-
centration of ions in the soil
where the people lived. When
crops are grown, the crops
remove elements such as
nitrogen, magnesium, calcium,
and phosphorus from the soil.
Thus, soil with a lower-than-
average concentration of
these elements may have held
ancient crops. Chlorophyll,
which is present in all plants,
contains magnesium ions. In
areas where ancient crops
were processed, the soil has a
higher concentration of Mg2+.
Continued ...
Chapter 8  Solutions and Their Concentrations • MHR 309
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 309
Act on Your Strategy
Method 1
Volume/volume percent = Volume of solute
Volume of solution
× 100%
Volume of solute = Volume/volume percent × Volume of solution
100%
= 70% × 500 mL
100%
= 350 mL
Method 2
x mL
500 mL
= 70 mL
100 mL
x = 0.7 × 500 mL
= 350 mL
Therefore, 350 mL of isopropyl alcohol is used to make 500 mL of
70% (v/v) rubbing alcohol.
Check Your Solution
The answer seems reasonable. It is expressed in appropriate units.
Practice Problems
10. 60 mL of ethanol is diluted with water to a ﬁnal volume of 400 mL.
What is the percent by volume of ethanol in the solution?
11. Milk fat is present in milk. Whole milk usually contains about
5.0% milk fat by volume. If you drink a glass of milk with a vol-
ume of 250 mL, what volume of milk fat have you consumed?
12. Both antifreeze (shown in Figure 8.18) and engine coolant contain
ethylene glycol. A manufacturer sells a concentrated solution that
contains 75% (v/v) ethylene glycol in water. According to the
label, a 1:1 mixture of the concentrate with water will provide
protection against freezing down to a temperature of −37˚C. A
motorist adds 1 L of diluted solution to a car radiator. What is
the percent (v/v) of ethylene glycol in the diluted solution?
13. The average adult human body contains about 5 L of blood. Of
this volume, only about 0.72% consists of leukocytes (white
blood cells). These essential blood cells ﬁght infection in the
body. What volume of pure leukocyte cells is present in the
body of a small child, with only 2.5 L of blood?
14. Vinegar is sold as a 5% (v/v) solution of acetic acid in water.
How much water should be added to 15 mL of pure acetic acid
(a liquid at room temperature) to make a 5% (v/v) solution of
acetic acid? Note: Assume that when water and acetic acid are
mixed, the total volume of the solution is the sum of the volumes
of each.
Antifreeze is a
Figure 8.18
solution of ethylene glycol and
water.
310 MHR • Unit 3  Solutions and Solubility
Math
LINK
One part per million is equal
to 1¢ in $10 000. One part per
billion is equal to 1 s in almost
32 years.
What distance (in km) would
you travel if 1 cm represented
1 ppm of your journey?
A swimming pool has the
dimensions 10 m × 5 m × 2 m .
If the pool is full of water, what
volume of water (in cm3) would
represent 1 ppb of the water in
the pool?
Concentration in Parts per Million and Parts per Billion
The concentration of a very small quantity of a substance in the human
body, or in the environment, can be expressed in parts per million (ppm)
and parts per billion (ppb). Both parts per million and parts per billion
are usually mass/mass relationships. They describe the amount of solute
that is present in a solution. Notice that parts per million does not refer
to the number of particles, but to the mass of the solute compared with
the mass of the solution.
ppm = Mass of solute
Mass of solution
× 106
or
or
Mass of solute
Mass of solution
=
x g
106 g of solution
ppb = Mass of solute
Mass of solution
× 109
Mass of solute
Mass of solution
=
x g
109 g of solution
Sample Problem
Parts per Billion in Peanut Butter
Problem
A fungus that grows on peanuts produces a deadly toxin. When
ingested in large amounts, this toxin destroys the liver and can cause
cancer. Any shipment of peanuts that contains more than 25 ppb
of this dangerous fungus is rejected. A company receives 20 t of
peanuts to make peanut butter. What is the maximum mass (in g)
of fungus that is allowed?
What Is Required?
You need to ﬁnd the allowed mass (in g) of fungus in 20 t of peanuts.
What Is Given?
The allowable concentration of the fungus is 25 ppb. The mass of the
peanut shipment is 20 t.
Plan Your Strategy
Method 1
Convert 20 t to grams. Rearrange the formula below to solve for the
allowable mass of the fungus.
ppb = Mass of fungus
Mass of peanuts
× 109
Method 2
Use ratios to solve for the unknown mass.
Continued ...
Chapter 8  Solutions and Their Concentrations • MHR 311
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 311
Act on Your Strategy
Method 1
First convert the mass in tonnes into grams.
20 t × 1000 kg/t × 1000 g/kg = 20 × 106 g
Next rearrange the formula and ﬁnd the mass of the fungus.
ppb = Mass of fungus
Mass of peanuts
× 109
∴ Mass of fungus = ppb × Mass of peanuts
= 25 ppb × (20 × 106 g)
109
109
Method 2
= 0.5 g
x g solute
20 × 106 g solution
=
25 g solute
1 × 109 g solution
x g = (20 × 106 g solution) ×
= 0.5 g
25 g solute
1 × 109 g solution
The maximum mass of fungus that is allowed is 0.5 g.
Check Your Solution
The answer appears to be reasonable. The units divided correctly
to give grams. Note: Parts per million and parts per billion have
no units. The original units, g/g, cancel out.
Practice Problems
15. Symptoms of mercury poisoning become apparent after a person
has accumulated more than 20 mg of mercury in the body.
(a) Express this amount as parts per million for a 60 kg person.
(b) Express this amount as parts per billion.
(c) Express this amount as a (m/m) percent.
16. The use of the pesticide DDT has been banned in Canada since
1969 because of its damaging effect on wildlife. In 1967, the
concentration of DDT in an average lake trout, taken from Lake
Simcoe in Ontario, was 16 ppm. Today it is less than 1 ppm.
What mass of DDT would have been present in a 2.5 kg trout
with DDT present at 16 ppm?
17. The concentration of chlorine in a swimming pool is generally
kept in the range of 1.4 to 4.0 mg/L. The water in a certain pool
has 3.0 mg/L of chlorine. Express this value as parts per million.
(Hint: 1 L of water has a mass of 1000 g.)
18. Water supplies with dissolved calcium carbonate greater than
500 mg/L are considered unacceptable for most domestic
purposes. Express this concentration in parts per million.
312 MHR • Unit 3  Solutions and Solubility
Careers
in Chemistry
Product Development
Chemist
A solvent keeps paint liqueﬁed so that it can be
applied to a surface easily. After the paint has
been exposed to the air, the solvent evaporates
and the paint dries. Product development
chemists develop and improve products such
as paints. To work in product development, they
require at least one university chemistry degree.
Chemists who work with paints must
examine the properties of many different
solvents. They must choose solvents that dissolve
paint pigments well, but evaporate quickly and
pose a low safety hazard.
Product development chemists must consider
human health and environmental impact when
choosing between solvents. Many solvents that
have been used in the past, such as benzene
and carbon tetrachloride, are now known to be
harmful to the health and/or the environment.
A powerful new solvent called d-limonene has
been developed from the peel of oranges and
lemons. This solvent is less harmful than many
older solvents. It has been used successfully as a
cleaner for airport runways and automotive parts,
and as a pesticide. Chemists are now studying
new applications for d-limonene.
Make Career Connections
1. Use reference books or the Internet to ﬁnd
the chemical structure of d-limonene. What
else can you discover about d-limonene?
2. To learn more about careers involving work
with solvents, contact the Canadian Chemical
Producers Association (CCPA).
Molar Concentration
The most useful unit of concentration in chemistry is molar concentra-
tion. Molar concentration is the number of moles of solute in 1 L of
solution. Notice that the volume of the solution in litres is used, rather
than the volume of the solvent in millilitres. Molar concentration is also
known as molarity.
Molar concentration (in mol/L) = Amount of solute (in mol)
Volume of solution (in L)
This formula can be shortened to give
C = n
V
Molar concentration is particularly useful to chemists because it is related
to the number of particles in a solution. None of the other measures of
concentration are related to the number of particles. If you are given the
molar concentration and the volume of a solution, you can calculate the
amount of dissolved solute in moles. This allows you to solve problems
involving quantities in chemical reactions, such as the ones on the
following pages.
Chapter 8  Solutions and Their Concentrations • MHR 313
Sample Problem
Calculating Molar Concentration
Problem
A saline solution contains 0.90 g of sodium chloride, NaCl,
dissolved in 100 mL of solution. What is the molar concentration
of the solution?
What Is Required?
You need to ﬁnd the molar concentration of the solution in mol/L.
What Is Given?
You know that 0.90 g of sodium chloride is dissolved in 100 mL
of solution.
Plan Your Strategy
Step 1 To ﬁnd the amount (in mol) of sodium chloride, ﬁrst
determine its molar mass. Then divide the amount of
sodium chloride (in g) by its molar mass (in g/mol).
Step 2 Convert the volume of solution from mL to L using this formula:
Volume (in L) = Volume (in mL) × 1.000 L
1000 mL
Step 3 Use the following formula to calculate the molar concentration:
Molar concentration (in mol/L) = Amount of solute (in mol)
Volume of solution (in L)
Act on Your Strategy
Step 1 Molar mass of NaCl = 22.99 + 35.45
= 58.44 g/mol
Amount of NaCl =
0.90 g
58.44 g/mol
= 1.54 × 10
−2 mol
Step 2 Convert the volume from mL to L.
Volume = 100 mL × 1.000 L
1000 mL
= 0.100 L
Step 3 Calculate the molar concentration.
Molar concentration = 1.54 × 10−2 mol
−1 mol/L
= 1.54 × 10
0.100 L
The molar concentration of the saline solution is 0.15 mol/L.
Check Your Solution
The answer has the correct units for molar concentration.
314 MHR • Unit 3  Solutions and Solubility
Sample Problem
Using Molar Concentration to Find Mass
Problem
At 20˚C, a saturated solution of calcium sulfate, CaSO4, has a
concentration of 0.0153 mol/L. A student takes 65 mL of this
solution and evaporates it. What mass (in g) is left in the
evaporating dish?
What Is Required?
You need to ﬁnd the mass (in g) of the solute, calcium sulfate.
What Is Given?
The molar concentration is 0.0153 mol/L. The volume of the
solution is 65 mL.
Plan Your Strategy
Step 1 Convert the volume from mL to L using the formula
Volume (in L) = Volume (in mL) × 1.000 L
1000 mL
Step 2 Rearrange the following formula to solve for the amount
of solute (in mol).
Molar concentration (in mol/L) = Amount of solute (in mol)
Volume of solution (in L)
Step 3 Determine the molar mass of calcium sulfate. Use the molar
mass to ﬁnd the mass in grams, using the formula below:
Mass (in g) of CaSO4
= Amount (in mol) × Molar mass of CaSO4 (in g/mol)
Act on Your Strategy
Step 1 Convert the volume from mL to L.
Volume = 65 mL × 1.000 L
1000 mL
= 0.065 L
Step 2 Rearrange the formula to solve for the amount of solute.
Molar concentration = Amount of solute
Volume of solution
∴ Amount of solute = Molar concentration × Volume of solution
= 0.0153 mol/L × 0.065 L
= 9.94 × 10
−4 mol
Step 3 Determine the molar mass. Then ﬁnd the mass in grams.
Molar mass of CaSO4 = 40.08 + 32.07 + (4 × 16.00)
Mass (in g) of CaSO4
= 136.15 g/mol
= 9.94 × 10
= 0.135 g
−4 mol × 136 g/mol
Continued ...
Chapter 8  Solutions and Their Concentrations • MHR 315
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 315
Therefore, 0.14 g of calcium sulfate are left in the evaporating dish.
Check Your Solution
The answer has the correct units and the correct number of
signiﬁcant ﬁgures.
Practice Problems
19. What is the molar concentration of each solution?
(a) 0.50 mol of NaCl dissolved in 0.30 L of solution
(b) 0.289 mol of iron(III) chloride, FeCl3 , dissolved in 120 mL
of solution
(c) 0.0877 mol of copper(II) sulfate, CuSO4, dissolved in 70 mL
of solution
(d) 4.63 g of sugar, C12H22O11, dissolved in 16.8 mL of solution
(e) 1.2 g of NaNO3 dissolved in 80 mL of solution
20. What mass of solute is present in each aqueous solution?
(a) 1.00 L of 0.045 mol/L calcium hydroxide, Ca(OH)2, solution
(b) 500 mL of 0.100 mol/L silver nitrate, AgNO3, solution
(c) 2.5 L of 1.00 mol/L potassium chromate, K2CrO4, solution
(d) 40 mL of 6.0 mol/L sulfuric acid, H2SO4, solution
(e) 4.24 L of 0.775 mol/L ammonium nitrate, NH4NO3, solution
21. A student dissolves 30.46 g of silver nitrate, AgNO3, in water
to make 500 mL of solution. What is the molar concentration
of the solution?
22. What volume of 0.25 mol/L solution can be made using 14 g
of sodium hydroxide, NaOH?
23. A 100 mL bottle of skin lotion contains a number of solutes. One
of these solutes is zinc oxide, ZnO. The concentration of zinc
oxide in the skin lotion is 0.915 mol/L. What mass of zinc oxide
is present in the bottle?
24. Formalin is an aqueous solution of formaldehyde, HCHO, used
to preserve biological specimens. What mass of formaldehyde
is needed to prepare 1.5 L of formalin with a concentration of
10 mol/L?
You have done many calculations for the concentration of various
solutions. Now you are in a position to do some hands-on work with
solution concentration. In the following investigation, you will use
what you have learned to design your own experiment to determine the
concentration of a solution.
316 MHR • Unit 3  Solutions and Solubility
S K I L L   F O C U S
Initiating and planning
Performing and recording
Communicating results
Predicting
Determining the
Concentration of a Solution
Your teacher will give you a sample of a solution.
Design and perform an experiment to determine
the concentration of the solution. Express the
concentration as
(a) mass of solute dissolved in 100 mL
of solution
(b) mass of solute dissolved in 100 g of solvent
(c) amount of solute (in mol) dissolved in 1 L
of solution
Safety Precautions
When you have designed your investigation,
think about the safety precautions you will
need to take.
Materials
any apparatus in the laboratory
solution containing a solid dissolved in water
Note: Your teacher will tell you the name of
the solute.
Procedure
1. Think about what you need to know in order
to determine the concentration of a solution.
Then design your experiment so that you can
measure each quantity you need. Assume that
the density of pure water is 1.00 g/mL.
2. Write the steps that will allow you to measure
the quantities you need. Design a data table
for your results. Include a space for the name
of the solute in your solution.
3. When your teacher approves your procedure,
complete your experiment.
4. Dispose of your solution as directed by
your teacher.
Analysis
1. Express the concentration of the solution
you analyzed as
(a) mass of solute dissolved in 100 mL
of solution
(b) mass of solute dissolved in 100 g of solvent
(c) molar concentration
Show your calculations.
Conclusions
2. List at least two important sources of error
in your measurements.
3. List at least two important ways that you
could improve your procedure.
4. Did the solute partially decompose on
heating, producing a gas and another solid?
If so, how do you think this affected the
results of your experiment?
Chapter 8  Solutions and Their Concentrations • MHR 317
Concept Organizer
Summary of Sections 8.1 to 8.3
g/100 mL
(m/v)%
(m/m)%
(v/v)%
Concentration can
be expressed in
different ways
ppm, ppb
mol/L
Solutions
• solid (e.g., steel)
• liquid (e.g., juice)
• gas (e.g., air)
Rate of dissolving
(how fast the
solute dissolves)
depends on
• temperature
• agitation
• particle size
ionic compounds
dissolve in polar
solvents
e.g., NaCl in H2O
polar covalent
compounds dissolve
in polar solvents
e.g., sugar in H2O
non-polar
compounds dissolve
in non-polar solvents
e.g., oil in benzene
Unit Issue Prep
The concentration of a pesti-
cide or other contaminant
dissolved in water determines
the level of pollution. If you
wish to work on your Unit 3
Issue now, do some research
on pesticides such as DDT,
diazinon, and MCPA. What
concentrations of these
pesticides are unacceptable
in water systems?
ion-dipole attraction
dipole-dipole attraction
no polar or ionic attraction
Attraction between
particles
Solubility (g/100 mL)
(how much solute dissolves)
depends on
• molecule size
• temperature
• pressure
Section Wrap-up
You have learned about several different ways in which chemists express
concentration: mass/volume, mass/mass, and volume/volume percent;
parts per million and parts per billion; and molar concentration. The
Concept Organizer above summarizes what you have learned in this
chapter so far.
In section 8.4, you will learn how standard solutions of known
concentration are prepared. You will also learn how to dilute a standard
solution.
Section Review
1
I
Ammonium chloride, NH4Cl, is a very soluble salt. 300 g of
ammonium chloride are dissolved in 600 mL of water. What is the
percent (m/m) of the solution?
2
I
A researcher measures 85.1 mL of a solution of liquid
hydrocarbons. The researcher then distills the sample to separate
the pure liquids. If 20.3 mL of the hydrocarbon hexane are recovered,
what is its percent (v/v) in the sample?
3
4
I
A stock solution of phosphoric acid is 85.0% (m/v) H3PO4
in water. What is its molar concentration?
MC
Cytosol is an intracellular solution containing many important
solutes. Research this solution. Write a paragraph describing the
function of cytosol, and the solutes it contains.
318 MHR • Unit 3  Solutions and Solubility
Preparing Solutions
What do the effectiveness of a medicine, the safety of a chemical reaction,
and the cost of an industrial process have in common? They all depend
on solutions that are made carefully with known concentrations. A
solution with a known concentration is called a standard solution. There
are two ways to prepare an aqueous solution with a known concentration.
You can make a solution by dissolving a measured mass of pure solute
in a certain volume of solution. Alternatively, you can dilute a solution of
known concentration.
Using a Volumetric Flask
A volumetric ﬂask is a pear-shaped glass container with a ﬂat bottom and
a long neck. Volumetric ﬂasks like the ones shown in Figure 8.19 are used
to make up standard solutions. They are available in a variety of sizes.
Each size can measure a ﬁxed volume of solution to ±0.1 mL at a particu-
lar temperature, usually 20˚C. When using a volumetric ﬂask, you must
ﬁrst measure the mass of the pure solute. Then you transfer the solute to
the ﬂask using a funnel, as shown in Figure 8.20. At this point, you add
the solvent (usually water) to dissolve the solute, as in Figure 8.21. You
continue adding the solvent until the bottom of the meniscus appears to
touch the line that is etched around the neck of the ﬂask. See Figure 8.22.
This is the volume of the solution, within ±0.1 mL. If you were perform-
ing an experiment in which signiﬁcant digits and errors were important,
you would record the volume of a solution in a 500 mL volumetric ﬂask
as 500.0 mL ±0.1 mL. Before using a volumetric ﬂask, you need to rinse
it several times with a small quantity of distilled water and discard the
washings. Standard solutions are never stored in volumetric ﬂasks. Instead,
they are transferred to another bottle that has a secure stopper or cap.
8.4
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
prepare solutions by
dissolving a solid solute and
then diluting a concentrated
solution
communicate your under-
standing of the following
terms: standard solution,
volumetric ﬂask
These volumetric
Figure 8.19
ﬂasks, from left to right, contain
solutions of chromium(III) salts,
iron(III) salts, and cobalt(II) salts.
Transfer a
Figure 8.20
known mass of solid solute
into the volumetric ﬂask.
Alternatively, dissolve the
solid in a small volume of
solvent. Then add the liquid
to the ﬂask.
Add distilled
Figure 8.21
water until the ﬂask is about
half full. Swirl the mixture
around in order to dissolve
the solute completely. Rinse
the beaker that contained
the solute with solvent. Add
the rinsing to the ﬂask.
Add the rest of
Figure 8.22
the water slowly. When the
ﬂask is almost full, add the
water drop by drop until the
bottom of the meniscus rests
at the etched line.
Chapter 8  Solutions and Their Concentrations • MHR 319
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
Diluting a Solution
You can make a less concentrated solution of a known solution by adding
a measured amount of additional solvent to the standard solution. The
number of molecules, or moles, of solute that is present remains the same
before and after the dilution. (See Figure 8.23.)
To reinforce these ideas, read through the Sample Problem below.
Then try the Practice Problems that follow.
When a solution is
Figure 8.23
diluted, the volume increases.
However, the amount of solute
remains the same.
Sample Problem
Diluting a Standard Solution
Problem
For a class experiment, your teacher must make 2.0 L of 0.10 mol/L
sulfuric acid. This acid is usually sold as an 18 mol/L concentrated
solution. How much of the concentrated solution should be used to
make a new solution with the correct concentration?
What Is Required?
You need to ﬁnd the volume of concentrated solution to be diluted.
What Is Given?
Initial concentration = 18 mol/L
Concentration of diluted solution = 0.10 mol/L
Volume of diluted solution = 2.0 L
Plan Your Strategy
Note: Amount of solute (mol) after dilution = Amount of solute
(mol) before dilution
Step 1 Calculate the amount of solute (in mol) that is needed for the
ﬁnal dilute solution.
Step 2 Calculate the volume of the concentrated solution that will
provide the necessary amount of solute.
Continued ...
320 MHR • Unit 3  Solutions and Solubility
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 320
Act on Your Strategy
Step 1 Calculate the amount of solute that is needed for the ﬁnal
dilute solution.
Molar concentration (in mol/L) = Amount of solute (in mol)
Volume of solution (in L)
∴ Amount of solute = Molar concentration × Volume of solution
For the ﬁnal dilute solution,
Amount of solute = 0.10 mol/L × 2.0 L
= 0.20 mol
Step 2 Calculate the volume of the original concentrated solution
that is needed.
Rearrange and use the molar concentration equation.
Substitute in the amount of solute you calculated in step 1.
Volume of solution (in L) =
Amount of solute (in mol)
Molar concentration (in mol/L)
= 0.20 mol
18 mol/L
= 0.011 L
Therefore, 0.011 L, or 11 mL, of the concentrated 18 mol/L solution
should be used to make 2.0 L of 0.10 mol/L sulfuric acid.
Check Your Solution
The units are correct. The ﬁnal solution must be much less
concentrated. Thus, it is reasonable that only a small volume of
concentrated solution is needed.
Practice Problems
25. Suppose that you are given a solution of 1.25 mol/L sodium
chloride in water, NaCl(aq). What volume must you dilute to
prepare the following solutions?
(a) 50 mL of 1.00 mol/L NaCl(aq)
(b) 200 mL of 0.800 mol/L NaCl(aq)
(c) 250 mL of 0.300 mol/L NaCl(aq)
26. What concentration of solution is obtained by diluting 50.0 mL of
0.720 mol/L aqueous sodium nitrate, NaNO3(aq), to each volume?
(a) 120 mL
(b) 400 mL
(c) 5.00 L
27. A solution is prepared by adding 600 mL of distilled water to
100 mL of 0.15 mol/L ammonium nitrate. Calculate the molar
concentration of the solution. Assume that the volume quantities
can be added together.
Now that you understand how to calculate standard solutions and dilution,
it is time for you to try it out for yourself. In the following investigation,
you will prepare and dilute standard solutions.
Chapter 8  Solutions and Their Concentrations • MHR 321
S K I L L   F O C U S
Initiating and planning
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
Estimating Concentration
of an Unknown Solution
Copper(II) sulfate, CuSO4, is a soluble salt. It is
sometimes added to pools and ponds to control
the growth of fungi. Solutions of this salt are
blue in colour. The intensity of the colour
increases with increased concentration. In this
investigation, you will prepare copper(II) sulfate
solutions with known concentrations. Then you
will estimate the concentration of an unknown
solution by comparing its colour intensity with
the colour intensities of the known solutions.
Copper(II) sulfate pentahydrate is a hydrate.
Hydrates are ionic compounds that have a
speciﬁc amount of water molecules associated
with each ion pair.
Question
How can you estimate the concentration of an
unknown solution?
Part 1 Making Solutions with Known
Concentrations
Safety Precautions
• Copper(II) sulfate is poisonous. Wash your
hands at the end of this investigation.
• If you spill any solution on your skin, wash
it off immediately with copious amounts of
cool water.
Materials
graduated cylinder
6 beakers
chemical balance
stirring rod
copper(II) sulfate pentahydrate, CuSO4·5H2O
distilled water
labels or grease marker
Procedure
1. With your partner, develop a method to
prepare 100 mL of 0.500 mol/L aqueous
CuSO4·5H2O solution. Include the water
molecules that are hydrated to the crystals,
as given in the molecular formula, in your
calculation of the molar mass. Show all your
calculations. Prepare the solution.
2. Save some of the solution you prepared in
step 1, to be tested in Part 2. Use the rest
of the solution to make the dilutions in
steps 3 to 5. Remember to label the solutions.
3. Develop a method to dilute part of the
0.500 mol/L CuSO4 solution, to make
100 mL of 0.200 mol/L solution. Show your
calculations. Prepare the solution.
4. Show your calculations to prepare 100 mL of
0.100 mol/L solution, using the solution you
prepared in step 3. (You do not need to
describe the method because it will be similar
to the method you developed in step 3. Only
the volume diluted will be different.) Prepare
the solution.
5. Repeat step 4 to make 100 mL of 0.050 mol/L
CuSO4, by diluting part of the 0.100 mol/L
solution you made. Then make 50 mL of
0.025 mol/L solution by diluting part of the
0.050 mol/L solution.
Part 2 Estimating the Concentration of an
Unknown Solution
Materials
paper towels
6 clean, dry, identical test tubes
medicine droppers
5 prepared solutions from Part 1
10 mL of copper(II) sulfate, CuSO4, solution
with an unknown concentration
322 MHR • Unit 3  Solutions and Solubility
Procedure
1. You should have ﬁve labelled beakers
containing CuSO4 solutions with the
following concentrations: 0.50 mol/L,
0.20 mol/L, 0.10 mol/L, 0.05 mol/L, and
0.025 mol/L. Your teacher will give you a
sixth solution of unknown concentration.
Record the letter or number that identiﬁes
this solution.
2. Label each test tube, one for each solution.
Pour a sample of each solution into a test
tube. The height of the solution in the test
tubes should be the same. Use a medicine
dropper to add or take away solution as need-
ed. (Be careful not to add water, or a solution
of different concentration, to a test tube.)
3. The best way to compare colour intensity is
by looking down through the test tube. Wrap
each test tube with a paper towel to stop light
from entering the side.  Arrange the solutions
of known concentration in order.
4. Place the solutions over a diffuse light source
such as a lightbox. Compare the colour of the
unknown solution with the colours of the
other solutions.
5. Use your observations to estimate the
concentration of the unknown solution.
6. Pour the solutions of CuSO4 into a beaker
supplied by your teacher. Wash your hands.
Analysis
1. Describe any possible sources of error for
Part 1 of this investigation.
2. What is your estimate of the concentration of
the unknown solution?
Conclusion
3. Obtain the concentration of the unknown
solution from your teacher. Calculate the
percentage error in your estimate.
Applications
4. Use your estimated concentration of the
unknown solution to calculate the mass of
CuSO4·5H2O that your teacher would need
to prepare 500 mL of this solution.
5. If your school has a spectrometer or colori-
meter, you can measure the absorption of light
passing through the solutions. By measuring
the absorption of solutions of copper(II) sulfate
with different concentrations, you can draw a
graph of absorption against concentration.
Chapter 8  Solutions and Their Concentrations • MHR 323
When diluting acid,
Figure 8.24
always add the acid to the
water—never the reverse.
Rubber gloves, a lab coat, and
safety goggles or a face shield
protect against acid splashes.
Diluting Concentrated Acids
The acids that you use in your investigations are bought as concentrated
standard solutions. Sulfuric acid is usually bought as an 18 mol/L solu-
tion. Hydrochloric acid is usually bought as a 12 mol/L solution. These
acids are far too dangerous for you to use at these concentrations. Your
teacher dilutes concentrated acids, following a procedure that minimizes
the hazards involved.
Concentrated acids should be diluted in a fume hood because
breathing in the fumes causes acid to form in air passages and lungs.
Rubber gloves must be used to protect the hands. A lab coat is needed
to protect clothing. Even small splashes of a concentrated acid will form
holes in fabric. Safety goggles, or even a full-face shield, are essential.
Mixing a strong, concentrated acid with water is a very exothermic
process. A concentrated acid is denser than water. Therefore, when it is
poured into water, it sinks into the solution and mixes with the solution.
The heat that is generated is spread throughout the solution. This is
the only safe way to mix an acid and water. If you added water to a
concentrated acid, the water would ﬂoat on top of the solution. The heat
generated at the acid-water layer could easily boil the solution and splat-
ter highly corrosive liquid. The sudden heat generated at the acid-water
boundary could crack the glassware and lead to a very dangerous spill.
Figure 8.24 illustrates safety precautions needed to dilute a strong acid.
Section Wrap-up
In this section, you learned how to prepare solutions by dissolving a solid
solute and then diluting a concentrated solution. In the next chapter, you
will see how water is used as a solvent in chemistry laboratories. Many
important reactions take place in water. You will also learn more about
water pollution and water puriﬁcation.
Section Review
1
2
3
4
5
I
What mass of potassium chloride, KCl, is used to make 25.0 mL
of a solution with a concentration of 2.00 mol/L?
I
A solution is prepared by dissolving 42.5 g of silver nitrate,
AgNO3 in a 1 L volumetric ﬂask. What is the molar concentration
of the solution?
I
The solution of aqueous ammonia that is supplied to schools has a
concentration of 14 mol/L. Your class needs 3.0 L of a solution with a
concentration of 0.10 mol/L.
(a) What procedure should your teacher follow to make up this solution?
(b) Prepare an instruction sheet or a help ﬁle for your teacher to carry
out this dilution.
I
47.9 g of potassium chlorate, KClO3, is used to make a solution with
a concentration of 0.650 mol/L. What is the volume of the solution?
I
Water and 8.00 mol/L potassium nitrate solution are mixed to
produce 700 mL of a solution with a concentration of 6.00 mol/L.
What volumes of water and potassium nitrate solution are used?
324 MHR • Unit 3  Solutions and Solubility
Review
Reﬂecting on Chapter 8
Summarize this chapter in the format of your
choice. Here are a few ideas to use as guidelines:
• Describe the difference between a saturated and
an unsaturated solution.
• Explain how you can predict whether a solute
will dissolve in a solvent.
• What factors affect the rate of dissolving?
• What factors affect solubility?
• How does temperature affect the solubility of a
solid, a liquid, and a gas?
• Describe how particle attractions affect solubility.
• Explain how to plot a solubility curve.
• Write the formulas for (m/v) percent, (m/m)
percent, (v/v) percent, ppm, ppb, and molar
concentration.
• Explain how you would prepare a standard
solution using a volumetric ﬂask.
Reviewing Key Terms
For each of the following terms, write a sentence
that shows your understanding of its meaning.
solution
solvent
solutes
variable composition
aqueous solution
miscible
immiscible
alloys
solubility
saturated solution
unsaturated solution
rate of dissolving
dipole
dipole-dipole attraction
hydrogen bonding
ion-dipole attractions
hydrated
electrolyte
non-electrolytes
concentration
mass/volume percent
mass/mass percent
volume/volume percent
parts per million
parts per billion
molar concentration
standard solution
volumetric ﬂask
Knowledge/Understanding
1. Identify at least two solutions in your home
that are
(a) beverages
(b) found in the bathroom or medicine cabinet
(c) solids
2. How is a solution different from a pure
compound? Give speciﬁc examples.
3. Mixing 2 mL of linseed oil and 4 mL of
turpentine makes a binder for oil paint. What
term is used to describe liquids that dissolve in
each other? Which liquid is the solvent?
4. How does the bonding in water molecules
account for the fact that water is an exellent
solvent?
5. Why does an aqueous solution of an electrolyte
conduct electricity, but an aqueous solution of
a non-electrolyte does not?
6. Use the concept of forces between particles to
explain why oil and water are immiscible.
7. Explain the expression “like dissolves like” in
terms of intermolecular forces.
8. What factors affect the rate of dissolving of a
solid in a liquid?
9. Which of the following substances would you
expect to be soluble in water? Brieﬂy explain
each answer.
(a) potassium chloride, KCl
(b) carbon tetrachloride, CCl4
(c) sodium sulfate, Na2SO4
(d) butane, C4H10
10. Benzene, C6H6, is a liquid at room temperature.
It is sometimes used as a solvent. Which of
the following compounds is more soluble
in benzene: naphthalene, C10H8, or sodium
ﬂuoride, NaF? Would you expect ethanol,
CH3CH2OH, to be soluble in benzene? Explain
your answers.
Inquiry
11. Boric acid solution is used as an eyewash.
What mass of boric acid is present in 250 g of
solution that is 2.25% (m/m) acid in water?
12. 10% (m/m) sodium hydroxide solution,
NaOH(aq), is used to break down wood ﬁbre
to make paper.
(a) What mass of solute is needed to make
250 mL of 10% (m/m) solution?
(b) What mass of solvent is needed?
(c) What is the molar concentration of the
solution?
13. What volume of pure ethanol is needed to
make 800 mL of a solution of ethanol in water
that is 12% (v/v)?
Chapter 8  Solutions and Their Concentrations • MHR 325
14. Some municipalities add sodium ﬂuoride, NaF,
to drinking water to help protect the teeth of
children. The concentration of sodium ﬂuoride
is maintained at 2.9 × 10−5 mol/L. What mass
(in mg) of sodium ﬂuoride is dissolved in 1 L of
water? Express this concentration in ppm.
15. A saturated solution of sodium acetate,
NaCH3COO, can be prepared by dissolving
4.65 g in 10.0 mL of water at 20˚C. What is the
molar concentration of the solution?
16. What is the molar concentration of each of the
following solutions?
(a) 7.25 g of silver nitrate, AgNO3, dissolved
in 100 mL of solution
(b) 80 g of glucose, C6H12O6, dissolved
in 70 mL of solution
17. Calculate the mass of solute that is needed to
prepare each solution below.
(a) 250 mL of 0.250 mol/L calcium acetate,
Ca(CH3COO)2
(b) 1.8 L of 0.35 mol/L ammonium sulfate,
(NH4)2SO4
18. Calculate the molar concentration of each
solution formed after dilution.
(a) 20 mL of 6.0 mol/L hydrochloric acid,
HCl(aq), diluted to 70 mL
(b) 300 mL of 12.0 mol/L ammonia, NH3(aq),
diluted to 2.50 L
19. Calculate the molar concentration of each
solution. Assume that the volumes can be
added.
(a) 85.0 mL of 1.50 mol/L ammonium chloride,
NH4Cl(aq), added to 250 mL of water
(b) a 1:3 dilution of 1.0 mol/L calcium
phosphate (that is, one part stock solution
mixed with three parts water)
20. A standard solution of 0.250 mol/L calcium ion
is prepared by dissolving solid calcium carbon-
ate in an acid. What mass of calcium carbonate
is needed to prepare 1.00 L of the solution?
21. Suppose that your teacher gives you three test
tubes. Each test tube contains a clear, colour-
less liquid. One liquid is an aqueous solution
of an electrolyte. Another liquid is an aqueous
solution of a non-electrolyte. The third liquid is
distilled water. Outline the procedure for an
experiment to identify which liquid is which.
326 MHR • Unit 3  Solutions and Solubility
22. Fertilizers for home gardeners may be sold as
aqueous solutions. Suppose that you want to
begin a company that sells an aqueous solution
of potassium nitrate, KNO3, fertilizer. You need
a solubility curve (a graph of solubility versus
temperature) to help you decide what concen-
tration to use for your solution. Describe an
experiment that you might perform to develop
a solubility curve for potassium nitrate. State
which variables are controlled, which are
varied, and which must be measured.
23. Potassium alum, KAl(SO4)2·12H2O , is used to
stop bleeding from small cuts. The solubility
of potassium alum, at various temperatures, is
given in the following table.
Solubility of Potassium Alum
Solubility
(g/100 g water)
Temperature (˚C)
4
10
15
23
31
49
67
101
135
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
(a) Plot a graph of solubility against temperature.
(b) From your graph, interpolate the solubility
of potassium alum at 67˚C.
(c) By extrapolation, estimate the solubility of
potassium alum at 82˚C.
(d) Look at your graph. At what temperature
will 120 g of potassium alum form a
saturated solution in 100 g of water?
24. Use the graph on the next page to answer
questions 24 and 25. At 80˚C, what mass of
sodium chloride dissolves in 1.0 L of water?
25. What minimum temperature is required to
dissolve 24 g of potassium nitrate in 40 g
of water?
26. A teacher wants to dilute 200 mL of 12 mol/L
hydrochloric acid to make a 1 mol/L solution.
What safety precautions should the teacher take?
240
220
200
180
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
)
O
2
H
g
0
0
1
/
g
(
y
t
i
l
i
b
u
l
o
S
NaCIO3
KNO3
KBr
NaCI
0
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
Temperature (˚C)
This graph shows the solubility of four salts at various
temperatures. Use it to answer questions 24 and 25.
Communication
27. Suppose that you make a pot of hot tea. Later,
you put a glass of the tea in the refrigerator to
save it for a cool drink. When you take it out of
the refrigerator some hours later, you notice
that it is cloudy. How could you explain this to
a younger brother or sister?
28. Deﬁne each concentration term.
(a) percent (m/v)
(b) percent (m/m)
(c) percent (v/v)
(d) parts per million, ppm
(e) parts per billion, ppb
29. The concentration of iron in the water that
is supplied to a town is 0.25 mg/L. Express
this in ppm and ppb.
30. Ammonia is a gas at room temperature and
pressure, but it can be liqueﬁed easily. Liquid
ammonia is probably present on some planets.
Scientists speculate that it might be a good
solvent. Explain why, based on the structure
of the ammonia molecule shown above.
H
N
H
H
31. At 20˚C, the solubility of oxygen in water is
more than twice that of nitrogen. A student
analyzed the concentration of dissolved gases
in an unpolluted pond. She found that the
concentration of nitrogen gas was greater
than the concentration of oxygen. Prepare an
explanation for the student to give to her class.
32. What is the concentration of pure water?
Making Connections
33. A bright red mineral called cinnabar has the
chemical formula HgS. It can be used to make
an artist’s pigment, but it is a very insoluble
compound. A saturated solution at 25˚C has a
concentration of 2 × 10−27 mol/L. In the past,
why was heavy metal poisoning common in
painters? Why did painters invariably waste
more cinnabar than they used?
34. Vitamin A is a compound that is soluble in fats
but not in water. It is found in certain foods,
including yellow fruit and green vegetables.
In parts of central Africa, children frequently
show signs of vitamin A deﬁciency, although
their diet contains a good supply of the
necessary fruits and vegetables. Why?
Answers to Practice Problems and
Short Answers to Section Review Questions:
Practice Problems: 1.(a) 3.16% (b) 1.75% (c) 2.9%  2. 6.31%
3. 0.362 g  4. 3.0 g, 0.1 g, 0.12 g  5.(a) 26% (b) 16.6%
(c) 15.1%  6. 35%  7. 85 g  8. 6.35 g  9. 15 g  10. 15%
11. 12 mL  12. 38%  13. 18 mL  14. 285 mL  15.(a) 0.33 ppm
(b) 3.3 × 102 ppb (c) 0.000033%  16. 0.040 g  17. 3.0 ppm
18. 500 ppm  19.(a) 1.7 mol/L (b) 2.41 mol/L (c) 1.2 mol/L
(d) 0.805 mol/L (e) 0.18 mol/L  20.(a) 3.3 g (b) 8.49 g
(c) 4.9 × 102 g (d) 24 g (e) 263 g  21. 0.359 mol/L  22. 1.4 L
23. 7.45 g  24. 4.5 × 102 g 25.(a) 40 mL (b) 128 mL
(c) 60.0 mL  26.(a) 0.300 mol/L (b) 9.00 × 10−2 mol/L
(c) 7.20 × 10−3 mol/L 27. 2.1 × 10−2 mol/L
Section Review:  8.1: 1. solute, solvent  8. polar, ionic
13. non-polar  8.2: 3.(a) increases (b) decreases
6.(a) Ce2(SO4)3 (b) Ce2(SO4)3, NaNO3 (c) NaCl (d) 84˚C
(e) 10 g  8.3: 1. 33.3  2. 23.8%  3. 8.67 mol/L  8.4: 1. 3.73 g
2. 0.25 mol/L  4. 601 mL  5. 175 mL, 525 mL
Chapter 8  Solutions and Their Concentrations • MHR 327
328
Aqueous Solutions
In 1966, a Russian scientist who was lecturing in England stunned the
scientiﬁc community with the report of a new discovery. He said that a
colleague had isolated a new form of liquid water. Dubbed “polywater,”
this substance was prepared in a laboratory by heating and then condens-
ing H2O(g) in very narrow glass capillary tubes. Over the next seven years,
scientists around the world conducted studies and published over 500
papers about polywater’s properties. For example, its boiling point,
density, and viscosity were greater than those of ordinary water. Its
freezing point was lower.
Then the popular media took an interest. They turned a simmering
scientiﬁc curiosity into a boiling concern. Polywater apparently had a
powerful capacity for hydrogen bonding. What if it escaped from a
laboratory? There were dire predictions that polywater would “take over”
Earth’s water resources. The imagined consequences for life on Earth
were grim.
Eventually further studies revealed that polywater was simply a
concentrated solution of silicon (silicic acid) and several ionic com-
pounds in ordinary water. The glass tubing was the source of these
solutes. They had leached into the water.
The polywater event occurred because scientists overlooked, for
awhile, water’s remarkable power as a solvent. In this chapter, you will
learn how to predict which compounds are soluble in water. As well,
you will consider how chemical reactions in aqueous (water) solutions
are useful in industry and in protecting the quality of our water supplies.
In what ways are aqueous
solutions an inescapable
part of your daily life?
C h a p t e r   P r e v i e w
9.1 Making Predictions About
Solubility
9.2 Reactions in Aqueous
Solutions
9.3 Stoichiometry in Solution
Chemistry
9.4 Aqueous Solutions and
Water Quality
C o n c e p t s   a n d   S k i l l s
Yo u   W i l l   N e e d
Before you begin this chapter,
review the following concepts
and skills:
identifying factors that
affect solubility (Chapter 8,
section 8.2)
performing stoichiometry
calculations (Chapter 7,
section 7.1)
Chapter 9  Aqueous Solutions • MHR 329
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
9.1
Making Predictions
About Solubility
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
describe and identify combi-
nations of aqueous solutions
that result in the formation of
precipitates
communicate, using appro-
priate scientiﬁc vocabulary,
ideas related to solubility
and aqueous solutions
communicate your under-
standing of the following
terms: precipitate, general
solubility guidelines
C H E M
FA C T
Because the terms “soluble”
and “insoluble” are relative,
some textbooks give different
deﬁnitions and units of con-
centration to describe them.
Here are a few examples:
In Chapter 8, you examined factors that affect the solubility of a com-
pound. As well, you learned that the terms “soluble” and “insoluble” are
relative, because no substance is completely insoluble in water. “Soluble”
generally means that more than about 1 g of solute will dissolve in 100
mL of water at room temperature. “Insoluble” means that the solubility is
less than 0.1 g per 100 mL. While many ionic compounds are soluble in
water, many others are not. Cooks, chemists, farmers, pharmacists, and
gardeners need to know which compounds are soluble and which are
insoluble. (See Figure 9.1.)
Plant food may
Figure 9.1
come in the form of a liquid or
a powder. Gardeners dissolve
the plant food in water, and then
either spray or water the plant
with the resulting solution.
Factors That Affect the Solubility of Ionic Substances
Nearly all alkali metal compounds are soluble in water. Sulﬁde and
phosphate compounds are usually insoluble. How, then, do you account
for the fact that sodium sulﬁde and potassium phosphate are soluble,
while iron sulﬁde and calcium phosphate are insoluble? Why do some
ions form soluble compounds, while other ions form insoluble compounds?
The Effect of Ion Charge on Solubility
Compounds of ions with small charges tend to be soluble. Compounds of
ions with large charges tend to be insoluble. Why? Increasing the charge
increases the force that holds the ions
together. For example, phosphates (com-
3−) tend to be insoluble. On
pounds of PO4
the other hand, the salts of alkali metals
are soluble. Alkali metal cations have a
single positive charge, so the force that
holds the ions together is less.
Soluble
more than 1 g
in 100 mL
or
greater than 0.1 mol/L
Partly or
slightly soluble
Insoluble
between 1 g and 0.1 g
in 100 mL
less than
0.1 g in 100 mL
or
between 0.1 mol/L
and 0.01 mol/L
or
less than
0.01 mol/L
330 MHR • Unit 3  Solutions and Solubility
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
The Effect of Ion Size on Solubility
When an atom gives up or gains an electron, the size of the ion that results
is different from the size of the original atom. In Figure 9.2A, for example,
you can see that the sodium ion is smaller than the sodium atom. In
general, the ions of metals tend to be smaller than their corresponding
neutral atoms. For the ions of non-metals, the reverse is true. The ions of
non-metals tend to be larger than their corresponding neutral atoms.
Small ions bond more closely together than large ions. Thus, the bond
between small ions is stronger than the bond between large ions with
the same charge. As a result, compounds with small ions tend to be less
soluble than compounds with large ions. Consider the ions of elements
from Group 17 (VIIA), for example. Recall, from Chapters 2 and 3, that the
size of the ions increases as you go down a family in the periodic table.
(See Figure 9.2B.) Therefore, you would expect that ﬂuoride compounds
are less soluble than chloride, bromide, and iodide compounds. This
tends to be the case.
Group
13
14 15 16
1
2
17
18
F
Cl
Br
I
372 pm
182 pm
Na
Na+
Cl
Cl −
362 pm
232 pm
A
B
The size of the cation
Figure 9.2A
of a metal, such as sodium, tends
to be smaller than the size of the
atom from which it was formed.
The size of the anion of a non-
metal, such as phosphorus, tends
to be larger than the size of its
atom.
In Group 17 (VIIA), ﬂuoride ions
Figure 9.2B
are smaller than chloride, bromide, and iodide
ions. How does this periodic trend affect the
solubility of compounds that are formed from
these elements?
Ionic size
F-
Cl-
Br-
I-
266 pm
362 pm
392 pm
440 pm
Making Predictions About Solubility
Sulﬁdes (compounds of S2−) and oxides (compounds of O2−) are inﬂuenced
by both ion size and ion charge. These compounds tend to be insoluble
because their ions have a double charge and are relatively small. Even so, a
few sulﬁdes and oxides are soluble, as you will discover in Investigation 1-A.
Many interrelated factors affect the solubility of substances in water.
This makes it challenging to predict which ionic substances will dissolve
in water. By performing experiments, chemists have developed guidelines
to help them make predictions about solubility. In Investigation 9-A,
you will perform your own experiments to develop quidelines about
the solubility of ionic compounds in water.
Sketch an outline of the
periodic table. Add labels
and arrows to indicate what
you think are the trends for
ionic size (radius) across a
period and down a group.
Then suggest reasons for
these trends. Speciﬁcally,
identify the factors that you
think are responsible for the
differences in the sizes of ions
and their “parent” atoms.
Chapter 9  Aqueous Solutions • MHR 331
S K I L L   F O C U S
Predicting
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
Communicating results
Safety Precautions
• Do not contaminate the dropper bottles. The
tip of a dropper should not make contact with
either the plate or another solution. Put the cap
back on the bottle immediately after use.
• Dispose of solutions as directed by your
teacher.
• Make sure that you are working in a well-
ventilated area.
• If you accidentally spill any of the solutions on
your skin, wash the area immediately with
plenty of cool water.
Procedure
1. Your teacher will give you a set of nine
solutions to test. Each solution includes one
of ﬁve cations or four anions. Design a table
to record the results of all the possible
combinations of cations with anions in
your set of solutions.
2. Decide how to use the well plate or spot plate
to test systematically all the combinations of
cations with anions in your set. If your plate
does not have enough wells, you will need
to clean the plate before you can test all the
possible combinations. To clean the plate, ﬁrst
discard solutions into the container provided
by your teacher. Then rinse the plate with
distilled water, and clean the wells using a
cotton swab.
3. To test each combination of anion and cation,
add one or two drops into your well plate or
spot plate. Then stir the mixture using a
toothpick. Rinse the toothpick with running
water before each stirring. Make sure that you
keep track of the combinations of ions in each
well or spot.
The Solubility of
Ionic Compounds
In this investigation, you will work with a set of
solutions. You will chemically combine small
quantities, two at a time. This will help you
determine which combinations react to produce
a precipitate. A precipitate is an insoluble solid
that may result when two aqueous solutions
chemically react. The appearance of a precipi-
tate indicates that an insoluble compound is
present. Then you will compile your data with
the data from other groups to develop some
guidelines about the solubility of several ionic
compounds.
Problem
How can you develop guidelines to help you pre-
dict the solubility of ionic compounds in water?
Prediction
Read the entire Procedure. Predict which
combination of anions and cations will likely
be soluble and which combination will likely
be insoluble. Justify your prediction by brieﬂy
explaining your reasoning.
Materials
12-well or 24-well plate, or spot plate
toothpicks
cotton swabs
wash bottle with distilled water
piece of black paper
piece of white paper
labelled dropper bottles of aqueous solutions that
contain the following cations:
Al3+, NH4
Na+, Zn2+
+, Ba2+, Ca2+, Cu2+, Fe2+, Mg2+, Ag+,
labelled dropper bottles of aqueous solutions that
contain the following anions:
CH3COO−, Br−, CO3
SO4
2−, S2−
2− , Cl−, OH−, PO4
3−,
332 MHR • Unit 3  Solutions and Solubility
2. Identify any anions that
(a) always appear to form soluble compounds
(b) always appear to form insoluble compounds
3. Based on your observations, which sulfates
are insoluble?
4. Based on your observations, which
phosphates are soluble?
5. Explain why each reagent solution you tested
must contain both cations and anions.
6. Your teacher prepared the cation solutions
using compounds that contain the nitrate ion.
For example, the solution marked Ca2+ was
prepared by dissolving Ca(NO3)2 in water.
Why were nitrates used to make these
solutions?
Conclusions
7. Which group in the periodic table most
likely forms cations with salts that are
usually soluble?
8. Which group in the periodic table most
likely forms anions with salts that are
usually soluble?
9. Your answers to questions 7 and 8 represent
a preliminary set of guidelines for predicting
the solubility of the compounds you tested.
Many reference books refer to guidelines like
these as “solubility rules.” Why might “solu-
bility guidelines” be a better term to use for
describing solubility patterns?
Why is it necessary to clean the well or spot plate as
described in step 2?
4. Examine each mixture for evidence of a
precipitate. Place the plate on a sheet of
white or black paper. (Use whichever colour
of paper helps you see a precipitate best.) Any
cloudy appearance in the mixture is evidence
of a precipitate. Many precipitates are white.
• If you can see that a precipitate has formed,
enter “I” in your table. This indicates that
the combination of ions produces an
insoluble substance.
• If you cannot see a precipitate, enter “S”
to indicate that the ion you are testing
is soluble.
5. Repeat steps 2 to 4 for each cation solution.
6. Discard the solutions and precipitates into the
container provided by your teacher. Rinse the
plate with water, and clean the wells using a
cotton swab.
7. If time permits, your teacher may give you a
second set of solutions to test.
Application
10. Predict another combination of an anion
8. Add your observations to the class data table.
Use your completed copy of the class data
table to answer the questions below.
Analysis
1. Identify any cations that
(a) always appear to form soluble compounds
(b) always appear to form insoluble compounds
and a cation (not used in this investigation)
that you would expect to be soluble. Predict
another combination that you would expect
to be insoluble. Share your predictions, and
your reasons, with the class. Account for any
agreement or disagreement.
Chapter 9  Aqueous Solutions • MHR 333
Soluble or Insoluble: General Solubility Guidelines
As you have seen, nearly all salts that contain the ammonium ion or an
alkali metal are soluble. This observed pattern does not tell you how solu-
ble these salts are, however. As well, it does not tell you whether ammo-
nium chloride is more or less soluble than sodium chloride. Chemists rely
on published data for this information. (See Figure 9.3.)
Many web sites on
Figure 9.3
the Internet provide chemical
and physical data for tens of
thousands of compounds. Print
resources, such as The CRC
Handbook of Chemistry and
Physics, provide these data
as well.
Many factors affect solubility. Thus, predicting solubility is neither
straightforward nor simple. Nevertheless, the general solubility guidelines
in Table 9.1 are a useful summary of ionic-compound interactions with
water. To use Table 9.1, remember that a higher guideline number always
takes precedence over a lower guideline number. For example, barium
chloride, BaCl2, is a white crystalline powder. The barium ion, Ba2+, is
listed in guideline 4 as insoluble. The chloride ion, Cl−, is listed in
guideline 3 as soluble. The higher guideline number takes precedence.
Thus, you would predict that barium chloride is soluble.
You will be referring to the general solubility guidelines often in this
chapter and in Chapter 10. They will help you identify salts that are solu-
ble and insoluble in aqueous solutions. Always keep in mind, however,
that water is a powerful solvent. Even an “insoluble” salt may dissolve
enough to present a serious hazard if it is highly poisonous.
Table 9.1 General Solubility Guidelines
Guideline
1
2
3
4
5
334 MHR • Unit 3  Solutions and Solubility
Cations
Li+, Na+, K+
,
Rb+, Cs+, NH4
+Hg
Ag+,
Pb2
+,
+
Anions
−
, CH3COO−,
NO3
−
ClO
3
2−
CO 2
,
3
S2−
O2−,
4PO
, OH
−3
,
−
Cl−, Br−, I−
Ba2+, Ca2+, Sr2+
Mg2+, Cu2+, Zn2+,
Fe2+, Fe3+, Al3+
−2
SO
4
Exceptions
Ca(ClO3)2
is insoluble
BaO and Ba(OH)2
are soluble.
Group 2 sulfides
tend  to decompose.
Result
soluble
insoluble
soluble
insoluble
soluble
Web
LINK
www.school.mcgrawhill.ca/
resources/
Different references present
solubility guidelines in different
ways. During a 1 h “surf
session” on the Internet, a
student collected ten different
versions. See how many
versions you can ﬁnd.
Compare their similarities and
differences. Which version(s)
do you prefer, and why? To
start your search, go to the
web site above. Go to Science
Resources, then to Chemistry
11 to ﬁnd out where to go next.
Practice Problems
1. Decide whether each of the following salts is soluble or insoluble in
distilled water. Give reasons for your answer.
(a) lead(II) chloride, PbCl2 (a white crystalline powder used in paints)
(b) zinc oxide, ZnO (a white pigment used in paints, cosmetics, and
calamine lotion)
(c) silver acetate, AgCH3COO (a whitish powder that is used to help
people quit smoking because of the bitter taste it produces)
2. Which of the following compounds are soluble in water? Explain
your reasoning for each compound.
(a) potassium nitrate, KNO3 (used to manufacture gunpowder)
(b) lithium carbonate, Li2CO3 (used to treat people who suffer
from depression)
(c) lead(II) oxide, PbO (used to make crystal glass)
3. Which of the following compounds are insoluble in water?
(a) calcium carbonate, CaCO3 (present in marble and limestone)
(b) magnesium sulfate, MgSO4 (found in the hydrated salt,
MgSO4·7H2O , also known as Epsom salts; used for the relief of
aching muscles and as a laxative)
(c) aluminum phosphate, AlPO4 (found in dental cements)
Section Wrap-up
In Chapter 8, you focussed mainly on physical changes that involve
solutions. In the ﬁrst section of this chapter, you observed that mixing
aqueous solutions of ionic compounds may result in either a physical
change (dissolving) or a chemical change (a reaction that forms a precipi-
tate). Chemical changes that involve aqueous solutions, especially ionic
reactions, are common. They occur in the environment, in your body,
and in the bodies of other organisms. In the next section, you will look
more closely at reactions that involve aqueous solutions. As well, you will
learn how to represent these reactions using a special kind of chemical
equation, called an ionic equation.
Chapter 9  Aqueous Solutions • MHR 335
Section Review
Language
LINK
1
Name the two factors that affect the solubility of an ionic
K/U
(a)
compound in water.
This poem is by an unknown
author. It is not great literature.
For decades, however, it has
helped many students remem-
ber the solubility guidelines.
Maybe it will do the same for
you. If not, you can try writing
your own poem!
Potassium, sodium, and
ammonium salts
Whatever they may be,
Can always be relied upon
For solubility.
Every single sulfate
Is soluble it’s said,
Except barium and calcium
And strontium and lead.
Most every chloride’s soluble,
That’s what we’ve always read,
Save silver, mercurous mercury,
And (slightly) chloride of lead.
When asked about the nitrates,
The answer’s always clear;
They each and all are soluble,
That’s all we want to hear.
Metallic bases won’t dissolve,
That is, all but three;
Potassium, sodium, and
ammonium
Dissolve quite readily.
But then you must remember,
You must surely not forget,
Calcium and barium
Dissolve a little bit.
Carbonates are insoluble,
It’s lucky that it’s so,
Or all our marble buildings
Would melt away like snow.
(b) Brieﬂy explain how each factor affects solubility.
2
K/U
Which would you expect to be less soluble: sodium ﬂuoride,
NaF (used in toothpaste), or sodium iodide, NaI (added to table salt
to prevent iodine deﬁciency in the diet)? Explain your answer.
3
K/U
Which of the following compounds are soluble in water?
(a) calcium sulﬁde, CaS (used in skin products)
(b) iron(II) sulfate, FeSO4 (used as a dietary supplement)
(c) magnesium chloride, MgCl2 (used as a disinfectant and a
food tenderizer)
4
MC
Which of the following compounds are insoluble in water? For
each compound, relate its solubility to the use described.
(a) barium sulfate, BaSO4 (can be used to obtain images of the stomach
and intestines because it is opaque to X-rays)
(b) aluminum hydroxide, Al(OH)3 (found in some antacid tablets)
(c) zinc carbonate, ZnCO3 (used in suntan lotions)
5
C
Calcium nitrate is used in ﬁreworks. Silver nitrate turns dark when
exposed to sunlight. When freshly made, both solutions are clear and
colourless. Imagine that someone has prepared both solutions but
has not labelled them. You do not want to wait for the silver nitrate
solution to turn dark in order to identify the solutions. Name a chemi-
cal that can be used to precipitate a silver compound with the silver
nitrate solution, but will produce no precipitate with the calcium
nitrate solution. State the reason for your choice.
6
C
Suppose that you discover four dropper bottles containing clear,
colourless liquids in your school laboratory. The following four labels
lie nearby:
• barium, Ba2+
• chloride, Cl−
• silver, Ag+
• sulfate, SO4
2−.
Unfortunately the labels have not been attached to the bottles. You
decide to number the bottles 1, 2, 3, and 4. Then you mix the solutions
in pairs. Three combinations give white precipitates: bottles 1 and 2, 1
and 4, and 2 and 3. Which ion does each bottle contain?
336 MHR • Unit 3  Solutions and Solubility
Reactions in Aqueous Solutions
When you mix two aqueous ionic compounds together, there are two
possible outcomes. Either the compounds will remain in solution without
reacting, or one aqueous ionic compound will chemically react with the
other. How can you predict which outcome will occur? Figure 9.4 shows
what happens when an aqueous solution of lead(II) nitrate is added to an
aqueous solution of potassium iodide. As you can see, a yellow solid — a
precipitate — is forming. This is a double displacement reaction. Recall,
from Chapter 4, that a double displacement reaction is a chemical reaction
that involves the exchange of ions to form two new compounds. It has the
general equation
WX + YZ → WZ + YX
In a double displacement reaction, the cations exchange anions. In the
reaction shown in Figure 9.4, for example, the lead cation is exchanged
with the iodide anion.
You can usually recognize a double displacement reaction by
observing one of these possible results:
• the formation of a precipitate (so that ions are removed from solution
as an insoluble solid)
• the formation of a gas (so that ions are removed from solution in the
form of a gaseous product)
• the formation of water (so that H+ and OH− ions are removed from
solution as water)
In this section, you will examine each of these results. At the same time,
you will learn how to represent a double displacement reaction using a
special kind of chemical equation: an ionic equation.
9.2
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
describe combinations
of aqueous solutions that
result in the formation of
precipitates
perform a qualitative
analysis of ions in solutions
represent double displace-
ment reactions by their net
ionic equations
(cid:2) write balanced chemical
equations and net ionic
equations for double
displacement reactions
communicate your under-
standing of the following
terms: spectator ions,
total ionic equation, net
ionic equation, qualitative
analysis
Language
LINK
Double displacement reactions
are also called metathesis
reactions. The word “meta-
thesis” (pronounced with the
stress on the second syllable:
meh-TATH-e-sis) means
“interchange.” In chemistry,
a metathesis reaction occurs
when ions or atoms are
exchanged between different
compounds. Chemists are
not the only people who use
this word. Use a dictionary
or encyclopedia to ﬁnd non-
chemistry examples of
metathesis.
Lead(II) nitrate
Figure 9.4
and potassium iodide are clear,
colourless aqueous solutions.
Mixing them causes a double
displacement reaction. An
insoluble yellow precipitate
(lead(II) iodide) and a soluble
salt (potassium nitrate) are
produced.
Chapter 9  Aqueous Solutions • MHR 337
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
Double Displacement Reactions That Produce a Precipitate
A double displacement reaction that results in the formation of an insolu-
ble substance is often called a precipitation reaction. Figure 9.4 is a clear
example of a precipitation reaction. What if you did not have this photo-
graph, however, and you were unable to do an experiment? Could you
have predicted that mixing Pb(NO3)(aq) and 2KI(aq) would result in an
insoluble compound? Yes. When you are given (on paper) a pair of solu-
tions to be mixed together, start by thinking about the exchange of ions
that may occur. Then use the general solubility guidelines (Table 9.1) to
predict which compounds, if any, are insoluble.
For example, consider lead(II) nitrate, Pb(NO3)2, and potassium
− anions.
iodide, KI. Lead(II) nitrate contains Pb2+ cations and NO3
Potassium iodide contains K+ cations and I− anions. Exchanging positive
ions results in lead(II) iodide, PbI2, and potassium nitrate, KNO3. From
the solubility guidelines, you know that all potassium salts and nitrates
are soluble. Thus, potassium nitrate is soluble. The Pb2+ ion is listed in
guideline 2 as an insoluble cation. The I− ion is listed in guideline 3 as
a soluble anion. Remember that a higher guideline number takes prece-
dence over a lower guideline number. Thus, you can predict that lead(II)
iodide is insoluble. It will form a precipitate when the solutions are
mixed. The balanced chemical equation for this reaction is
Pb(NO3)2(aq) + 2KI(aq) → 2KNO3(aq) + PbI2(s)
Sample Problem
Predicting the Formation of a Precipitate
Problem
Which of the following pairs of aqueous solutions produce a precipi-
tate when mixed together? Write the balanced chemical equation if
you predict a precipitate. Write “NR” if you predict that no reaction
takes place.
(a) potassium carbonate and copper(II) sulfate
(b) ammonium chloride and zinc sulfate
What Is Required?
You need to predict whether or not each pair of aqueous solutions
forms an insoluble product (a precipitate). If it does, you need to
write a balanced chemical equation.
What Is Given?
You know the names of the compounds in each solution.
Plan Your Strategy
Start by identifying the ions in each pair of compounds. Then
exchange the positive ions in the two compounds. Compare the
resulting compounds against the solubility guidelines, and make
your prediction.
Continued ...
338 MHR • Unit 3  Solutions and Solubility
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 338
Act on Your Strategy
(a) Potassium carbonate contains K+ and CO3
2− ions. Copper(II) sul-
2− ions. Exchanging positive ions results
fate contains Cu2+ and SO4
in potassium sulfate, K2SO4, and copper(II) carbonate, CuCO3.
All potassium salts are soluble, so these ions remain dissolved
in solution.
The copper(II) ion is listed in guideline 5 as a soluble cation. The
carbonate anion is listed in guideline 2 as insoluble. Because
guideline 2 is higher, copper(II) carbonate should be insoluble. So
you can predict that a precipitate forms. The balanced chemical
equation for this reaction is
K2CO3(aq) + CuSO4(aq) → K2SO4(aq) + CuCO3(s)
(b) Ammonium chloride contains NH4
+ and Cl− ions. Zinc sulfate
2− ions. Exchanging positive ions results
consists of Zn2+ and SO4
in ammonium sulfate, (NH4)2SO4, and zinc chloride, ZnCl2.
Since all ammonium salts are soluble, the ammonium sulfate
stays dissolved in solution.
Zinc chloride consists of a guideline 5 soluble cation and a guide-
line 3 soluble anion. Because guideline 3 is higher, zinc chloride
should be soluble. Thus, you can predict that no precipitate forms.
NH4Cl(aq) + ZnSO4(aq) → NR
Check Your Solution
An experiment is always the best way to check a prediction. If
possible, obtain samples of these solutions from your teacher, and
mix them together.
Practice Problems
4. Predict the result of mixing each pair of aqueous solutions. Write
a balanced chemical equation if you predict that a precipitate
forms. Write “NR” if you predict that no reaction takes place.
(a) sodium sulﬁde and iron(II) sulfate
(b) sodium hydroxide and barium nitrate
(c) cesium phosphate and calcium bromide
(d) sodium carbonate and sulfuric acid
(e) sodium nitrate and copper(II) sulfate
(f) ammonium iodide and silver nitrate
(g) potassium carbonate and iron(II) nitrate
(h) aluminum nitrate and sodium phosphate
(i) potassium chloride and iron(II) nitrate
(j) ammonium sulfate and barium chloride
(k) sodium sulﬁde and nickel(II) sulfate
(l) lead(II) nitrate and potassium bromide
Chapter 9  Aqueous Solutions • MHR 339
You can easily
Figure 9.5
identify limestone and marble by
their reaction with hydrochloric
acid. The gas that is produced
by this double displacement
reaction is carbon dioxide.
Double Displacement Reactions That Produce a Gas
Double displacement reactions are responsible for producing a number
of gases. (See Figure 9.5.) These gases include
• hydrogen
• hydrogen sulﬁde (a poisonous gas that smells like rotten eggs)
• sulfur dioxide (a reactant in forming acid rain)
• carbon dioxide
• ammonia
A Reaction that Produces Hydrogen Gas
The alkali metals form bonds with hydrogen to produce compounds
called hydrides. Hydrides react readily with water to produce hydrogen
gas. Examine the following equation for the reaction of lithium hydride,
LiH, with water. If you have difﬁculty visualizing the ion exchange that
takes place, rewrite the equation for yourself using HOH instead of H2O.
LiH(s) + H2O((cid:2)) → LiOH(aq) + H2(g)
A Reaction that Produces Hydrogen Sulﬁde Gas
Sulﬁdes react with certain acids, such as hydrochloric acid, to produce
hydrogen sulﬁde gas.
K2S(aq) + 2HCl(aq) → 2KCl(aq) + H2S(g)
A Reaction that Produces Sulfur Dioxide Gas
Some reactions produce a compound that, afterward, decomposes into
a gas and water. Sodium sulﬁte is used in photography as a preservative.
It reacts with hydrochloric acid to form sulfurous acid. The sulfurous acid
then breaks down into sulfur dioxide gas and water. The net reaction is
the sum of both changes. If the same compound appears on both sides of
an equation (as sulfurous acid, H2SO3, does here), it can be eliminated.
This is just like eliminating terms from an equation in mathematics.
Na2SO3(aq) + 2HCl(aq) → 2NaCl(aq) + H2SO3(aq)
H2SO3(aq) → SO2(g) + H2O((cid:2))
Therefore, the net reaction is
Na2SO3(aq) + 2HCl(aq) → 2NaCl(aq) + SO2(g) + H2O((cid:2))
A Reaction that Produces Carbon Dioxide Gas
The reaction of a carbonate with an acid produces carbonic acid. Carbonic
acid decomposes rapidly into carbon dioxide and water.
Na2CO3(aq) + 2HCl(aq) → 2NaCl(aq) + H2CO3(aq)
H2CO3(aq) → CO2(g) + H2O((cid:2))
The net reaction is
Na2CO3(aq) + 2HCl(aq) → 2NaCl(aq) + CO2(g) + H2O((cid:2))
A Reaction that Produces Ammonia Gas
Ammonia gas is very soluble in water. You can detect it easily, however,
by its sharp, pungent smell. Ammonia gas can be prepared by the reaction
of an ammonium salt with a base.
NH4Cl(aq) + NaOH(aq) → NaCl(aq) + NH3(aq) + H2O((cid:2))
340 MHR • Unit 3  Solutions and Solubility
Double Displacement Reactions That Produce Water
The neutralization reaction between an acid and a base is a very
important double displacement reaction. In a neutralization reaction,
water results when an H+ ion from the acid bonds with an OH− ion
from the base.
H2SO4(aq) + 2NaOH(aq) → Na2SO4(aq) + 2H2O((cid:2))
Most metal oxides are bases. Therefore, a metal oxide will react with an
acid in a neutralization reaction to form a salt and water.
2HNO3(aq) + MgO(s) → Mg(NO3)2(aq) + H2O((cid:2))
Non-metal oxides are acidic. Therefore, a non-metal oxide will react
with a base. This type of reaction is used in the space shuttle. Cabin air
is circulated through canisters of lithium hydroxide (a base) to remove
the carbon dioxide before it can reach dangerous levels.
2LiOH(s) + CO2(g) → Li2CO3(aq) + H2O((cid:2))
Representing Aqueous Ionic Reactions with Net Ionic Equations
Mixing a solution that contains silver ions with a solution that contains
chloride ions produces a white precipitate of silver chloride. There must
have been other ions present in each solution, as well. You know this
because it is impossible to have a solution of just a cation or just an anion.
Perhaps the solution that contained silver ions was prepared using silver
nitrate or silver acetate. Similarly, the solution that contained chloride
ions might have been prepared by dissolving NaCl in water, or perhaps
NH4Cl or another soluble chloride. Any solution that contains Ag+
will react with any other solution that contains Cl−
precipitate of AgCl(s). The other ions in the solutions are not important
to the net result. These ions are like passive onlookers. They are called
spectator ions.
(aq) to form a
(aq)
The reaction between silver nitrate and sodium chloride can be
represented by the following chemical equation:
AgNO3(aq) + NaCl(aq) → NaNO3(aq) + AgCl(s)
This equation does not show the change that occurs, however. It shows
the reactants and products as intact compounds. In reality, soluble ionic
compounds dissociate into their respective ions in solution. So chemists
often use a total ionic equation to show the dissociated ions of the soluble
ionic compounds.
−
(aq) + Na+
Ag+
(aq) + NO3
−
(aq) + AgCl(s)
(aq) + NO3
(aq) → Na+
(aq) + Cl−
Notice that the precipitate, AgCl, is still written as an ionic formula. This
makes sense because precipitates are insoluble, so they do not dissociate
into ions. Also notice that the spectator ions appear on both sides of the
equation. Here is the total ionic equation again, with slashes through the
spectator ions.
Ag+
−
(aq) + AgCl(s)
(aq) + NO3
−
(aq) + Na+
(aq) + NO3
(aq) → Na+
(aq) + Cl−
If you eliminate the spectator ions, the equation becomes
Ag+
(aq) + Cl−
(aq) → AgCl(s)
Chapter 9  Aqueous Solutions • MHR 341
An ionic equation that is written this way, without the spectator ions, is
called a net ionic equation. Before you try writing your own net ionic
equations, examine the guidelines in Table 9.2 below.
Table 9.2 Guidelines for Writing a Net Ionic Equation
1. Include only ions and compounds that have reacted. Do not include
spectator ions.
2. Write the soluble ionic compounds as ions. For example, write
+
(aq) and Cl−
NH4
(aq), instead of NH4Cl(aq).
3. Write insoluble ionic compounds as formulas, not ions. For example,
zinc sulﬁde is insoluble, so you write it as ZnS(s), not Zn2+ and S2−.
4. Since covalent compounds do not produce ions in aqueous solution,
write their molecular formulas. Water is a common example,
because it dissociates only very slightly into ions. When a reaction
involves a gas, always include the gas in the net ionic equation.
5. Write strong acids (discussed in the next chapter) in their ionic
form. There are six strong acids:
• hydrochloric acid (write as H+
• hydrobromic acid (write as H+
• hydroiodic acid (write as H+
• sulfuric acid (write as H+
• nitric acid (write as H+
• perchloric acid (write as H+
All other acids are weak and form few ions. Therefore, write them
in their molecular form.
(aq) and Cl−
(aq) and Br−
(aq) and l−
(aq))
(aq) and SO4(aq))
−
(aq) and NO3
(aq))
−
(aq) and CIO4
(aq))
(aq), not HCl(aq))
(aq))
6. Finally, check that the net ionic equation is balanced for charges as
well as for atoms.
Sample Problem
Writing Net Ionic Equations
Problem
A chemical reaction occurs when the following aqueous solutions
are mixed: sodium sulﬁde and iron(II) sulfate. Identify the spectator
ions. Then write the balanced net ionic equation.
What Is Required?
You need to identify the spectator ions and write a balanced net
ionic equation for the reaction between sodium sulﬁde and iron(II)
sulfate.
What Is Given?
You know the chemical names of the compounds.
Continued ...
342 MHR • Unit 3  Solutions and Solubility
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 342
Plan Your Strategy
Step 1 Start by writing the chemical formulas of the given
compounds.
Step 2 Then write the complete chemical equation for the reaction,
using your experience in predicting the formation of a
precipitate.
Step 3 Once you have the chemical equation, you can replace the
chemical formulas of the soluble ionic compounds with their
dissociated ions.
Step 4 This will give you the total ionic equation. Next you can
identify the spectator ions (the ions that appear on both sides
of the equation).
Step 5 Finally, by rewriting the total ionic equation without the
spectator ions, you will have the net ionic equation.
Act on Your Strategy
Steps 1 and 2
Na2S(aq) + FeSO4(aq) → Na2SO4(aq) + FeS(s)
The chemical equation for the reaction is
Step 3 The total ionic equation is
(aq) + Fe2+
2Na+
2−
(aq) + SO4
(aq) + S2−
(aq) → 2Na+
(aq) + SO4
2−
(aq) + FeS(s)
Step 4 Therefore, the spectator ions are Na+
(aq) and SO4
(aq).
2−
Step 5 The net ionic equation is
Fe2+
(aq) → FeS(s)
(aq) + S2−
Check Your Solution
Take a ﬁnal look at your net ionic equation to make sure that no ions
are on both sides of the equation.
Practice Problems
5. Mixing each pair of aqueous solutions results in a chemical
reaction. Identify the spectator ions. Then write the balanced
net ionic equation.
(a) sodium carbonate and hydrochloric acid
(b) sulfuric acid and sodium hydroxide
6. Identify the spectator ions for the reaction that takes place when
each pair of aqueous solutions is mixed. Then write the balanced
net ionic equation.
(a) ammonium phosphate and zinc sulfate
(b) lithium carbonate and nitric acid
(c) sulfuric acid and barium hydroxide
Chapter 9  Aqueous Solutions • MHR 343
Identifying Ions in Aqueous Solution
Suppose that you have a sample of water. You want to know what, if any,
ions are dissolved in it. Today technological devices, such as the mass
spectrometer, make this investigative work fairly simple. Before such
devices, however, chemists relied on wet chemical techniques:
experimental tests, such as submitting a sample to a series of double
displacement reactions. Chemists still use wet chemical techniques.
With each reaction, insoluble compounds precipitate out of the solution.
(See Figure 9.6.) This enables the chemist to determine, eventually, the
identity of one or several ions in the solution. This ion-identiﬁcation
process is an example of qualitative analysis.
Chemists use a range of techniques for qualitative analysis. For exam-
ple, the colour of an aqueous solution can help to identify one of the ions
that it contains. Examine Table 9.3. However, the intensity of ion colour
varies with its concentration in the solution. Also keep in mind that many
ions are colourless in aqueous solution. For example, the cations of ele-
ments from Groups 1 (IA) and 2 (IIA), as well as aluminum, zinc, and
most anions, are colourless. So there are limits to the inferences you can
make if you rely on solution colour alone.
Another qualitative analysis technique is a ﬂame test. A dissolved
ionic compound is placed in a ﬂame. Table 9.4 lists the ﬂame colours
associated with several ions. Notice that all the ions are metallic. The
ﬂame test is only useful for identifying metallic ions in aqueous solution.
Qualitative analysis challenges a chemist’s creative imagination and
chemical understanding. Discover this for yourself in Investigation 9-B.
Table 9.3 The Colour of Some Common Ions in Aqueous Solution
Table 9.4 The Flame Colour of Selected Metallic Ions
Ions
chromium (II)
copper(II)
chromium(III)
copper(I)
iron(II)
nickel(II)
s
n
o
i
t
a
C
iron(III)
cobalt(II)
manganese(II)
chromate
dichromate
s
n
o
i
n
A
permanganate
Symbol
Cr2+
Cu2+
Cr3+
Cu+
Fe2+
Ni2+
Fe3+
Co2+
Mn2+
2−
CrO4
2−
Cr2O7
−
MnO4
Colour
blue
green
pale yellow
pink
yellow
orange
purple
Ion
lithium
sodium
potassium
cesium
calcium
strontium
barium
copper
boron
lead
Symbol
Li+
Na+
K+
Cs+
Ca2+
Sr2+
Ba2+
Cu2+
B2+
Pb2+
Colour
red
yellow
violet
violet
red
red
yellowish-green
bluish-green
green
bluish-white
add
precipitating
solution
add
precipitating
solution
etc.
mixture
of ions
remaining
ions
remaining
ions
precipitate
1
precipitate
2
This illustration
Figure 9.6
shows the basic idea behind a
qualitative analysis for identify-
ing ions in an aqueous solution.
At each stage, the resulting
precipitate is removed.
344 MHR • Unit 3  Solutions and Solubility
Qualitative Analysis
In this investigation, you will apply your knowl-
edge of chemical reactions and the general solu-
bility guidelines to identify unknown ions.
Question
How can you identify ions in solution?
Predictions
Read the entire Procedure. Can you predict the
results of any steps? Write your predictions in
your notebook. Justify each prediction.
Materials
Part 1
12-well or 24-well plate, or spot plate
toothpicks
cotton swabs
unknowns: 4 dropper bottles (labelled A, B, C,
and D) of solutions that include Na+
(aq), and Cu2+
Ag+
(aq), Ca2+
(aq)
(aq),
reactants: 2 labelled dropper bottles, containing
dilute HCI(aq) and dilute H2SO4(aq)
Part 2
cotton swabs
Bunsen burner
heat-resistant pad
unknowns: 4 dropper bottles, containing the same
unknowns that were used in Part 1
reactants: 4 labelled dropper bottles, containing
Na+
(aq), Ag+
(aq), Ca2+
(aq), and Cu2+
(aq)
Part 3
12-well or 24-well plate, or spot plate
toothpicks
cotton swabs
unknowns: 3 dropper bottles (labelled X, Y,
and Z), containing solutions of SO4
(aq),
CO3
(aq), and I−
(aq)
2−
2−
reactants: 3 labelled dropper bottles, containing
(aq), and HCl(aq)
(aq), Ag+
Ba2+
S K I L L   F O C U S
Predicting
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
Safety Precautions
• Be careful not to contaminate the dropper
bottles. The tip of a dropper should not
make contact with either the plate or another
solution. Put the cap back on the bottle
immediately after use.
• Hydrochloric acid and sulfuric acid are
corrosive. Wash any spills on your skin with
plenty of cool water. Inform your teacher
immediately.
• Part 2 of this investigation requires an open
ﬂame. Tie back long hair, and conﬁne any loose
clothing.
Procedure
Part 1 Using Acids to Identify Cations
1. Read steps 2 and 3 below. Design a suitable
table for recording your observations.
2. Place one or two drops of each unknown
solution into four different wells or spots.
Add one or two drops of hydrochloric acid
to each unknown. Record your observations.
3. Repeat step 2. This time, test each unknown
solution with one or two drops of sulfuric
acid. Record your observations.
4. Answer Analysis questions 1 to 5.
Part 2 Using Flame Tests to Identify Cations
Note: Your teacher may demonstrate this part or
provide you with an alternative version.
1. Design tables to record your observations.
2. Observe the appearance of each known solu-
tion. Record your observations. Repeat for
each unknown solution. Some cations have
a characteristic colour. (Refer to Table 9.4.)
If you think that you can identify one of the
unknowns, record your identiﬁcation.
Chapter 9  Aqueous Solutions • MHR 345
3. Flame tests can identify some cations. Set up
the Bunsen burner and heat-resistant pad.
Light the burner. Adjust the air supply to pro-
duce a hot ﬂame with a blue cone.
4. Place a few drops of solution containing
(aq) on one end of a cotton swab.
Na+
CAUTION
Carefully hold the saturated tip so
it is just in the Bunsen burner ﬂame, near
the blue cone. You may need to hold it in
this position for as long as 30 s to allow the
solution to vaporize and mix with the ﬂame.
Record the colour of the ﬂame.
5. Not all cations give colour to a ﬂame. The
sodium ion does give a distinctive colour to a
ﬂame, however. It is often present in solutions
as a contaminant. For a control, repeat step 4
with water and record your observations. You
can use the other end of the swab for a second
test. Dispose of used swabs in the container
your teacher provides.
6. Repeat the ﬂame test for each of the other
known solutions. Then test each of the
unknown solutions.
7. Answer Analysis question 6.
Part 3 Identifying Anions
Analysis
1. (a) Which of the cations you tested should
form a precipitate with hydrochloric acid?
Write the net ionic equation.
(b) Did your results support your predictions?
Explain.
2. (a) Which cation(s) should form a precipitate
when tested with sulfuric acid? Write the
net ionic equation.
(b) Did your results support your predictions?
Explain.
3. Which cation(s) should form a soluble chlo-
ride and a soluble sulfate?
4. Which cation has a solution that is not
colourless?
5. Based on your analysis so far, tentatively
identify each unknown solution.
6. Use your observations of the ﬂame tests to
conﬁrm or refute the identiﬁcations you made
in question 5. If you are not sure, check your
observations and analysis with other students.
If necessary, repeat some of your tests.
7. Which anion(s) should form a precipitate with
Ba2+? Write the net ionic equation.
1. Place one or two drops of each unknown
8. Which precipitate should react when
hydrochloric acid is added? Give reasons for
your prediction.
9. Tentatively identify each anion. Check your
observations against the results you obtained
when you added hydrochloric acid. Were
they what you expected? If not, check your
observations and analysis with other students.
If necessary, repeat some of your tests.
Conclusion
10. Identify the unknown cations and anions in
this investigation. Explain why you do, or do
not, have conﬁdence in your decisions. What
could you do to be more conﬁdent?
solution into three different wells or spots.
Add one or two drops of Ba2+
(aq) to each
unknown solution. Stir with a toothpick.
Record your observations.
2. Add a drop of hydrochloric acid to any well
or spot where you observed a precipitate in
step 1. Stir and record your observations.
3. Repeat step 1, adding one or two drops of
(aq) to each unknown solution. Record the
Ag+
colour of any precipitate that forms.
4. Answer Analysis questions 7 to 9.
346 MHR • Unit 3  Solutions and Solubility
Section Wrap-up
Qualitative analysis helps you identify ions that may be present in a solu-
tion. It does not, however, tell you how much of these ions are present. In
other words, it does not provide any quantitative information about the
quantity or concentration of ions in solution. In the next section, you will
ﬁnd out how to calculate this quantitative information, using techniques
you learned in Unit 2.
Section Review
1
C
Brieﬂy compare the relationships among a chemical formula, a total
ionic equation, and a net ionic equation. Use sentences or a graphic
organizer.
2
K/U
Write a net ionic equation for each double displacement reaction
in aqueous solution.
(a) tin(II) chloride with potassium phosphate
(b) nickel(II) chloride with sodium carbonate
(c) chromium(III) sulfate with ammonium sulﬁde
3
4
5
K/U
For each reaction in question 2, identify the spectator ions.
K/U
Would you expect a qualitative analysis of a solution to give you
the amount of each ion present? Explain why or why not.
I
A solution of limewater, Ca(OH)2(aq), is basic. It is used to test for
the presence of carbon dioxide. Carbon dioxide is weakly acidic and
turns limewater milky. Use a chemical equation to explain what
happens during the test. What type of reaction occurs?
6
K/U
State the name and formula of the precipitate that forms when
aqueous solutions of copper(II) sulfate and sodium carbonate are
mixed. Write the net ionic equation for the reaction. Identify the
spectator ions.
7
I
All the solutions in this photograph have the same concentration:
0.1 mol/L. Use Table 9.3 to infer which ion causes the colour in each
solution. How much conﬁdence do you have in your inferences? What
could you do to increase your conﬁdence?
Chapter 9  Aqueous Solutions • MHR 347
9.3
Stoichiometry in
Solution Chemistry
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
represent double displace-
ment reactions by their net
ionic equations
(cid:2) write balanced chemical
equations for double
displacement reactions
solve stoichiometry prob-
lems that involve solutions
describe and work with
solutions that have
known concentrations
Recall that stoichiometry involves calculating the amounts of reactants
and products in chemical reactions. If you know the atoms or ions in a
formula or a reaction, you can use stoichiometry to determine the
amounts of these atoms or ions that react. Solving stoichiometry problems
in solution chemistry involves the same strategies you learned in Unit 2.
Calculations involving solutions sometimes require a few additional steps,
however. For example, if a precipitate forms, the net ionic equation may
be easier to use than the chemical equation. Also, some problems may
require you to calculate the amount of a reactant, given the volume and
concentration of the solution.
Take your time working through the next three Sample Problems.
Make sure that you understand how to arrive at the solutions. Then try
the Practice Problems on page 352.
Sample Problem
The Concentration of Ions
Problem
Calculate the concentration (in mol/L) of chloride ions in
each solution.
(a) 19.8 g of potassium chloride dissolved in 100 mL of solution
(b) 26.5 g of calcium chloride dissolved in 150 mL of solution
(c) a mixture of the two solutions in parts (a) and (b), assuming that
the volumes are additive
What Is Required?
(a) and (b) You need to ﬁnd the concentration (in mol/L) of chloride
ions in two different solutions.
(c) You need to ﬁnd the concentration of chloride ions when the two
solutions are mixed.
What Is Given?
You know that 19.8 g of potassium chloride is dissolved in 100 mL
of solution. You also know that 26.5 g of calcium chloride is
dissolved in 150 mL of solution.
Plan Your Strategy
(a) and (b) For each solution, determine the molar mass. Find the
amount (in mol) using the mass and the molar mass. Write
equations for the dissociation of the substance. (That is, write
the total ionic equation.)
Continued ...
348 MHR • Unit 3  Solutions and Solubility
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 348
Use the coefﬁcients in the dissociation equation to determine
the amount (in mol) of chloride ions present. Calculate the
concentration (in mol/L) of chloride ions from the amount and
volume of the solution.
(c) Add the amounts of chloride ions in the two solutions to ﬁnd
the total. Add the volumes of the solutions to ﬁnd the total
volume. Calculate the concentration of chloride ions (in mol/L)
using the total amount (in mol) divided by the total volume (in L).
Act on Your Strategy
(a) and (b)
Solution
KCI
Molar mass
Amount (mol)
Dissociation
equation
39.10 + 35.45 = 74.55 g
19.8 g × 1 mol
74.55 g
= 0.266 mol
KCls → K
+
(aq) + Cl−
(aq)
Amount of Cl
–
0.266 mol KCl ×
1 mol Cl−
1 mol KCl
Concentration
of
Cl –
0.266 mol
0.100 L
= 2.66 mol/L
CaCl2
40.08 + (2 × 35.45) = 110.98 g
26.5 g × 1 mol
110.98 g
= 0.239 mol
CaCl2(s) → Ca2+
(aq) + 2Cl−
(aq)
= 0.266 mol 0.239 mol CaCl2
−
× 2 mol Cl
1 mol
CaCl2
= 0.478 mol
0.478 mol
0.150 L
= 3.19 mol/L
The concentration of chloride ions when 19.8 g of potassium
chloride is dissolved in 100 mL of solution is 2.66 mol/L. The
concentration of chloride ions when 26.5 g of calcium chloride
is dissolved in 150 mL of solution is 3.19 mol/L.
−
(aq) = 0.266 + 0.478 mol
(c) Total amount of Cl
= 0.744 mol
Total volume of solution = 0.100 + 0.150 L
−
Total concentration of Cl
= 0.250 L
(aq) = 0.744 mol
0.250 L
= 2.98 mol/L
The concentration of chloride ions when the solutions are mixed
is 2.98 mol/L.
Check Your Solution
The units for amount and concentration are correct. The answers
appear to be reasonable. When the solutions are mixed, the
concentration of the chloride ions is not a simple average of the
concentrations of the two solutions. Why? The volumes of the two
solutions were different.
Chapter 9  Aqueous Solutions • MHR 349
Sample Problem
The Mass Percent of Ions
Problem
The leaves of a rhubarb plant contain a relatively high concentration
2−. Oxalate ions are poisonous, causing respira-
of oxalate ions, C2O4
tory failure. To determine the percent of oxalate ions, a student
measured the mass of some leaves. Then the student ground up the
leaves and added excess calcium chloride solution to precipitate
calcium oxalate. The student tested 238.6 g of leaves. The dried
mass of calcium oxalate was 0.556 g. What was the mass percent
of oxalate ions in the leaves?
Although rhubarb stalks are safe to eat, the leaves are poisonous.
What Is Required?
You need to ﬁnd the mass percent of oxalate ions in the leaves.
What Is Given?
You know the mass of the leaves is 238.6 g. You also know the mass
of dried calcium oxalate is 0.556 g.
Plan Your Strategy
Determine the molar mass of calcium oxalate. Use the mass of
calcium oxalate and its molar mass to ﬁnd the amount (in mol) of
calcium oxalate. Write the net ionic equation for the formation of
calcium oxalate. From the coefﬁcients in the net ionic equation, ﬁnd
the amount of oxalate ions (in mol). Calculate the mass of oxalate
ions from the amount of oxalate ions (in mol) and the molar mass.
Calculate the mass percent of oxalate ions in rhubarb leaves from
the mass of the leaves and the mass of the oxalate ions present.
Continued ...
350 MHR • Unit 3  Solutions and Solubility
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 350
Act on Your Strategy
Molar mass of CaC2O4 = 128.1 g
Amount of CaC2O4 = 0.556 g × 1 mol
128.1 g
= 0.004 34 mol
PROBLEM TIP
Review the method for solving
stoichiometry problems
you learned in Chapter 7,
Section 7.1.
The net ionic equation is
Ca2+
(aq) + C2O4
(aq) → CaC2O4(s)
2−
2− to CaC2O4 is 1:1. Therefore, the leaves must
The mole ratio of CrO4
have contained 0.004 34 mol of C2O4
Molar mass of C2O4
2−.
2− = 88.02 g
2− = 0.004 34 mol × 88.02 g
1 mol
Mass of C2O4
= 0.382 g
Mass percent of C2O4
2−
in the leaves = 0.382 g
238.6 g
= 0.160%
× 100%
The mass percent of oxalate ions in the leaves is 0.160%.
Check Your Solution
Since the units divide out properly, you can be fairly conﬁdent that
the answer is correct. The ﬁnal value appears to be reasonable.
Sample Problem
Finding the Minimum Volume to Precipitate
Problem
Aqueous solutions that contain silver ions are usually treated with
chloride ions to recover silver chloride. What is the minimum
volume of 0.25 mol/L magnesium chloride, MgCl2(aq), needed to
precipitate all the silver ions in 60 mL of 0.30 mol/L silver nitrate,
AgNO3(aq)? Assume that silver chloride is completely insoluble
in water.
What Is Required?
You need to ﬁnd the minimum volume of magnesium chloride that
will precipitate all the silver ions.
What Is Given?
You know the volumes and concentrations of the silver nitrate
(volume = 60 mL ; concentration = 0.30 mol/L ). The concentration
of the magnesium chloride solution is 0.25 mol/L.
Plan Your Strategy
Find the amount (in mol) of silver nitrate from the volume
and concentration of solution. Write a balanced chemical
Continued ...
Chapter 9  Aqueous Solutions • MHR 351
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 351
equation for the reaction. Use mole ratios from the coefﬁcients in the
equation to determine the amount (in mol) of magnesium chloride
that is needed. Use the amount (in mol) of magnesium chloride and
the concentration of solution to ﬁnd the volume that is needed.
Act on Your Strategy
Amount AgNO3 = 0.060 L × 0.30 mol/L
= 0.018 mol
MgCl2(aq) + 2AgNO3(aq) → 2AgCl(s) + Mg(NO3)2(aq)
The mole ratio of MgCl2 to AgNO3 is 1:2.
n mol MgCl2
= 0.018 mol AgNO3
= 0.0090 mol
× 1 mol MgCl2
2 mol AgNO3
Volume of 0.25 mol/L MgCl2 needed = 0.0090 mol
0.25 mol/L
= 0.036 L
The minimum volume of 0.25 mol/L magnesium chloride that
is needed is 36 mL.
Check Your Solution
The answer is in millilitres, an appropriate unit of volume.
The amount appears to be reasonable.
Practice Problems
7. Food manufacturers sometimes add calcium acetate to puddings
and sweet sauces as a thickening agent. What volume of
0.500 mol/L calcium acetate, Ca(CH3COO)2(aq), contains 0.300 mol
of acetate ions?
8. Ammonium phosphate can be used as a fertilizer. 6.0 g of
ammonium phosphate is dissolved in sufﬁcient water to produce
300 mL of solution. What are the concentrations (in mol/L) of the
ammonium ions and phosphate ions present?
9. An aqueous solution of a certain salt contains chloride ions. A
sample of this solution was made by dissolving 17.59 g of the salt
in a 1 L volumetric ﬂask. Then 25.00 mL of the solution was treat-
ed with excess silver nitrate. The precipitate, AgCl(s), was ﬁltered
and dried. If the mass of the dry precipitate was 47.35 g, what
was the mass percent of chloride ions in the solution?
10. The active ingredient in some rat poisons is thallium(I) sulfate,
Tl2SO4. A chemist takes a 500 mg sample of thallium(I) sulfate
and adds potassium iodide, to precipitate yellow thallium(I)
iodide. When the precipitate is dried, its mass is 200 mg. What is
the mass percent of Tl2SO4 in the rat poison?
352 MHR • Unit 3  Solutions and Solubility
Limiting Reactant Problems in Aqueous Solutions
In Chapter 7, you learned how to solve limiting reactant problems. You
can always recognize a limiting reactant problem because you are always
given the amounts of both reactants. A key step in a limiting reactant
problem is determining which one of the two reactants is limiting. In
aqueous solutions, this usually means ﬁnding the amount of a reactant,
given the volume and concentration of the solution.
Sample Problem
Finding the Mass of a Precipitated Compound
Problem
Mercury salts have a number of important uses in industry and in
chemical analysis. Because mercury compounds are poisonous,
however, the mercury ions must be removed from the waste water.
Suppose that 25.00 mL of 0.085 mol/L aqueous sodium sulﬁde is
added to 56.5 mL of 0.10 mol/L mercury(II) nitrate. What mass of
mercury(II) sulﬁde, HgS(s), precipitates?
What Is Required?
You need to ﬁnd the mass of mercury(II) sulﬁde that precipitates.
What Is Given?
You know the volumes and concentrations of the sodium sulﬁde
and mercury(II) nitrate solutions.
Plan Your Strategy
Write a balanced chemical equation for the reaction. Find the
amount (in mol) of each reactant, using its volume and concentra-
tion. Identify the limiting reactant. Determine the amount (in mol)
of mercury(II) sulﬁde that forms. Calculate the mass of mercury(II)
sulﬁde that precipitates.
PROBLEM TIP
Chemists solve limiting reac-
tant problems in different
ways. The method used here
is different from the one you
used in Chapter 7, Section 7.2
Act on Your Strategy
The chemical equation is
Hg(NO3)2(aq) + Na2S(aq) → 2NaNO3(aq) + HgS(s)
Calculate the amount (in mol) of each reactant.
Amount of Hg(NO3)2 = 0.0565 L × 0.10 mol/L
= 0.005 65 mol
Amount of Na2S = 0.0250 L × 0.085 mol/L
= 0.002 12 mol
The reactants are in a 1:1 ratio. Because Na2S is present
in the smallest amount, it is the limiting reactant.
The equation indicates that each mol of Na2S reacts to produce the
same amount of HgS(s) precipitate. This amount is 0.002 12 mol.
Continued ...
Chapter 9  Aqueous Solutions • MHR 353
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 353
Molar mass of HgS = 200.6 + 32.1
= 232.7
Mass of HgS(s) = Amount × Molar mass
= 0.002 12 mol × 232.7 g
1 mol
= 0.493 g
The mass of mercury(II) sulﬁde that precipitates is 0.49 g
Check Your Solution
The answer has appropriate units of mass. This answer appears to be
reasonable, given the values in the problem.
Sample Problem
Finding the Mass of Another
Precipitated Compound
Problem
Silver chromate, Ag2CrO4, is insoluble. It forms a brick-red precipi-
tate. Calculate the mass of silver chromate that forms when 50.0 mL
of 0.100 mol/L silver nitrate reacts with 25.0 mL of 0.150 mol/L
sodium chromate.
What Is Required?
You need to ﬁnd the mass of silver chromate that precipitates.
What Is Given?
You know the volumes and concentrations of the silver nitrate and
sodium chromate solutions.
Plan Your Strategy
Write a balanced chemical equation for the reaction. Find the
amount (in mol) of each reactant, using its volume and concentra-
tion. Identify the limiting reactant. Determine the amount (in mol)
of silver chromate that forms. Calculate the mass of silver chromate
that precipitates.
Act on Your Strategy
The chemical equation is
2AgNO3(aq) + Na2CrO4(aq) → Ag2CrO4(s) + 2NaNO3(aq)
Calculate the amount (in mol) of each reactant.
Amount of AgNO3 = 0.0500 L × 0.100 mol/L
= 5.00 × 10
−3 mol
Amount of Na2CrO4 = 0.0250 L × 0.150 mol/L
= 3.75 × 10
−3 mol
354 MHR • Unit 3  Solutions and Solubility
Continued ...
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 354
To identify the limiting reactant, divide by the coefﬁcient in
the equation and ﬁnd the smallest result.
AgNO3 : 5.00 × 10−3 mol
= 2.50 × 10−3 mol
Na2CrO4 : 3.75 × 10−3 mol
Since the smallest result is given for AgNO3, this reactant is the
= 3.75 × 10−3 mol
1
2
limiting reactant.
Using the coefﬁcients in the balanced equation, 2 mol of AgNO3
react for each mole of Ag2CrO4 formed.
Amount of Ag2CrO4 = 5.00 × 10
= 2.50 × 10
× 1 mol Ag2CrO4
2 mol AgNO3
−3 mol AgNO3
−3 mol Ag2CrO4
The molar mass of Ag2CrO4 is 331.7 g/mol.
Mass of precipitate = 2.50 × 10
−3 mol × 331.7 g
1 mol
= 0.829 g
The mass of silver chromate that precipitates is 0.829 g.
Check Your Solution
The answer has appropriate units of mass. The answer appears to be
reasonable, given the values in the problem.
Practice Problems
11. 8.76 g of sodium sulﬁde is added to 350 mL of 0.250 mol/L
lead(II) nitrate solution. Calculate the maximum mass of
precipitate that can form.
12. 25.0 mL of 0.400 mol/L Pb(NO3)2(aq) is mixed with 300 mL of
0.220 mol/L KI(aq). What is the maximum mass of precipitate
that can form?
13. A student mixes 15.0 mL of 0.250 mol/L aqueous sodium hydrox-
ide with 20.0 mL of 0.400 mol/L aqueous aluminum nitrate.
(a) Write the chemical equation for the reaction.
(b) Calculate the maximum mass of precipitate that forms.
Section Wrap-up
In the last two sections, you have used qualitative and quantitative
techniques to investigate ions in aqueous solution. Every drop of water
that comes into your home contains a variety of such ions. It also contains
other substances, in various concentrations. You have investigated water
quality in previous grades. In the next section, you will consider the
chemistry of water quality.
Chapter 9  Aqueous Solutions • MHR 355
Section Review
1
2
I
Equal volumes of 0.120 mol/L potassium nitrate and 0.160 mol/L
iron(III) nitrate are mixed together. What is the concentration of nitrate
ions in the mixture?
I
Suppose that you want to remove the barium ions from 120 mL
of 0.0500 mol/L aqueous barium nitrate solution. What is the minimum
mass of sodium carbonate that you should add?
3
I
An excess of aluminum foil is added to a certain volume of 0.675
mol/L aqueous copper(II) sulfate solution. The mass of solid copper
that precipitates is measured and found to be 4.88 g. What was the
volume of the copper(II) sulfate solution?
4
I
To generate hydrogen gas, a student adds 5.77 g of mossy zinc to
80.1 mL of 4.00 mol/L hydrochloric acid in an Erlenmeyer ﬂask. When
the reaction is over, what is the concentration of aqueous zinc chloride
in the ﬂask?
5
I
Copper can be recovered from scrap metal by adding sulfuric acid.
Soluble copper sulfate is formed. The copper sulfate then reacts with
metallic iron in a single displacement reaction. To simulate this reac-
tion, a student places 1.942 g of iron wool in a beaker that contains
136.3 mL of 0.0750 mol/L aqueous copper(II) sulfate. What mass of
copper is formed?
6
I
Your stomach secretes hydrochloric acid to help you digest the
food you have eaten. If too much HCl is secreted, however, you may
need to take an antacid to neutralize the excess. One antacid product
contains the compound magnesium hydroxide, Mg(OH)2.
(a) Predict the reaction that takes place when magnesium hydroxide
reacts with hydrochloric acid. (Hint: This is a double-displacement
reaction.)
(b) Imagine that you are a chemical analyst testing the effectiveness of
antacids. If 0.10 mol/L HCl(aq) serves as your model for stomach
acid, how many litres will react with an antacid that contains 0.10 g
of magnesium hydroxide?
7
I
Even though lead is toxic, many lead compounds are still used as
paint pigments (colourings). What volume of 1.50 mol/L lead(II) acetate
contains 0.400 mol Pb2+ ions.
356 MHR • Unit 3  Solutions and Solubility
Aqueous Solutions
and Water Quality
Water, as you know, is the most abundant substance on Earth’s surface.
Unfortunately there is more than enough water in some places, but not
enough in others. As well, because water is used and re-used, and because
it is such a powerful solvent, it is easily polluted.
Canada, with less than 1% of the world’s population, has 22% of its
fresh water. So, in most regions of our country, the quality of water is
usually of greater concern than the quantity available. In this section, you
will examine factors that affect water quality. You will also study some of
the reactions that make polluted water safe and ﬁt to drink.
Acceptable Concentrations of Substances in Drinking Water
The federal government assesses the health risks of speciﬁc substances
in drinking water. Guidelines for acceptable concentrations of each sub-
stance are then established in partnership with provincial and territorial
governments. See Table 9.5. These governments require water suppliers
to meet the guidelines. Corrective action may be taken when guidelines
are violated.
Table 9.5 Acceptable Concentrations of Selected Ions and Compounds in Drinking Water
Ion or compound
aldrin and dieldrin
(organic insecticides*)
aluminum
arsenic
benzene (organic
component of gasoline)
cadmium (component
of batteries)
chloride
fluoride
iron
lead
malathion (organic
insecticide)
mercury
selenium
sulfide (as H2S)
toluene (organic solvent)
uranium
Maximum Acceptable
Concentration (MAC)
(mg/L)
0.0007
Interim Maximum
Acceptable
Concentration
(mg/L)
Aesthetic
Objectives (AO)
(mg/L)
<0.1 or <0.2**
0.025
0.005
0.005
1.5
0.010
0.19
0.001
0.01
0.1
≤ 250
≤ 0.3
≤ 0.05
≤ 0.024
*As you will learn in Unit 5, the term “organic” refers to most compounds
structured around the element carbon. Toluene belongs to a large class of
petroleum-related compounds called hydrocarbons.
** Health-based guidelines have not yet been established. The concentrations
that are listed depend on the method of treatment. They are noted as a
precautionary measure.
9.4
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
explain the origins of
pollutants in natural waters
identify the allowed
concentrations of pollutants
in drinking water
explain the origins and
consequences of water
hardness, and outline meth-
ods for softening hard water
describe the technology
involved in purifying drinking
water and treating waste
water
communicate your under-
standing of the following
terms: water treatment,
hard water, soft water, ion
exchange, waste-water
treatment
You are probably familiar with
the water cycle: the natural
process that ensures a contin-
ual supply of Earth’s water.
Sketch, from memory, a
schematic drawing of the
water cycle. Add labels to
indicate the states and energy
changes involved. Then infer
the main solutes and suspend-
ed materials in water at each
of the following locations:
• the atmosphere
• Earth’s surface (at an
urban and a rural location)
• below Earth’s surface
(that is, in ground water)
• a fresh-water lake
• an ocean
For each location, suggest
sources of the solutes and
materials you inferred.
Chapter 9  Aqueous Solutions • MHR 357
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
C H E M
FA C T
Drinking water guidelines
exist for microscopic organ-
isms, such as bacteria and
protozoans, as well as for
chemicals. These guidelines
were compromised in the town
of Walkerton, Ontario, in 2000.
Seven people died and about
2000 people became ill as a
result of exposure to E. coli
bacteria that were present in
the town’s water supply. The
maximum acceptable concen-
tration for E. coli bacteria is
zero organisms detectable in
100 mL of drinking water. To
achieve this target, chlorine is
commonly used to kill E. coli
and other organisms in drink-
ing water. Despite receiving
two warnings from the Ministry
of the Environment, the town’s
water manager chose not to
increase the concentration of
chlorine in the water supply.
As a result of this incident, the
Ontario government drafted
legislation to enforce strict
adherence to water quality
quidelines.
Sources That Compromise Water Quality
Pure water does not exist in nature. All water naturally contains dissolved
substances or ions. For example, rainwater is naturally acidic. This is
because water droplets dissolve atmospheric gases, such as carbon diox-
ide, to form carbonic acid, H2CO3 . As water ﬁlters through soil and rock,
it tends to dissolve (leach) certain ions and compounds, such as Ca2+
(aq),
2−
Mg2+
(aq). In general, these substances pose
little or no threat to plants, animals, or you. In contrast, many of the
substances listed in Table 9.5 may pose a threat. They result mainly from
human activities, such as manufacturing, food and materials processing,
farming, and garbage disposal. The sources of these substances can be
classiﬁed in the following three broad categories.
• Point Sources: A manufacturing or processing plant that discharges
(aq), and SO4
(aq), Fe2+
(aq), Fe3+
untreated or insufﬁciently treated waste water into a river or lake is a
point source of pollution. Point sources include wrecked tankers that
leak oil and factories that discharge metallic ions, organic compounds,
acids, and bases. Water itself can be a point source of thermal pollution,
when thermal power plants discharge warm water into a lake from their
cooling towers. Point sources can spread pollution over huge areas.
• Diffuse Sources: Pollution that comes from a wide range of sources,
not from a single source, is said to come from a diffuse source. (See
Figure 9.7.) A heavy downpour can cause run-off from farm ﬁelds to
enter rivers and lakes. This run-off often carries undesirable pollutants,
including fecal matter, pesticides, and fertilizer compounds, such as
nitrates and phosphates.
• Indirect Sources: Air, water, and soil can become polluted from a
variety of indirect sources. Motor vehicles and factory smokestacks
release gases that can indirectly cause many different types of pollution.
The acidic gases that are produced (sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxides)
dissolve and contribute to the formation of acid rain. The concentra-
tions of ions in ground water are affected by how acidic the water is.
For example, aluminum compounds are commonly found in soil. Acidic
water increases the leaching of aluminum ions into rivers and lakes.
Landﬁll leachate
Figure 9.7
is rainwater that has percolated
through landﬁll wastes. It dis-
solves numerous compounds,
many of them toxic. Modern
landﬁlls have containment and
treatment procedures to prevent
this diffuse source of pollution
from contaminating ground water.
358 MHR • Unit 3  Solutions and Solubility
Treating Water for Your Home
If you live on a farm or in a remote area, you probably obtain your water
directly from a well on your property. If you live in an urban community,
you probably obtain your water through a municipal or regional water
authority. Before the water is made available to you, it is processed at a
water treatment plant to remove pollutants. Lake, river, or reservoir water
enters the treatment plant, where a number of physical and chemical
processes take place. Figure 9.8 summarizes these processes.
storage
tank
to homes
and businesses
6
5
2
3
4
A coarse screen made of metal bars ﬁlters large particles and trash such as bottles and cans.
2−
(aq) + SO4
(aq) + 10H+
Chlorine is added to kill bacteria and viruses. It also helps to remove dissolved hydrogen sulﬁde:
H2S(aq) + 4Cl2(aq) + 4H2O(l) → 8Cl−
A process called ﬂocculation removes suspended particles such as clay and microorganisms. Lime (CaO)
and aluminum sulfate (Al2(SO4)3) are added. They react together to form aluminum hydroxide:
3CaO(s) + 3H2O(l) + Al2(SO4)3(s) → 2Al(OH)3(s) + 3Ca2+
Aluminum hydroxide is a sticky gel that traps the ﬁnely suspended particles. Lime is a basic oxide, so it
decreases the acidity of the water, and it precipitates some calcium carbonate. The aluminum hydroxide
with its trapped particles settles to the bottom of the tank.
(aq) + 3SO4
(aq)
(aq)
2−
The water is passed through a bed of graded gravel and sand in a ﬁltering tank.
Water is often saturated with oxygen by spraying it into the air, which helps to remove volatile organic
compounds and improves the taste and odour.
The water receives a second treatment with chlorine to kill bacteria. Ammonia is added to make the
chlorine last longer in the piping. Some municipalities add compounds such as sodium ﬂuoride.
1
1
2
3
4
5
6
Figure 9.8
processes must ensure that the water meets all the allowable concentrations.
The following processes take place at a water treatment plant. These
Chapter 9  Aqueous Solutions • MHR 359
C H E M
FA C T
Why is hard water so hard to
lather? Ordinary soap is often
sodium stearate, NaC17H35O2.
Sodium stearate consists of
the sodium salt of a compound
that contains many carbon
atoms. The calcium ions in
hard water displace the
sodium ions, and the new
salts are insoluble:
Ca2+
(aq) + 2NaC17H35O2(aq) →
Ca(C17H35O2)2(s) + 2Na+
As a result, the effectiveness
of the soap is reduced. The
insoluble salts form a scum
on clothing and a grey slimy
deposit in sinks and bathtubs:
“bathtub ring.”
(aq)
Hard Water and Soft Water
The water that ﬂows through your faucet has been treated to remove,
or limit, a large number of pollutants. It is far from pure, however. For
example, it still contains dissolved ions, such as Ca2+
(aq), Fe2+
Fe3+
(aq). These ions, especially calcium and magnesium,
make it difﬁcult to form lather with soap. Water with high concentrations
of these ions is called hard water, partly because it is “hard” to lather.
Water with relatively low concentrations of these ions lathers well. It is
called soft water.
(aq), and SO4
(aq), Mg2+
(aq),
2−
Ground water is usually harder than surface water in the same region.
The extent of the hardness depends on the types of rocks through which
the water ﬂows. It also depends on the length of time that the water is
in contact with the rocks. The Rocky Mountains, the Canadian Shield,
and most of the Maritimes have very insoluble bedrock. Thus, the water
in these regions is usually soft. The sedimentary rocks of the Niagara
Peninsula and the Prairies are more soluble, resulting in water that ranges
from moderately hard to very hard.
The most common type of rock to cause hard water is limestone
(calcium carbonate). Limestone is usually considered insoluble. The small
amount that does dissolve forms low concentrations of important ions.
CaCO3(s) + H2O((cid:2)) → Ca2+
(aq) + HCO−
3(aq) + OH−
(aq)
When the water contains dissolved acids (often H2CO3 from rainwater),
the H+
(aq) ion increases the concentrations of calcium and hydrogen
carbonate ions.
CaCO3(s) + H+
(aq) → Ca2+
(aq) + HCO3−
(aq)
Hydrogen carbonate ions can be economically costly. Solutions that
contain these ions decompose when heated to form carbonates.
−
(aq) → H2O((cid:2)) + CO2(g) + CO3
2HCO3
2−
(aq)
The carbonate ions recombine with calcium ions to form calcium carbon-
ate deposits. These deposits form a coating on heating elements in kettles
and boilers, and build up inside hot water pipes. The coating is com-
monly called boiler scale. (See Figure 9.9.) It not only reduces the ﬂow
of water in pipes, but it also increases the cost of heating the water.
A simple way to remove boiler scale from the inside of a kettle or
a coffee maker is to add vinegar. Acetic acid in vinegar reacts with
calcium (and magnesium) carbonates to form soluble salts. (Remember
that all acetates are soluble.)
CaCO3(s) + 2CH3COOH(aq) → Ca2+
(aq) + 2CH3COO−
(aq) + H2O((cid:2)) + CO2(g)
This photomicro-
Figure 9.9
graph shows the crystalline
structure of precipitated
boiler scale.
360 MHR • Unit 3  Solutions and Solubility
Treating Water at Home
The ions that cause hard water are not a health hazard but they can be
a nuisance. They are not always removed at municipal treatment plants.
If you wish, you can remove some of these ions (mainly Ca2+
(aq),
and Fe2+
(aq)) yourself. For relatively small volumes of water (such as
enough to ﬁll a bathtub or a washing machine), you can add sodium
carbonate decahydrate, Na2CO3·10H2O. This compound is commonly
called washing soda. It is an inexpensive way to add carbonate ion to the
water. The carbonate ions precipitate the unwanted ions.
(aq), Mg2+
Ca2+
(aq) + CO3
2−
(aq) → CaCO3(s)
The sodium ions in the washing soda behave as spectator ions, leaving
the water soft.
For the large volume of water needed on a daily basis, people often
install an ion exchange water softener. This apparatus exchanges one
kind of ion for another. (See Figure 9.10.) The hard water passes through a
column that is packed with beads. The beads are made from an insoluble
plastic material and are coated with sodium salts, often NaCl. (The salt-
coated beads are referred to as an ion exchange resin.) As the hard water
passes through the column, the ions in the water displace the sodium
ions on the resin. After most of the sodium ions have been exchanged for
calcium ions (and other hardness-causing ions), the resin is regenerated.
This is done by passing a very concentrated solution of sodium chloride
(brine) through the column. The calcium ions are ﬂushed out of the
system, along with excess sodium chloride solution.
Biology
LINK
A vivid red dye is produced
from a small insect, called the
cochineal, that lives in the
Peruvian Andes. Two chemists
from Simon Fraser University
in British Columbia, Dr. Cam
Oehlschlager and Dr. Eva
Czyzewska, have developed an
improved process for extract-
ing the natural red colouring
agent from the insects. The
ions that cause hard water
change the colour of the dye,
however. So the ﬁrst step in
the process uses demineral-
ized hot water. After precipitat-
ing the dye, it is dried and used
for a variety of products. Some
of your classmates may be
wearing examples of these
products right now. Use the
library or the Internet to ﬁnd
out what they are.
mineral tank
inlet
brine tank
brine well
hard
water
in
salt
float
screen
brine
outlet
Electronic Learning Partner
Your Chemistry 11 Electronic
Learning Partner has a movie
detailing several methods for
purifying water.
timer
drain
core
pipe
resin
beads
An ion exchange
Figure 9.10
water softener adds signiﬁcant
amounts of sodium to the water.
Thus, it may not be the best
choice for drinking water. This
is especially true for people on
sodium-restricted diets.
Chapter 9  Aqueous Solutions • MHR 361
Waste-Water Treatment
The treatment of waste water (sewage) is often divided into three types:
primary, secondary, and tertiary treatment. (See Figure 9.11.)
• Primary treatment mainly involves removing solids from waste water
physically, using ﬁlters and settling tanks.
• Secondary treatment involves using bacteria to chemically decompose
dissolved and suspended organic compounds.
• Tertiary treatment involves chemical treatments to remove the majority
of remaining ions and disease-causing micro-organisms.
Primary
Treatment
incoming
waste
water
1
2
3
Secondary
Treatment
5
trickling
filter tank
activated
sludge tank
sludge-
digesting
tank
4
secondary
setting tank
6
Tertiary
Treatment
discharge
to waterways
solids sent to landfill
or farms for fertilizer
methane
gas
Primary Treatment
1
2
3
4
Screens remove larger solids.
As waste water slowly passes through a grit tank, smaller particles (such as gravel, sand, and food wastes)
settle out.
In a sedimentation tank, ﬁner-sized particles settle out slowly to form sludge.
Sludge, oils, and grease from the sedimentation tank move to a sludge-digesting tank. There they are
chemically decomposed (“digested”) by anaerobic bacteria.
Secondary Treatment
5
Bacterial decomposition of dissolved organic matter takes place in trickling ﬁlter tanks and activated
sludge tanks.
Tertiary Treatment
6
The resulting waste water may be returned to waterways or used by industries or for irrigation. Processes
such as precipitation and ﬁltration remove most remaining pollutants. Treatment with chlorine or ozone
kills most of the disease-causing micro-organisms. The resulting water is safe for most purposes, but not
for drinking.
Figure 9.11
may use one, two, or all three treatment methods, depending on their needs and ﬁnances.
The main steps involved in the treatment of waste water: Municipalities
362 MHR • Unit 3  Solutions and Solubility
ThoughtLab
Testing Hard Water and Soft Water
Water is hard if it contains high concentrations of
calcium and magnesium ions, Ca2+ and Mg2+. If
these ions are present in lower concentrations,
the water is considered to be soft. Distilled water
has few ions of any kind, and no Ca2+ or Mg2+.
Sodium oxalate, Na2C2O4, is a compound that
causes Ca2+ to precipitate as calcium oxalate,
CaC2O4, and Mg2+ to precipitate as magnesium
oxalate, MgC2O4.
Procedure
1. A student added 1 mL of hard water to one
test tube, 1 mL of soft water to another, and
1 mL of distilled water to a third. The hard
water sample contained Ca2+ and Mg2+. The
soft water contained lower concentrations of
these ions.
Canadians
in Chemistry
Dr. Jiangning Wu:
Cleaning the World’s Water
Around the world, researchers are working to
reduce the pollutants in our lakes, rivers, and
ground water. Both industry and agriculture too
often produce waste water that contains every-
thing from animal droppings and excess fertilizer
to artiﬁcial colours and other chemicals. Yet,
without industry and agriculture, we would not
have many of the modern comforts we expect
and enjoy.
Jiangning Wu was born and raised in
Nanjing, China. She came to Canada to complete
her studies in chemical engineering at the
University of Windsor. After earning her doctorate
in 1992, she turned her attention to the use of
enzymes for purifying waste water.
2. Into each test tube, the student put two
drops of 0.1 mol/L sodium oxalate solution.
Then the student mixed the contents.
Analysis
1. Infer what the student observed in each test
tube. Write a net ionic equation if you predict
that a precipitate formed. Write “NR” if you
think that no reaction occurred.
2. Imagine that you have the three water sam-
ples the student used, but no sodium oxalate
solution. How else could you test the validity
of your predictions?
3. With your teacher’s permission, test your
Sodium oxalate is
predictions.
poisonous. Wear an apron and safety goggles.
Handle all the solutions carefully.
CAUTION
Enzymes are naturally occurring substances
that speed up chemical reactions without being
used up or changed by the reactions. They are
basic to living organisms. Thus it is no surprise
that they are well-suited to removing organic
pollutants from waste water. For instance, an
enzyme that is found in horseradish helps to
accelerate the oxidation of soluble organic pollu-
tants known as phenols. The resulting com-
pounds are less soluble and more easily removed
from the waste water.
In 1993, Dr. Wu found that, with a single
additive, the same enzyme was able to remove
phenols from waste water. Her strategy worked
even for the low concentrations of phenols
typical of industrial waste water. Moreover,
signiﬁcantly lower concentrations of the enzyme
were needed! Dr. Wu’s discovery brought
researchers one step closer to a commercial
process, which would mean cleaner waters and
less stress on the environment.
Dr. Wu is a professor in the School of
Chemical Engineering at Ryerson Polytechnical
University in Toronto. She is currently investigat-
ing the use of ozone for waste-water treatment
and food preservation.
Chapter 9  Aqueous Solutions • MHR 363
C H E M
FA C T
Chlorine was ﬁrst used to
disinfect water in Britain in
1904, after a typhoid epidemic.
(Typhoid is a water-borne, con-
tagious illness that is caused
by a species of Salmonella
bacteria.) Strict limits are
necessary because chlorine is
ineffective when its concentra-
tion is less than 0.1 mg/L. It
gives water an unpleasant
taste at concentrations above
1.0 mg/L. Chlorine has a disad-
vantage, however. It can react
with other chemicals in the
water to form poisonous com-
pounds, such as chloroform,
CHCl3. These chemicals may
remain in solution even after
the entire treatment process.
Section Wrap-up
In this section, you applied your understanding of aqueous solutions to
explore the chemistry of water quality. Some of the chemicals you
considered belong to a group of compounds that are called acids and
bases. In the next chapter, you will investigate the properties and chemi-
cal behaviour of these important compounds.
Section Review
1
2
K/U
In what ways can water in the environment become polluted?
Give at least two examples for each.
K/U
Which chemical in Table 9.5 has the lowest acceptable
concentration? Which chemical has the highest acceptable concentra-
tion? Rearrange the chemicals in the table so they are organized by
concentration, from lowest to highest, rather than alphabetically by
name.
3
MC
What is the source of the water you use at home? Based on your
experience with this water, which ions do you think it contains?
Explain your answer.
4
5
C
Use a graphic organizer to outline the main steps involved in
treating drinking water and waste water.
MC
An alternative to ion exchange water softening is a process called
reverse osmosis. Use your knowledge of osmosis to infer, in general
terms, how this method might work. Consult print or electronic
resources to modify or expand on your ideas. Then use suitable
software to communicate your ﬁndings as a graphic organizer or a
virtual slide presentation.
6
MC
One component of the waste water that enters a waste water plant
for treatment is urea, (NH2)2CO.
(a) Use reference materials to ﬁnd out how urea is chemically changed
to nitrate ions. (There are several steps.)
(b) Write chemical equations to represent the steps involved in this
process.
(c) What happens to aqueous nitrates when they are discharged to
waterways in the environment?
364 MHR • Unit 3  Solutions and Solubility
Review
Reﬂecting on Chapter 9
Summarize this chapter in the format of your
choice. Here are a few ideas to use as guidelines:
• Predict combinations of aqueous solutions that
result in the formation of precipitates.
• Describe your experiences with a qualitative
analysis of ions in solution.
• Represent a double-displacement reaction using
its net ionic equation.
• Write balanced chemical equations and net ionic
equations for double-displacement reactions.
• Apply your understanding of stoichiometry to
solve quantitative problems involving solutions.
• Identify the origins of pollutants in drinking
water, and the allowed concentrations of some
of these pollutants.
• Examine the causes and effects of water hard-
ness. Considered several methods for softening
hard water.
• Compare the chemistry and the technology of
water treatment and waste-water treatment.
Reviewing Key Terms
For each of the following terms, write a sentence
that shows your understanding of its meaning.
general solubility guidelines
hard water
net ionic equation
qualitative analysis
spectator ions
waste-water treatment
ion exchange
precipitate
soft water
total ionic equation
water treatment
Knowledge/Understanding
1. In your own words, deﬁne the terms “spectator
ion” and “net ionic equation.”
2. Identify the spectator ions in the following
skeleton equation. Then write the balanced
ionic equation for the reaction.
Al(NO3)3(aq) + NH4OH(aq) →
Al(OH)3(s) + NH4NO3(aq)
3. Hydrogen sulﬁde gas can be prepared by the
reaction of sulfuric acid with sodium sulﬁde.
H2SO4(aq) + Na2S(aq) → H2S(g) + Na2SO4(aq)
Write the net ionic equation for this reaction.
4. Each of the following combinations of reagents
results in a double displacement reaction.
In your notebook, complete the chemical
equation. Then identify the spectator ions,
and write the net ionic equation.
(a) copper(II) chloride(aq) + ammonium
→
phosphate(aq)
(b) aluminum nitrate(aq) + barium
→
hydroxide(aq)
(c) sodium hydroxide(aq)
chloride(aq) →
+ magnesium
5. Use the general solubility guidelines to name
three reagents that will combine with each ion
below to form a precipitate. Assume that the
reactions take place in aqueous solution. For
each reaction, write the net ionic equation.
(a) bromide ion
(b) carbonate ion
(c) lead(II) ion
(d) iron(III) ion
6. The transition metals form insoluble sulﬁdes,
often with a characteristic colour. Write the net
ionic equation for the precipitation of each ion
by the addition of an aqueous solution of
sodium sulﬁde.
(a) Cr3+
(b) Ni2+
(c) Mn4+
(Note: Cr2S3(s) is brown-black.)
(Note: NiS(s) is black.)
(Note: MnS2(s) is green or red,
depending on the arrangement
of ions in the solid.)
(aq)
(aq)
(aq)
7. Identify three cations and three anions that
are commonly found in ground water. Suggest
at least one likely source for each.
8. Brieﬂy describe two steps in the primary
treatment of waste water, one involving a
physical change and the other involving a
chemical change.
9. (a) Many liquid antacids contain magnesium
hydroxide, Mg(OH)2. Why must the bottle
be shaken before a dose is poured?
(b) Stomach acid contains hydrochloric acid.
Excess acid that backs up into the esophagus
is the cause of “heartburn.” Write the
chemical equation and the net ionic
equation for the reaction that takes place
when someone with heartburn swallows
a dose of liquid antacid.
Chapter 9  Aqueous Solutions • MHR 365
10. Aqueous solutions of iron(III) chloride
and ammonium sulﬁde react in a double
displacement reaction.
(a) Write the name and formula of the substance
that precipitates.
(b) Write the chemical equation for the reaction.
(c) Write the net ionic equation.
Inquiry
11. A reference book states that the solubility of
silver sulfate is 0.57 g in 100 mL of cold water.
You decide to check this by measuring the
mass of a silver salt precipitated from a known
volume of saturated silver sulfate solution.
Solubility data show that silver chloride is
much less soluble than silver nitrate. Explain
why you should not use barium chloride to
precipitate the silver ions. Suggest a different
reagent, and write the net ionic equation for the
reaction.
12. The presence of copper(II) ions in solution
can be tested by adding an aqueous solution
of sodium sulﬁde. The appearance of a black
precipitate indicates that the test is positive.
A solution of copper(II) bromide is tested this
way. What precipitate is formed? Write the net
ionic equation for the reaction.
13. An old home-gardening “recipe” for fertilizer
suggests adding 15 g of Epsom salts (magne-
sium sulfate heptahydrate, MgSO4·7H2O ) to 4 L
of water. What will be the concentration of
magnesium ions?
14. Calculate the concentration (in mol/L) of each
aqueous solution.
(a) 7.37 g of table sugar, C12H22O11, dissolved in
125 mL of solution
(b) 15.5 g of ammonium phosphate, (NH4)3PO4,
dissolved in 180 mL of solution
(c) 76.7 g of glycerol, C3H8O3, dissolved in
1.20 L of solution
15. 50.0 mL of 0.200 mol/L Ca(NO3)2(aq) is mixed
with 200 mL of 0.180 mol/L K2SO4(aq). What is
the concentration of sulfate ions in the ﬁnal
solution?
16. Suppose that 1.00 L of 0.200 mol/L KNO3(aq) is
mixed with 2.00 L of 0.100 mol/L Ca(NO3)2(aq).
Determine the concentrations of the major ions
in the solution.
366 MHR • Unit 3  Solutions and Solubility
17. Equal masses of each of the following salts
are dissolved in equal volumes of water:
sodium chloride, calcium chloride, and iron(III)
chloride. Which salt produces the largest
concentration of chloride ions?
(aq), calculate
18. Imagine that you are the chemist at a cement
factory. You are responsible for analyzing the
factory’s waste water. If a 50.0 mL sample of
waste water contains 0.090 g of Ca2+
(aq) and
0.029 g of Mg2+
(a) the concentration of each ion in mol/L
(b) the concentration of each ion in ppm
19. The concentration of calcium ions, Ca2+, in
blood plasma is about 2.5 × 10−3 mol/L.
Calcium ions are important in muscle contrac-
tion and in regulating heartbeat. If the concen-
tration of calcium ions falls too low, death is
inevitable. In a television drama, a patient is
brought to hospital after being accidentally
splashed with hydroﬂuoric acid. The acid
readily penetrates the skin, and the ﬂuoride
ions combine with the calcium ions in the
blood. If the patient’s volume of blood plasma
is 2.8 L, what amount (in mol) of ﬂuoride
ions would completely combine with all the
calcium ions in the patient’s blood?
20. A double displacement reaction occurs in
aqueous solution when magnesium phosphate
reacts with lead(II) nitrate. If 20.0 mL of
0.750 mol/L magnesium phosphate reacts,
what is the maximum mass of precipitate that
can be formed?
Communication
21. Phosphate ions act as a fertilizer. They promote
the growth of algae in rivers and lakes. They
can enter rivers and lakes from ﬁelds that are
improperly fertilized or from untreated waste
water that contains phosphate detergents.
How can the water be treated to remove the
phosphate ions?
22. A chemist analyzes the sulfate salt of an
unknown alkaline earth metal. The chemist
adds 1.273 g of the salt to excess barium
chloride solution. After ﬁltering and drying, the
mass of precipitate is found to be 2.468 g.
(a) Use the formula MSO4 to represent the
unknown salt. Write the molecular and net
ionic equations for the reaction.
(b) Calculate the amount (in mol) of MSO4
used in the reaction.
(c) Determine the molar mass of the
unknown salt.
(d) What is the likely identity of the unknown
metal cation? What test might the chemist
perform to help conﬁrm this conclusion?
23. The same volume of solution is made using the
same masses of two salts: rubidium carbonate
and calcium carbonate. Which salt gives the
larger concentration of aqueous carbonate ions?
24. A prospector asks you to analyze a bag of silver
ore. You measure the mass of the ore and add
excess nitric acid to it. Then you add excess
sodium chloride solution. You ﬁlter and dry
the precipitate. The mass of the ore is 856.1 g,
and 1.092 g of silver chloride is collected.
(a) Why did you ﬁrst treat the ore with excess
nitric acid?
(b) Calculate the mass percent of silver in the
ore. The ore that is extracted at a silver mine
typically contains about 0.085% silver by
mass. Should the prospector keep looking
or begin celebrating?
Making Connections
25. Think about your activities yesterday. Which
activity required the most use of water?
Estimate the volume of water you used. Would
it make sense to have two supplies of water to
your home, one for drinking and a second of
lower purity for every other activity that uses
water? Give reasons for your answer.
26. List three different household wastes that are
commonly discarded and have the potential
to contaminate ground water if rain leaches
through your local landﬁll site. What chemi-
cal(s) does each contain? For each waste,
identify an alternative to dumping it in a
landﬁll site.
27. Water is essential for crops. Improper irrigation
over a number of years, however, can result in
farmed land becoming laden with toxic chemi-
cal compounds. Research how this happens.
Find out whether this is a concern to farmers
near where you live.
2−
(aq) and Cl−
(aq); net ionic equation:
(aq); net ionic equation:
(aq); net ionic equation:
(aq) → H2O(l) 6.(a) spectator ions: NH4
(aq) → CO2(g) + H2O(l) (b) spectator ions:
2−
Answers to Practice Problems and
Short Answers to Section Review Questions:
Practice Problems: 1.(a) insoluble (b) insoluble
(c) soluble  2.(a) soluble (b) soluble (c) insoluble
3.(a) insoluble (b) soluble (c) insoluble
4.(a) Na2S(aq) + FeSO4(aq) → Na2SO4(aq) + FeS(s)
(b) NaOH(aq) + Ba(NO3)2(aq) → NR
(c) 2Cs3PO4(aq) + 3CaBr2(aq) → 6CsBr(aq) + Ca3(PO4)2(s)
(d) Na2CO3(aq) + H2SO4(aq) → NR
(e) NaNO3(aq) + CuSO4(aq) → NR
(f) NH4I(aq) + AgNO3(aq) → AgI(s) + NH4NO3(aq)
(g) K2CO3(aq) + Fe(NO3)2(aq) → FeCO3(s) + 2KNO3(aq)
(h) Al(NO3)3(aq) + Na3PO4(aq) → AlPO4(s) + 3NaNO3(aq)
(i) KCl(aq) + Fe(NO3)2(aq) → NR
(j) (NH4)2SO4(aq) + BaCl2(aq) → BaSO4(s) + 2NH4Cl(aq)
(k) Na2S(aq) + NiSO4(aq) → NiS(s) + Na2SO4(aq)
(l) Pb(NO3)2 + 2KBr(aq) → PbBr2(s) + 2KNO3(aq)
5.(a) spectator ions: Na+
(aq) + 2H+
CO3
Na+
(aq) and SO4
(aq) + OH−
H+
and SO4
Zn2+
Li+
CO3
none; net ionic equation:
2H+
(aq) + 2OH−
4 (aq) + Ba2−
7. 300 mL  8. concentration of NH4
concentration of PO4
10. 30.47%  11. 20.9 g of PbS  12. 4.61 g PbI2
13.(a) 3NaOH(aq) + Al(NO3)3(aq) → Al(OH)3(s) + 3NaNO3(aq)
(b) 0.0975 g
Section Review:  9.1: 2. NaF less soluble, because F− is
smaller than I−.  3.(a) insoluble (b) soluble (c) soluble.
4. all insoluble.  5. Any reagent containing Cl−, Br−, or I−
will precipitate silver ion but leave calcium ion in
solution.  6. 1 = Ag+, 2 = SO4
2+, 3 = Ba2+, 4 = Cl−.
9.2: 2.(a) 3Sn2+
(b) Ni2+
(c) 2Cr3+
(b) Cl−
6. copper(II) carbonate, CuCO3;
Cu2+
2−
(aq) + CO3
(aq) and Na+
2−
(aq).  9.3: 1. 0.300 mol/L nitrate ion.
SO4
2. 0.636 g Na2CO3(s).  3. 114 mL.  4. 1.09 mol/L ZnCl2.
5. 0.650 g Cu  6. 3.4 × 10−2 L 7. 0.267 L
(aq) → Zn3(PO4)2(s) (b) spectator ions:
(aq); net ionic equation:
(aq) → CO2(g) + H2O(l) (c) spectator ions:
3−
2−(aq) → NiCO3(s)
(aq) → Cr2S3(s) 3.(a) Cl−
+
(aq) (c) NH4
(aq) and SO4
(aq) → BaSO4(s) + H2O(l)
+
(aq) is 0.40 mol/L;
(aq) is 0.13 mol/L  9. 66.57%
2−
3−
(aq) + PO4
(aq) and NO3−
(aq) + 2H+
2−
(aq) + CO3
(aq) + 3S2−
(aq) and Na+
(aq) → CuCO3(s); spectator ions:
(aq) and K+
2−
(aq).
(aq) → Sn3(PO4)2(s)
(aq) + SO2−
(aq) + 2PO4
(aq)
(aq)
3−
+
Chapter 9  Aqueous Solutions • MHR 367
368
Acids and Bases
What do cheese, stomach juices, baking soda, oven cleaner, and under-
arm odour have in common? They are all acidic or basic. Do you know
which are acidic and which are basic?
Acids and bases are very important chemicals. They have been used
for thousands of years. Vinegar is an acidic solution that is common in
many food and cleaning products. It was discovered long ago—before
people invented the skill of writing to record its use. Today, acids are also
used to manufacture fertilizers, explosives, plastics, motor vehicles, and
computer circuit boards.
Like acids, bases have numerous uses in the home and in chemical
industries. Nearly 5000 years ago, in the Middle East, the Babylonians
made soap using the bases in wood ash. Today, one of Canada’s most
important industries, the pulp and paper industry, uses huge quantities
of a base called sodium hydroxide. Sodium hydroxide is also used to
manufacture soaps, detergents, dyes, and many other compounds.
In this chapter, you will learn about the properties of acids and bases.
You will learn how these properties change when acids and bases react
together. As well, you will have a chance to estimate and measure the
acidity of aqueous solutions.
C h a p t e r   P r e v i e w
10.1 Acid-Base Theories
10.2 Strong and Weak Acids
and Bases
10.3 Acid-Base Reactions
C o n c e p t s   a n d   S k i l l s
Yo u   W i l l   N e e d
Before you begin this chapter,
review the following concepts
and skills:
describing and calculat-
ing the concentration of
solutions (Chapter 8,
section 8.2)
performing stoichiometry
calculations (Chapter 7,
section 7.2)
naming and identifying
polyatomic ions and their
formulas (Chapter 3,
section 3.4)
Books that have been published since the mid-nineteenth
century suffer from yellowing, brittle pages as they age.
How might acids cause this problem? Can you think of
any solutions to this problem?
Chapter 10  Acids and Bases • MHR 369
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
10.1
Acid-Base Theories
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
describe and compare the
Arrhenius and Brønsted-
Lowry theories of acids and
bases
identify conjugate acid-base
pairs
communicate your
understanding of the
following terms: Arrhenius
theory of acids and bases,
hydronium ion, Brønsted-
Lowry theory of acids and
bases, conjugate acid-base
pair, conjugate base,
conjugate acid
As you can see in Table 10.1, acids and bases are common products in the
home. It is easy to identify some products as acids. Often the word “acid”
appears in the list of ingredients. Identifying bases is more difﬁcult. Acids
and bases have different properties, however, that enable you to distin-
guish between them.
Table 10.1 Common Acids and Bases in the Home
Acids
Product
Acid(s) contained in the product
citrus fruits (such as lemons,
limes, oranges and tomatoes)
citric acid and ascorbic acid
dairy products (such as cheese,
milk, and yogurt)
lactic acid
vinegar
soft drinks
acetic acid
carbonic acid; may also contain
phosphoric acid and citric acid
underarm odour
3-methyl-2-hexenoic acid
Bases
Product
Base contained in the product
oven cleaner
baking soda
washing soda
sodium hydroxide
sodium hydrogen carbonate
sodium carbonate
glass cleaner (some brands)
ammonia
Language
LINK
The word “acid” comes from
the Latin acidus, meaning
“sour tasting.” As you will
learn in this chapter, bases
are the “base” (the foundation)
from which many other com-
pounds form. A base that is
soluble in water is called an
alkali. The word “alkali” comes
from an Arabic word meaning
“ashes of a plant.” In the
ancient Middle East, people
rinsed plant ashes with hot
water to obtain a basic
solution. The basic solution
was then reacted with animal
fats to make soap.
Properties of Acids and Bases
One way to distinguish acids from bases is to describe their observable
properties. For example, acids taste sour, and they change colour when
mixed with coloured dyes called indicators. Bases taste bitter and feel
slippery. They also change colour when mixed with indicators.
CAUTION
You should never taste or touch acids, bases, or any other
chemicals. Early chemists used their senses of taste and touch to
observe the properties of many chemicals. This dangerous practice
often led to serious injury, and sometimes death.
Another property that can be used to distinguish acids from bases is
their conductivity in solution. As you can see in Figure 10.1, aqueous
solutions of acids and bases conduct electricity. This is evidence that ions
are present in acidic and basic solutions. Some of these solutions, such as
hydrochloric acid and sodium hydroxide (a base), cause the bulb to
glow brightly. Most acidic and basic solutions, however, cause the bulb
to glow dimly.
370 MHR • Unit 3  Solutions and Solubility
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
An oxide is a compound of oxy-
gen with a metal or non-metal.
Most metal oxides react with
water to form basic solutions.
For example, calcium oxide is a
metal oxide that is important in
the construction industry as an
ingredient of cement. Calcium
oxide reacts with water to form
a basic solution of calcium
hydroxide.
CaO(s) + H2O((cid:2)) → Ca(OH)2(aq)
Many municipal water treat-
ment plants use calcium
hydroxide to soften very hard
water before releasing it for
public use. Most non-metal
oxides react with water to form
acidic solutions. For example,
sulfur dioxide gas dissolves in
water to form sulfurous acid.
SO2(g) + H2O((cid:2)) → H2SO3(aq)
The metallic character of the
elements in the periodic table,
and the acid-base properties
of their oxides, show a distinct
trend across periods and down
groups. Infer what this trend is.
In other words, state what you
think happens to the acid-base
properties of oxides as you go
across a period and down a
group. Make a quick sketch of
the periodic table to illustrate
this trend. How would you
describe the acid-base proper-
ties of the metalloids? (Use
your knowledge of the physical
properties of the metalloids to
help you make your inference.)
pure water
hydrochloric acid, HCl(aq) (1 mol/L)
acetic acid, CH3COOH(aq) (1 mol/L)
sodium hydroxide, NaOH(aq) (1 mol/L)
Aqueous solutions of
Figure 10.1
acids and bases can be tested using
a conductivity tester. The brightness
of the bulb is a clue to the concentration
of ions in the solution. Which of these
solutions have higher concentrations of
ions? Which have lower concentrations?
ammonia, NH3(aq) (1 mol/L)
Table 10.2 on the next page summarizes the observable properties of acids
and bases. These observable properties include their physical characteris-
tics and their chemical behaviour. The Express Lab on page xxx provides
you with an opportunity to compare some of these properties. What are
acids and bases, however? How does chemical composition determine
whether a substance is acidic or basic? You will consider one possible
answer to this question starting on page 373.
Chapter 10  Acids and Bases • MHR 371
Table 10.2 Some Observable Properties of Acids and Bases
Taste
Property
Electrical conductivity
in solution
taste sour
conduct electricity
Feel of solution
have no
characteristic feel
taste bitter
conduct electricity
feel slippery
ACIDS
BASES
Reaction with
litmus paper
Property
Reaction with
active metals
Reaction with
carbonate compounds
ACIDS
Acids turns blue
litmus red
produce
hydrogen gas
produce carbon
dioxide gas
BASES
Bases turn red
litmus blue
do not react
do not react
372 MHR • Unit 3  Solutions and Solubility
ExpressLab
Clean a Penny
Many cleaning products contain an acid or a
base. For example, some window cleaners
contain vinegar (acetic acid). Other window
cleaners contain ammonia (a base). Oven clean-
ers, however, contain only bases. This activity
will help you infer why.
Safety Precautions
Materials
water
vinegar
100 mL graduated cylinder
spoon or scoopula
baking soda
3 small beakers (about 200 mL)
3 tarnished pennies
Procedure
1. Predict which solution(s) will clean the penny
best. Give reasons for your prediction.
2. In one beaker, mix 50 mL of vinegar with
about 150 mL of water. In a second beaker,
mix about 20 mL to 30 mL spoonfuls of baking
soda with 150 mL of water. In the third beaker,
put only 150 mL of water.
3. Place a tarnished penny in each beaker.
Observe what happens for about 15 min.
Analysis
1. Which solution was the best cleaner? How
did your observations compare with your
prediction?
2. What results would you expect if you tried
cleaning a penny in a solution of lemon juice?
What if you used a dilute solution of
ammonia? Note: If you want to test your
predictions, ask your teacher for the concen-
trations of the solutions you should use.
3. The base that is often used in oven cleaners is
sodium hydroxide. This base is very corrosive,
and it can burn skin easily. A corrosive acid,
such as hydrochloric acid, could also remove
baked-on grease and grime from ovens. Why
are bases a better choice for oven cleaners?
The Arrhenius Theory of Acids and Bases
In Figure 10.1, you saw evidence that ions are present in solutions of
acids and bases. When hydrogen chloride dissolves in water, for example,
it dissociates (breaks apart) into hydrogen ions and chloride ions.
HCl(aq) → H+
(aq) + Cl−
(aq)
When sodium hydroxide dissolves in water, it dissociates to form sodium
ions and hydroxide ions.
NaOH(aq) → Na+
(aq) + OH−
(aq)
The dissociations of other acids and bases in water reveal a pattern. This
pattern was ﬁrst noticed in the late nineteenth century by a Swedish
chemist named Svanté Arrhenius. (See Figure 10.2.)
HBr(aq) → H+
H2SO4(aq) → H+
HClO4(aq) → H+
(aq) + Br−
(aq)
(aq) + HSO−
(aq) + ClO−
4(aq)
4(aq)
acids dissociating in water,
and their resulting ions
Figure 10.2
(1859–1927).
Svanté Arrhenius
LiOH(aq) → Li+
KOH(aq) → K+
Ba(OH)2(aq) → Ba+
(aq) + OH−
(aq) + OH−
(aq)
(aq) + 2OH−
(aq)
bases dissociating in water,
and their resulting ions
(aq)
Chapter 10  Acids and Bases • MHR 373
Web
LINK
In 1887, Arrhenius published a theory to explain the nature of acids
and bases. It is called the Arrhenius theory of acids and bases.
www.school.mcgrawhill.ca/
resources/
Scientists did not embrace the
Arrhenius theory when they
ﬁrst heard about it during the
1880s. Why were they unim-
pressed with this theory? What
was necessary to convince
them? Arrhenius is featured on
several web sites on the
Internet. To link with these web
sites, go to the web site above.
Go to Science Resources, then
to Chemistry 11 to ﬁnd out
where to go next.
The Arrhenius Theory of Acids and Bases
• An acid is a substance that dissociates in water to produce one or
more hydrogen ions, H+.
• A base is a substance that dissociates in water to form one or more
hydroxide ions, OH−.
According to the Arrhenius theory, acids increase the concentration of H+
in aqueous solutions. Thus, an Arrhenius acid must contain hydrogen as
the source of H+. You can see this in the dissociation reactions for acids
on the previous page.
Bases, on the other hand, increase the concentration of OH− in aque-
ous solutions. An Arrhenius base must contain the hydroxyl group, —OH,
as the source of OH−. You can see this in the dissociation reactions for
bases on the previous page.
Limitations of the Arrhenius Theory
The Arrhenius theory is useful if you are interested in the ions that result
when an acid or a base dissociates in water. It also helps explain what
happens when an acid and a base undergo a neutralization reaction. In
such a reaction, an acid combines with a base to form an ionic compound
and water. Examine the following reactions:
HCl(aq) + NaOH(aq) → NaCl(aq) + H2O((cid:2))
The net ionic equation for this reaction shows the principal ions in the
Arrhenius theory.
H+
(aq) + OH−
(aq) → H2O((cid:2))
Since acids and bases produce hydrogen ions and hydroxide ions, water
is an inevitable result of acid-base reactions.
Problems arise with the Arrhenius theory, however. One problem
involves the ion that is responsible for acidity: H+. Look again at the equa-
tion for the dissociation of hydrochloric acid.
(aq) + Cl−
HCl(aq) → H+
(aq)
This dissociation occurs in aqueous solution, but chemists often leave out
H2O as a component of the reaction. They simply assume that it is there.
What happens if you put H2O into the equation?
HCl(aq) + H2O((cid:2)) → H+
(aq) + Cl−
(aq) + H2O((cid:2))
Notice that the water is unchanged when the reaction is represented
this way. However, you learned earlier that water is a polar molecule.
The O atom has a partial negative charge, and the H atoms have partial
positive charges. Thus, H2O must interact in some way with the ions H+
and Cl−. In fact, chemists made a discovery in the early twentieth century.
They realized that protons do not exist in isolation in aqueous solution.
(The hydrogen ion is simply a proton. It is a positively charged nuclear
particle.) Instead, protons are always hydrated: they are attached to
water molecules. A hydrated proton is called a hydronium ion, H3O+
(See Figure 10.3.)
(aq).
374 MHR • Unit 3  Solutions and Solubility
hydrogen bond
+
H3O+
There is another problem with the Arrhenius theory. Consider the
reaction of ammonia, NH3, with water.
(aq) .
For convenience,
Figure 10.3
chemists often use H+
(aq) as
a shorthand notation for the
hydronium ion, H3O+
Hydronium ions do not exist
independently. Instead, they form
hydrogen bonds with other water
molecules. Thus, a more correct
+
formula is H
(H2O)n, where n is
usually 4 or 5.
NH3(g) + H2O((cid:2)) → NH+
4(aq) + OH−
(aq)
Use the idea of the hydronium
ion to complete the following
equation:
HCl(aq) + H2O((cid:2)) →
Ammonia is one of several substances that produce basic solutions
in water. As you can see, ammonia does not contain hydroxide ions.
However, it does produce these ions when it reacts with water. Ammonia
also undergoes a neutralization reaction with acids. The Arrhenius theory
cannot explain the basic properties of ammonia. Nor can it explain the
fact that certain other substances, such as salts that contain carbonate
ions, also have basic properties.
There is yet another problem with the Arrhenius theory. It is limited
to acid-base reactions in a single solvent, water. Many acid-base reactions
take place in other solvents, however.
The Brønsted-Lowry Theory of Acids and Bases
In 1923, two chemists working independently of each other, proposed a
new theory of acids and bases. (See Figure 10.4.) Johannes Brønsted in
Copenhagen, Denmark, and Thomas Lowry in London, England, proposed
what is called the Brønsted-Lowry theory of acids and bases. This theory
overcame the problems related to the Arrhenius theory.
The Brønsted-Lowry Theory of Acids and Bases
• An acid is a substance from which a proton (H+ ion) can be
removed.
• A base is a substance that can remove a proton (H+ ion) from
an acid.
Figure 10.4
Johannes Brønsted
(1879–1947), left, and Thomas
Lowry (1874–1936), right. Brønsted
published many more articles
about ions in solution than
Lowry did. Thus, some chemistry
resources refer to the “Brønsted
theory of acids and bases.”
Chapter 10  Acids and Bases • MHR 375
C H E M
FA C T
In many chemistry references,
Brønsted-Lowry acids are
called "proton donors."
Brønsted-Lowry bases are
called "proton acceptors."
Although these terms are
common, they create a false
impression about the energy
that is involved in acid-base
reactions. Breaking bonds
always requires energy. For
example, removing a proton
from a hydrochloric acid mole-
cule requires 1.4 × 103 kJ/mol.
This is far more energy than
the word "donor" implies.
Like an Arrhenius acid, a Brønsted-Lowry acid must contain H in its
formula. This means that all Arrhenius acids are also Brønsted-Lowry
acids. However, any negative ion (not just OH−) can be a Brønsted-Lowry
base. In addition, water is not the only solvent that can be used.
According to the Brønsted-Lowry theory, there is only one require-
ment for an acid-base reaction. One substance must provide a proton, and
another substance must receive the same proton. In other words, an acid-
base reaction involves the transfer of a proton.
The idea of proton transfer has major implications for understanding
the nature of acids and bases. According to the Brønsted-Lowry theory,
any substance can behave as an acid, but only if another substance
behaves as a base at the same time. Similarly, any substance can behave as
a base, but only if another substance behaves as an acid at the same time.
For example, consider the reaction between hydrochloric acid and
water shown in Figure 10.5. In this reaction, hydrochloric acid is an acid
because it provides a proton (H+) to the water. The water molecule
receives the proton. Therefore, according to the Brønsted-Lowry theory,
water is a base in this reaction. When the water receives the proton, it
becomes a hydronium ion (H3O+). Notice the hydronium ion on the right
side of the equation.
proton transfer
HCl(aq) + H2O((cid:2))
base
acid
conjugate
acid
H3O+
→
(aq) + Cl−
(aq)
conjugate
base
Figure 10.5
Brønsted-Lowry theory
The reaction between hydrochloric acid and water, according to the
Two molecules or ions that are related by the transfer of a proton are
called a conjugate acid-base pair. (Conjugate means "linked together.")
The conjugate base of an acid is the particle that remains when a proton
is removed from the acid. The conjugate acid of a base is the particle that
results when the base receives the proton from the acid. In the reaction
between hydrochloric acid and water, the hydronium ion is the conjugate
acid of the base, water. The chloride ion is the conjugate base of the acid,
hydrochloric acid.
According to the Brønsted-Lowry theory, every acid has a conjugate
base, and every base has a conjugate acid. The conjugate base and conju-
gate acid of an acid-base pair are linked by the transfer of a proton. The
conjugate base of the acid-base pair has one less hydrogen than the acid. It
also has one more negative charge than the acid. The conjugate acid of the
acid-base pair has one more hydrogen than the base. It also has one less
negative charge than the base.
These ideas about acid-base reactions and conjugate acid-base pairs
will become clearer as you study the following Sample Problems and
Practice Problems.
376 MHR • Unit 3  Solutions and Solubility
Sample Problem
Conjugate Acid-Base Pairs
Problem
Hydrogen bromide is a gas at room temperature. It is soluble in
water, forming hydrobromic acid. Identify the conjugate acid-base
pairs.
What Is Required?
You need to identify two sets of conjugate acid-base pairs.
What Is Given?
You know that hydrogen bromide forms hydrobromic acid in
aqueous solution.
Plan Your Strategy
• Write a balanced chemical equation.
• On the left side of the equation, identify the acid as the molecule
that provides the proton. Identify the base as the molecule that
accepts the proton.
• On the right side of the equation, identify the particle that has one
proton less than the acid on the left side as the conjugate base of
the acid. Identify the particle on the right side that has one proton
more than the base on the left side as the conjugate acid of
the base.
Act on Your Strategy
Hydrogen bromide provides the proton, so it is the Brønsted-Lowry
acid in the reaction. Water receives the proton, so it is the Brønsted-
Lowry base. The conjugate acid-base pairs are HBr/Br− and
H2O/H3O+.
conjugate acid-base pair
acid
HHBBrr((g)) + HH22OO(((cid:2))) −→ HH3OO+++
base
(aq)
conjugate
acid
conjugate
base
+ BBBBrr−
(aq)
conjugate acid-base pair
Check Your Solution
The formulas of the conjugate pairs differ by one proton, H+,
as expected.
Chapter 10  Acids and Bases • MHR 377
Sample Problem
More Conjugate Acid-Base Pairs
Problem
Ammonia is a pungent gas at room temperature. Its main use is in
the production of fertilizers and explosives. It is very soluble in
water. It forms a basic solution that is used in common products,
such as glass cleaners. Identify the conjugate acid-base pairs in the
reaction between aqueous ammonia and water.
+
(aq) + OH−
NH3(g) + H2O((cid:2)) → NH4
(aq)
What Is Required?
You need to identify the conjugate acid-base pairs.
What Is Given?
The chemical equation is given.
Plan Your Strategy
• Identify the proton-provider on the left side of the equation as the
acid. Identify the proton-remover (or proton-receiver) as the base.
• Identify the conjugate acid and base on the right side of the equa-
tion by the difference of a single proton from the acid and base on
the left side.
Act on Your Strategy
The conjugate acid base pairs are NH4
+/NH3 and H2O/OH−.
conjugate acid-base pair
acid
NNHH3(g) + HH22OO((cid:2)) −→ NNHH4
base
conjugate
acid
conjugate
base
(aq) + OOOOHH−
(aq)
+++
PROBLEM TIP
In the previous Sample
Problem, water acted as a
base. In this Sample Problem,
water acts as an acid.
Remember: Water can act as a
proton-provider (an acid) in
some reactions and as a
proton-receiver (a base)
in others.
conjugate acid-base pair
Check Your Solution
The formulas of the conjugate pairs differ by a proton, as expected.
Practice Problems
1. Hydrogen cyanide is a poisonous gas at room temperature. When
this gas dissolved in water, the following reaction occurs:
HCN(aq) + H2O((cid:2)) → H3O+
Identify the conjugate acid-base pairs.
(aq) + CN−
(aq)
378 MHR • Unit 3  Solutions and Solubility
Continued ...
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 378
2. Sodium acetate is a good electrolyte. In water, the acetate ion
reacts as follows:
CH3COO−
(aq) + H2O((cid:2)) → CH3COOH(aq) + OH−
(aq)
Identify the conjugate acid-base pairs.
3. Write equations to show how the hydrogen sulﬁde ion, HS−, can
react with water. First show the ion acting as an acid. Then show
the ion acting as a base.
Section Wrap-up
The two theories that you have considered in this section attempt to
explain the chemical nature of acids and bases. Table 10.3 summarizes the
key points of these theories.
In both the Arrhenius theory and the Brønsted-Lowry theory, acids
and bases form ions in solution. Many characteristics of acid-base behav-
iour are linked to the number of ions that form from a particular acid or
base. One of these characteristics is strength.
In section 10.2, you will learn why a dilute solution of vinegar is safe
to ingest, while the same molar concentration of hydrochloric acid would
be extremely poisonous.
Table 10.3 Comparing the Arrhenius Theory and the Brønsted-Lowry Theory
Theory
Acid
Base
Example
Arrhenius
Brønstead-Lowry
any substance that
dissociates to form H+ in
aqueous solution
any substance that provides a proton
to another substance (or any substance
from which a proton may be removed)
any substance that
dissociates to form OH− in
aqueous solution
HCl(aq)  H+
(aq) + Cl−
→
(aq)
any substance that receives a proton
from an acid (or any substance that
removes a proton from an acid)
(aq) + Cl−
HCl(aq) + H2O((cid:2))  H3O+
→
(aq)
Section Review
1
I
Suppose that you have four unknown solutions, labelled A, B, C,
and D. You use a conductivity apparatus to test their conductivity,
and obtain the results shown below. Use these results to answer the
questions that follow.
Solution
Results of Conductivity Test
A
B
C
D
the bulb glows dimly
the bulb glows strongly
the bulb does not glow
the bulb glows strongly
(a) Which of these solutions has a high concentration of dissolved ions?
What is your evidence?
(b) Which of these solutions has a low concentration of dissolved ions?
What is your evidence?
Chapter 10  Acids and Bases • MHR 379
(c) Which of the four unknowns are probably aqueous solutions of acids
or bases?
(d) Based on these tests alone, can you distinguish the acidic solution(s)
from the basic solutions(s)? Why or why not?
(e) Suggest one way that you could distinguish the acidic solution(s)
from the basic solution(s).
2
K/U
Deﬁne an acid and a base according to the Arrhenius theory.
(a)
(b) Give two examples of observations that the Arrhenius theory
can explain.
(c) Give two examples of observations that the Arrhenius theory
can not explain.
3
(a)
K/U
Deﬁne an acid and a base according to the Brønsted-Lowry
theory.
(b) What does the Brønsted-Lowry theory have in common with the
Arrhenius theory? In what ways is it different?
(c) Which of the two acid-base theories is more comprehensive? (In
other words, which explains a broader body of observations?)
4
5
K/U
What is the conjugate acid of a base?
(a)
(b) What is the conjugate base of an acid?
(c) Use an example to illustrate your answers to parts (a) and (b) above.
Write the formula for the conjugate acid of the following:
K/U
(a) the hydroxide ion, OH−
2−
(b) the carbonate ion, CO3
6
K/U
Write the formula for the conjugate base of the following:
(a) nitric acid, HNO3
(b)
−
the hydrogen sulfate ion, HSO4
7
K/U
Which of the following compounds is an acid according to the
Arrhenius theory?
(a) H2O
(b) Ca(OH)2
(c) H3PO3
(d) HF
8
K/U
Which of the following compounds is a base according to the
Arrhenius theory?
(a) KOH
(b) Ba(OH)2
(c) HClO
(d) H3PO4
9
C
Hydroﬂuoric acid dissociates in water to form ﬂuoride ions.
(a) Write a balanced chemical equation for this reaction.
(b) Identify the conjugate acid-base pairs.
(c) Explain how you know whether or not you have correctly identiﬁed
the conjugate acid-base pairs.
10
I
Identify the conjugate acid-base pairs in the following reactions:
(aq) + CO2−
−
(a) H2PO4
(b) HCOOH(aq) + CN−
(aq) + OH−
−
(c) H2PO4
−
2−
(aq) + HCO3
3(aq) → HPO4
(aq) → HCOO−
(aq) + HCN(aq)
2−
(aq) + H2O((cid:2))
(aq) → HPO4
(aq)
380 MHR • Unit 3  Solutions and Solubility
10.2
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
explain, in terms of the
degree to which they
dissociate, the difference
between strong and weak
acids and bases
distinguish between binary
acids and oxoacids
deﬁne pH, and experimental-
ly determine the effect on pH
of diluting an acidic solution
communicate your under-
standing of the following
terms: strong acid, weak
acid, strong base, weak
base, binary acid, oxoacid,
pH
Table 10.4 Strong Acids
hydrochloric acid, HCl
hydrobromic acid, HBr
hydroiodic acid, HI
nitric acid, HNO3
sulfuric acid, H2SO4
perchloric acid, HClO4
Strong and Weak Acids and Bases
Re-examine Figure 10.1 on page xxx. Look at the photographs of
hydrochloric acid and acetic acid. The conductivity tester is testing the
same concentrations of both acids. As you can see, the bulb glows brightly
in the hydrochloric acid. The bulb glows dimly in the acetic acid. How
can these different results be explained?
Strong Acids and Weak Acids
You know that ions are present in an aqueous solution of an acid. These
ions result from the dissociation of the acid. An acid that dissociates
completely into ions in water is called a strong acid. For example,
hydrochloric acid is a strong acid. All the molecules of hydrochloric acid
in an aqueous solution dissociate into H+ and Cl− ions. The H+ ions, as
you know, bond with surrounding water molecules to form hydronium
ions, H3O+. (See Figure 10.6.) The concentration of hydronium ions in a
dilute solution of a strong acid is equal to the concentration of the acid.
Thus, a 1.0 mol/L solution of hydrochloric acid contains 1.0 mol/L of
hydronium ions. Table 10.4 lists the strong acids.
Before
Dissociation
100
After
Dissociation
100
100
s
e
l
u
c
e
l
o
m
f
o
r
e
b
m
u
n
e
v
i
t
a
l
e
R
HCl
HCl(g) + H2O(l)
HCl
H3O+
−
Cl
H3O+
(aq) + Cl
−
(aq)
When hydrogen chloride molecules enter an aqueous solution, 100% of the
Figure 10.6
hydrogen chloride molecules dissociate. As a result, the solution contains the same per-
cent of H+ ions (in the form of H3O+) and Cl− ions: 100%.
A weak acid is an acid that dissociates very slightly in a water solu-
tion. Thus, only a small percentage of the acid molecules break apart into
ions. Most of the acid molecules remain intact. For example, acetic acid is
a weak acid. On average, only about 1% (one in a hundred) of the acetic
acid molecules dissociate at any given moment in a 0.1 mol/L solution.
(The number of acid molecules that dissociate depends on the concentra-
tion and temperature of the solution.) In fact, the concentration of
hydronium ions in a solution of a weak acid is always less than the
concentration of the dissolved acid. (See Figure 10.7.)
Chapter 10  Acids and Bases • MHR 381
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
Before Dissociation
After Dissociation
100
about
99
l
s
e
u
c
e
o
m
l
f
o
r
e
b
m
u
n
e
v
l
i
t
a
e
R
CH3COOH
CH3COOH(aq) + H2O(l)
about
1
about
1
CH3COOH
H3O
+
+
H3O
−
CH3COO
−
(aq) + CH3COO
(aq)
When acetic acid molecules enter an aqueous solution, only about 1% of
Figure 10.7
them dissociate. Thus, the number of acetic acid molecules in solution is far greater than
the number of hydronium ions and acetate ions.
Notice the arrow that is used in the equation in Figure 10.7. It points in
both directions, indicating that the reaction is reversible. In other words,
the products of the reaction also react to produce the original reactants. In
this reaction, molecules of acetic acid dissociate just as quickly and as
often as the dissociated ions re-associate to produce acetic acid molecules.
(Figure 10.8 will help you visualize what happens.)
Most acids are weak acids. Whenever you see a reversible chemical
equation involving an acid, you can safely assume that the acid is weak.
+
−
+
−
CH3COOH + H2O
CH3COO + H3O
+
CH3COO + H2O
Figure 10.8
and re-associate at the same time and at the same rate.
When acetic acid dissolves in water, acetic acid molecules dissociate
A few acids contain only a single hydrogen ion that can dissociate.
These acids are called monoprotic acids. (The preﬁx mono- means “one.”
The root -protic refers to “proton.”) Hydrochloric acid, hydrobromic acid,
and hydroiodic acid are strong monoprotic acids. Hydroﬂuoric acid, HF, is
weak monoprotic acid.
Many acids contain two or more hydrogen ions that can dissociate.
For example, sulfuric acid, H2SO4(aq), has two hydrogen ions that can dis-
sociate. As you know from Table 10.4, sulfuric acid is a strong acid. This
is true only for its ﬁrst dissociation, however.
H2SO4(aq) → H+
−
(aq) + HSO4
The resulting aqueous hydrogen sulfate ion, HSO−
sociates to form the sulfate ion in the following reversible reaction:
(aq)
4, is a weak acid. It dis-
382 MHR • Unit 3  Solutions and Solubility
−
HSO4
(aq)
H+
(aq) + SO4
2−
(aq)
Thus, acids that contain two hydrogen ions dissociate to form two anions.
These acids are sometimes called diprotic acids. (The preﬁx di-, as you
know, means “two.”) The acid that is formed by the ﬁrst dissociation is
stronger than the acid that is formed by the second dissociation.
Acids that contain three hydrogen ions are called triprotic acids.
Phosphoric acid, H3PO4(aq), is a triprotic acid. It gives rise to three anions,
as follows:
H3PO4(aq) + H2O((cid:2))
−
(aq) + H2O((cid:2))
H2PO4
2−
(aq) + H2O((cid:2))
HPO4
H+
H+
H+
−
(aq) + H2PO4
(aq) + HPO4
3−
(aq) + PO4
(aq)
2−
(aq)
(aq)
Here again, the acid that is formed by the ﬁrst dissociation is stronger
than the acid that is formed by the second dissociation. This acid is
stronger than the acid that is formed by the third dissociation. Keep in
mind, however, that all three of these acids are weak because only a small
proportion of them dissociates.
Strong Bases and Weak Bases
Like a strong acid, a strong base dissociates completely into ions in water.
All oxides and hydroxides of the alkali metals — Group 1 (IA) — are strong
bases. The oxides and hydroxides of the alkaline earth metals — Group 2
(IIA) — below beryllium are also strong bases.
Recall that the concentration of hydronium ions in a dilute solution of
a strong acid is equal to the concentration of the acid. Similarly, the con-
centration of hydroxide ions in a dilute solution of a strong base is equal
to the concentration of the base. For example, a 1.0 mol/L solution of
sodium hydroxide (a strong base) contains 1.0 mol/L of hydroxide ions.
Table 10.5 lists some common strong bases. Barium hydroxide,
Ba(OH)2, and strontium hydroxide, Sr(OH)2 , are strong bases that are
soluble in water. Magnesium oxide, MgO, and magnesium hydroxide,
Mg(OH)2, are also strong bases, but they are considered to be insoluble.
A small amount of these compounds does dissolve in water, however.
Virtually all of this small amount dissociates completely.
Most bases are weak. A weak base dissociates very slightly in a
water solution. The most common weak base is aqueous ammonia. In a
0.1 mol/L solution, only about 1% of the ammonia molecules react with
water to form hydroxide ions. This reversible reaction is represented in
Figure 10.9.
Table 10.5 Common Strong Bases
sodium hydroxide, NaOH
potassium hydroxide, KOH
calcium hydroxide, Ca(OH)2
strontium hydroxide, Sr(OH)2
barium hydroxide, Ba(OH)2
NH3
+
H2O
+
NH4
+
−
OH
Ammonia does not contain hydroxide ions, so it is not an Arrhenius base.
Figure 10.9
As you can see, however, an ammonia molecule can remove a proton from water, leaving
a hydroxide ion behind. Thus, ammonia is a Brønsted-Lowry weak base.
Chapter 10  Acids and Bases • MHR 383
The terms “strong” and “con-
centrated” have very different
meanings when describing
solutions of acids, bases, or
salts. Similarly, the terms
“weak” and “dilute” have very
different meanings. In your
own words, summarize the dif-
ference between “strong” and
“concentrated.” Give examples
that illustrate this difference.
Then summarize the difference
between “weak” and “dilute,”
again giving examples.
The conjugate base of a strong
acid is always a weak base.
Conversely, the conjugate base
of a weak acid is always a
strong base. Explain this
inverse relationship.
Naming Acids and Their Anions
There are two main kinds of acids: binary acids and oxoacids. A binary
acid is composed of two elements: hydrogen and a non-metal. Two exam-
ples of binary acids are hydroﬂuoric acid and hydrochloric acid. All bina-
ry acids have the general formula HX(aq) . The H represents one or more
hydrogen atoms. The X represents the non-metal. As you can see in Table
10.6, the names of binary acids are made up of the following parts:
• the preﬁx hydro-
• a root that is formed from the name of the non-metal
• the sufﬁx -ic
• the word “acid” at the end
Table 10.6 Examples of Naming Binary Acids
Binary acid
Prefix
Non-metal root
Suffix
hydrofluoric acid, HF(aq)
hydro-
-fluor-
hydrochloric acid, HCl(aq)
hydro-
-chlor-
hydrosulfuric acid, H2S
hydro-
-sulfur-
-ic
-ic
-ic
As you know, anions are formed when binary acids dissociate. The
names of these anions end in the sufﬁx -ide. For example, hydroﬂouric
acid forms the anion ﬂuoride, F−. Hydrochloric acid forms the anion
chloride, Cl−.
An oxoacid is an acid formed from a polyatomic ion that contains
oxygen, hydrogen, and another element. (Oxoacids are called oxyacids in
some chemistry textbooks). In Chapter 3, you learned the names of com-
mon polyatomic ions and their valences (oxidation numbers). The names
of oxoacids are similar to the names of their polyatomic oxoanions. Only
the sufﬁx is different. Study the three rules and examples for naming
oxoacids below. Then try the Practice Problems that follow.
1. For anions that end in -ate, the sufﬁx of the acid is -ic. For example,
the acid of the chlorate anion ClO3
−, is chloric acid, HClO3.
2. For anions that end in -ite, the sufﬁx of the acid is -ous. For example,
the acid of the chlorite anion, ClO2
−, is chlorous acid, HClO2.
3. The preﬁxes hypo- and per- remain as part of the acid name. For exam-
−, is perchloric acid, HClO4.
ple, the acid of the perchlorate anion, ClO4
The acid of the hypochlorite anion, ClO−, is hypochlorous acid, HClO.
Practice Problems
4. (a) Write the chemical formula for hydrobromic acid. Then write the
name and formula for the anion that it forms.
(b) Hydrosulfuric acid, H2S, forms two anions. Name them and write
their formulas.
5. Write the chemical formulas for the following acids. Then name and
write the formulas for the oxoanions that form from each acid. Refer
to Chapter 3, Table 3.5, Names and Valences of Some Common
Polyatomic Ions, as necessary.
(a) nitric acid
(b) nitrous acid
(c) hyponitrous acid
(d) phosphoric acid
(e) phosphorous acid
(f) periodic acid
384 MHR • Unit 3  Solutions and Solubility
Describing Acid and Base Strength Quantitatively: pH
You are probably familiar with the term “pH” from a variety of sources.
Advertisers talk about the “pH balance” of products such as soaps, sham-
poos, and skin creams. People who own aquariums and swimming pools
must monitor the pH of the water. (See Figure 10.10.) Gardeners and farm-
ers use simple tests to determine the pH of the soil. They know that plants
and food crops grow best within a narrow range of pH. Similarly, the pH
of your blood must remain within narrow limits for you to stay healthy.
pH is clearly related to health, and to the proper functioning of products
and systems. (Notice that the “p” is always lower case, even at the start
of a sentence.) What exactly is pH? How is it measured? To answer these
questions, consider a familiar substance: water.
Maintaining a
Figure 10.10
safe environment for an aquarium
or a swimming pool requires
measuring the pH of the water
and knowing how to adjust it.
The Power of Hydrogen in Water
As you know, all aqueous solutions contain ions. Even pure water con-
tains a few ions that are produced by the dissociation of water molecules.
Remember: The double arrow in the equation shows that the reaction is
reversible. The ions recombine to form water molecules.
H2O((cid:2)) + H2O((cid:2))
+ OH−
H3O+
(aq)
(aq)
On average, at 25°C, only about two water molecules in a billion are
dissociated at any given moment. As you know, it is the ions in solution
that conduct electricity. If there are virtually no ions, no electricity is
conducted. This is why pure water is such a poor conductor. Chemists
have determined that the concentration of hydronium ions in neutral
water, at 25˚C, is only 1.0 × 10−7 mol/L. The dissociation of water also
produces the same, very small number of hydroxide ions. Therefore, the
concentration of hydroxide ions is also 1.0 × 10−7 mol/L.
Chemists sometimes use square brackets around a chemical formula.
This shorthand notation means “the concentration of” the chemical inside
the brackets. For example, [H3O+] is read as “the concentration of hydro-
nium ions.” Thus, the concentration of hydronium ions and hydroxide
ions in neutral water can be written as
the concentration of hydronium ions
[H3O+] = [OH−] = 1.0 × 10–7 mol/L
the concentration of hydroxide ions
Chapter 10  Acids and Bases • MHR 385
Compared with neutral water, acidic solutions contain a higher con-
centration of hydronium ions. Basic solutions contain a lower concentra-
tion of hydronium ions. Therefore, the dissociation of water provides
another way of thinking about acids and bases. An acid is any compound
that increases [H3O+] when it is dissolved in water. A base is any com-
pound that increases [OH −] when it is dissolved in water. (See Figure
10.11.)
acidic solution
basic solution
neutral solution
[H3O+]
>
[OH
−
]
[H3O+]
<
[OH
−
]
[H3O+]
=
[OH
−
]
Figure 10.11
hydroxide ions in a solution determines whether the solution is acidic, basic, or neutral.
The relationship between the concentrations of hydronium ions and
The pH Scale: Measuring by Powers of Ten
The concentration of hydronium ions ranges from about 10 mol/L for a
concentrated strong acid to about 10−15 mol/L for a concentrated strong
base. This wide range of concentrations, and the negative powers of 10,
are not very convenient to work with. In 1909, a Danish biochemist, Søren
Sørensen, suggested a method for converting concentrations to positive
numbers. His method involved using the numerical system of logarithms.
The logarithm of a number is the power to which you must raise 10 to
equal that number. For example, the logarithm of 10 is 1, because
101 = 10. The logarithm of 100 is 2, because 102 = 100. (See Appendix E
for more information about exponents and logarithms.)
Sørensen deﬁned pH as −log [H+]. Since Sørensen did not know about
hydronium ions, his deﬁnition of pH is based on Arrhenius’ hydrogen
ion. Many chemistry references reinterpret the H so that it refers to the
Brønsted-Lowry hydronium ion, H3O+, instead. This textbook adopts the
hydronium ion usage. Thus, the deﬁnition for pH becomes
pH = −log [H3O+]. Recall, though, that chemists use [H+] as a shorthand
notation for [H3O+]. As a result, both equations give the same product.
As you can see in Figure 10.12, the “p” in pH stands for the word
“power.” The power referred to is exponential power: the power of 10.
The “H” stands for the concentration of hydrogen ions (or H3O+ ions),
measured in mol/L.
" the negative
logarithm of...
or
−log
pH
" ...the concentration
of H+ ions (in mol/L)
or
[H+]
The concept
Figure 10.12
of pH makes working with
very small values, such as
0.000 000 000 000 01, much easier.
386 MHR • Unit 3  Solutions and Solubility
The concept of pH allows hydronium (or hydrogen) ion concentra-
tions to be expressed as positive numbers, rather than negative exponents.
For example, recall that [H3O+] of neutral water at 25˚C is 1.0 × 10−7 .
+
∴pH = −log [H3O
]
= −log (1.0 × 10
= −(−7.00)
= 7.00
[H3O+] in acidic solutions is greater than [H3O+] in neutral water. For
example, if [H3O+] in an acid is 1.0 × 10−4 mol/L, this is 1000 times greater
than [H3O+] in neutral water. Use Table 10.7 to make sure that you under-
stand why. The pH of the acid is 4.00. All acidic solutions have a pH that
is less than 7.
−7)
Table 10.7 Understanding pH
Range of acidity
and basicity
strong acid
neutral
[H+] = [OH−]
= 1.0 × 10−7
[H30+] (mol/L)
1
0.1
0.01
0.001
0.000 1
0.000 01
0.000 001
0.000 000 1
0.000 000 01
0.000 000 001
0.000 000 000 1
0.000 000 000 01
0.000 000 000 001
0.000 000 000 000 1
strong base
0.000 000 000 000 01
Exponential
notation (mol/L)
1 × 100
1 × 10−1
1 × 10−2
1 × 10−3
1 × 10−4
1 × 10−5
1 × 10−6
1 × 10−7
1 × 10−8
1 × 10−9
1 × 10−10
1 × 10−11
1 × 10−12
1 × 10−13
1 × 10−14
log
0
−1
−2
−3
−4
−5
−6
−7
−8
−9
−10
−11
−12
−13
−14
pH
(-log [H30+])
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
[H3O+] in basic solutions is less than [H3O+] in pure water. For exam-
ple, if [H3O+] in a base is 1.0 × 10−11 mol/L, this is 10 000 times less than
[H3O+] in neutral water. The pH of the base is 11.00. All basic solutions
have a pH that is greater than 7.
The relationship among pH, [H3O+], and the strength of acids and
bases is summarized in the Concept Connection on the next page. Use the
following Sample Problem and Practice Problems to assess your under-
standing of this relationship. Then, in Investigation 10-A, you will look
for a pattern involving the pH of a strong acid, a weak acid, and dilutions
of both.
Science
LINK
Using logarithms is a conven-
ient way to count a wide range
of values by powers of 10.
Chemists are not the only
scientists who use such loga-
rithms, however. Audiologists
(scientists who study human
hearing) use logarithms, too.
Research the decibel scale to
ﬁnd out how it works. Present
your ﬁndings in the medium of
your choice.
Math
LINK
How do you determine the
number of signiﬁcant digits in a
pH? You count only the digits to
the right of the decimal point.
For example, suppose that the
concentration of hydronium
ions in a sample of orange
juice is 2.5 × 10−4 mol/L. This
number has two signiﬁcant
digits: the 2 and the 5. The
power of 10 only tells us where
to place the decimal: 0.000 25.
The pH of the sample is
−log (2.5 × 10−4) = 3.602 059.
The digit to the left of the deci-
mal (the 3) is derived from the
power of 10. Therefore, it is not
considered to be a signiﬁcant
digit. Only the two digits to the
right of the decimal are
signiﬁcant. Thus, the pH value
is rounded off to 3.60.
Identify the signiﬁcant digits in
each pH value below.
1. The pH of drain cleaner is
13.1.
2. The pH of milk is 6.4.
3. The pH of vinegar is 2.85.
4. The pH of lemon juice is
2.310.
Chapter 10  Acids and Bases • MHR 387
Concept Organizer
pH, [H3O+], and the Strength of Acids and Bases
Type of solution
acidic solution
neutral solution
basic solution
[H30+] (mol/L)
greater than 1 × 10−7
1 × 10−7
less than 1 × 10−7
Concentration of hydronium
and hydroxide ions
[H3O+] > [OH−]
[H3O+] = [OH−]
[H3O+] < [OH−]
pH at 25˚C
< 7.00
7.00
> 7.00
pH
14
13
12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
1mol/L NaOH (14.0)
lye (sodium hydroxide)
(13.0)
household ammonia
(11.9)
milk of magnesia
(antacid) (10.5)
detergent solution
(approximately 10)
ocean water (7.0-8.3)
blood (7.4)
NEUTRAL
milk (6.4)
urine (4.8-7.5)
rain water (5.6)
tomatoes (4.2)
vinegar (2.4-3.4)
lemon juice (2.2-2.4)
stomach acid
(mainly HCl) (1.0-3.0)
1 mol/L HCl (0.0)
The pH values of many common solutions fall within a range from 0 to 14, as
shown on this pH scale. The table above the pH scale relates the positive pH
values to their hydronium ion concentrations and their logarithms.
I
C
S
A
B
E
R
O
M
I
I
C
D
C
A
E
R
O
M
388 MHR • Unit 3  Solutions and Solubility
Sample Problem
Calculating the pH of a Solution
Problem
Calculate the pH of a solution with [H3O+] = 3.8 × 10−3 mol/L .
What Is Required?
You need to calculate the pH, given [H3O+].
What Is Given?
You know that [H3O+] is 3.8 × 10−3 mol/L.
Plan Your Strategy
Use the equation pH = −log [H3O+] to solve for the unknown.
Act on Your Strategy
−3)
pH = −log (3.8 × 10
= 2.42
Check Your Solution
[H3O+] is greater than 1.0 × 10−7 mol/L. Therefore, the pH should be
less than 7.00. The solution is acidic, as you would expect.
Practice Problems
6. Calculate the pH of each solution, given the hydronium ion
concentration.
(a) [H3O+] = 0.0027 mol/L
(b) [H3O+] = 7.28 × 10−8 mol/L
(c) [H3O+] = 9.7 × 10−5 mol/L
(d) [H3O+] = 8.27 × 10−12
7. [H3O+] in a cola drink is about 5.0 × 10−3 mol/L. Calculate the pH
of the drink. State whether the drink is acidic or basic.
8. A glass of orange juice has [H3O+] of 2.9 × 10−4 mol/L. Calculate
the pH of the juice. State whether the result is acidic or basic.
9. (a) [H3O+] in a dilute solution of nitric acid, HNO3, is
6.3 × 10−3 mol/L. Calculate the pH of the solution.
(b) [H3O+] of a solution of sodium hydroxide is 6.59 × 1010 mol/L.
Calculate the pH of the solution.
PROBLEM TIP
Appendix E, “Math and
Chemistry”, explains how you
can do these calculations with
a calculator.
Chapter 10  Acids and Bases • MHR 389
S K I L L   F O C U S
Predicting
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
Safety Precautions
Hydrochloric acid is corrosive. Wash any spills
on skin or clothing with plenty of cool water.
Inform your teacher immediately.
Materials
100 mL graduated cylinder
100 mL beaker
2 beakers (250 mL)
universal indicator paper and glass rod
pH meter
0.10 mol/L hydrochloric acid (for Part 1)
0.10 mol/L acetic acid (for Part 2)
distilled water
Procedure
Part 1 The pH of Solutions of a Strong Acid
1. Copy the table below into your notebook.
Record the pH you predicted for each dilution.
2. Pour about 40 mL of 0.10 mol/L hydrochloric
acid into a clean, dry 100 mL beaker. Use the
end of a glass rod to transfer a drop of solu-
tion to a piece of universal pH paper into the
acid. Compare the colour against the colour
chart to determine the pH. Record the pH.
Then measure and record the pH of the acid
using a pH meter. Rinse the electrode with
distilled water afterward.
The Effect of Dilution
on the pH of an Acid
In this investigation, you will compare the effects
of diluting a strong acid and a weak acid.
In Part 1, you will measure the pH of a strong
acid. Then you will perform a series of ten-fold
dilutions. That is, each solution will be one-tenth
as dilute as the previous solution. You will meas-
ure and compare the pH after each dilution.
In Part 2, you will measure the pH of a weak
acid with the same initial concentration as the
strong acid. Then you will perform a series of
ten-fold dilutions with the weak acid. Again,
you will measure and compare the pH after
each dilution.
Problem
How does the pH of dilutions of a strong acid
compare with the pH of dilutions of a weak acid?
Prediction
Predict each pH, and explain your reasoning.
(a) the pH of 0.10 mol/L hydrochloric acid
(b) the pH of the hydrochloric acid after one
ten-fold dilution
(c) the pH of the hydrochloric acid after each of
six more ten-fold dilutions
(d) the pH of 0.10 mol/L acetic acid, compared
with the pH of 0.10 mol/L hydrochloric acid
(e) the pH of the acetic acid after one ten-fold
dilution
Data Table for Part 1
[HCl(aq)] mol/L Predicted pH
pH measured with universal indicator
pH measured with pH meter
1 × 10−1
1 × 10−2
1 × 10−3
1 × 10−4
1 × 10−5
1 × 10−6
1 × 10−7
1 × 10−8
390 MHR • Unit 3  Solutions and Solubility
3. Measure 90 mL of distilled water in a 100 mL
graduated cylinder. Add 10 mL of the acid
from step 2. The resulting 100 mL of solution
is one-tenth as concentrated as the acid from
step 2. Pour the dilute solution into a clean,
dry 250 mL beaker. Use universal pH paper
and a pH meter to measure the pH. Record
your results.
4. Repeat step 3. Pour the new dilute solution
into a second clean, dry beaker. Dispose of the
more concentrated acid solution as directed
by your teacher. Rinse and dry the beaker so
you can use it for the next dilution.
5. Make further dilutions and pH measurements
until the hydrochloric acid solution is
1.0 × 10−8 mol/L
Part 2 The pH of Solutions of a Weak Acid
1. Design a table to record your predictions and
measurements for 0.10 mol/L and 0.010 mol/L
concentrations of acetic acid.
2. Use the same procedure that you used in Part
1 to measure and record the pH of a 0.10
mol/L sample of acetic acid. Then dilute the
solution to 0.010 mol/L. Measure the pH
again.
Analysis
1. Which do you think gave the more accurate
pH: the universal indicator paper or the pH
meter? Explain.
2. For the strong acid, compare the pH values
you predicted with the measurements you
made. How can you explain any differences
for the ﬁrst few dilutions?
3. What was the pH of the solution that had a
concentration of 1.0 × 10−8 mol/L? Explain the
pH you obtained.
4. Compare the pH of 0.10 mol/L acetic acid
with the pH of 0.10 mol/L hydrochloric acid.
Why do you think the pH values are different,
even though the concentrations of the acids
were the same?
5. What effect does a ten-fold dilution of a strong
acid (hydrochloric acid) have on the pH of the
acid? What effect does the same dilution of a
weak acid (acetic acid) have on its pH?
Compare the effects for a strong acid and a
weak acid. Account for any differences.
Conclusion
6. Use evidence from your investigation to
support the conclusion that a weak acid
ionizes less than a strong acid of identical
concentration.
7. Why is the method for calculating the pH of a
strong acid (if it is not too dilute) not appro-
priate for a weak acid?
Applications
8. Nicotinic acid is a B vitamin. The pH of a
0.050 mol/L solution of this acid is measured
to be 3.08. Is it a strong acid or a weak acid?
Explain. What would be the pH of a solution
of nitric acid having the same concentration?
9. Would you expect to be able to predict the
pH of a weak base, given its concentration?
Explain. Design an experiment you could
perform to check your answer.
Chapter 10  Acids and Bases • MHR 391
Chemistry Bulletin
The Chemistry of Oven Cleaning
Oven cleaning is not a job that most people
enjoy. Removing baked-on grease from inside
an oven requires serious scrubbing. Any chemi-
cal oven cleaners that help to make the job
easier are usually welcome. Like all chemicals,
however, the most effective oven cleaners
require attention to safety.
Cleaners that contain strong bases are the
most effective for dissolving grease and grime.
Bases are effective because they produce soaps
when they react with the fatty acids in grease.
When a strong base (such as sodium hydroxide,
NaOH, or potassium hydroxide, KOH) is used on
a dirty oven, the fat molecules that make up the
grease are split into smaller molecules. Anions
from the base then bond with some of these
molecules to form soap.
One end of a soap molecule is non-polar
(uncharged), so it is soluble in dirt and grease,
which are also non-polar. The other end of a
soap molecule is polar (charged), so it is soluble
in water. Because of its two different properties,
soap acts like a “bridge” between the grease
and the water. Soap enables grease to dissolve
in water and be washed away, thus allowing
the cleaner to remove the grease from the
oven surface.
392 MHR • Unit 3  Solutions and Solubility
Cleaners that contain sodium hydroxide and
potassium hydroxide are very effective. They
are also caustic and potentially very dangerous.
For example, sodium hydroxide, in the concen-
trations that are used in oven cleaners, can
irritate the skin and cause blindness if it gets
in the eyes. As well, it is damaging to paints
and fabrics.
There are alternatives to sodium hydroxide
and other strong base cleaners. One alternative
involves using ammonia, NH3, which is a weak
base. If a bowl of dilute ammonia solution is
placed in an oven and left for several hours,
most of the grease and grime can be wiped off.
Ammonia does not completely ionize in
water. Only a small portion dissociates.
Although an ammonia solution is less caustic
than sodium hydroxide, it can be toxic if inhaled
directly. As well, ammonia vapours can cause
eye, lung, and skin irritations. At higher concen-
trations, ammonia can be extremely toxic.
Baking soda is a non-toxic alternative, but it
is much less effective. Therefore, it requires
even more scrubbing. An abrasive paste can be
made by mixing baking soda and water. The
basic properties of baking soda also have a
small effect on grease and grime if it is applied
to the oven and left for several hours.
Making Connections
1. Survey the cleaners in your home or school.
Which cleaners contain bases and which con-
tain acids? What cleaning jobs can an acid
cleaner perform well? How do most acid
cleaners work?
2. Some companies claim to make environmen-
tally sensitive cleaners. Investigate these
cleaners. What chemicals do they contain?
See if you can infer how they work. You
might like to design a controlled experiment
to test the effectiveness of several oven
cleaners.
your teacher before performing such an
experiment.
Obtain permission from
CAUTION
Section Wrap-up
In this section, you considered the relationship among the strength of
acids and bases, the concentration of hydronium and hydroxide ions, and
pH. Much of the time, you examined acids and bases acting independent-
ly of each other. However, acids and bases often interact. In fact, acid-base
reactions have many important applications in the home, as well as in the
laboratory. In section 10.3, you will investigate acid-base reactions.
Section Review
1
2
3
4
K/U
Distinguish, in terms of degree of dissociation, between a strong
Unit Issue Prep
acid and a weak acid, and a strong base and a weak base.
K/U
Give one example of the following:
(a) a weak acid
(b) a strong acid
(c) a strong base
(d) a weak base
K/U
Formic acid, HCOOH, is responsible for the painful bites of ﬁre
ants. Is formic acid strong or weak? Explain.
K/U
KMnO4 is an intense purple-coloured solid that can be made into
a solution to kill bacteria. What is the name of this compound?
Give the name and the formula of the acid that forms when KMnO4
combines with water.
As you investigate the contam-
ination of Prince Edward
Island’s soils with sodium
arsenite from pesticides, inves-
tigate the link between the pH
and solubility. For example,
water polluted with sodium
arsenite may be treated with
lime (calcium oxide), CaO.
What is the purpose of this
treatment?
5
K/U
State the name or the formula for the acid that forms from each of
the following anions:
(a) hydrogen sulfate
(b) F−
(c) HS−
(d) bromite
6
7
K/U
Explain the meaning of pH, both in terms of hydrogen ions and
hydronium ions.
Arrange the following foods in order of increasing acidity: beets,
K/U
pH = 5.0; camembert cheese, pH = 7.4; egg white, pH = 8.0; sauerkraut,
pH = 3.5; yogurt, pH = 4.5.
8
I
Calculate the pH of each body ﬂuid, given the concentration of
hydronium ions.
(a) tears, [H3O+] = 4.0 × 10−8 mol/L
(b) stomach acid, [H3O+] = 4.0 × 10−2 mol/L
9
I
Calculate the pH of the solution that is formed by diluting 50 mL
of 0.025 mol/L hydrochloric acid to a ﬁnal volume of 1.0 L
10
C
What is [H3O+] in a solution with pH = 0? Why do chemists not
usually use pH to describe [H3O+] when the pH value would be a
negative number?
Chapter 10  Acids and Bases • MHR 393
10.3
Acid-Base Reactions
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
perform calculations involv-
ing neutralization reactions
determine the concentration
of an acid in solution by con-
ducting a titration
communicate your under-
standing of the following
terms: neutralization
reaction, salt, acid-base
indicator, titration,
equivalence point, end-point
Is there a box of baking soda in your refrigerator at home? Baking soda is
sodium hydrogen carbonate. (It is also commonly called sodium bicarbon-
ate.) Baking soda removes the odours caused by spoiling foods. The
smelly breakdown products of many foods are acids. Baking soda, a base,
eliminates the odours by neutralizing the characteristic properties of
the acids.
Adding a base to an acid neutralizes the acid’s acidic properties. This
type of reaction is called a neutralization reaction.
There are many different acids and bases. Being able to predict the
results of reactions between them is important. Bakers, for example,
depend on neutralization reactions to create light, ﬂuffy baked goods.
Gardeners and farmers depend on these reactions to modify the character-
istics of the soil. Industrial chemists rely on these reactions to produce the
raw materials that are used to make a wide variety of chemicals and
chemical products. (See Figure 10.13.)
hydrogen
fuels
margarine
hydrochloric acid: used to make medicines, cosmetics
salt (sodium chloride)
electricity
and water
chlorine
solvents
pvc (plastics)
water purification
other industrial chemicals
bleach: used to make paper, textiles, cleaning products
sodium hydroxide
paper
synthetic fibres
soaps and detergents
other industrial chemicals
You know sodium
Figure 10.13
chloride as common table salt. As
you can see here, however,
sodium chloride is anything but
common. Sodium chloride is a
product of an acid-base reaction
between hydrochloric acid and
sodium hydroxide.
Neutralization Reactions
The reaction between an acid and a base produces an ionic compound
(a salt) and water.
acid + base → a salt + water
A salt is an ionic compound that is composed of the anion from an acid
and a cation from a base. For example, sodium nitrate is a salt that is
found in many kitchens. It is often added to processed meat to preserve
the colour and to slow the rate of spoiling by inhibiting bacterial growth.
Sodium nitrate can be prepared in a laboratory by reacting nitric acid with
sodium hydroxide, as shown on the next page.
394 MHR • Unit 3  Solutions and Solubility
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
cation from base
H NO3(aq) + NaOH(aq) → NaNO3(aq) + H2O((cid:2))
anion from acid
The balanced chemical equation for this reaction shows that 1 mol of
nitric acid reacts with 1 mol of sodium hydroxide. If equal molar
quantities of nitric acid and sodium hydroxide are used, the result is a
neutral (pH 7) aqueous solution of sodium nitrate. In fact, when any
strong acid reacts with any strong base in the mole ratio from the bal-
anced chemical equation, a neutral aqueous solution of a salt is formed.
Reactions between acids and bases of different strengths usually do not
result in neutral solutions.
For most neutralization reactions, there are no visible signs that a
reaction is occurring. How can you determine that a neutralization
reaction is taking place? One way is to use an acid-base indicator. This
is a substance that changes colour in acidic and basic solutions. Most
acid-base indicators are weak, monoprotic acids. The undissociated weak
acid is one colour. Its conjugate base is a different colour.
colour 1
H (indicator)(aq)
H+ + (indicator)−
(aq)
colour 2
C H E M
FA C T
If a small quantity of an acid or
a base is spilled in a laborato-
ry, you can use a neutralization
reaction to minimize the
hazard. To neutralize a basic
solution spill, you can add solid
sodium hydrogen sulfate or
citric acid. For an acidic solu-
tion spill, you can use sodium
hydrogen carbonate (baking
soda). Note that you cannot
use a strong acid or base to
clean up a spill. This would
result in another hazardous
spill. As well, the neutralization
reaction would generate a lot
of heat, and thus produce a
very hot solution.
In an acidic solution, the indicator does not dissociate very much. It
appears as colour 1. In a basic solution, the indicator dissociates much
more. It appears as colour 2. Often a single drop of indicator causes a dra-
matic change in colour. For example, phenolphthalein is an indicator that
chemists often use for reactions between a strong acid and a strong base. It
is colourless between pH 0 and pH 8. It turns pink between pH 8 and
pH 10. (See Figure 10.14.)
Show that the net ionic equa-
tion for the reaction between
HNO3 (a strong acid) and
NaOH (a strong base) results in
the formation of water.
Figure 10.14
A good indicator, such as the phenolphthalein shown here, must give a
vivid colour change.
Chapter 10  Acids and Bases • MHR 395
C H E M
FA C T
An old remedy to relieve the
prickly sting of a nettle plant is
to rub the area with the leaf of
a dock plant. The sting con-
tains an acid. This acid is neu-
tralized by a base that is pres-
ent in the dock leaf. Bees and
ants also have an acidic sting.
You can wash the sting with
soap, because soap is basic.
You can also apply baking soda
(a base) to the skin for more
effective relief. If you are stung
by a wasp, however, you
should apply vinegar. The sting
of a wasp contains a base.
PROBLEM TIPS
1. Make sure that the
values you use in your
calculations refer to the
same reactant. For exam-
ple, you can use the con-
centration and volume of
sodium hydroxide to ﬁnd
the amount of sodium
hydroxide in this problem.
You cannot use the con-
centration of sodium
hydroxide and the volume
of hydrochloric acid.
In the solution, the vol-
umes are converted to
litres. If all the volumes
are expressed in the
same unit, the conversion
step is not necessary.
2.
3. Do not drop signiﬁcant
digits, even zeros, during
your calculations.
Calculations Involving Neutralization Reactions
Suppose that a solution of an acid reacts with a solution of a base. You
can determine the concentration of one solution if you know the concen-
tration of the other. (This assumes that the volumes of both are accurately
measured.) Use the concentration and volume of one solution to deter-
mine the amount (in moles) of reactant that it contains. The balanced
chemical equation for the reaction describes the mole ratio in which the
compounds combine. In the following Sample Problems and Practice
Problems, you will see how to do these calculations.
Sample Problem
Finding Concentration
Problem
13.84 mL of hydrochloric acid, HCl(aq), just neutralizes 25.00 mL of a
0.1000 mol/L solution of sodium hydroxide, NaOH(aq). What is the
concentration of the hydrochloric acid?
What Is Required?
You need to ﬁnd the concentration of the hydrochloric acid.
What Is Given?
Volume of hydrochloric acid, HCl = 13.84 mL
Volume of sodium hydroxide, NaOH = 25.00 mL
Concentration of sodium hydroxide, NaOH = 0.1000 mol/L
Plan Your Strategy
Step 1 Write the balanced chemical equation for the reaction.
Step 2 Calculate the amount (in mol) of sodium hydroxide added,
based on the volume and concentration of the sodium
hydroxide solution.
Step 3 Determine the amount (in mol) of hydrochloric acid needed to
neutralize the sodium hydroxide.
Step 4 Find [HCl(aq)], based on the amount and volume of hydrochlo-
ric acid solution needed.
Act on Your Strategy
Step 1 The balanced chemical equation is
HCl(aq) + NaOH(aq) → NaCl(aq) + H2O((cid:2))
Step 2
Amount (in mol) = Concentration (in mol/L)
× Volume (in L)
Amount NaOH (in mol) added = 0.1000 mol/L × 0.02500 L
= 2.500 × 10
−3 mol
Continued ...
396 MHR • Unit 3  Solutions and Solubility
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 396
Step 3 HCl reacts with NaOH in a 1:1 ratio, so there must be
2.500 × 10−3 mol HCl.
Step 4 Concentration (in mol/L) = Amount (in mol)
Volume (in L)
[HCl(aq)] = 2.500 × 103 mol
0.01384 L
= 0.1806 mol/L
Therefore, the concentration of hydrochloric acid is 0.1806 mol/L.
Check Your Solution
[HCl(aq)] is greater than [NaOH(aq)]. This is reasonable because a
smaller volume of hydrochloric acid was required. As well, the
balanced equation shows a 1:1 mole ratio between these reactants.
Sample Problem
Finding Volume
Problem
What volume of 0.250 mol/L sulfuric acid, H2SO4(aq), is needed to
react completely with 37.2 mL of 0.650 mol/L potassium hydroxide,
KOH(aq)?
What Is Required?
You need to ﬁnd the volume of sulfuric acid.
What Is Given?
Concentration of sulfuric acid, H2SO4 = 0.250 mol/L
Concentration of potassium hydroxide, KOH = 0.650 mol/L
Volume of potassium hydroxide, KOH = 37.2 mL.
Plan Your Strategy
Step 1 Write the balanced chemical equation for the reaction.
Step 2 Calculate the amount (in mol) of potassium hydroxide, based
on the volume and concentration of the potassium hydroxide
solution.
Step 3 Determine the amount (in mol) of sulfuric acid that is needed
to neutralize the potassium hydroxide.
Step 4 Find the volume of the sulfuric acid, based on the amount and
concentration of sulfuric acid needed.
Act on Your Strategy
Step  1 The balanced chemical equation is
H2SO4(aq) + 2KOH → K2SO4(aq) + 2H2O((cid:2))
Step 2 Amount (in mol) of KOH = 0.650 mol/L × 0.0372 L
= 0.02418 mol
Continued ...
Chapter 10  Acids and Bases • MHR 397
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 397
Step 3 H2SO4 reacts with KOH in a 1:2 mole ratio. The amount of
H2SO4 needed is
1 mol H2SO4
2 mol KOH
0.024 18 mol KOH × 1 mol H2SO4
2 mol KOH
= 0.01209 mol H2SO4
0.2418 mol KOH
= 0.01209 mol H2SO4
Step 4 Amount (in mol) H2SO4
= 0.01209 mol
= 0.250 mol/L × Volume H2SO4(aq) (in L)
Volume H2SO4(aq) = 0.01209 mol
0.250 mol/L
= 0.04836 L
Therefore, the volume of sulfuric acid that is needed is 48.4 mL.
Check Your Solution
The balanced chemical equation shows that half the amount of sulfu-
ric acid will neutralize a given amount of potassium hydroxide. The
concentration of sulfuric acid, however, is less than half the concen-
tration of potassium hydroxide. Therefore, the volume of sulfuric
acid should be greater than the volume of potassium hydroxide.
Practice Problems
10. 17.85 mL of nitric acid neutralizes 25.00 mL of 0.150 mol/L
NaOH(aq). What is the concentration of the nitric acid?
11. What volume of 1.015 mol/L magnesium hydroxide is needed to
neutralize 40.0 mL of 1.60 mol/L hydrochloric acid?
12. What volume of 0.150 mol/L hydrochloric acid is needed to
neutralize each solution below?
(a) 25.0 mL of 0.135 mol/L sodium hydroxide
(b) 20.0 mL of 0.185 mol/L ammonia solution
(c) 80 mL of 0.0045 mol/L calcium hydroxide
13. What concentration of sodium hydroxide solution is needed for
each neutralization reaction?
(a) 37.82 mL of sodium hydroxide neutralizes 15.00 mL of
0.250 mol/L hydroﬂuoric acid.
(b) 21.56 mL of sodium hydroxide neutralizes 20.00 mL of
0.145 mol/L sulfuric acid.
(c) 14.27 mL of sodium hydroxide neutralizes 25.00 mL of
0.105 mol/L phosphoric acid.
398 MHR • Unit 3  Solutions and Solubility
Acid-Base Titration
In the previous Sample Problems and Practice Problems, you were given
the concentrations and volumes you needed to solve the problems. What
if you did not have some of this information? Chemists often need to
know the concentration of an acidic or basic solution. To acquire this
information, they use an experimental procedure called a titration. In a
titration, the concentration of one solution is determined by quantitative-
ly observing its reaction with a solution of known concentration. The
solution of known concentration is called a standard solution. The aim of
a titration is to ﬁnd the point at which the number of moles of the stan-
dard solution is stoichiometrically equal to the original number of moles
of the unknown solution. This point is referred to as the equivalence
point. At the equivalence point, all the moles of hydrogen ions that were
present in the original volume of one solution have reacted with an equal
number of moles of hydroxide ions from the other solution.
Precise volume measurements are needed when you perform a
titration. Chemists use special glass apparatus to collect these measure-
ments. (See Figure 10.15.) As well, an acid-base indicator is needed to
monitor changes in pH during the titration.
Web
LINK
www.school.mcgrawhill.ca/
resources
Sometimes a moving picture is
worth a thousand words. To
enhance your understanding,
your teacher will demonstrate
the titration procedure
described in this textbook. In
addition, some web sites pro-
vide downloadable or real-time
titration movies to help stu-
dents visualize the procedure
and its techniques. Go to the
web site above, then to
Science Resources and to
Chemistry 11 to see where to
go next. Compare the different
demonstrations you can ﬁnd
and observe, including your
teacher’s. Prepare your own
set of "Titration Tips" to help
you recall important details.
A transfer pipette (bottom) measures a ﬁxed volume of liquid,
Figure 10.15
such as 10.00 mL, 25.00 mL, or 50.0 mL. A burette (top) measures a variable
volume of liquid.
In a titration, a pipette is used to measure a precise volume of standard
solution into a ﬂask. The ﬂask sits under a burette that contains the
solution of unknown concentration. After adding a few drops of indicator,
you take an initial burette reading. Then you start adding the known solu-
tion, slowly, to the ﬂask. The end-point of the titration occurs when the
indicator changes colour. The indicator is chosen so that it matches its
equivalance point.
Titration Step by Step
The following pages outline the steps that you need to follow to prepare
for a titration. Review these steps carefully. Then observe as your teacher
demonstrates them for you. At the end of this section, in Investigation
10-B, you will perform your own titration of a common substance: vinegar.
P R O B E W A R E
If you have access to probe-
ware, try the Chemistry 11 lab,
Titrating an Unknown, or a
similar lab from a probeware
company
Chapter 10  Acids and Bases • MHR 399
TITRATION TIP
Never use your mouth in place
of a suction bulb to draw a
liquid into a pipette. The
liquid could be corrosive or
poisonous. As well, you will
contaminate the glass stem.
TITRATION TIP
Practice removing the bulb and
replacing it with your index
ﬁnger. You need to be able to
perform this action quickly and
smoothly.
You can prevent a
Figure 10.18
“stubborn” drop from clinging to
the pipette tip by touching the tip
to the inside of the glass surface.
Rinsing the Pipette
A pipette is used to measure and transfer a precise
volume of liquid. You rinse a pipette with the solu-
tion whose volume you are measuring. This
ensures that any drops that remain inside the
pipette will form part of the measured volume.
1. Pour a sample of standard solution into a clean,
dry beaker.
2. Place the pipette tip in a beaker of distilled
water. Squeeze the suction bulb. Maintain your
grip while placing it over the stem of the
pipette. (If your suction bulbs have valves, your
teacher will show you how to use them.)
3. Relax your grip on the bulb to draw up a small
volume of distilled water.
4. Remove the bulb and discard the water by
letting it drain out.
5. Rinse the pipette by drawing several millilitres
of solution from the beaker into it. Rotate and
rock the pipette to coat the inner surface with
solution. Discard the rinse. Rinse the pipette
twice in this way. It is now ready to ﬁll with
standard solution.
Filling the Pipette
6. Place the tip of the pipette below the surface of
the solution.
7. Hold the suction bulb loosely on the end of the
glass stem. Use the suction bulb to draw liquid
up just past the etched volume mark. (See
Figure 10.16.)
8. As quickly and smoothly as you can, slide the
bulb off and place your index ﬁnger over the
end of the glass stem.
9. Gently roll your ﬁnger slightly away from end of
the stem to let solution drain slowly out.
10. When the bottom of the meniscus aligns with
the etched mark, as in Figure 10.17, press your
ﬁnger back over the end of the stem. This will
prevent more solution from draining out.
11. Touch the tip of the pipette to the side of the
beaker to remove any clinging drop. See Figure
10.18. The measured volume inside the pipette
is now ready to transfer to an Erlenmeyer ﬂask
or a volumetric ﬂask.
Transferring the Solution
12. Place the tip of the pipette against the inside
glass wall of the ﬂask. Let the solution drain
slowly, by removing your ﬁnger from the stem.
13. After the solution drains, wait several seconds,
then touch the tip to the inside wall of the ﬂask
to remove any drop on the end. Note: You may
notice a small amount of liquid remaining in the
tip. The pipette was calibrated to retain this
amount. Do not try to remove it.
400 MHR • Unit 3  Solutions and Solubility
Draw a bit
Figure 10.16
more liquid than you need
into the pipette. It is easier
to reduce this volume than
it is to add more solution
to the pipettes.
The bottom
Figure 10.17
of the meniscus must align
exactly with the etched
mark.
Adding the Indicator
14. Add two or three drops of indicator to the ﬂask
and its contents. Do not add too much indicator.
Using more does not make the colour change
easier to see. Also, indicators are usually weak
acids. Too much can change the amount of
base needed for neutralization. You are now
ready to prepare the apparatus for the titration.
Rinsing the Burette
A burette is used to accurately measure the vol-
ume of liquid added during a titration experiment.
It is a graduated glass tube with a tap at one end.
15. To rinse the burette, close the tap and add
about 10 mL of distilled water from a wash
bottle.
16. Tip the burette to one side and roll it gently
back and forth so that the water comes in
contact with all inner surfaces.
17. Hold the burette over a sink. Open the tap, and
let the water drain out. While you do this, check
that the tap does not leak. Make sure that it
turns smoothly and easily.
18. Rinse the burette with 5 mL to 10 mL of the
solution that will be measured. Remember to
open the tap to rinse the lower portion of the
burette. Rinse the burette twice, discarding the
liquid each time.
Filling the Burette
19. Assemble a retort stand and burette clamp to
hold the burette. Place a funnel in the top of the
burette.
20. With the tap closed, add solution until the liquid
is above the zero mark. Remove the funnel.
Carefully open the tap. Drain the liquid into a
beaker until the bottom of the meniscus is at or
below the zero mark.
21. Touch the tip of the burette against the beaker
to remove any clinging drop. Check that the
portion of the burette that is below the tap is
ﬁlled with liquid and contains no air bubbles.
22. Record the initial burette reading in your
notebook.
23. Replace the beaker with the Erlenmeyer ﬂask
that you prepared earlier. Place a sheet of white
paper under the Erlenmeyer to help you see the
indicator colour change that will occur near the
end-point.
Reading the Burette
24. A meniscus reader is a small white card with a
thick black line on it. Hold the card behind the
burette, with the black line just under the
meniscus, as in Figure 10.20. Record the
volume added from the burette to the nearest
0.05 mL.
TITRATION TIP
If you are right-handed, the tap
should be on your right as you
face the burette. Use your left
hand to operate the tap. Use
your right hand to swirl the liq-
uid in the Erlenmeyer ﬂask. If
you are left-handed, reverse
this arrangement.
TITRATION TIP
Near the end-point, when you
see the indicator change
colour as liquid enters the ﬂask
from the burette, slow the
addition of liquid. The end-
point can occur very quickly.
TITRATION TIP
Observe the level of solution in
the burette so that your eye is
level with the bottom of the
meniscus.
Chapter 10  Acids and Bases • MHR 401
A meniscus
Figure 10.20
reader helps you read the
volume of liquid in the
burette more easily
S K I L L   F O C U S
Predicting
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
The Concentration
of Acetic Acid in Vinegar
Vinegar is a dilute solution of acetic acid,
CH3COOH. Only the hydrogen atom that is
attached to an oxygen atom is acidic. Thus,
acetic acid is monoprotic. As a consumer, you
can buy vinegar with different concentrations.
For example, the concentration of table vinegar is
different from the concentration of the vinegar
that is used for pickling foods. To maintain con-
sistency and quality, manufacturers of vinegar
need to determine the percent concentration of
acetic acid in the vinegar. In this investigation,
you will determine the concentration of acetic
acid in a sample of vinegar.
Prediction
Which do you predict has the greater concentra-
tion of acetic acid: table vinegar or pickling
vinegar? Give reasons for your prediction.
Materials
pipette
suction bulb
retort stand
burette
burette clamp
3 beakers (250 mL)
3 Erlenmeyer ﬂasks (250 mL)
labels
meniscus reader
sheet of white paper
funnel
table vinegar
pickling vinegar
sodium hydroxide solution
distilled water
dropper bottle containing phenolphthalein
Safety Precautions
Both vinegar and sodium hydroxide solutions are
corrosive. Wash any spills on skin or clothing
with plenty of water. Inform your teacher imme-
diately.
Procedure
1. Record the following information in your
notebook. Your teacher will tell you the con-
centration of the sodium hydroxide solution.
• concentration of NaOH(aq) (in mol/L)
• type of vinegar solution
• volume of pipette (in mL)
2. Copy the table below into your notebook, to
record your observations.
Burette Readings for the Titration of Acetic Acid
Reading (mL)
Trial 1
Trial 2
Trial 3
final reading
initial reading
volume added
3. Label a clean, dry beaker for each liquid:
NaOH(aq), vinegar, and distilled water. Obtain
each liquid. Record the type of vinegar you
will be testing.
4. Obtain a pipette and a suction bulb. Record
the volume of the pipette for trial 1. Rinse it
with distilled water, and then with vinegar.
5. Pipette some vinegar into the ﬁrst Erlenmeyer
ﬂask. Record this amount. Add approximately
50 mL of water. Also add two or three drops
of phenolphthalein indicator.
6. Set up a retort stand, burette clamp, burette,
and funnel. Rinse the burette ﬁrst with
distilled water. Then rinse it with sodium
hydroxide solution. Make sure that there are
no air bubbles in the burette. Also make sure
402 MHR • Unit 3  Solutions and Solubility
Conclusions
6. Compare your results with the results of other
students who used the same type of vinegar.
Then compare the concentration of acetic acid
in table vinegar with the concentration in
pickling vinegar. How did your results
compare with your prediction?
7. List several possible sources of error in this
investigation.
Application
8. Most shampoos are basic. Why do some peo-
ple rinse their hair with vinegar after washing
it?
that the liquid ﬁlls the tube below the glass
tap. Remove the funnel before beginning the
titration.
7. Place a sheet of white paper under the
Erlenmeyer ﬂask. Titrate sodium hydroxide
into the Erlenmeyer ﬂask while swirling the
contents. The end-point of the titration is
reached when a permanent pale pink colour
appears. If you are not sure whether you have
reached the end-point, take the burette read-
ing. Add one drop of sodium hydroxide, or
part of a drop. Observe the colour of the solu-
tion. If you go past the end-point, the solution
will become quite pink.
8. Repeat the titration twice more. Record your
results for each of these trials.
9. When you have ﬁnished all three trials,
dispose of the chemicals as directed by your
teacher. Rinse the pipette and burette with
distilled water. Leave the burette tap open.
Analysis
1. Average the two closest burette readings.
Average all three readings if they agree within
about ±0.2 mL.
2. Write the chemical equation for the reaction
of acetic acid with sodium hydroxide.
3. Calculate the concentration of acetic acid in
your vinegar sample. Use the average volume
and concentration of sodium hydroxide, and
the volume of vinegar.
4. Find the molar mass of acetic acid. Then
calculate the mass of acid in the volume of
vinegar you used.
5. The density of vinegar is 1.01 g/mL. (The den-
sity of the more concentrated vinegar solution
is greater than the density of the less concen-
trated solution. You can ignore the difference,
however.) Calculate the mass of the vinegar
sample. Find the percent by mass of acetic
acid in the sample.
Chapter 10  Acids and Bases • MHR 403
Section Wrap-up
In this section, as in much of Unit 3, you combined liquid solutes and
liquid solvents. You have learned how to describe the concentration of
ions that determine the acidic or basic nature of a solution. As well, you
performed calculations to determine the concentration of acids and many
other substances in solution. In the upcoming unit, you will apply your
understanding of stoichiometry and solutions by examining the nature
and interactions of substances in the gaseous state.
Section Review
1
2
3
4
K/U
Write a generalized word equation to describe what happens
during a neutralization reaction.
K/U
Write a chemical equation for each neutralization reaction.
(a) KOH with HNO3
(b) HBr with Ca(OH)2
(c) H3PO4 with NaOH
(d) Mg(OH)2 (the active ingredient in milk of magnesia, an antacid) with
HCl (the acid in your stomach)
K/U
Distinguish between the equivalence point and the end-point in a
titration. Why might they be different? How would this affect the result
of a titration?
I
A 25.0 mL sample of sulfuric acid is completely neutralized by
adding 32.8 mL of 0.116 mol/L ammonia solution. Ammonium sulfate,
(NH4)2SO4, and water are formed. What is the concentration of the
sulfuric acid?
5
I
The following data were collected during a titration. Calculate the
concentration of the sodium hydroxide solution.
Titration Data
Volume of HCl(aq)
Final volume of NaOH(aq)
10.00 mL
23.08 mL
Initial volume of NaOH(aq)
1.06 mL
Concentration of HCl(aq)
0.235 mol/L
6
I
You should always put the two solutions for a titration experiment
in clean, dry beakers. You do not need to dry the Erlenmeyer ﬂask to
which you add the solutions, however, if it has been thoroughly rinsed
with distilled water. Explain the difference in these procedures.
7
C
Suppose that a laboratory technician accidentally spills a dilute
solution of a strong acid on her hands, the sleeve of her lab coat, and
the laboratory bench. Explain how she would deal with this spill.
404 MHR • Unit 3  Solutions and Solubility
Review
Reﬂecting on Chapter 10
Summarize this chapter in the format of your
choice. Here are a few ideas to use as guidelines:
• Compare the properties of acids and bases.
• Distinguish the two theories for explaining the
behaviour and composition of acids and bases.
• Identify conjugate acid-base pairs for selected
acid-base reactions.
• Describe strong and weak acids and bases on the
basis of their dissociation.
• Explain the signiﬁcance of the concentration
of hydronium ion in describing pH.
• Dilute an acid and describe the effect on its pH.
• Describe and conduct a titration procedure.
Reviewing Key Terms
For each of the following terms, write a sentence
that shows your understanding of its meaning.
weak base
binary acid
oxoacid
Arrhenius theory
hydronium ion
Brønsted-Lowry theory
conjugate acid-base pair pH
conjugate base
conjugate acid
strong acid
weak acid
strong base
neutralization reaction
salt
acid-base indicator
titration
equivalence point
end-point
Knowledge/Understanding
1. Use the Arrhenius theory and then the
Brønsted-Lowry theory to describe the follow-
ing concepts. If one of the theories does not
apply, state that this is the case.
(a) composition of an acid and a base
(b) conductivity of an acidic or basic solution
(c) interaction between an acid and water
(d) interaction between a base and water
(e) conjugate acid-base pairs
(f) strong and weak acids and bases
(g) the pH of a solution
2. How does diluting an acidic or basic solution
affect the pH of the solution?
3. Codeine is a compound that is extracted from
opium. It is used for pain relief. The pH of a
0.020 mol/L solution of codeine is 10.26. Is
codeine an acid or a base? Is it strong or weak?
Explain how you decided.
4. Sodium hydrogen carbonate, NaHCO3
(commonly called sodium bicarbonate, or
bicarbonate of soda), is commonly used in
baked goods. It dissolves in water to form an
alkaline solution.
(a) Is the pH of NaHCO3(aq) greater or less
than 7.00?
(b) Write the name and formula of an acid and a
base that react together to form this com-
pound. Identify each as strong or weak.
5. Aluminum sulfate, Al2(SO4)3, is used to
help clarify water. In aqueous solution, it is
slightly acidic.
(a) Is the pH of Al2(SO4)3(aq) greater or less
than 7.00?
(b) Write the name and formula of an acid and
a base that react together to form aluminum
sulfate. Identify each as either strong
or weak.
6. Sodium hydrogen carbonate can be used to
neutralize an acid. The hydrogen carbonate ion
is the conjugate base of which acid?
7. Write the net ionic equation for the reaction
of aqueous sodium hydroxide with aqueous
nitric acid.
8. In different reactions in aqueous solution, the
hydrogen carbonate ion can act as an acid or a
base. Write the chemical formula of the conju-
gate acid and the conjugate base of the hydro-
−
gen carbonate ion, HCO3
(aq) . Then complete
the following equations. State whether the ion
is a Brønsted-Lowry acid or a base.
(aq) + H3O+
−
(a) HCO3
(aq) + OH−
−
(b) HCO3
(aq) →
(aq) →
9. Which of the following are conjugate acid-base
pairs? For those pairs that are not conjugates,
write the correct conjugate acid or base for each
compound or ion.
(a) HNO3/OH−
+/NH3
(b) NH4
−/SO4
(c) HSO4
(d) H3PO4/PO4
2−
3−
10. In the laboratory, you have samples of three dif-
ferent acids of equal concentration: a 1.0 mol/L
solution of acetic acid, a 1.0 mol/L solution of
hydrochloric acid, and a 1.0 mol/L solution of
sulfuric acid.
(a) How would the pH of each acid solution
compare? Explain.
Chapter 10  Acids and Bases • MHR 405
(b) If samples of each acid were used in separate
titration experiments with 0.50 mol/L sodi-
um hydroxide solution, how would the
volume of acid required for neutralization
compare? State your reasoning.
11. Write balanced chemical equations for the
following reactions:
(a) calcium oxide with hydrochloric acid
(b) magnesium with sulfuric acid
(c) sodium carbonate with nitric acid
12. Domestic bleach is typically a 5% solution of
sodium hypochlorite, NaOCl(aq). It is made by
bubbling chlorine gas through a solution of
sodium hydroxide.
(a) Write a balanced chemical equation showing
the reaction that takes place.
(b) In aqueous solution, the hypochlorite ion
(aq) present in water to
combines with H+
form hypochlorous acid. Write the equation
for this reaction. Is the hypochlorite ion
acting as an acid or a base?
13. In this chapter, you are told that [H3O+] in pure
water is 1.0 × 10−7 mol/L at 25˚C. Thus, two out
of every one billion water molecules have dis-
sociated. Check these data by answering the
following questions.
(a) What is the mass (in g) of 1.0 L of water?
(b) Calculate the amount (in mol) of water in
1.0 L. This is the concentration of water
in mol/L.
(c) Divide the concentration of hydronium ions
by the concentration of water. Your answer
should be about 2 ppb.
Inquiry
14. 80.0 mL of 4.00 mol/L, H2SO4 are diluted to
400.0 mL by adding water. What is the molar
concentration of the sulfuric acid after dilution?
15. In a titration experiment, 25.0 mL of an aque-
ous solution of sodium hydroxide was required
to neutralize 50.0 mL of 0.010 mol/L
hydrochloric acid. What is the molar concen-
tration of the sodium hydroxide solution?
16. A burette delivers 20 drops of solution per
1.0 mL. What amount (mol) of H+
in one drop of a 0.20 mol/L HCl solution?
(aq) is present
406 MHR • Unit 3  Solutions and Solubility
17. How is a 1.0 mol/L solution of hydrochloric
acid different from a 1.0 mol/L solution of
acetic acid? Suppose that you added a strip of
magnesium metal to each acid. Would you
observe any differences in the reactions?
Explain your answer so that grade 9 students
could understand it.
Communication
18. Commercial processors of potatoes remove the
skin by using a 10-20% by mass solution of
sodium hydroxide. The potatoes are soaked in
the solution for a few minutes at 60-70˚C, after
which the peel can be sprayed off using fresh
water. You work in the laboratory at a large
food processor and must analyse a batch of
sodium hydroxide solution. You pipette 25.00
mL of NaOH(aq), and ﬁnd it has a mass of 25.75
g. Then you titrate the basic solution against
1.986 mol/L HCI, and ﬁnd it requires 30.21 mL
of acid to reach an end point.
(a) Inform your supervisor what the molar con-
centration of the sodium hydroxide is.
(b) The mass percent of NaOH present must be a
minimum of 10% for the solution to be used.
Advise your supervisor whether or not the
solution can be used to process more pota-
toes, and explain your reasoning.
19. Ammonia is an important base, used to make
fertilizers, nylon, and nitric acid. The manufac-
ture of ammonia depends on a process discov-
ered by Fritz Haber (1868-1934). After gather-
ing information from print or electronic
resources, write an obituary for Haber. Describe
his accomplishments and the effect on society
of plentiful supplies of ammonia.
Making Connections
20. Limestone, chalk, and marble are all forms of
calcium carbonate. Limestone rock can be used
to build roads, but it is a very important basic
compound used in large quantities by chemical
industries. For example, limestone is used
directly to make concrete and cement. It is also
used in the manufacture of glass and in agricul-
ture. Limestone is often processed to make
quicklime, CaO, and hydrated lime (calcium
hydroxide), Ca(OH)2.
(a) Research the uses of quicklime and hydrated
lime. Investigate one of these uses further.
(b) Design a poster illustrating the use you
decided to research. Your poster should be
both informative and visually interesting.
Include a bibliography showing the
resources you found useful.
21. On several occasions during the past few years,
you have studied the environmental issue of
acid rain. Now that you have further developed
your understanding of acids and bases in this
chapter, reﬂect on your earlier understandings.
(a) List two facts about acid rain that you now
understand in a more comprehensive way.
Explain what is different between your pre-
vious and your current understanding in
each case.
(b) Identify three questions that your teacher
could assign as a research project on acid
rain. The emphasis of the research must be
on how an understanding of chemistry can
contribute clarifying the questions and
possible solutions involved in this issue.
Develop a rubric that would be used to
assess any student who is assigned this
research project.
22. Research the use of hypochlorous acid in the
management of swimming pools and write a
report on your ﬁndings. Include a discussion
on the importance of controlling pool water.
(aq) ; as a base:
(aq) 4.(a) HBr; bromate; Br−
− 5.(a) nitric acid, HNO3;
− (c) hyponi-
Answers to Practice Problems and
Short Answers to Section Review Questions
Practice Problems:  1. HCN/CN− and H2O/H3O+ 2. H2O/OH− and
CH3COO−/CH3COOH 3. as an acid:
(aq) + H2O((cid:2)) ↔ S2−
(aq) + H3O+
HS−
HS−
(aq) + H2O((cid:2)) ↔ H2S(aq) + OH−
(b) hydrogen sulﬁde, HS−; sulﬁde, S2
− (b) nitrous acid, HNO2; nitrite, NO2
nitrate, NO3
trous acid, HNO; hyponitrite, NO− (d) phosphoric acid, H3PO4;
−, hydrogen phosphate, HPO4
2−,
dihydrogen phosphate, H2PO4
3− (e) phosphorous acid, H3PO3; dihydrogen
phosphate, PO4
2−, phosphite,
phosphite, H2PO3
− 6.(a) 2.57 (b) 7.138
PO3
(c) 4.01 (d) 11.082  7. pH = 2.30; acidic  8. 3.54; acidic  9.(a) 2.20
(b) 9.181; basic  10. 0.210 mol/L  11. 31.5 mL  12.(a) 22.5 mL
(b) 24.7 mL (c) 4.8 mL  13.(a) 0.0992 mol/L (b) 0.269 mol/L
(c) 0.552 mol/L
Section Review:  10.1:  1.(a) B and D (b) A (C, although unintended,
would also be correct) (c) A, B, D (d) no (e) litmus test, for
2− 7. c and d
example  5.(a) H2O (b) HCO3
3− (f) periodic acid, HlO4; periodate, IO4
−, hydrogen phosphite, HPO3
− 6.(a) NO3
− (b) SO4
2− and
−/HPO4
−/HPO4
(aq) + F−
−
2−/HCO3
2− and CO3
(aq) (b) HF/F−;
8. a and b  9.(a) HF(aq) + H2O(l) → H3O+
H2O/H3O+ 10.(a) H2PO4
(b) HCOOH/HCOO− and CN−/HCN (c) H2PO4
OH−/H2O 10.2:  3. weak  4. potassium permanganate; permangan-
ic acid, HMnO4 5.(a) sulfuric acid, H2SO4 (b) hydroﬂuoric acid,
HF (c) hydrosulfuric acid, H2S (d) bromous acid, HBr2 7. egg
white, camembert cheese, beets, yogurt, sauerkraut
8.(a) 7.4 (b) 1.4  9. 2.90  10. 1.0 mol/L; concentrations greater than
this give negative pH values, but this gives no advantage over
the actual concentration of H3O+ 10.3: 1. acid + base = salt +
water  4. 0.304 mol/L  5. 0.107 mol/L
Chapter 10  Acids and Bases • MHR 407
U N I T   3   An  Issue  to  Analyze
Island at Risk:
A Simulation
Background
Would you rather have ﬁsh — or chips? People on
Prince Edward Island are discovering that their sources
of both of these food items are increasingly at risk.
The fertile red soil of Prince Edward Island is
famous for potato growing. Agricultural corporations
have been increasing their potato plantings on this
island province. In the process, they have been elimi-
nating other crops, which has led to a monoculture.
(“Monoculture” refers to the growing of a single crop
in an area.) Potato pests are posing a huge threat to
this proﬁtable cash crop, however. Part of the problem
results from the fact that the potato ﬁelds are very
close together. To combat the pests— potato bugs, in
particular— farmers are applying more and more pesti-
cides, fertilizers, and herbicides to the potato ﬁelds.
What are the environmental effects of this heavy
use of pesticides (insecticides and herbicides)? After
heavy rains on the island, large numbers of dead ﬁsh
have been found in the ocean, and washed up on the
shore near the potato farms. The suspected cause is
the leaching of sodium arsenite and other pesticides
used in the potato ﬁelds. Sodium arsenate is a chemi-
cal used to kill both weeds and insects. If the poison-
ing of the ocean waters continues, Prince Edward
Island’s unique seafood industry will come to an end.
408 MHR • Unit 3  Solutions and Solubility
Suggestions for dealing with this problem have
included:
• creating a mandatory untilled area spanning
20 m next to waterways;
• growing genetically engineered potatoes that are
more blight-resistant. These genetically modiﬁed
potatoes would contain genes from bacteria that
have insecticidal properties;
• employing alternative fertilization and pesticide
methods to reduce the amount of chemicals used
on the potato crop; and
• rotating crops (that is, alternating types of crops
from year to year) so that the spread of potato
bugs and the overuse of soil would be less of
a problem.
Plan and Present
1
Look up the properties of sodium arsenate in either
the CRC Handbook or the Merck Manual. As well,
search the Internet for an MSDS sheet about
sodium arsenate.
2
3
4
Using your knowledge of solutions and dissolving,
explain how the chemicals from the potato ﬁelds
end up in the water with the ﬁsh. Make a diagram,
a poster, or a PowerPointTM presentation that clearly
illustrates the processes involved in this type of
aquatic pollution.
Provide a minimum of two advantages and two
disadvantages of each of the four possible solutions
to the problem.
The provincial government in Charlottetown has
decided that action must be taken, in some form or
another. The following people and organizations
have been invited to participate on a board to
develop an action plan:
Assessment
After you analyze this issue,
Assess the quality and practicality of
your solution.
Assess your solution based on how clearly
the chemistry concepts are expressed
and communicated.
2
3
From what you learned in Unit 3 about solutions
and water treatment, do you think there could be
other chemical-based solutions to this problem in
the future? Give a chemical explanation of how the
leachates might be contained, if such processing
were possible.
Try to suggest some safe, alternative methods of
reducing weeds, insects, and harmful microorgan-
isms. For example, could boiling water be used as
an effective herbicide? Would this method of
reducing weeds cause more problems than it
would solve? Why or why not?
• the P. E. I. Potato Board
• the scientists who helped develop the genetically
engineered, blight-resistant potato variety
• the corporations who want to buy the potatoes
and process them
• people who ﬁsh for their living
• potato farmers
(a) Your class will be divided into groups, and each
group will research the point of view of one of
these interest groups. Consider questions such
as these:
• To what extent do landowners have the right
to determine how they use their land?
• What recourse should the ﬁshers on P.E.I.
have available to them to respond to the
threat posed to their livelihood?
• What possible consumers’ rights need to be
assessed in analyzing this issue?
(b) Before developing an action plan, each group
should decide on and state clearly their motive
and their mandate. In other words, what is the
reason for their existence as a group and to
whom is the group accountable? For example:
• Are the scientists working for biotechnology
companies or are they doing pure research?
• What is each group’s present policy regarding
issues such as environmental protection
and sustainability?
• What points might be included in each
group’s short-term and long-term action plan?
(c) Make a one-page summary of your points to
hand out to other members at the meeting. A
large diagram, poster, overhead transparency,
or PowerPoint™ slide will help your group
illustrate how your action plan:
• will affect the environment
• acknowledges the scientiﬁc realities of the
leaching situation
• satisﬁes the needs of other interest groups
(d) Hold a meeting of the action plan board, to
present all points of view, and to try to reach
a consensus on an action plan.
Evaluate the Results
1
(a) Take notes on every point of view presented
during the meeting.
(b) Decide what you think the best solution is, for
everyone involved. Why do you consider it to be
the best solution?
Web
LINK
www.school.mcgrawhill.ca/resources/
Go to McGraw-Hill Ryerson’s Chemistry 11 web site at
the above address, and then follow the links to access
further information.
Unit 3 An Issue to Analyze • MHR 409
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
Review
Knowledge/Understanding
True/False
(h) The conjugate base  When solute is added to
an aqueous solution, the
solute dissolves
−
of HSO3
In your notebook, indicate whether each statement
is true or false. Correct each false statement.
1. The solubility of a gas increases with increased
temperature.
2. Molar concentration refers to the amount, in
moles, of solute dissolved in one kilogram of
solvent.
3. The maximum amount of a solute that will
dissolve in a solvent at a certain temperature
is called its solubility.
4. The term insoluble has a precise meaning.
5. The component of a solution present in the
smaller amount is called the solvent.
6. The molar concentration of a solution contain-
ing 4 mol of solute dissolved in 2 L of solvent
is 2 mol/L.
7. The rate at which a solid solute dissolves in
water can usually be increased by increasing
the temperature of the solution.
8. Each ten-fold increase in the concentration of
hydronium ions in a solution increases the pH
of the solution by one unit.
9. Hydrobromic acid is a strong acid.
Matching
10. Match each description in column B with the
correct term in column A.
Column A
(a) Unsaturated solution A solution with pH = 10
Column B
(b) Saturated solution
(c) Dilute solution
(d) Concentrated
solution
(e) Arrhenius acid
2−
NH3
SO3
H2SO3
A solution that contains
a relatively large amount
of solute
(f) Brønsted–Lowry
A solution with pH = 8
base
(g) An example of a
weak acid
When solute is added to
an aqueous solution, the
solute does not dissolve
410 MHR • Unit 3  Solutions and Solubility
(i) A solution more
acidic than one
with pH = 9
(j) A solution more
basic than one
with pH = 9
Multiple Choice
A substance that
produces H+ when
dissolved in water
A solution that contains
a relatively small
amount of solute
In your notebook, write the letter of the best
answer for each of the following questions.
11. Which of the following would best indicate
that a sample of water is pure?
(a) Measure its boiling point.
(b) Measure its pH.
(c) Add it to a sample of pure water and see if it
is miscible (dissolves inﬁnitely).
(d) Pass an electric current through it to see
if it decomposes into hydrogen gas and
oxygen gas.
(e) See if sodium chloride dissolves in it.
12. If 1.00 g of solid sodium chloride is dissolved
in enough water to make 350 mL of solution,
what is the molar concentration of the solu-
tion?
(a) 5.98 mol/L
(b) 1.67 × 10−1 mol/L
(c) 4.89 × 10−2 mol/L
(d) 5.98 × 10−3 mol/L
(e) 4.88 × 10−5 mol/L
13. What volume of 5.00 × 10−2 mol/L Ca(NO3)2
solution will contain 2.50 × 10−2 mol of nitrate
ions?
(a) 200 mL
(b) 250 mL
(c) 500 mL
(d) 750 mL
(e) 1.00 L
14. If 40.0 mL of 6.00 mol/L sulfuric acid is diluted
to 120 mL by the addition of water, what is the
molar concentration of the sulfuric acid after
dilution?
(a) 5.00 × 10−2 mol/L
(b) 7.50 × 10−2 mol/L
(c) 1.00 mol/L
(d) 2.0 mol/L
(e) 4.0 mol/L
15. When solutions of sodium chloride, NaCl, and
silver nitrate, AgNO3, are mixed, what is the
net ionic equation for the reaction that results?
(a) Na+
(aq) + NO−
3(aq) → NaNO3(aq)
(aq) + Cl−
(b) Ag+
(aq) → AgCl(s)
−
+
+
−
(aq) →
(aq) + Cl
(aq) + Ag
(aq) + NO3
(c) Na
AgCl(s) + NaNO3(aq)
−
+
+
−
(aq) + Ag
(aq) →
(aq) + Cl
(aq) + NO3
(d) Na
+
−
(aq) + NO3
AgCl(s) + Na
(aq)
−
+
+
−
(aq) →
(aq) + Cl
(aq) + Ag
(aq) + NO3
(e) Na
+
+
(aq) + Na
NaNO3(aq) + Ag
(aq)
16. The acidity in a sample of soil could be
neutralized by adding:
(a) sodium chloride
(b) ammonium nitrate
(c) potassium sulfate
(d) calcium oxide
(e) magnesium phosphate
Short Answers
In your notebook, write a sentence or a short para-
graph to answer each of the following questions:
17. Is a saturated solution always a concentrated
solution? Give an example to explain your
answer.
18. How can a homogeneous mixture be distin-
guished from a heterogeneous mixture? Give
one example of each.
19. List three different ways in which the concen-
tration of a solution could be described.
20. What would you observe if a saturated solution
of sodium carbonate (commonly called washing
soda) at room temperature was cooled to 5˚C?
21. Explain why calcium hydroxide (solubility
0.165 g per 100 g water at 20˚C) is much more
soluble than magnesium hydroxide (solubility
0.0009 g per 100 g water at 20˚C).
22. Iron concentrations of 0.2 to 0.3 parts per
million in water can cause fabric staining
when washing clothes. A typical wash uses
12 L of water. What is the maximum mass of
iron that can be present so that the clothes will
not be stained?
23. High levels of phosphorus are not toxic, but
can cause digestive problems. The allowable
drinking water concentration is 0.05 ppm.
What is the maximum mass of phosphorus
that could be present in a 250 mL glass of tap
water?
24. Is a 1% solution of table salt, NaCl(aq), more
concentrated, less concentrated, or at the same
concentration as a 1% solution of sugar,
C12H22O11(aq)? Explain.
25. Bones and teeth consist mostly of a compound
called hydroxyapatite, Ca10(PO4)6(OH)2. This
compound contains PO4
(a) Do you expect hydroxyapatite will be an
3− and OH− ions.
acid or a base?
(b) Foods that contain sucrose form lactic acid
in the mouth and the pH drops. As a result,
eating candy promotes a reaction between
hydroxyapatite and H+
skeleton reaction:
Ca10(PO4)6(OH)2 + H+
CaHPO4(s) + H2O((cid:2)) + Ca2+
(aq) →
(aq)
(aq). Balance the
(c) At lower pH values, the CaHPO4(s) also
(aq):
(aq) → Ca2+
(aq)
reacts with H+
CaHPO4(s) + H+
Dentists and toothpaste manufacturers warn
that eating candy promotes tooth decay.
What chemical evidence have you seen to
support this advice?
−
+ H2PO4
(aq)
26. (a) Why does water from different regions vary
in its hardness?
(b) Why is ﬁltration not an effective method to
remove the hardness from water?
(c) Why should hard water be treated before it is
heated in a hot water boiler?
27. Vinegar is added to a kettle with a build-up of
scale due to hard water. What would you
expect to observe? Explain.
28. Chloroform and diethyl ether were among the
ﬁrst substances used as anaesthetics. Both are
non-polar substances.
(a) Would you expect either or both of these
substances to be soluble in water? Explain.
(b) Write a sentence or two to describe how you
think these substances are able to get from
the lungs to the brain.
Unit 3 Review • MHR 411
Inquiry
29. A Chemist has a large beaker containing
(ii) Bromophenol blue
(iii) Phenolphthalein
ice-cold water, and another containing boiling
water. The laboratory is well-equipped with
other apparatus.
(a) Explain how the chemist could maximize
the solubility of the following solutes in
water (following appropriate safety
precautions):
(i) magnesium chloride, MgCl2, used to ﬁre-
proof wood
(ii) benzene, a non-polar liquid used by the
industry and found in gasoline
(iii) carbon monoxide, CO, a poisonous gas
formed by incomplete combustion of
hydrocarbons
(b) Explain how you could minimize the
solubility of the same solutes in water.
30. Design an experiment to collect data on the
pH of a stream, over a period of one year.
Why might the pH vary at different times of
the year?
31. The table below shows the colours of various
indicators at different pH values.
(a) If a vinegar solution is at pH 5, what colour
would you expect the following indicators to
show if placed into separate samples of the
vinegar?
(i) Thymol blue
(b) An aqueous solution of sodium acetate
used in photographic development makes
phenol red indicator red, and phenolph-
thalein pink. What is the pH of this sodium
acetate solution?
Communicating
32. Lead is highly toxic when absorbed into the
body, especially for young children. A level of
10 micrograms of lead per decilitre of blood is
cause for concern. Do research, then write a
report describing the health effects of lead.
Include information on the sources of this
heavy metal and on how lead might be
absorbed by a child.
33. Sulfuric acid is the chemical produced in the
largest quantity in the world. Research some of
the uses of sulfuric acid. Design a poster for
students in a younger grade, illustrating one
way in which this acid is used. Your poster
should be informative and visually interesting.
34. In the past, scurvy was a disease that killed
many sailors. James Lind discovered that eating
citrus fruits prevents scurvy. Citrus fruits
contain ascorbic acid (vitamin C). Research the
life of James Lind, and write a brief biography.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
pH
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
Crystal violet
Thymol blue
2,4-Dinitrophenol
Bromphenol blue
Bromcresol green
Methyl red
Alizarin
Bromthymol blue
Phenol red
Phenolphthalein
Alizarin yellow R
412 MHR • Unit 3  Solutions and Solubility
Making Connections
35. The disposal of nuclear waste presents many
difﬁculties. Some proposals suggest burying the
waste in glass or ceramic containers deep in
the earth.
(a) Why would these containers be superior to
containers made of metal or concrete?
(b) What are some of the concerns related to
burying radioactive waste?
(c) Make a suggestion on a different way to dis-
pose of radioactive waste. Include a list of
the pros and cons of your suggestion.
36. The following is a short list of some weak bases
and their uses. Which ones are
Brønsted–Lowry bases, but not Arrhenius
bases?
(a) ammonia, NH3, used in the manufacture of
fertilizers, plastics, and explosives
(b) zinc oxide, ZnO, a white pigment used in
paints and cosmetics
(c) copper(II) hydroxide, Cu(OH)2, used to kill
fungi and bacteria
(d) hydrazine, N2H4, a colourless liquid that can
be used as a rocket fuel
37. In 1963, a treaty was signed by the US, UK, and
USSR to ban the atmospheric testing of atomic
weapons. Previous testing of atomic weapons
had added radioactive isotopes of strontium
(Sr-90) and cesium (Cs-137) to the atmosphere.
Eventually, these pollutants fell to the ground
and may have entered the food chain.
(a) Which would you expect to form more
soluble compounds, strontium or cesium?
Explain your answer.
(b) State two important factors that might
help you to determine the health risks of
these isotopes.
C O U R S E
C H A L L E N G E
Think about these questions as you plan for your
Chemistry Course Challenge.
• How might you use your knowledge of solutions to
analyze the purity of a sample of water?
• How could you precipitate out contaminants to purify
a sample of water?
• What dissolved substances might end up in water as
it passes through rock? How might you identify these
substances? How could you extract them from the
contaminated water?
Unit 3 Review • MHR 413
Gases and
Atmospheric Chemistry
U N I T   4   C O N T E N T S
CHAPTER  11
The Behaviour of Gases
CHAPTER  12
Exploring Gas Laws
UNIT  4  ISSUE
The Cost of Getting Around
UNIT 4 OVERALL  EXPECTATIONS
What laws govern the
behaviour of gases?
What are the relationships
between the temperature,
pressure, volume, and number
of moles of a gas?
What modern technologies
depend on gas chemistry?
What environmental phenom-
ena and issues are related to
gases?
Unit Issue Prep
You probably ride in a car or a bus
several times a week, if not every
day. What gases do these vehicles
produce? How can we prevent
environmental harm from vehicle
emissions? Think through this issue
as you study the material in Unit 4.
You will have a chance to debate
your point of view with your
classmates at the end of the unit.
416
Did you realize that air turbulence
is caused by the behaviour of gases?
Turbulence can be caused by
changes in air pressure in the
atmosphere. Airplanes are designed,
however, to adjust to the behaviour
of atmospheric gases. The combus-
tion in the engines, the shape of the
airplane, and the air mixture that
passengers breathe are all designed
to take gas behaviour into account.
Gas behaviour and gas reactions
are part of everyday life. For exam-
ple, photosynthesis is a reaction
that uses carbon dioxide gas, along
with other reactants, to produce
oxygen gas. High in the atmosphere,
ozone gas interacts with dangerous
ultra-violet light to protect us from
the Sun’s harsh rays.
Scientists study gases to under-
stand how they react. This under-
standing can help prevent further
damage to the environment. It also
leads to advances in gas-related
technology. Carbonated soft drinks,
air bags, medical anaesthetics, scuba
equipment, and rocket engines are
all based on gas chemistry.
In this unit, you will learn
about the relationships between the
pressure, temperature, volume, and
number of moles of a gas. You will
see how all these relationships are
combined in the ideal gas law: an
equation that predicts the behaviour
of a gas in almost any situation.
416
The Behaviour of Gases
How many gases are shown in the main photograph on the opposite
page? The only gas you can actually see is the water vapour in the clouds.
In fact, however, many gases are present. Our atmosphere is made up of a
mixture of different gases. The most important of these gases is oxygen,
which we need to breathe. But did you know that most of the air you
breathe is composed of nitrogen gas? This fact is well known to deep-sea
divers, who encounter problems with nitrogen gas when diving far below
the surface of the ocean.
Gases are important in many different areas, from medical technology
to the food industry. In this chapter, you will learn how particles behave
in the gaseous, liquid, and solid states. You will also learn about laws
that predict the behaviour of gases under different conditions of pressure,
temperature, and volume. As well, you will discover some of the impor-
tant ways in which gases are used in everyday life.
C h a p t e r   P r e v i e w
11.1 States of Matter and the
Kinetic Molecular
Theory
11.2 Gas Pressure and
Volume
11.3 Gases and Temperature
Changes
11.4 Combined Gas Law
Calculations
11.5 Gas Applications
A knowledge of gases is
a necessary part of many
different ﬁelds of study.
How are gases being
used in this photograph?
C o n c e p t s   a n d   S k i l l s
Yo u   W i l l   N e e d
Before you begin this chapter,
review the following concepts
and skills:
signiﬁcant digits
(Chapter 1, Section 1.2)
unit analysis problem
solving (Appendix D)
the behaviour of atoms
and molecules (Chapter 3,
Sections 3.1, 3.2, and 3.3)
Figure 11.1
Chapter 11  The Behaviour of Gases • MHR 417
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
11.1
States of Matter and
the Kinetic Molecular Theory
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
explain states of matter in
terms of intermolecular
forces and the motion of
particles
perform an ExpressLab to
determine if gases occupy
space
describe a gas using the
kinetic molecular theory
communicate your
understanding of the follow-
ing terms and concepts:
condensation, kinetic
molecular theory of gases,
ideal gas
The arrangement of
Figure 11.2
particles in a solid. Particles
vibrate in a ﬁxed position relative
to one another. They are unable to
move past each other.
Most of the universe is composed of plasma, a state of matter that exists at
incredibly high temperatures (>5000˚C). Under normal conditions, matter
on Earth can only exist in the other three physical states, namely, the
solid, liquid, or gaseous states. As you learned in an earlier course, the
particle theory describes matter in all states as being composed of tiny
invisible particles, which can be atoms, ions, or molecules. In this section,
you will learn how these particles behave in each state. You will also
learn about the forces that cause their behaviour.
Solids and Liquids
In previous courses, you learned about the properties of the different
states of matter. You may recall that both solids and liquids are
incompressible. That is, the particles cannot squeeze closer together,
or compress. The incompressible nature of solids and liquids is not
due to the fact that particles are touching. On the contrary, the particle
theory states that there is empty space between all particles of matter.
The incompressibility of solids and liquids arises instead from the fact
that these particles cannot move independently of each other. That is,
the movement of one particle affects the movement of other particles,
or is restricted by them.
This is especially true for solids. The particles of a solid are held
together in a framework, called a crystal lattice. In a crystal lattice, the
positions of solid particles are relatively ﬁxed. This explains why solids
have deﬁnite shapes: the particles are unable to slip past each other and
thus change the shape of the solid.
Like solids, liquid particles cannot move independently of one
another. They can slip past each other enough, however, to ﬂow and
change shape.
Another property of states of matter is their motion. According to the
particle theory, all particles that make up matter are in constant motion.
In solids, the range of motion of the particles is the most restricted. Each
particle of a solid is only able to vibrate around a ﬁxed point in the lattice
(see Figure 11.2). This is called vibrational motion. Since solid particles
are ﬁxed in space, the degree of disorder is very low.
Particles in the liquid state can move more freely than particles in the
solid state, although not entirely independently. Liquid particles move
with rotational motion as well as vibrational motion. This means that the
particles can rotate and change position. It explains why liquids are able
to ﬂow and change shape, but keep the same volume. Since liquid parti-
cles move around more than solid particles, the liquid state has a higher
degree of disorder, as shown in Figure 11.3.
To summarise the discussion, particles in solids and liquids are
incompressible and thus have deﬁnite volumes. The particles in each state
cannot move independently of each other. Therefore they are relatively
restricted in their motion. How are the properties of gases different from
those of solids and liquids?
418 MHR • Unit 4  Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
The Gas State
Unlike solids and liquids, particles in the gaseous state are able to move
independently of one another. Gas particles are able to move from one
point in space to another. This is called translational motion. Thus, gas
particles move with all three types of motion: vibrational, rotational,
and translational. Gas particles move through space in random fashion.
However, they do travel in straight lines until their course is altered by
collisions with other particles. Because gas particles move freely, there is
a high degree of disorder in a gaseous state.
Gas particles move much faster than liquid particles. Liquids
always ﬂow to the lowest point because they are still greatly inﬂuenced by
gravity. Because gas particles move so quickly, gravity does not affect
them as much. Gases ﬂow in all directions, including upward against
gravity, until all of the available empty space is occupied. This is why
gases expand to ﬁll a container. (See Figure 11.4.)
Gases can be compressed, unlike both solids and liquids. What is
different about their particle arrangement that allows for this? The space
between gas particles is much larger than the space between liquid or
solid particles. Even if gas particles are moved closer together through
compression, the distance between each particle is still very large. The
particles remain in the gaseous state. When gas molecules are compressed
further, eventually the forces between molecules become strong enough to
hold the gas molecules together. At this point, the gas changes to the liq-
uid state. This is known as condensation.
Forces Between Particles
You have examined some properties of solids, liquids, and gases. You
have seen how the motion of the particles affects these properties. Now
you will examine how the particles affect each other.
The particle theory states that there are attractive forces between
particles. The weaker the attractive force is between particles, the freer the
particles are to move. Therefore, attractive forces between particles are at
their strongest in the solid state. Attractive forces are at their weakest in
the gaseous state.
The strength of attractive forces between particles in any physical
state depends on two major factors: type of force and temperature. The
effect of temperature, or kinetic energy, on the state of a substance will be
covered in greater detail later on in this section.
Attractions Between Charged Particles
What types of attractive forces exist between particles? In Chapter 3, you
learned that oppositely charged particles attract each other due to electro-
static attraction. Ionic bonding is one example of electrostatic attraction.
A positive ion (an atom or molecule that has lost electrons) is attracted to
a negative ion (an atom or molecule that has gained electrons). Ions form
very strong ionic bonds. Since these attractive forces are so strong, ionic
compounds usually exist in nature as solids. For example, table salt
(sodium chloride, NaCl) is a solid crystalline substance. It has a high
melting point and a high boiling point.
Particles in liquids
Figure 11.3
are not held in a ﬁxed position
relative to other particles. They
can slide over and past one
another.
Gas particles move
Figure 11.4
freely in all directions, bouncing
off each other as well as off the
walls of their container.
Chapter 11  The Behaviour of Gases • MHR 419
What is a dipole? Go back to
Chapter 3 or Chapter 8 to
refresh your memory.
Dipole–dipole
Figure 11.5
interactions between polar HCl
molecules
Hydrogen bonding is a very
strong type of dipole-dipole
interaction. Go back to Chapter
8 to review how this type of
intermolecular force works.
Electronic Learning Partner
If you are having difﬁculty
visualizing molecules in the
different states of matter, go to
the Chemistry 11 Electronic
Learning Partner.
Attractions Between Polar Molecules
Not all particles are charged, but attractions can still form between them.
You learned about intermolecular forces in Chapter 3. Intermolecular
forces are forces that exist between neutral molecules, or between
molecules and ions.
You know that some molecules are polar due to their asymmetrical
shapes. Sulfur dioxide (SO2) is one example of a polar molecule. These
molecules have a permanent dipole effect. This means that one end of
the molecule is more positive, and the other end is more negative.
Polar molecules attract ions and other polar molecules.
The partially positive end of one molecule is attracted to
the partially negative end of another molecule. This pattern
continues throughout the substance. These dipole–dipole
forces of attraction are not as strong as ionic bonds. Thus sub-
stances made up of polar molecules can exist as liquids and
gases. For example, ethanol (CH3CH2OH) is polar, and exists as
a liquid. You know this liquid as rubbing alcohol. Hydrogen
chloride (HCl) is also polar. It is a gas under normal conditions
as shown in Figure 11.5.
Attractions Between Non-Polar Molecules
What about substances made of non-polar molecules? You
learned in Chapter 3 that weak dispersion forces form between
non-polar molecules. As temporary dipoles form, they cause molecules to
move closer together. However, these attractions are temporary and weak.
Thus, most small non-polar molecules do not hold together long enough
to maintain their solid or liquid forms. As a result, most small non-polar
molecules exist as gases at room temperature. For example, carbon diox-
ide (CO2) is a gas at normal temperatures.
The Relationship Between Size and State
Dispersion forces are also the primary forces of attraction between large
non-polar molecules. However, as these molecules increase in size, their
melting and boiling points rise. For example, methane (CH4) is a small
non-polar molecule. It has a very low boiling point and exists as a gas at
room temperature. Pentane (C5H12) is a larger non-polar molecule.
It has a higher boiling point, so it exists as a liquid at room temperature.
Pentane has more sites along its length than methane does where tempo-
rary dipoles can form. The dispersion forces add up, so that it takes
more energy overall to separate the molecules. This leads to a higher
boiling point.
To summarize, the state of a substance depends on the forces between
the particles of that substance. If the forces are very strong, that substance
is likely to exist as a solid. If the forces are weaker, that substance will
exist as a liquid, or as a gas. The state of a non-polar substance also
depends on the size of the molecule. Smaller non-polar molecules are
more likely to be gases. Larger non-polar molecules will probably exist as
liquids or even solids. Table 11.1 shows the forces discussed in this sec-
tion ranked in order of strength.
420 MHR • Unit 4  Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
What kind of molecular forces
would you expect for KI, SCl6,
and SiO2? Use diagrams to
explain your answer. Compare
their melting and boiling points.
Table 11.1 Attractive Forces
strong forces
weak forces
Force
Ionic
Polar (dipole–dipole)
Dispersion
Type of force
between ions
(intramolecular)
between molecules
(intermolecular)
between molecules
(intermolecular)
State
usually solid
liquid or gas
(can also be solid)
liquid or gas
Example
NaCl(s)
CH3CH2OH(  ), HCl(g)
(cid:2)
C5H12(  ),  CH4(g),  CO2(g)
(cid:2)
The Effect of Kinetic Energy on the State of a Substance
There is one more factor that affects the state of a substance: temperature,
which is related to kinetic energy. A hotter substance with high kinetic
energy is more likely to overcome attractive forces between molecules,
and exist as a gas. A cooler substance with low kinetic energy is more
likely to be a solid or a liquid. This explains why heating a substance
causes a change in state. When a solid is heated, it gains kinetic energy.
Eventually it will melt, and become a liquid. When you add kinetic
energy by heating a liquid, it will boil and become a gas. Earlier in this
section, you learned that gases move much more quickly than liquids or
solids. This is because gases have high kinetic energy.
Kinetic Molecular Theory of Gases
The particle theory of matter does not discuss the kinetic energy of parti-
cles. Kinetic energy is important, however, when describing the unique
properties of gases.
The kinetic molecular theory of gases makes the following
assumptions:
• The volume of an individual gas molecule is negligible compared
to the volume of the container holding the gas. This means that
individual gas molecules, with virtually no volume of their own,
are extremely far apart and most of the container is “empty” space.
• There are neither attractive nor repulsive forces between gas
molecules,
• Gas molecules have high translational energy. They move randomly
in all directions, in straight lines. (See Figure 11.6, on page 423.)
• When gas molecules collide with each other or with a container
wall, the collisions are perfectly elastic. This means that when gas
molecules collide, somewhat like billiard balls, there is no loss of
kinetic energy.
• The average kinetic energy of gas molecules is directly related to
the temperature. The greater the temperature, the greater the
average motion of the molecules and the greater their average
kinetic energy.
The kinetic molecular theory describes a hypothetical gas called an
ideal gas. In an ideal gas, the gas particles take up hardly any space. Also,
the particles of an ideal gas do not attract each other.
Chapter 11  The Behaviour of Gases • MHR 421
ExpressLab
Do Gases Take Up Space?
Not everything can be seen with the unaided
eye. Looking at a solid or a liquid, it is easy to
see that they have mass and volume. Most gases
are colourless. How can we “see” the volume of
a gas?
Materials
1 L or 2 L clean plastic soft drink or juice bottle
round balloon
pointed scissors
Safety Precautions
Be careful with the sharp point of the scissors
when piercing the plastic bottle.
Procedure
1. Insert the balloon into the bottle, holding the
open end. Stretch the open end of the balloon
over the lip of the bottle.
2. Step 3 will ask you to inﬂate the balloon as
large as you can. Before you do Step 3, predict
how much you will be able to inﬂate the bal-
loon. Record your prediction in your notebook.
3. Inﬂate the balloon inside the bottle. How large
did it get? Record your observations in your
notebook.
4. Using the sharp end of a pair of scissors,
puncture a hole in the middle of the bottom of
the plastic bottle. Inﬂate the balloon again.
Record your observations in your notebook.
Analysis
1. Was your prediction in Step 2 veriﬁed in Step
3? If you had problems inﬂating the balloon in
Step 3, explain why.
2. Was there a difference in how much you were
able to inﬂate the balloon after you punctured
a hole in the bottle? If there was, explain why.
3. From your observations in this activity, do
gases take up space? Explain your answer.
Why Use the Kinetic Molecular Theory?
How and why did scientists formulate the kinetic molecular theory?
Experiments into gas behaviour demonstrate that, under normal tempera-
tures and pressures, nearly all gases behave in similar and predictable
ways. The properties and behaviours of real gases can be generalized into
a theory of an ideal gas. This generalization makes it possible for us to
calculate mathematically, with a high degree of accuracy, how real gases
will behave under varying conditions.
Of course, no gas is really “ideal.” The ideal gas theory ignores certain
facts about real gases. For example, an ideal gas particle does not take up
any space. In fact, you know that all particles of matter must take up
space. Gas particles are small and far apart, however. Thus the space
occupied by the particles is insigniﬁcant compared to the total volume
of the container. You will learn more about the behaviour of real gases
in Chapter 12.
422 MHR • Unit 4  Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
This diagram
Figure 11.6
shows the possible path of one
gas molecule inside a volleyball.
In a sample of gas, there are
countless molecules moving in
straight lines. They rebound off
each other and the inner wall
of the volleyball.
Section Wrap-up
The molecular-level interpretation of gas behaviour given by the kinetic
molecular theory helps to explain the macroscopic, or “larger picture,”
properties of gases in the real world. One of the most important properties
of gases is their compressibility—how they react to the application of an
external force. In the next section, you will observe how gases behave
under pressure. Later in this chapter, you will learn about some interest-
ing applications of pressurized gases.
C H E M
FA C T
Oxygen molecules in the
atmosphere, at room tempera-
ture, travel at an average
speed of 443 m/s. This is
approximately 1600 km/h!
Section Review
1
K/U
Using the kinetic molecular theory of matter, explain each of the
following observations.
(a) Gases are more compressible than liquids.
(b) The density of gases is less than that of solids.
2
3
K/U
In your own words, describe the characteristics of an ideal gas.
MC
Using your knowledge of intermolecular forces, predict the state
of each substance at room temperature. Explain your answer.
(a) hexane (C6H14)
(b) hydrogen ﬂuoride (HF)
(c) potassium chloride (KCl)
4
I
Explain each of the following observations.
(a) Metals expand when heated, yet contract in cold weather.
(b) Gases have no ﬁxed volume.
5
6
7
8
(c) A certain amount of moles of water occupies much more space as a
gas than as a liquid.
C
How does the degree of disorder of a gas compare to that of a liquid
or a solid? Explain your answer.
K/U
Describe the motion of a gas particle.
K/U
What effect does heating have on the particles of a liquid?
(a)
C
Draw ﬁve boxes in your notebook. Inside them, illustrate the
motion of gas particles according to the kinetic molecular theory.
(b) Draw another ﬁve boxes underneath the ﬁve boxes in (a).
Illustrate how you think the molecules of a real gas might move
in comparison.
Chapter 11  The Behaviour of Gases • MHR 423
11.2
Gas Pressure and Volume
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
perform experiments to
determine the quantitative
and graphical relationships
between pressure and
volume in an ideal gas
solve problems using
Boyle’s law
review your understanding
of the following terms and
concepts: newton, pascal,
kilopascal, pressure, volume
interconvert units of
pressure
communicate your under-
standing of the following
terms: closed system,
pressure, pascal, kilopascals,
mm Hg, torr, atmospheres,
standard atmospheric
pressure, Boyle’s law
The earliest use of pressure in English referred to a burden or worry
troubling a person’s mind. Scientists found this a useful mental model
to picture what happens when force is applied to a speciﬁc area. They
adopted the word pressure to describe any application of force over
an area.
Throughout the rest of this chapter, you will discover how gases
behave when they are under pressure in a closed system. A closed system
is one with a constant amount of moles of a substance. It is not open to
the atmosphere. Gases in closed systems, from CO2 in ﬁre extinguishers
to O2 in oxygen tanks, perform important functions in our lives.
Understanding the behaviour of gases in closed systems is essential to
our safe and effective use of gases.
How is Pressure Calculated?
As you learned in previous studies, pressure is deﬁned in physical terms
as the force exerted on an object per unit of surface area (P = F/A ). One
commonly used SI unit of pressure is the pascal (Pa), equal to 1 N/m2.
More often, pressure is reported in kilopascals (kPa), equal to 1000 Pa.
(You will learn about other units of pressure later in this section.)
Assume a student with a mass of 51.0 kg is sitting on a chair. The
force the student applies to the chair is 500.0 N. If the surface area of
the chair seat is 0.05 m2, the pressure the student exerts is
P = F
A
= 500.0 N
0.05 m2
= 10 000 N/m2 = 10 000 Pa = 10.0 kPa
Figure 11.7 shows how a decrease in surface area can dramatically
increase pressure.
A woman with a mass of 50.0 kg exerts a pressure of about 21 kPa on the
Figure 11.7
ﬂoor as she walks. If another woman with an equal mass is wearing high heels, she
will exert a pressure of about 5000 kPa as her heel hits the ﬂoor. This pressure is approx-
imately 240 times greater than if she were wearing ﬂat shoes!
424 MHR • Unit 4  Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
pressure of
ball casing
atmospheric
pressure
gas pressure
How does a gas exert pressure? In a sense, it
cannot exert measurable pressure in the same way
that a solid or liquid can. The pressure of a gas
is determined by the kinetic motion of its compo-
nent molecules. Suppose hundreds of billions of
gas molecules are in random motion, striking the
entire inner surface of their container. Each colli-
sion exerts a force on the container’s inner surface.
Picture inﬂating a basketball. As you add more
and more air to it, more molecules collide against
the inside wall of the basketball. Each collision
exerts a force on the basketball’s inner surface
area. The collective number of collisions as well
as the strength of the force form the net or overall
gas pressure. Since the molecules move in all
directions, the net pressure exerted will be equal
throughout. (Figure 11.8 illustrates this.)
Atmospheric Pressure
Despite the popular expression, you can’t carry the world on your shoul-
ders! Scientists estimate that the lithosphere, or solid Earth, has a mass of
6.0 × 1024 kg. The hydrosphere, or the portion of Earth covered by water,
has an estimated mass of 1.4 × 1021 kg.
This diagram
Figure 11.8
shows gas particles exerting
pressure as they bounce off the
inner surface of a basketball
The column of air above one square metre (1 m2) at sea level and 0˚C
Figure 11.9
exerts a pressure of 101 325 Pa (1 Pa = 1 N/m2). This is equivalent to a mass of about
10000 kg over an area of 1 m2!
You do constantly experience the pressure exerted by Earth’s
atmosphere. Scientists estimate that the atmosphere has a mass of
5.1 × 1018 kg. Thus air molecules, which have mass, are being pulled
down by gravity and are exerting pressure on all objects on Earth.
Figure 11.9 shows how much pressure is exerted by the atmosphere
over an area of 1 m2.
C O U R S E
C H A L L E N G E
What are the main factors
determining atmospheric
pressure on Earth? In your
Chemistry Course Challenge,
you will consider the atmos-
phere on a newly discovered
planet. Why might the
atmospheric pressure on
another planet be different?
Chapter 11  The Behaviour of Gases • MHR 425
Early Studies of Atmospheric Pressure
In the early seventeenth century, the Italian scientist Galileo Galilei
(1564–1642) developed a suction pump. It used air to lift water up to the
surface from about 10 m underground. When drawn from greater depths,
the column of water collapsed before it reached ground level. Galileo
concluded that the water could not be pumped higher because it had
reached the “limit of vacuum.” Pumping from any depth beyond 10 m
required a greater pressure from the suction pump than was provided
by the atmosphere. However, Galileo did not know exactly how water
was being moved up the tube.
From 1641 to 1642, Evangelista Torricelli (1608–1647) served as
Galileo’s secretary. He continued Galileo’s experiments and concluded
that the weight of air was pushing down on the rest of the water. The
weight of the air pushed water up the column. This was a logical conclu-
sion since gas molecules, like all matter on Earth, are pulled down by the
force of gravity.
Torricelli did further calculations involving the weight of the atmos-
phere pressing on the water. He then improved upon the experiment
by using mercury, which has a density 13.6 times greater than water.
He designed the apparatus which we now know as the barometer, shown
in Figure 11.10. Torricelli ﬁlled a glass tube of 1 cm diameter, closed at
one end, with mercury. He then inverted the tube in a dish of mercury.
Some of the mercury ran out of the tube. But about 760 mm of mercury
remained in the tube. This is about 13.6 times less than the height of
water that Galileo could pump. It is the air pushing on the mercury in the
dish that keeps this 760 mm of mercury in the tube.
Changes in Atmospheric Pressure
At ﬁrst, Torricelli considered his experiment a failure. The height of the
mercury column did not remain constant at 760 mm, but changed slightly
as the weather and air temperature changed. As you learned in Grade 10,
these small changes in the height of the mercury column provide us with
valuable information. We can predict the weather, in part, by looking at
changes in atmospheric pressure. For example, if the atmospheric pres-
sure decreases suddenly, a storm may be on the way.
Atmospheric pressure affects us in other ways, too. People who live at
high elevations, such as in the Rocky Mountains, have less mass of air
above them. At lower atmospheric pressure, the boiling point of water
decreases. Because the water boils at a lower temperature, it takes longer
to cook food in boiling water on a mountain than at sea level.
The following ExpressLab demonstrates atmospheric pressure in a
dramatic way, showing you ﬁrsthand the tremendous pressure that the air
around us can exert.
Using the Internet or another
source, ﬁnd the average
atmospheric pressure at the
top of Mount Everest. If it
takes four minutes to boil a
soft-boiled egg at sea level,
how long would it take to boil
an egg at the top of Mount
Everest?
vacuum
glass
tube
760 mmHg
air pressure
pool of mercury
Figure 11.10
Torricelli’s barometer
426 MHR • Unit 4  Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
ExpressLab
Observing Atmospheric Pressure in Action
In this ExpressLab, you will see just how powerful
atmospheric pressure can be.
2. Heat the can on the hot plate until steam
begins rising from the opening of the can.
Materials
empty, clean soft drink can
hot plate
beaker tongs
large beaker of ice water
10 mL graduated cylinder
5 mL of water
Safety Precautions
Use safety goggles during this activity. Handle
the heated can carefully using the beaker tongs.
Procedure
1. Pour 5 mL of water into the soft drink can.
& Techniques
Tools
High Pressure Injectors
When gas molecules under high pressure are
allowed to escape and expand, they release
kinetic energy. This energy has been harnessed to
beneﬁt human health by powering high-pressure
injectors, better known as jet injectors.
Jet injectors are hypodermic syringes that
use high-pressure gas instead of a needle to
inject vaccines under a patient’s skin. Dr. Robert
Higson (1913–1996) developed the “Hypospray”
in the 1940s. This device used spring pressure
against a plunger to force a vaccine through a
tiny nozzle at 1000 km/h. The pressure was
3. Using the beaker tongs, quickly invert the can
into the large beaker of ice water so that the
opening of the can is just under the surface of
the water. Observe carefully.
Analysis
1. What happened to the air and water molecules
inside the can when it was heated?
2. Explain what happened to the can when it was
placed in the ice water.
Extension
3. Calculate the surface area of the outside of
the can exposed to the atmosphere. Assuming
an atmospheric pressure of 100.0 kPa, how
much force was applied to the can by the
atmosphere?
enough to drive the vaccine into the tissue of a
patient’s arm without breaking the skin.
Today jet injectors use a tank of compressed
gas and an automatic vaccine dispenser that
works through a pistol-like injector. When
triggered, the new device releases a measured
dose of vaccine into a sterile chamber and a
small volume of gas through a hose. As the
compressed gas expands, it forces the vaccine
at high velocity through the injector’s nozzle.
The process is fast and simple, ideal for perform-
ing mass vaccinations. It also eliminates the
problems of disposing of used syringes. Also,
it protects medical personnel from infection
through accidental needle pricks.
In 1958, Higson led a team that inoculated
about 90 000 people in Asia and Africa against
polio, typhoid, and cholera using the Hypospray.
In 1965, the United Nation’s World Health
Organization used the jet injector. The organiza-
tion freeze-dried vaccines for its successful
worldwide smallpox eradication program. For its
key role in eliminating smallpox from the list of
human diseases, the jet injector earned a new
name—the “Peace Pistol.”
Chapter 11  The Behaviour of Gases • MHR 427
Math
LINK
You may encounter tire pres-
sure gauges that are calibrat-
ed in pounds per square inch
(psi). The conversion factor
between kPa and psi is
101.3 kPa = 14.7 psi. To con-
vert a tire pressure of 28.0 psi:
= 101.3 kPa
14.7 psi
x = 28.0 psi
x KPa
28.0 psi
× 101.3 kPa
14.7 psi
= 193 kPa
What would a tire pressure
of 27.3 psi be in kPa? What
would the pressure of
198.7 kPa be in psi?
Units of Pressure
For many years, atmospheric pressure was measured in millimetres of
mercury (mm Hg). In the British Commonwealth and the United States,
inches of mercury were used. Standard atmospheric pressure, the
pressure of the atmosphere at sea level and 0˚C, is 760 mm Hg. More
recently, in honour of the work of Torricelli, standard atmospheric
pressure has been deﬁned as 760 torr. 1 torr represents a column of
mercury 1 mm in height at 0˚C. Another common unit for measuring
pressure is atmospheres (atm), where 1 atm is equivalent to 760 torr.
While mm Hg, torr, and atm are still used to measure pressure, especially
in technological and medical applications, the SI units are pascals (Pa)
or kilopascals (kPa).
In other words, standard atmospheric pressure at 0˚C is equivalent to:
760 mm Hg = 760 torr = 1 atm = 101.3 kPa
Using this relationship, we can convert from one unit to another. For
example, a pressure of 100.0 kPa is equivalent to
100.0 kPa × 760.0 torr
101.3 kPa
= 750.2 torr
The Relationship Between Pressure and Volume
Figure 11.11 shows a meteorologist preparing to release a weather balloon
partially ﬁlled with helium gas. As the balloon rises, atmospheric pressure
decreases. The volume of the balloon increases.
Weather balloons are partially inﬂated with helium. They carry
Figure 11.11
specialised instruments to measure varying atmospheric conditions such as pressure,
temperature, and humidity.
Since the helium atoms inside the balloon move randomly in all
directions, they constantly bombard all the area inside the walls of the
balloon, exerting a pressure. With decreasing atmospheric pressure, there
are fewer air molecules to collide with the outside of the balloon. As the
pressure outside the balloon becomes less than that inside the balloon,
the balloon expands. Given an expandable container, such as a balloon,
the volume occupied by the gas will increase when external pressure
decreases. As external pressure increases, gas molecules are forced closer
together. The volume of gas then decreases.
428 MHR • Unit 4  Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
Electronic Learning Partner
Go to the Chemistry 11
Electronic Learning Partner for
a demonsration of Boyle’s law.
When we refer to the volume of a gas, we are in fact talking about the
volume of the container. The deﬁnition of the volume of a gas is the space
available for gas molecules to move around in. The kinetic molecular the-
ory of gases assumes that the volume of each gas molecule is essentially
zero. Thus, the amount of space for them to move around in is the volume
of the container. For all gases,Vgas = the volume of the container holding
the gas. (Do not confuse this with the molar volume of gases. You will
learn about molar volume in Chapter 12.)
Think about how the relationship between pressure and area for
solids would apply if you were testing a gas in a three-dimensional
container. You know that according to the kinetic molecular theory, gas
molecules exert pressure over the entire inside surface of their container.
If the volume of the container is halved, what would happen to the
pressure of the gas inside the container?
Robert Boyle (1627–1691) was an Irish scientist with an interest in
chemistry. He investigated the relationship between pressure and volume
of gases at constant temperatures. By making careful measurements of the
volume of a trapped gas, he was able to describe what happened when
the pressure exerted on the gas was increased. Figure 11.12 shows Boyle’s
experiment. Boyle measured the length of the column of trapped air
compared to the length of the column of mercury. Since the length of the
mercury column is directly related to its volume, Boyle was able to
deduce the relationship between pressure and volume.
gas
h
h
Hg
A
B
C
When liquid mercury is added to the open tube, the pressure caused
Figure 11.12
by the weight of mercury on the trapped gas increases. The volume of the trapped gas
(b and c) decreases.
Since mercury is a poisonous element, you will use a different method in
Investigation 11-A to examine the relationship between the pressure and
the volume of a gas.
Chapter 11  The Behaviour of Gases • MHR 429
S K I L L   F O C U S
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
Identifying variables
The Relationship Between the
Pressure and the Volume of a Gas
Boyle measured the variance in length of a
column of trapped air. Since length is directly
proportional to volume in a column with a regu-
lar diameter, this gave him an indirect measure
of changes in volume of the air with increased
pressure. In this activity, air is trapped inside
a sealed plastic pipette. You can measure the
volume of the trapped gas in terms of the length
of the column of air, the way that Boyle did more
than three hundred years ago. You will measure
the applied pressure in terms of the number of
turns of a clamp rather than in kPa.
Question
What is the relationship between the pressure
and volume of a ﬁxed amount of gas at a
constant temperature?
Procedure
1. Squeezing the bulb, draw enough coloured
water into a pipette so that the water ﬁlls the
bulb and extends about 2 to 3 cm down the
stem. The rest of the stem should be ﬁlled
with air.
2. Using a ﬂame from a Bunsen burner, carefully
seal the end of the pipette completely. Allow
the pipette to cool for at least three minutes
before completing the rest of the procedure.
3. Copy out the data table into your notes.
P
(no. of turns)
V (mm)
1 /V (mm)
P × V
(turns · mm)
0
1
Materials
thin stem plastic pipette with bulb
small C-clamp
metric ruler (with mm)
match or Bunsen burner
craft stick
coloured water
Safety Precautions
• Be very careful when sealing the end of the
plastic pipette with a ﬂame. The plastic will
melt and may begin to burn. Hot, molten
plastic can burn your skin.
• Do not inhale any of the fumes from the
plastic.
• Before lighting the Bunsen burner, check that
there are no ﬂammable solvents nearby.
4. Break a craft stick in two. Place one half of
the stick on either side of the pipette bulb.
Tighten a small C-clamp around the bulb of
the pipette so that the clamp just holds the
bulb snugly (see the diagram).
5. Using a ruler, measure the length of trapped
gas (the “volume”) in millimetres. Record this
in your data table.
6. Increase the “pressure” on the bulb by turning
the handle of the clamp one half or one
complete turn, depending on the size of your
clamp. Record the “volume” of the trapped
gas in your data table.
7. Repeat step 6 until you have made at least ﬁve
complete turns.
8. Complete the data table. Calculate an average
value for the P × V column.
9. Plot a graph of P (y-axis) versus V (x-axis).
10. Plot a graph of P (y-axis) versus 1/V (x-axis).
430 MHR • Unit 4  Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
Analysis
1. What relationship exists between volume and
pressure, based on the data collected and the
graphs produced?
2. Express this relationship mathematically. To
help you to do this, look at the mathematical
form of Boyle’s law, located after this
investigation.
3. Calculate the slope of the P vs. 1/V graph.
How does this value compare with the
average P × V value? Of what signiﬁcance
are these two values?
4. What changes in temperature occurred during
the experiment? In the amount of trapped air?
Explain how this may have affected your
results.
Conclusion
In your own words, state the relationship
between pressure and the volume of a gas.
Extension
Using pressure probes and a graphing calculator
or computer interface, investigate the relation-
ship between the pressure and the volume of a
gas. Produce a data table and graphical interpre-
tation of these results.
plastic pipette
craft sticks
C-clamp
Chapter 11  The Behaviour of Gases • MHR 431
Boyle’s Law
In 1662, Robert Boyle stated that the volume of a given amount of gas, at
a constant temperature, varies inversely with the applied pressure. In
other words, as external pressure on a gas increases, the volume of the gas
decreases by the same factor. This statement is known as Boyle’s law.
Figure 11.13 illustrates Boyle’s law using a bicycle pump.
1.
2.
3.
Figure 11.13
Pext
Pgas
d1
Pgas = Pext
P  increases,
ext
T and n fixed
Pext
d2
Pgas
Higher Pext
causes lower V,
which causes
more collisions
until  Pgas = Pext
1. With the piston pulled all
the way out, the air pressure
inside a bicycle pump equals
the air pressure outside.
2. If the piston is pushed
halfway down the cylinder,
the volume of the cylinder
is decreased to one half its
original value. The pressure
doubles.
3. If the piston compresses the
air to one fourth its original
value, the pressure of the air
inside the pump will be four
times higher than its original
value.
Boyle found that this relationship
held true for all gases as long as the
temperature remained unchanged.
As external pressure on a gas
increases, the volume of the gas
decreases. The gas molecules are
forced closer together. However, if
the volume of a gas decreases, then
the gas molecules have to travel a
shorter distance before they strike
the container walls, as shown in
Figure 11.14. Since they travel a
shorter distance, gas molecules will
strike the container walls more
often per unit time. This increases
At a given temper-
Figure 11.14
ature, gas molecules travel an
average distance (d1) before they
collide with the container wall.
When the volume is decreased,
the gas molecules travel a shorter
distance (d2) before striking
the wall.
the internal pressure of the gas. (With an increased volume, there are
fewer collisions per unit time and a lower gas pressure is exerted.)
In other words, as the pressure of a closed system increases, its vol-
ume decreases. If the pressure is decreased by half, the volume doubles.
We can write this relationship mathematically by using the proportion-
ality symbol, α. V α 1/P means that volume is inversely proportional to
the pressure.
Mathematically, the proportionality sign (α) can be removed by
introducing a proportionality constant (k).
V α 1
P
V = 1
P
× k
or
PV = k
432 MHR • Unit 4  Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
In Investigation 11-A, when you plotted a graph of P versus 1/V, you
obtained a straight line. The slope of this line gives the value of the
proportionality constant, k. If the pressure is tripled, the volume will
decrease to one third of its original volume, such that P × V = k . The
value of k differs depending on the gas sample and the temperature.
Remember, this mathematical relationship only applies if the temperature
remains constant. A graph of P versus 1/V is shown in Figure 11.15.
For the gas sample at its initial conditions (i )
PiVi = k
If the gas sample is then subjected to a change in pressure,
at its ﬁnal conditions (f)
PfVf = k
Since the slope of the line (k) is constant, and since initial
and ﬁnal conditions are both equal to k, we can write
PiVi = PfVf
This mathematical relationship is another way of stating Boyle’s law.
C H E M
FA C T
Scientiﬁc discoveries often
happen simultaneously.
Edmé Mariotte, a French
scientist, investigated the
pressure–volume relationship
of gases independently of
Boyle. He did not publish
his work until 1676, fourteen
years after Boyle had. In many
European countries, the math-
ematical relationship between
gas pressure and volume is
known as Mariotte’s Law.
Sample Problem
Boyle’s Law: Calculating Volume
Problem
A sample of helium gas is collected at room temperature in a 4.50 L
balloon at standard atmospheric pressure. The balloon is then
submerged in a tub of water, also at room temperature, such that
the external pressure is increased to 110.2 kPa. What will the ﬁnal
volume of the balloon become?
What Is Required?
You need to ﬁnd the volume of the balloon after the pressure on the
balloon has been increased. (Vf = ?)
What Is Given?
• You know the initial pressure and volume, and the ﬁnal pressure.
Initial pressure
Initial volume
Final pressure
(Pi) = 101.3 kPa
(Vi) = 4.50 L
(Pf) = 110.2 kPa
• You know that the temperature does not change.
Plan Your Strategy
Algebraic method
• Since temperature is constant and pressure and volume have
been given, you will need to use the Boyle’s law formula.
• You can substitute numbers and units for the variables in the
formula to solve for the unknown (Vf).
Final conditions
P
Constant
slope
Initial conditions
1
V
If a sample of gas
Figure 11.15
at initial conditions has a change
of pressure applied to it, its
volume decreases proportionally,
such that in its ﬁnal state,
P × V = k.
PROBLEM TIP
In this Sample Problem, you
will see two different methods
of solving the problem: the
algebraic method and the ratio
method. Choose the method
you prefer to solve this type
of problem.
Continued ...
Chapter 11  The Behaviour of Gases • MHR 433
Technology
LINK
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 433
In 1998, a weather balloon
carrying instruments to meas-
ure the ozone layer drifted
off course. It veered into
transatlantic air routes, where
it posed a serious danger.
By this time, the balloon had
expanded in size to about the
same volume as Toronto’s Sky
Dome. Two Canadian Air Force
CF-18 jets directed over 1000
rounds of cannon ﬁre at it, but
could not bring the balloon
down. It ﬁnally landed on an
island off the coast of Finland.
University of Toronto physicists
have developed a new mecha-
nism to prevent such an event
from recurring. When an
experiment has been complet-
ed, a parachute will return the
scientiﬁc instruments to the
ground. As the instruments fall,
they will pull panels from the
side of the balloon, causing it
to plummet rapidly.
Can you think of other ways
to solve the problem that faced
the University of Toronto scien-
tists? Create a set of blueprints
for another technological
solution, using CAD software
if you have access to it.
Ratio method
• The pressure on the balloon increases. When this happens, if
temperature remains the same, you know according to Boyle’s
law that the volume of the balloon will decrease.
• To ﬁnd the ﬁnal volume, you can multiply the initial volume
of the balloon by a ratio of the two pressures that is less than
one (i.e.
101.3 kPa
110.2 kPa
).
Act on Your Strategy
Algebraic method
PiVi = PfVf
(101.3 kPa)(4.50 L) = (110.2 kPa)(Vf)
To isolate Vf, you need to divide both sides of the equation
by 110.2 kPa.
(101.3 kPa)(4.50 L)
(110.2 kPa)
(101.3 kPa)(4.50 L)
(110.2 kPa)
= (110.2 kPa)(Vf)
(110.2 kPa)
= (Vf)
Vf = 4.137 L
Ratio method
Vf = 4.50 L × pressure ratio
= 4.50 L × 101.3 kPa
110.2 kPa
= 4.137 L
Since the least number of signiﬁcant digits in the question is three,
the answer is:
Vf = 4.14 L
Check Your Solution
• The units for the answer are in litres.
• When units cancel out, L remains.
• The volume of the balloon has decreased due to the increase
in pressure.
Practice Problems
1. A 50.0 cm3 sample of nitrogen gas is collected at 101.3 kPa. If
the volume is reduced to 5.0 cm3, and the temperature remains
constant, what will the ﬁnal pressure of the nitrogen be?
Continued ...
434 MHR • Unit 4  Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
C H E M
FA C T
Now that you’ve ﬁnished
practising Boyle’s law prob-
lems, take a deep breath and
relax. You have just illustrated
Boyle’s law! When you inhale,
muscles in your torso expand
your rib cage. The volume of
your lungs increases. Since
the pressure inside your
lungs is decreased with the
expansion in volume, outside
air under higher pressure
rushes in.
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 434
2. A weather balloon has a volume of 1000 L at a pressure of
740.0 torr. The balloon rises to a height of 1000 m where the
atmospheric pressure is measured as 450.0 torr. Assuming there
is no change in temperature, what is the ﬁnal volume of the
weather balloon?
3. A 45.0 cm3 sample of nitrogen gas is collected at 1.0 atm. The
nitrogen is compressed to a pressure of 10.0 atm. What is the
ﬁnal volume of the nitrogen if the temperature remains constant?
4. A 45.6 mL sample of gas at 490 torr is compressed to a certain
volume at 3 atm. What is the new volume, in litres?
Section Wrap-up
In this section, you learned about the relationship between pressure
and volume of a gas. This relationship is stated in Boyle’s law. With
knowledge of gas properties and behaviours, we are able to devise and
improve upon technologies used everyday. You will learn about some of
these important technologies later in this chapter. In the meantime, the
next section examines how gases respond to changes in yet another
variable: temperature.
Section Review
1
C
Using the relationship 760 mm Hg = 760 torr = 1 atm = 101.3 kPa,
convert each of the following units:
(a) 2.03 atm to kPa
(b) 85.2 kPa to atm
(c) 1.50 atm to torr
(d) 600 torr to kPa
2
3
4
5
Use the kinetic molecular theory. Explain why the air pressure
K/U
inside a capped syringe increases if the volume decreases from 15 cm3
to 10 cm3.
K/U
Explain, using the kinetic molecular theory, why pressure is
exerted by gases in all directions.
I
A 1.00 L helium balloon is ﬂoating in the air on a day when the
atmospheric pressure is 102.5 kPa and the temperature is 20.0˚C.
Suddenly, clouds appear and the pressure rapidly drops to 98.6 kPa at
a temperature of 20.0˚C. What is the new volume of the balloon?
I
0.750 L of oxygen gas is trapped at 101.3 kPa in a cylinder with a
moveable piston. The piston is moved and the gas is compressed to a
volume of 0.500 L. What is the ﬁnal pressure applied to the oxygen gas
if the temperature remains unchanged?
6
MC
A student produces 38.3 mL of oxygen gas in a burette. The next
day, there are 40.2 mL of gas in the burette at a pressure of 103 kPa.
What was the pressure on the previous day, in torr? What might be
happening to the weather in the student’s neighbourhood?
Chapter 11  The Behaviour of Gases • MHR 435
11.3
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
perform laboratory experi-
ments investigating the
effects of temperature
changes on the volume of
gases
solve problems using
Charles’ law and
Gay-Lussac’s law
convert units between
the Celsius and Kelvin
temperature scales
communicate your under-
standing of the following
terms: Kelvin scale,
absolute zero, Charles’ law,
Gay-Lussac’s law, pressure-
relief valve, fusible plugs
As you perform Investigation
11-B, keep in mind the ratio
of 1/273 discovered by Charles.
Can you recall from your
previous studies a special sig-
niﬁcance for the number 273?
Gases and Temperature Changes
As you learned in Section 11.1, the average kinetic energy of gas mole-
cules is directly related to the temperature. The greater the temperature,
the greater the average motion of the molecules and the greater their
average kinetic energy. In other words, the temperature of a substance is
deﬁned as the measure of the average kinetic energy of the molecules in
that substance.
When substances are cooled, they lose kinetic energy. How does this
affect their volume? Remember, for an ideal gas, we can think of its
particles as having mass but no volume. When you perform Investigation
11-B on page 438, imagine air behaving as an ideal gas. How do you think
air, in an expandable container will react to temperature changes?
Temperature and Volume
Sometimes, scientiﬁc discoveries are made well before any technological
application of them can be envisioned. At other times, the desire to
develop new technologies leads to experiments from which discoveries
are made.
Jacques Charles (1746–1823), a French scientist, was the ﬁrst to ﬁll a
balloon with hydrogen. He was also interested in hot-air balloons, which
were being developed in France at the time. Charles investigated the
expansion rates of nitrogen, oxygen, hydrogen, and carbon dioxide. He
found that these gases all expanded by the same ratio. For each degree
Celsius increase in temperature, all of these gases would expand by a
certain fraction. This fraction was 1/273rd of their volume at 0˚C. For each
degree Celsius decrease in temperature, their volume would decrease by
the same fraction. Thus, if a gas at 0˚C were to be heated to 273˚C, its
volume would double. This held true when the pressure and the amount
of gas remained constant. Figure 11.16 shows the expansion of the volume
of gas in a hot-air balloon as the air inside the balloon is heated.
A
B
C
Figure 11.16
Since hot air is less dense than cooler air, the balloon rises.
These photographs show the gradual expansion of a hot air balloon.
436 MHR • Unit 4  Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
Chemistry Bulletin
Gas Temperature and Cryogenics
Some people wish to be frozen when they die,
trusting that future technologies will be able to
revive them. This untested process is called
cryonics. It was ﬁrst suggested by Robert C.W.
Ettinger in 1962. Ettinger has since set up his
own Cryonics Institute in Michigan, where
people can have their bodies frozen and stored.
We still cannot freeze and re-animate higher
animals, such as people. Cryogenic freezing,
however, can suspend the life of tissues and
organs used for transplants. Cryogenics has
also made many other technologies possible.
It has proven that science and science ﬁction
are often closer than we think!
The term cryogenics can be applied to all
temperatures below the normal boiling point
of oxygen, or –183˚C.
When substances encounter temperatures
this low, they often behave strangely. Liquid
helium, for example, becomes a “superﬂuid”
at temperatures below −270.97˚C. The principle
of “superconductivity” is just as interesting
Cryogenically cooled rings made out of metals
such as lead and aluminum become “supercon-
ductors.” They can keep currents travelling in
circles for hours even after scientists have
removed the original source of electricity.
Scientists have made use of the strange
things that happen to matter at low tempera-
tures. Superconductors have been used to
make huge electromagnets, like the one at the
Argonne National Laboratory near Chicago.
Argonne’s electromagnet can produce a
magnetic ﬁeld 134 000 times as strong as
Earth’s. It operates on relatively little power
because of its superconducting capabilities.
Such magnets are used in nuclear power
research to ﬁnd new nuclear particles. And
while cryogenics has advanced nuclear
science, it also helps scientists to study the
effects of nuclear radiation. Scientists study
cryogenically frozen atoms suspended in an
irradiated state to understand how nuclear
radiation can harm human health.
Cryogenically cooled magnets are used in MRI
technology.
Cryogenics produces large-scale amounts of
nitrogen and oxygen. Scuba divers and astro-
nauts use compressed oxygen tanks that
provide a six to eight hour supply of oxygen.
Rocket engines use liquid oxygen as fuel.
We use liquid nitrogen to make ammonia for
fertilizers, to keep frozen foods cold during
transport, and to fast-freeze these foods.
The list of applications of cryogenics is
long and varied, and research continues.
Maybe Ettinger is right and one day all of the
occupants of the Cryonics Institute will live
again!
Making Connections
1. What do you think might be some possible
future applications of cryogenics?
2. Scientists use Dewar Flasks to contain
cryogenic ﬂuids. How do these ﬂasks work?
Do some research to ﬁnd out.
Chapter 11  The Behaviour of Gases • MHR 437
S K I L L   F O C U S
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
Identifying variables
The Relationship Between
Temperature and Volume of a Gas
As you learned in Investigation 11-A, the length
of a column of trapped air is directly proportion-
al to its volume. In this investigation, you will
see the effect of temperature changes on the
volume of a gas, also measured in terms of the
length of a column of trapped air.
Question
What is the relationship between the temperature
and volume of a ﬁxed amount of gas at a
constant external pressure?
Materials
thin stem plastic pipette
metric ruler (with mm)
Celsius thermometer
400 mL beaker
ice
hot plate
match or Bunsen burner
2 elastics
scissors
coloured water
tap water
Safety Precautions
• Be very careful when sealing the end of the
plastic pipette with a ﬂame. The plastic will
melt and may begin to burn. Hot, molten
plastic can burn your skin.
• Do not inhale any of the fumes from the
plastic.
• Before lighting the Bunsen burner, check that
there are no ﬂammable solvents nearby.
Procedure
1. Squeezing the pipette bulb, draw enough
water into the pipette to form a small plug.
The rest of the pipette should contain air.
438 MHR • Unit 4  Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
2. Using a ﬂame from a match or Bunsen burner,
carefully seal the open end of the pipette
completely. Allow the pipette to cool for at
least 3 min before carrying on with the rest of
the procedure.
3. Using scissors, cut off the tip of the bulb of
the pipette.
4. Carefully attach the pipette to the ruler, using
a rubber band, so that the bottom of the tube
is even with the 1.0 cm mark of the ruler.
5. Fill a 400 mL beaker about two thirds full of
tap water and add 3 or 4 ice cubes. Place the
thermometer in the water. Then put the ruler
with attached pipette into the water. Allow
the ruler and pipette to sit for 5 min.
top of pipette cut open
elastic band
plug of coloured water
plastic pipette
metric ruler (with mm)
6. Copy the data table into your notebook. Your
table should have at least eight rows for data.
Temp. (˚C)
V (length of trapped air in mm)
7. After 5 min, measure the length (or “volume”)
of the trapped gas in mm. Remember that the
bottom of the pipette stem is set at the 1.0 cm
mark. Record these values in your data table.
8. Place the beaker on the hot plate and slowly
heat the water in the beaker. Measure the
length (“V”) and temperature of the trapped
gas at every 10˚C to 15˚C. Measure the length
and temperature to a maximum of 60˚C.
9. Clean the apparatus and dispose of the pipette
as directed.
10. Complete the data table. Find the average
of the V/T column.
11. Plot a graph of V (mm) versus T. The
horizontal axis (temperature) must extend
from −300˚C to 100˚C.
12. Draw a line of best ﬁt. Extrapolate this line to
the x-intercept.
Analysis
1. What is the independent variable in this
investigation? What is the dependent
variable?
2. What relationship did you notice between
temperature and volume?
3. When Jacques Charles did an activity similar
to this one, he obtained an x-intercept of
−273˚C. What is signiﬁcant about this value?
4. If the value obtained by Charles was correct,
what is the percentage error in your
x-intercept?
Conclusion
5. In your own words, state the qualitative rela-
tionship that exists between the temperature
and volume of a ﬁxed amount of gas at con-
stant pressure.
Chapter 11  The Behaviour of Gases • MHR 439
3.0
2.0
1.0
)
L
(
e
m
u
o
V
l
−273
0
−200 −100
173
73
0
273
100
373
200
473
300
573
400
673
500 (˚C)
773
(K)
Temperature
The Kelvin Scale and Absolute Zero
Charles found that, regardless of the gas tested,
the x-intercept on a graph would always be
−273˚C. In 1848, Lord Kelvin (1824–1907), a
Scottish scientist, realised the signiﬁcance of
this ﬁnding. He reasoned that at −273˚C, molec-
ular motion would cease. At this temperature,
kinetic energy would be zero. The volume of
a gas would, hypothetically, also be zero.
Of course, real gas molecules do have
volume. Also, at low temperatures all gases
will condense and change state. Still, Kelvin
used this reasoning as the basis for a new tem-
perature scale, the Kelvin scale. The starting
point for the scale, 0 K, is called absolute zero.
Figure 11.17 shows how absolute zero can be
Absolute zero for
Figure 11.17
an ideal gas is −273.15˚C or 0 K,
the point at which all molecular
motion theoretically ceases.
As temperature
Figure 11.18
increases, particles move more
rapidly, striking the outside of the
thermometer with greater force
and frequency. The kinetic energy
of the particles is transferred to
the particles inside the tube of
the thermometer. The volume of
the liquid inside the tube (usually
mercury or coloured alcohol)
expands.
hypothesized, based on data from experiments. The modern accepted
value for 0 K, derived with equipment more sophisticated than that avail-
able to Charles, is −273.15˚C. Each unit in the Kelvin scale is exactly the
same as a unit in the Celsius scale.
There are no degree signs used in the Kelvin scale. More importantly,
there are no negative values. What would happen if you tried to calculate
a temperature twice as warm as −5˚C? Mathematically, the answer would
be −10˚C, but this is a colder temperature. When mathematical manipula-
tions are involved in studying gas behaviour, you need to convert degree
Celsius temperatures into kelvins. This is done using the relationship
TK = ˚C + 273.15 or ˚C + 273
Most often, you will round off and use 273 as the conversion factor
relating K and ˚C.
Charles’ Law
Although Charles discovered that the volume of a ﬁxed amount of gas
at constant pressure was proportional to its temperature, he never pub-
lished this ﬁnding. In 1802, Joseph Louis Gay-Lussac (1778–1850), a
French scientist, made reference to Charles’ work in a published paper.
The relationship between temperature and volume has since become
known as Charles’ law. Charles’ law states that the volume of a ﬁxed
mass of gas is proportional to its temperature when the pressure is kept
constant.
As you can see from Figure 11.19 on page 442, the volume of a gas
increases or decreases by a ﬁxed increment when subjected to a change in
temperature. The algebraic statement of Charles’ law depends on using
absolute, or Kelvin, temperatures. This law is stated as V α T, where T
is measured in kelvins. (Figure 11.18 uses Charles’ law to explain how a
thermometer works.)
Introducing a proportionality constant (k1), this relationship can be
restated as
V = k1T
or
V
T
= k1
This relationship only applies if pressure is kept constant and tempera-
ture is given in kelvins. If a sample of gas is collected at initial conditions
(i), this relationship can be rewritten as
= k1
Vi
Ti
440 MHR • Unit 4  Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
Suppose the gas sample is subjected to a change in temperature. Under
the ﬁnal conditions (f ), there will be a volume change such that
Vf
Tf
= k1
Since both initial and ﬁnal conditions are equal to the proportionality
constant, Charles’ law can be written as
= Vf
Tf
Vi
Ti
Thus, Charles’ law can be restated as: the volume of a ﬁxed mass of gas
at constant pressure is directly proportional to its Kelvin temperature.
In the next ThoughtLab, you will convert your temperature ﬁndings from
Investigation 11-B into kelvins and see why you must use Kelvin tempera-
ture when performing calculations with gases.
Electronic Learning Partner
Go to the Chemistry 11
Electronic Learning Partner
for a demonstration of
Charles’ law.
ThoughtLab
Charles’ Law and Kelvin Temperature
As you have learned, when making calculations
involving temperature in gas samples, Kelvin
temperatures must be used. You will see why for
yourself in this ThoughtLab.
Materials
data table from Investigation 11-B
graph paper
Procedure
1. Make a new data table like the one below. You
should include at least eight rows for data.
Temp (˚C)
Temp (K)
V (mm)
V (mm)
T (˚C)
V (mm)
T (K)
2. How do the values of V/T (K) compare to the
values of V/T (˚C) in the data table? Explain the
signiﬁcance of these two sets of data.
3. What mathematical relationship seems to
exist between volume and temperature when
temperature is recorded in ˚C? In kelvins?
Extension
4. Make a new data table like the one below.
Include at least eight rows for data.
At 100 kPa
At 163 kPa
At 346 kPa
T (K)
V (mm)
T (K)
V (mm)
T (K)
V (mm)
2. Fill in columns 1, 3, and 4 with your data from
Investigation 11-B.
3. Convert temperature data in column 1 from
˚C to kelvins. Enter the new values in columns
2 and 5.
4. Plot a graph of V (mm) versus T (K). The
horizontal axis (T) must extend from 0 K to
400 K.
5. Draw a line of best ﬁt. Extrapolate this line
to the x-intercept.
Analysis
1. What did you notice about the values of
V/T (K) in the data table?
In columns 1 and 2, enter your data from
columns 2 and 3 of the data table you made
above. Carry the data from column 1 into
columns 3 and 5.
5. Using the Boyle’s law formula (PiVi = Pf Vf at
constant T and n), calculate the “volume” of
the gas sample at 163 kPa and at 346 kPa.
6. Plot a graph of your new data table. Use a
different colour for each line. Extrapolate each
line to the x-intercept.
7. Of what signiﬁcance are the results obtained
from this graph?
Chapter 11  The Behaviour of Gases • MHR 441
C H E M
FA C T
As helium gas is cooled below
−268.95˚C, it forms a liquid. At
−270.97˚C, helium still looks
like a liquid, but a liquid with
unusual properties. Suddenly,
liquid density drops and this
“liquid” gains the ability to
move through very small holes
that helium gas cannot pass
through. It ﬂows up the walls
of its container defying gravity,
and has zero viscosity. Below
−270.97˚C, helium becomes
a superﬂuid, the only one
discovered so far. Helium
never changes to a solid.
Patm
Pgas
T1
T increases
fixed n
Patm
atm
Pgas
T2
V increases
P
Pgas
T2
Pgas = Patm
Higher T increases
collision frequency:
Patm
Pgas
>
V increases until
Pgas = Patm
As a gas is heated from Ti to Tf, the molecules move faster and collide
Figure 11.19
with the container walls more frequently, increasing the pressure applied by the gas
(Pgas). This added pressure increases the volume of the container until the pressure
exerted by the gas is equal to the pressure exerted by the atmosphere.
Sample Problem
Charles’ Law: Calculating Volume
Problem
Using a glass syringe, a scientist draws exactly 25.5 cm3 of dry
oxygen at 20.0˚C from a metal cylinder. She needs to heat the oxygen
for an experiment, so she places the syringe in an oven at 65.0˚C and
leaves it there for 30 min. Assuming the atmospheric pressure
remains the same, what volume will the oxygen occupy?
What Is Required?
You need to ﬁnd the volume of the oxygen in the syringe after it has
been heated for 30 min. (Vf = ?)
What Is Given?
• You know the initial volume and temperature.
Initial volume
Initial temperature
(Vi ) = 25.5 cm3
(Ti ) = 20.0˚C
• You know the ﬁnal temperature.
Final temperature
(Tf ) = 65.0˚C
• You know that the pressure does not change.
Continued ...
442 MHR • Unit 4  Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
PROBLEM TIP
In these Sample Problems, you
will see two different methods
of solving the problem: the
algebraic method and the ratio
method. Choose the method
you prefer to solve this type
of problem.
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 442
Plan Your Strategy
Algebraic method
• Since the pressure is constant and the temperature of the gas
increases, you will need to use the Charles’ law formula to
ﬁnd the ﬁnal volume of the gas sample.
• Since T is given in ˚C, you will need to convert it to kelvins.
• You can substitute numbers and units for the variables in the
formula to solve for the unknown (Vf).
Ratio method
• Since the pressure is constant and the gas is subjected to an
increase in temperature, you know that, according to Charles’
law, the volume will increase.
• Since T is given in ˚C, you will need to convert it to kelvins.
• To ﬁnd the ﬁnal volume, you can multiply the initial volume
by a ratio of the kelvin temperatures that is greater than one.
Act on Your Strategy
Algebraic method
Ti = (20.0˚C + 273)
= 293 K
= Vf
Vi
Ti
Tf
25.5 cm3
293 K
= Vf
338 K
Tf = (65.0˚C + 273)
= 338 K
To isolate Vf, you need to multiply both sides of the equation
by 338 K.
25.5 cm3
293 K
× 338 K = Vf
338 K
× 338 K
(25.5 cm3)(338 K)
(293 K)
= Vf
Vf = 29.42 cm3
Ratio method
Ti = (20.0˚C + 273)
= 293 K
Vf = Vi × temperature ratio
= 25.5˚C × 338 K
293 K
= 29.42 cm3
Tf = (65.0˚C + 273)
= 338 K
Continued ...
Chapter 11  The Behaviour of Gases • MHR 443
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 443
Since the least number of signiﬁcant digits in the question is three,
the ﬁnal volume will be reported to three signiﬁcant digits.
Vf = 29.4 cm3
Check Your Solution
• The units for the answer are in cubic centimetres.
• When the units cancel out, cm3 remains.
• The volume of the oxygen gas increased due to an increase
in temperature.
Sample Problem
Charles’ Law: Calculating Temperature
Problem
A balloon is ﬁlled with 2.50 L of dry helium at 23.5˚C. The balloon
is placed in a freezer overnight. The next morning, the balloon is
removed and the volume is found to be 2.15 L. What was the temper-
ature (in ˚C) inside the freezer if the pressure remained constant?
What Is Required?
You need to ﬁnd the temperature of the freezer in ˚C. (Tf = ?)
What Is Given?
• You know the initial volume and temperature.
Initial volume
Initial temperature
(Vi) = 2.50 L
(Ti) = 23.5˚C
• You know the ﬁnal volume.
Final volume
(Vf) = 2.15 L
• You know that the pressure does not change.
Plan Your Strategy
Algebraic method
• Since pressure is constant and the volume and temperature
change, you will need to use the Charles’ law formula to ﬁnd
the ﬁnal temperature of the gas sample.
• Since T is given in ˚C, you need to convert it to kelvins.
• You can substitute numbers and units for the variables in the
formula to solve for the unknown (Tf ).
Continued ...
444 MHR • Unit 4  Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 444
Ratio method
• Since pressure remains constant and the volume of the balloon
decreases, you know that according to Charles’ law, the
temperature of the gas must also decrease.
• Since T is given in ˚C, you need to convert it to kelvins.
• To ﬁnd the ﬁnal temperature inside the freezer, you can
multiply the initial temperature by a volume ratio that is less
than one.
Act on Your Strategy
Algebraic method
Ti = (23.5˚C + 273)
= 297 K
= Vf
Tf
Vi
Ti
2.50 L
297 K
= 2.15 L
Tf
To simplify the equation and make it easier to solve, you can
ﬁrst cross-multiply the above equation.
(2.50 L)(Tf) = (296.5 K)(2.15 L)
To isolate Tf , you need to divide both sides of the equation
by 2.50 L.
(2.50 L)(Tf)
(2.50 L)
= (297 K)(2.15 L)
(2.50 L)
Tf = (297 K)(2.15 L)
(2.50 L)
= 255.42 K
Since the question asks for the temperature in ˚C, you need to
convert kelvins to ˚C. To do this, subtract 273 from the answer.
Tf = (255.42 K − 273)
= −17.6˚C
Ratio method
Ti = (23.5˚C + 273)
= 297 K
Tf = 297 K × volume ratio
= 297 K × 2.15 L
2.50 L
= 255.42 K
Since the question asks for the temperature in ˚C, you need to
convert kelvins to ˚C. To do this, subtract 273 from the answer.
Tf = (255.42 K − 273)
= −17.6˚C
Continued ...
Chapter 11  The Behaviour of Gases • MHR 445
Using the formula y = mx + b,
see if you can derive the
Charles’ law formula from the
graph that you produced in
the ThoughtLab on page 441.
For help in deriving equations
from graphs, see Appendix E.
PROBLEM TIP
In question 8, the smallest
number of signiﬁcant digits is
two (17˚C). However, before
doing your calculations, you
must convert this value to
kelvins (290 K). This value now
has three signiﬁcant digits.
Round off your ﬁnal answer to
three signiﬁcant digits.
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 445
Since the least number of signiﬁcant digits in the question is three
signiﬁcant digits, the ﬁnal temperature will be reported to the same
signiﬁcant digits.
Tf = −17.6˚C
Check Your Solution
• The unit for the answer is in kelvins.
• When the units cancel out, kelvins remain.
• Kelvins have been converted to ˚C.
• The temperature of the balloon has decreased, which is reﬂected in
its decrease in volume.
Practice Problems
5. Convert the following temperatures to the Kelvin scale.
(a) 25˚C
(b) 37˚C
(c) 150˚C
6. Convert the following temperatures to degrees Celcius.
(a) 373 K
(b) 98 K
(c) 425 K
7. Give an example of something that might be at each temperature
in question 5.
8. A sample of nitrogen gas surrounding a circuit board occupies a
volume of 300 mL at 17˚C and 100 kPa. What volume will the
nitrogen occupy at 100.0˚C if the pressure remains constant?
9. A 2.5 L balloon is completely ﬁlled with helium indoors at a
temperature of 24.2˚C. The balloon is taken out on a cold winter
day (−17.5˚C). What will the volume of the balloon become,
assuming a constant pressure?
10. 10.0 L of neon at 20.0˚C is expanded to a volume of 30.0 L. If
the pressure remains constant, what must the ﬁnal temperature
be (in ˚C)?
11. A 14.5 cm3 sample of oxygen gas at 24.3˚C is drawn into a syringe
with a maximum volume of 60 cm3. What is the maximum
change in temperature that the oxygen can be subjected to before
the plunger pops out of the syringe?
12. Methane gas can be condensed by cooling and increasing the
pressure. A 600 L sample of methane gas at 25˚C and 100 kPa is
cooled to −20˚C. In a second step, the gas is compressed until the
pressure is quadrupled. What will the ﬁnal volume be? (Hint: Use
both Boyle’s law and Charles’ law to answer this question.)
446 MHR • Unit 4  Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
Gay-Lussac’s Law
Aside from balloons and syringes, most containers that are used to store
gases have a ﬁxed volume. You know that temperature is a measure of
the average kinetic energy of the molecules making up a substance. If the
temperature of a gas increases, but the volume of its container cannot
increase, what happens to the pressure of the gas inside?
Extending the work of Charles, Joseph Louis Gay-Lussac discovered
the relationship between temperature and pressure acting on a ﬁxed
volume of a gas. (Remember that for gases, Vgas = volume of container
holding the gas.) As you will learn later in this section, this relationship
is very important for the safe handling of gases under pressure in steel
tanks or aerosol cans. Gay-Lussac’s law states that the pressure of a ﬁxed
amount of gas, at constant volume, is directly proportional to its Kelvin
temperature. (See Figure 11.20.)
P α T
(if T is given in kelvins and volume and amount of gas is constant)
Technology
LINK
Underinﬂated vehicle tires
contribute to unsafe road
handling and to lower fuel
economy. Based on what you
know about Gay-Lussac’s law,
why should you measure the
pressure in vehicle tires
before driving the vehicle
for a long distance?
Introducing a new proportionality constant (k2), this relationship can be
restated as
P = k2T
or
P
T
= k2
If we assign Pi and Ti as the initial conditions, and Pf and Tf for the ﬁnal
conditions, the above relationship can be rewritten as
Pi
Ti
= Pf
Tf
As you will notice, this mathematical relationship is very similar to that
of Charles’ law.
1.0 atm
2.0 atm
T
increases
higher
collison
frequency
T1
T2
A
B
When temperature increases from Ti to Tf in a rigid container with a con-
Figure 11.20
stant volume, the average speed of the gas molecules increases. Since the molecules
move faster, they collide with each other and with the walls of the container more force-
fully and more frequently. The gas pressure increases.
Web
LINK
www.school.mcgrawhill.ca/
resources/
Refrigerators and air conditi-
ioners function because of the
relationship between pressure
and temperature. Research the
Joule-Thomson Effect. Go to
the web site above. Go to
Science Resources, then to
Chemistry 11 to ﬁnd out
where to go next.
Chapter 11  The Behaviour of Gases • MHR 447
Sample Problem
Gay-Lussac’s Law: Calculating Pressure
Problem
A cylinder of chlorine gas (Cl2) is stored in a concrete-lined room for
safety. The cylinder is designed to withstand 50 atm of pressure.
The pressure gauge reads 35.0 atm at 23.2˚C. An accidental ﬁre in
the room next door causes the temperature in the storage room
to increase to 87.5˚C. What will the pressure gauge read at this
temperature?
What Is Required?
You need to ﬁnd the pressure of the oxygen once the temperature has
been increased. (Tf = ?)
What Is Given?
• You know the initial pressure and temperature.
Initial pressure
Initial temperature
(Pi) = 35.0 atm
(Ti) = 23.2˚C
• You know the ﬁnal temperature.
Final temperature
(Tf) = 87.5˚C
• You know that the volume of the rigid metal tank will not change
appreciably.
PROBLEM TIP
Plan Your Strategy
In these Sample Problems, you
will see two different methods
of solving the problem: the
algebraic method and the ratio
method. Choose the method
you prefer to solve this type
of problem.
Algebraic method
• Since the volume of the cylinder is essentially constant,
and the temperature increases, you will need to use the
Gay-Lussac’s law formula to ﬁnd the ﬁnal pressure of the
gas sample.
• Since T is given in ˚C, you need to convert it to kelvins.
• You can substitute numbers and units for the variables in the
formula to solve for the unknown. (Pf = ?)
Ratio method
• Since the volume of the cylinder is essentially constant, and
the temperature increases, you know that according to Gay-
Lussac’s law, the pressure exerted by the gas increases as well.
• Since T is given in ˚C, you need to convert it to kelvins.
• To ﬁnd the ﬁnal pressure of the gas, you can multiply the
initial pressure by a temperature ratio that is greater than one.
Continued ...
448 MHR • Unit 4  Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 448
Act on Your Strategy
Algebraic method
Ti = (23.2˚C + 273) = 296 K
Pi
Ti
35.0 atm
296 K
= Pf
Tf
=
Pf
361 K
Tf = (87.5˚C + 273) = 360 K
To simplify the equation and make it easier to solve, you can
ﬁrst cross-multiply the above equation.
(35.0 atm)(361 K) = (Pf)(296 K)
To isolate Pf, you need to divide both sides of the equation
by 296 K.
(35.0 atm)(361 K)
(296 K)
= (Pf)(296 K)
(296 K)
(35.0 atm)(361 K)
(296 K)
= Pf
Pf = 42.69 atm
Ratio method
Ti = (23.2˚C + 273) = 296 K
Pf = 35.0 atm × temperature ratio
= 35.0 atm × 361 K
296 K
= 42.69 atm
Tf = (87.5˚C + 273) = 361 K
Since the least number of signiﬁcant digits in the question is three,
the ﬁnal pressure will be rounded off to the same number of
signiﬁcant digits.
Pf = 42.7 atm
Check Your Solution
• The unit for the answer is in atmospheres.
• When the units cancel out, atm remains.
• Kelvins have been converted to ˚C.
• The pressure inside the cylinder has increased, as would
be expected when the temperature increases.
Practice Problems
13. An unknown gas is collected in a 250.0 mL ﬂask and sealed.
Using electronic devices, it is found that the gas inside the ﬂask
exerts a pressure of 135.5 kPa at 15˚C. What pressure will the gas
exert if the temperature (in Kelvins) is doubled?
Continued ...
Chapter 11  The Behaviour of Gases • MHR 449
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 449
14. At 18˚C, a sample of helium gas stored in a metal cylinder exerts
a pressure of 17.5 atm. What will the pressure become if the tank
is placed in a closed room where the temperature increases to
40˚C?
15. A gaseous refrigerant, enclosed in copper tubes, surrounds the
freezer in a small refrigerator. The gas is found to exert a pressure
of 110 kPa at 45˚C. The refrigerant is allowed to expand through a
nozzle into an expansion chamber such that the exerted
pressure decreases to 89 kPa. What is the temperature inside
the freezer?
16. Before leaving on a trip to Florida, you measure the pressure
inside the tires of your car at a gas station. At −7.5˚C the tire
pressure is found to be 206.5 kPa. When you arrive in Florida,
you stop for dinner. Before leaving, you once again measure the
tire pressure at a gas station beside the restaurant. Most pressure
gauges in the United States are calibrated in psi. You ﬁnd the tire
pressure to be 34.3 psi. What is the approximate temperature in
Florida? (Hint: See the MathLink on page 428 to ﬁnd out how to
convert psi to kPa.)
Compressed Gases and Safety Concerns
The Gay-Lussac’s law Sample Problem in this section indicates how care-
fully gases under pressure must be handled. Chlorine gas can cause seri-
ous respiratory problems and irritate the skin and mucous membranes. In
extreme cases, death from suffocation could result from exposure to this
gas. Yet chlorine is an important industrial product. Compounds of chlo-
rine are used in bleaches, oxidizing agents, and solvents, and as interme-
diates in the manufacture of other substances.
Compressed gases are commonly stored in thick-walled
metal cylinders designed especially for this purpose. All
cylinders must comply with Canadian Transport Commission
(CTC) regulations. Containers must be permanently marked with
a serial number and speciﬁcations for the volume of the cylinder
and the maximum pressure it can withstand. Containers must be
tested every ﬁve to ten years, with the date of the test stamped
on the cylinder.
Figure 11.22 on the next page shows a typical compressed
gas cylinder. You can see that it is built to withstand high
pressures. There are other safety precautions as well, however.
Most cylinders used to store gases have safety devices
regulating the internal gas pressure. The most common of these
is a pressure relief valve. If the pressure inside the cylinder
increases to a dangerous level, a spring allows the valve to open
and release excess gas until the internal pressure returns to a
safe level. Some pressure relief valves will close once excess
gas is released. These valves are relatively expensive compared
to non-reclosing valves. Non-reclosing valves are found on
common household products such as aerosol hairsprays.
Gas cylinders have pressure
Figure 11.21
valves to help the user regulate the amount of
gas escaping when the cylinder is opened.
450 MHR • Unit 4  Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
Cylinders used to store gases such as acetylene (C2H2), that
could cause an explosive chemical reaction at high tempera-
tures, are ﬁtted with fusible plugs. These plugs are designed to
melt and allow gas to escape at temperatures lower than those at
which hazardous reactions can start. Fusible plugs for acetylene
cylinders are made of a metal alloy that melts at 100˚C.
Not all compressed gas cylinders are ﬁtted with pressure-
relief valves or fusible plugs. Cylinders containing toxic gases
such as chlorine or phosgene (COCl2) are one example. These
gases could cause serious harm to health if released into the
air in sufﬁcient quantities. Therefore, these gases, like all
compressed gases, must be handled with great care. They
must be stored in a well-ventilated, dry area. The surrounding
storage area must be ﬁre-resistant, and proper ﬁre-ﬁghting
equipment must be immediately available. Gas cylinders should
never be stored near electrical circuits that might spark or near
other ignition sources such as open ﬂames. Material Data Safety
Sheets must be available, and all cylinders must
be clearly labelled with WHMIS warning signs.
Section Wrap-up
In this section, you learned about the relationship between
volume and temperature (Charles’ law). You also learned about
the relationship between pressure and temperature (Gay-Lussac’s
law). In the next section, you will see how these relationships
can be combined with Boyle’s law to produce one equation that
works in all three situations.
Pressure relief valves prevent
Figure 11.22
a compressed gas cylinder from exploding
if the temperature, and thus the pressure
increases.
Section Review
1
K/U
What safety concerns and precautions should be taken
with compressed gases? Use what you know about the movement
of particles to explain these precautions.
2
(a)
I
A gas at 107 kPa and 300 K is cooled to 146 K at the same
volume. What is the new pressure?
(b)
I
17 L of gas at 300 K are cooled to 146 K at the same pressure.
What is the new volume?
3
4
MC
Describe the relationship between your answers in parts (a) and (b)
of question 2.
C
Explain in terms of molecular motion why, when the temperature
is increased:
(a) a gas increases in volume
(b) the pressure of a gas increases
5
K/U
A balloon at a party drifts above a hot stove, and explodes. Why
did this happen?
Chapter 11  The Behaviour of Gases • MHR 451
11.4
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
solve problems involving
the combined gas law
and Dalton’s law of partial
pressures
identify the components
of Earth’s atmosphere
communicate your under-
standing of the following
terms: standard tempera-
ture, standard temperature
and pressure, standard
ambient temperature and
pressure, combined gas law,
Dalton’s law of partial
pressures
Combined Gas Law Calculations
You may have heard a common joke about Canadian weather: “If you
don’t like it, wait an hour and it will change.” While this is an exaggera-
tion, atmospheric pressure and temperature rarely remain constant for
any extended period of time. Since the volume of gases changes when
pressure and temperature change, standards have been designed to allow
a comparison of different gas volumes.
The average pressure of the atmosphere at sea level is taken as stan-
dard pressure (760 mm Hg = 760 torr = 1 atm = 101.3 kPa). The freezing
point of water (0˚C or 273 K) is deﬁned as standard temperature.
Together, these conditions are referred to as standard temperature and
pressure (STP). (See Figure 11.23.) The normal conditions under which
we live are referred to as standard ambient temperature and pressure.
These conditions are known as SATP, deﬁned as 25˚C and 100 kPa.
How could we ﬁnd what the volume of a gas, measured under
different conditions, would be when changed to STP or SATP?
This photograph
Figure 11.23
illustrates typical STP conditions:
0˚C at sea level.
Under what conditions might
you use standard ambient tem-
perature and pressure as a
reference rather than standard
temperature and pressure ?
Boyle established that pressure and volume are inversely proportional:
PiVi = PfVf
Charles found that volume and temperature are directly proportional:
Vi
Ti
= Vf
Tf
Gay-Lussac discovered that pressure has the same relationship to
temperature as volume does:
Do you notice a pattern here?
Pi
Ti
= Pf
Tf
Pressure and volume are directly related to temperature, and inversely
related to each other. Write this as one law, and it is possible to calculate
situations in which three variables change at the same time. The mathe-
matics work out just as consistently as in the two-variable equations.
452 MHR • Unit 4  Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
The Combined Gas Law
Boyle’s law can be used to solve for changes in volume when pressure
changes. The gas must be in a closed system and the temperature must
remain constant. You can use Charles’ law to solve for changes in volume
with temperature changes. This law works only in a closed system in
which pressure remains constant. Gay-Lussac’s law can solve problems in
which the amount and volume of gas remain constant while the tempera-
ture and pressure change.
As you learned, Boyle’s law (V α 1/P) is expressed mathematically
as PV = k. Charles’ law (V α T) is expressed mathematically as V/T = k1
when temperature is recorded in kelvins. Combining these two
expressions gives:
V α 1
P
× T
or
V α T
P
Introducing a new proportionality constant (k3), we can write
V = T
P
× k3
or
PV
T
= k3
This mathematical relationship is the combined gas law.
If a sample of a gas is trapped at a measured set of initial conditions,
the combined gas law can be rewritten as
= k3
PiVi
Ti
As this gas is then subjected to changes in pressure and temperature,
the ﬁnal condition of the gas can be described mathematically as
PfVf
Tf
= k3
Since both expressions are equal to the same proportionality constant (k3),
the combined gas law can be written as
PiVi
Ti
= PfVf
Tf
Sample Problem
Finding Volume: The Combined Gas Law
Problem
Sandra is having a birthday party on a mild winter’s day. The weath-
er changes and a higher-pressure (103.0 kPa) cold front (−25˚C) rush-
es into town. The original air temperature was −2˚C and the pressure
was 100.8 kPa. What will happen to the volume of the 4.2 L balloons
that were tied to the front of the house?
What Is Required?
You need to ﬁnd the volume of the balloons under the new
conditions of temperature and pressure. (Vf = ?)
Continued ...
Chapter 11  The Behaviour of Gases • MHR 453
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 453
What Is Given?
• You know the initial pressure, volume, and temperature.
Initial pressure
Initial volume
Initial temperature
(Pi) = 100.8 kPa
(Vi) = 4.2 L
(Ti) = −2˚C
• You know the ﬁnal pressure and temperature.
Final pressure
Final temperature
(Pf) = 103.0 kPa
(Tf) = −25˚C
Plan Your Strategy
Algebraic method
• Since pressure and temperature both change, use the combined
gas law to ﬁnd the ﬁnal volume of the balloon.
• Since T is given in ˚C, you need to convert it to kelvins.
• You can rearrange the combined gas law and substitute num-
bers and units for the variables in the formula to solve for Vf.
Ratio method
• Since pressure and temperature change, you know that the
volume of the balloon will also change.
• Since T is given in ˚C, you need to convert it to kelvins.
• To ﬁnd the new volume based on the increase in pressure,
you need to multiply the initial volume by a pressure ratio
that is less than one.
• To ﬁnd the new volume based on the decrease in temperature,
you need to multiply the initial volume by a temperature ratio
that is less than one.
• To ﬁnd the new volume based on both pressure and tempera-
ture changes, you can multiply the initial volume by the
pressure and temperature ratios.
PROBLEM TIP
Act on Your Strategy
In these Sample Problems, you
will see two different methods
of solving the problem: the
algebraic method and the ratio
method. Choose the method
you prefer to solve this type
of problem.
Algebraic method
Ti = (−2˚C + 273) = 271 K
PiVi
Tf
Solve the combined gas law, in this case for Vf.
= PfVf
Tf
Tf = (−25˚C + 273) = 248 K
Continued ...
454 MHR • Unit 4  Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 454
To isolate Vf, move Tf and Pf. Multiply Tf up to
the numerator on the left side, and divide Pf down
to the denominator. This leaves
PiViTf
TiPf
(100.8 kPa)(4.2 L)(248 K)
(271 K)(103.0 kPa)
= Vf
= Vf
Vf = 3.76 L
Vf = 3.8 L
So
Ratio method
Ti = (−2˚C + 273) = 271 K
Vf = Vi × pressure ratio × temperature ratio
Tf = (−25˚C + 273) = 248 K
= 4.2 L × 100.8 kPa
103.0 kPa
= 3.76 L ≅ 3.8 L
× 248 K
271 K
Remember to change the answer to correct signiﬁcant digits. The
least number of digits in the question was two, so the answer must
have only two signiﬁcant digits. Vf = 3.8 L.
Check Your Solution
• The unit for the answer is in litres.
• When the units cancel out, L remains.
• The volume of the balloon has decreased, as would be expected
when pressure increases and temperature decreases.
Sample Problem
Combined Gas Law
Problem
An automated instrument has been developed to help drug-research
chemists determine the amount of nitrogen in a compound. Any
compound containing carbon, nitrogen, and hydrogen is reacted
with copper(II) oxide to produce CO2, H2O, and N2 gases. The gases
are collected separately and analyzed.
In an analysis of 39.8 mg of caffeine using this instrument,
10.1 mL of N2 gas is produced at 23˚C and 746 torr. What must the
new temperature of nitrogen be, in ˚C, if the volume is increased
to 12.0 mL, and the pressure is increased to 780 torr?
What Is Required?
You need to ﬁnd the temperature of the nitrogen under the new
conditions of volume and pressure. (Tf = ?)
Continued ...
Chapter 11  The Behaviour of Gases • MHR 455
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 455
What Is Given?
• You know the initial pressure, volume, and temperature.
(Pi) = 746 torr
(Vi) = 10.1 mL
(Ti) = 23˚C
Initial pressure
Initial volume
Initial temperature
• You know the ﬁnal pressure and volume.
Final pressure
Final volume
(Pf) = 780 torr
(Vf) = 12.0 mL
Plan Your Strategy
Algebraic method
• Since pressure and volume both change, you will need to use
the combined gas law formula to ﬁnd the ﬁnal temperature of
the nitrogen.
• Since T is given in ˚C, you need to convert it to kelvins.
• You can rearrange the combined gas law and substitute num-
bers and units for the variables in the formula to solve for Tf .
Ratio method
• Since pressure and volume change, you know that the
temperature of the nitrogen will also change.
• Since T is given in ˚C, you need to convert it to kelvins.
• To ﬁnd the new temperature based on the increase in pressure,
you need to multiply the initial volume by a pressure ratio that
is greater than one.
• To ﬁnd the new temperature based on an increase in volume,
you need to multiply the initial temperature by a volume ratio
that is less than one.
• To ﬁnd the new temperature based on both pressure and
volume changes, you can multiply the initial temperature by
the pressure and volume ratios.
Act on Your Strategy
Algebraic method
Ti = (23˚C + 273) = 296 K
PiVi
Ti
Divide both sides by PfVf to isolate Tf .
= PfVf
Tf
= 1
Tf
PiVi
TiPfVf
Now ﬂip both sides of the equation over:
TiPfVf
PiVi
= Tf
1
456 MHR • Unit 4  Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
Continued ...
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 456
Alternatively, you could have divided down PiVi and multiplied
both Tf and Ti up. This is an equally correct procedure and the
result would be the same. Put in the numbers:
(296 K)(780 torr)(12.0 ml)
(746 torr)(10.1 ml)
= Tf
Tf = 368 K
Since the question asks for the temperature in ˚C, you need to
convert kelvins to ˚C. To do this, subtract 273 from the answer.
Tf = (368 − 273)
= 95˚C
(Note the correct number of signiﬁcant digits.)
Ratio method
Ti = (23˚C + 273) = 296 K
Tf = Ti × pressure ratio × temperature ratio
= 296 K × 780 torr
746 torr
= 368 K
× 12.0 mL
10.1 mL
Since the question asks for the temperature in ˚C, you need to
convert kelvins to ˚C. To do this, subtract 273 from the answer.
Tf = (368 − 273)
= 95˚C
(Note the correct number of signiﬁcant digits.)
Check Your Solution
• The unit for the answer is in degrees Celcius.
• The temperature of the nitrogen has increased, as would be
expected when pressure and volume increase.
Practice Problems
17. A sample of gas has a volume of 150 mL at 260 K and 92.3 kPa.
What will the new volume be at 376 K and 123 kPa?
18. A cylinder at 48 atm pressure and 290 K releases 35 mL of carbon
dioxide gas into a 4.0 L container at 297 K. What is the pressure
inside the container?
19. In a large syringe, 48 mL of ammonia gas at STP is compressed
to 24 mL and 110 kPa. What must the new temperature of the
gas be?
20. A 100 W light bulb has a volume of 180.0 cm3 at STP. The light
bulb is turned on and the heated glass expands slightly, changing
the volume of the bulb to 181.5 cm3 with an internal pressure
of 214.5 kPa. What is the temperature of the light bulb (in ˚C)?
21. Sulfur hexaﬂuoride, SF6(g), is used as a chemical insulator. A
5.0 L sample of this gas is collected at 205.0˚C and 350 kPa. What
pressure must be applied to this gas sample to reduce its volume
to 1.7 L at 25˚C?
Chapter 11  The Behaviour of Gases • MHR 457
Gases and Natural Phenomena
Gases under pressure are responsible for natural phenomena such as
volcanoes and geysers. On March 20, 1980, residents in the northern part
of Washington state heard a rumble from the mountains. They were told it
was only a minor earthquake. By March 27, seismologists were sure that
something more was involved. Deep inside one of the mountains, Earth’s
crust was moving. The lower portion of the crust was melting into hot
liquid called magma. The magma started rising up through cracks in the
crust. Trapped water quickly turned into superheated steam. Trapped
gases added to the increasing pressure inside the mountain. Then, on
May 18, 1980, the top half of Mount St. Helens blew away in a gigantic
explosion. It released all of the built-up pressure, along with many tonnes
of rock and ash, twenty kilometres into the atmosphere. It also released
steam, and gases such as carbon dioxide, nitrogen, and sulfur dioxide.
(See Figure 11.24.)
Before a volcano
Figure 11.24
erupts, there is a tremendous
build-up of ﬂuid and gas
pressures inside the volcano due
to magma, steam, and gases.
Other gases released in volcanic explosions include the oxides, sulﬁdes,
and chlorides of carbon, sulfur, hydrogen, chlorine, and ﬂuorine. These
include CO2, CO, SO2, SO3, H2, H2S, Cl2, HCl, and F2 . It is estimated that
the eruption of Mt. Pinatubo in the Philippines on June 15, 1991 released
about 1.8 × 1010 kg of gases and ash into the atmosphere.
After a volcanic blast, or in an area of volcanic activity, geysers may
form. Cool water from Earth’s surface trickles down between rocks. It
drains deep into Earth’s crust, into regions where hot magma is still
present. As the water is heated, it forms steam. The steam rises back up
though ﬁssures and cracks, meeting more water and heating it up as well.
More and more boiling water accumulates, until suddenly, through a
narrow opening, the pressurized hot water is violently ejected. As the
water cools in the air, it falls back and the process starts again.
Yellowstone National Park in the United States has one of the most
famous geysers in the world, Old Faithful. It erupts approximately once
every sixty-ﬁve minutes. (Figure 11.25 shows Old Faithful erupting.)
In Chapter 12, you will learn more about the gas chemistry of
our atmosphere.
Geysers form in
Figure 11.25
areas of early volcanic activity
or after a volcanic blast. They
should be approached with
caution since the hot water that
erupts can cause severe burns.
458 MHR • Unit 4  Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
Dalton’s Law of Partial Pressures
What if there are two gases in one container, or as in the case of the
atmosphere, a mixture of many gases? How does this affect the pressure?
The English scientist John Dalton did a very thorough analysis of the
atmosphere. He concluded that it comprised about 79% nitrogen and 21%
oxygen. (See Table 11.2 to ﬁnd out how close he really was.) Dalton noticed
that the water vapour, however, seemed quite variable, so he did further
experiments. He obtained some very dry air, and measured the pressure
in the container. He then introduced some water vapour. The pressure
increased! Dalton repeated and adjusted his experiment time after time,
always with the same results. He concluded that the total pressure of a
mixture of gases is the sum of the pressures of each of the individual gases.
This is called Dalton’s Law of partial pressures. (See Figure 11.27 below.)
1.0 atm
Gas A
Gas B
1.5 atm
Mixture of
A and B
Piston
depressed
Closed
Open
vacuum
water
vapor
air pressure
of 101.3 kPa
vapour
pressure
of water
column of Hg
760 mm high
A method of
Figure 11.26
determining water vapour pres-
sure. A drop of water vapourizes
in the vacuum and the water
vapour exerts a pressure on the
mercury in the tube.
Gas A is stored
Figure 11.27
at 0.5 atm and gas B at 1.0 atm.
When gas A is added to gas B,
the total pressure exerted is now
1.5 atm while the volume of the
ﬂask remains the same.
PA = Ptotal
= 0.50 atm
nA = 0.30 mol
A
A
PB = Ptotal
= 1.0 atm
nB = 0.60 mol
B
Table 11.2 Components of the Dry Atmosphere
Components
Percentage
Nitrogen (N2)
Oxygen (O2)
Argon (Ar)
Carbon dioxide (CO2)
Neon (Ne)
Other gases
78.08
20.95
0.93
0.03
0.002
0.008
Ptotal = PA + PB
= 1.5 atm
ntotal  = 0.90 mol
XA = 0.33 mol
XB = 0.67 mol
The action of winds mixes the atmosphere so that the
composition of the dry atmosphere is fairly constant over
the entire Earth. Water vapour, though an important compo-
nent of the atmosphere, is not listed in the table. The quantity
of water vapour in the air, or humidity, is variable. In desert
climates, the quantity of water vapour will be very small (low
humidity). In tropical areas, or near large bodies of water, the
quantity of water vapour in the air can be quite substantial
(high humidity).
Dalton extended this idea to enhance what he had discovered about the
composition of the atmosphere. If the atmosphere is 79% nitrogen, and
the atmospheric pressure on a certain day is, for example, 101.3 kPa,
then he concluded that the nitrogen itself must be contributing
79
100
× 101.3 kPa = 80 kPa
The other gases in the atmosphere contribute pressures corresponding to
their percentage of the total composition of air.
The generalized form of Dalton’s law of partial pressures is
Ptotal = P1 + P2 + P3 + . . . + Pn
This law can be applied to any mixture of gases. Study the following
Sample Problem and try the Practice Problems to verify your understand-
ing of how Dalton’s law works.
Chapter 11  The Behaviour of Gases • MHR 459
Sample Problem
Applying Dalton’s Law of Partial Pressures
Problem
What is the pressure contribution of CO2 to the atmospheric pressure
on a very dry day when the barometer read 0.98 atm? Convert your
answer into three different units.
What Is Required?
You must ﬁnd the contribution of CO2 to the atmospheric pressure,
and then convert the units.
What Is Given?
• According to Table 11.2, CO2 contributes 0.03% of the
atmospheric pressure. The total atmospheric pressure is 0.98 atm.
The conversion factors of pressure are
1 atm = 760 torr = 760 mm Hg = 101.3 kPa
Plan Your Strategy
• You need to multiply the total atmospheric pressure times CO2’s
contribution to the total.
• Then you can multiply the answer in atm by the conversion factors
to cancel out atm and obtain other units.
Act on Your Strategy
0.03
100
2.9 × 10−4 atm × 101.3 kPa
× 0.98 atm = 2.9 × 10−4 atm
1 atm
= 0.030 kPa
2.9 × 10−4 atm × 760 torr
1 atm
= 0.22 torr = 0.22 mm Hg
Check Your Solution
• The answers given are all very small. This is expected, as CO2 only
contributes a small percentage of gas molecules to the atmosphere.
Practice Problems
22. To speed up a reaction in a vessel pressurized at 98.0 kPa, a
chemist added 202.65 kPa of hydrogen gas. What was the
resulting pressure?
23. A gas mixture contains 12% Ne, 23% He, and 65% Rn. If the
total pressure is 116 kPa, what is the partial pressure of each gas?
24. The partial pressure of argon gas, making up 40% of a mixture,
is 325 torr. What is the total pressure of the mixture in kPa?
25. A mixture of nitrogen and carbon dioxide gas is at a pressure
of 1.00 atm and a temperature of 278 K. If 30% of the mixture is
nitrogen, what is the partial pressure of the carbon dioxide?
460 MHR • Unit 4  Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
Molar Mass and Gas Behaviour
In the following ThoughtLab, you will examine one more factor affecting
gas behaviour:
ThoughtLab
Boiling Points of Gases
What effect does molar mass have on the
behaviour of a gas? In fact, molar mass helps to
determine whether a compound or element is
gaseous or not. You will examine the connection
between boiling point and molar mass here.
Table 11.3 The Boiling Points of Various Gases
Gas
He
Ne
N2
Ar
O2
Kr
Xe
Boiling Point (˚C)
−269
−246
−196
−186
−183
−153
−108
Materials
graph paper; periodic table
Procedure
1. Using a periodic table, record the molar mass
of each of the gases listed in the table.
2. Plot a graph of boiling points of gases (y-axis)
versus their molar masses (x-axis).
Analysis
1. From the graph obtained, what relationship
exists between the molar mass of a gas and
its boiling point?
2. Using the graph, what would be the boiling
points of gases such as hydrogen (H2),
ﬂuorine (F2) and radon (Rn)?
3. Predict whether a substance such as bromine
(Br2) would be a gas or liquid at room
temperature. Use a reference book to check
your answer.
Section Wrap-up
In this section, you learned how to use the combined gas law for gas
calculations. You also learned about natural phenomena that are related
to gases. Finally, you learned about Dalton’s law of partial pressures. In
Chapter 12, you will learn more about gas laws. First, however, you will
take a closer look at some technological applications of the gas laws.
Section Review
1
2
3
4
5
K/U
In a large syringe, 48 mL of ammonia gas at STP is compressed
to 24 mL and 110 kPa. What must the new temperature of the gas be?
Explain the result in terms of kinetic molecular theory.
I
Design an investigation to test Dalton’s law of partial pressure.
Write a procedure and list the materials and equipment you need.
C
Explain Dalton’s law of partial pressure.
K/U
What are the main components of the atmosphere?
MC
Popcorn pops as the water in the kernel is vapourized. The
building pressure becomes too much for the shell of the kernel, and it
explodes. Explain, using your knowledge of the behaviour of gases,
what happens to the temperature just before and just after the kernel
pops. (Use a diagram to help you to visualize the situation.)
Chapter 11  The Behaviour of Gases • MHR 461
11.5
Gas Applications
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
identify technological prod-
ucts based on compressed
gas
describe how a knowledge
of gases is used in other
areas of study
communicate your under-
standing of the following
term: fuel cell
Medical applica-
Figure 11.28
tions of pressurized oxygen can
help the very strong, the very
weak, and everyone in between.
In the previous section, you learned about the colourless, odorless
mixture of gases that make up the atmosphere. It is easy to take the air
around us for granted. You know that you need oxygen to breathe, but
does it serve any other purposes? Nitrogen is not required for respiration,
but it composes about four-ﬁfths of our atmosphere. Is nitrogen a
“useless” gas? In this section, you will learn about how gases are used.
You will ﬁnd out more about oxygen and nitrogen, and discover the
importance of gases in deep-sea exploration.
Compressed Oxygen
You may never really think about breathing—until it becomes hard to do.
In certain situations, normal human respiratory functions are disrupted.
Hospitals use compressed oxygen for patients with respiratory disorders
such as emphysema, pneumonia, or lung cancer.
You may have heard of hyperbaric oxygen (HBO) chambers being used
to treat sports injuries. A high oxygen concentration in the blood causes
blood vessels to constrict. This lowers the swelling that can occur in
injured tissues. How is this high oxygen content delivered to the blood?
In an HBO chamber such as that shown in Figure 11.28, air is compressed
to three times normal atmospheric pressure. The patient breathes pure
oxygen (O2(g)) through a mask. The highly compressed air forces O2(g) in
the lungs into the blood. This increases of dissolved O2(g) in the blood-
stream. Consequently, oxygen is delivered rapidly to all the blood vessels
of the body. In fact, oxygen can reach the injured tissue at 15 times the
normal rate!
The use of compressed oxygen can beneﬁt not only athletes, but also
vulnerable premature babies. Premature babies can be afﬂicted with hya-
line-membrane disease. This condition prevents the alveoli in their lungs
from inﬂating, which leads to serious breathing difﬁculties. Placing these
babies in an oxygen-rich environment such as an HBO or an incubator
(Figure 11.28) helps inﬂate the alveoli. This increases the infants’ chances
for survival.
462 MHR • Unit 4  Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
Oxygen at High Altitudes
At other times, respiratory functions may be normal, but the environment
poses problems. Commercial jet planes ﬂy at an altitude of around 9.5 km.
Airplanes carry pressurized oxygen for their passengers to breathe as they
ﬂy at high altitudes. Mountain climbers also need compressed oxygen
when climbing to great heights. Those exploring ocean depths need oxy-
gen as well. Scuba divers and submarine crews need compressed oxygen
to breathe when they are underwater. You will learn more about undersea
exploration later in this section.
Careers
in Chemistry
Cancer Research Specialist
The National Cancer Institute of Canada estimates
that in the year 2000 there were more than
132 000 new cases of cancer and 65 000 deaths
caused by cancer in Canada. People are desper-
ate for treatment.
Dr. Abdullah Kirumira, President and lead
scientist at BioMedica Diagnostics in Windsor,
Nova Scotia, has developed a way to speed up
drug testing. This method uses compressed
carbon dioxide and a dry chemistry diagnostics
system including the ﬁreﬂy enzyme, luciferase.
Growing Cancer Cells for Testing
To obtain a consistent supply of cancer cells to
test, CO2 is pumped from a compressed gas
cylinder. It is depressurized through a regulator
into a specially designed incubator kept at about
37˚C, the optimum temperature for cell growth.
This CO2-enriched atmosphere plays two roles:
• it is required for rapid cellular metabolism; and
• it interacts with a bicarbonate buffer in the
growth medium to maintain an optimum pH
balance.
Global Ties
In 1975, during the reign of dictator Idi Amin,
Dr. Kirumira ﬂed his native Uganda to Iraq,
where he earned a B.Sc. in food technology.
He then travelled to England for a Master’s
degree in dairy chemistry. From there, he moved
to Australia where he earned his Ph.D. in
biotechnology. In 1990, he and his wife moved to
Nova Scotia in search of a slower-paced lifestyle.
At BioMedica, Dr. Kirumira oversees
12 employees, six of whom have advanced
degrees, three technicians and three administra-
tors. In addition, Dr. Kirumira teaches biochem-
istry and biotechnology at Acadia and Dalhousie
Universities.
He frequently visits his home in Uganda.
From Uganda, Dr. Kirumira says he can “take
back what I have learnt from the West to help
the people who probably need it the most.”
Make Career Connections
1. To learn more about the biotech applications
of using the ﬁreﬂy enzyme, luciferase, you can
go to BioMedica’s web site.
2. What universities offer degrees in biotechno-
logy? Do research to ﬁnd two universities near
you that offer this program.
Chapter 11  The Behaviour of Gases • MHR 463
Web
LINK
www.school.mcgrawhill.ca/re
sources/
CO2 is a greenhouse gas,
thought to contribute to global
warming. Many countries
around the world have sought
to reduce their emissions of
CO2. International climate con-
trol treaties, such as the
Montréal Protocol, have set
targets to do this.
Since plants cycle CO2 out of
the atmosphere, several coun-
tries including Canada have
argued that countries with
large forest resources should
be able to claim them as “car-
bon sinks.” Rather than cutting
their CO2 emissions by the tar-
get amount, Canada and other
countries maintain that they
should be allowed to claim a
reduction for the CO2 absorbed
by their large forests.
Research the current debate
over “carbon sinks.” Do you
agree with the idea that CO2
absorbed by plant life provides
a valid strategy for controlling
pollution? Go to the web site
above. Go to Science
Resources, then to Chemistry
11 to ﬁnd out where to go next.
Oxygen and Combustion
A ﬁre breaks out and smoke begins to ﬁll the room. Breathing becomes
difﬁcult. Should you open a window to let the smoke out before you leave
through the door? You may have learned you should never open windows
before leaving the area of a ﬁre. A ﬁre can only burn as long as it has
sufﬁcient oxygen. (See Figure 11.29.)
Oxygen is an extremely important gas because it supports combustion.
(You will learn more about combustion reactions in Unit 5.) The more
oxygen available, the hotter a ﬁre will burn. Pressurized oxygen is used
in the manufacture of steel and specialized alloys. In the manufacture of
steel, oxygen is used to remove excess carbon by burning the carbon into
carbon monoxide or carbon dioxide. High levels of carbon make steel too
brittle for many uses.
A remarkable invention called the fuel cell is used by the space
industry. Some fuel cells burn hydrogen and oxygen gas, leaving water as
a by-product (which astronauts can then drink). Companies such as
Ballard Power Systems Inc. of Vancouver, British Columbia are working to
make this technology practical for automobiles. Fuel cells are completely
non-polluting. However, the current process for making large amounts of
hydrogen gas does create a good deal of pollution, in the form of CO2.
Coal or another hydrocarbon is used to heat up and decompose water in a
reaction similar to the following:
heat
CH4(g) + 2H2O(g) → CO2(g) + 4H2(g)
Before astronauts can use the fuel cell in space, they ﬁrst have to get
there! Liquid oxygen is an important component of rocket fuel. Liquid
hydrogen and liquid oxygen are mixed and ignited in a combustion
chamber. This reaction provides a very rapid expansion of gas. It produces
enough energy to lift extremely heavy rockets carrying crewed vessels,
such as the Space Shuttle, into orbit (Figure 11.30).
Liquid water becomes water vapour
Figure 11.29
when exposed to the heat of a ﬁre. Fireﬁghters must
take precautions to avoid steam burns.
The large centre tank that is attached to the shuttle
Figure 11.30
orbiter has two compartments, one containing liquid hydrogen and
the other containing liquid oxygen. The energy released by the reac-
tion between these two substances provides the thrust needed to
propel the orbiter into space.
464 MHR • Unit 4  Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
Nitrogen’s Many Uses
Inert gases are not very reactive. The word inert is also a synonym for
sluggish and slow. Something with the property of inertness hardly
sounds useful! Yet this very property makes nitrogen extremely valuable
in technological and industrial applications.
Because nitrogen gas reacts with very few substances, it can be used
to blanket substances, preventing them from reacting with oxygen. (A
reaction with oxygen is called oxidation.) Blanketing means covering
something with nitrogen, displacing all of the oxygen. This usually hap-
pens in a closed container. For example, ground coffee can taste bitter
when exposed to oxygen for long periods of time. Packaging coffee in a
nitrogen-enhanced container helps coffee keep its ﬂavour. Gaseous nitro-
gen is also used for the long-term storage of fruits such as apples, allowing
us to enjoy a wide variety of produce out of season.
Liquid nitrogen’s low boiling point (77 K) means that it can be used in
food preservation. Foods frozen quickly in liquid nitrogen retain more
nutrients than slowly frozen foods. Less damage is done to cell structure
during the quick-freezing process. Freezing foods this way also removes
moisture, decreasing their weight and size. Freeze-dried foods are often
used by people who require easily portable, lightweight food, such as
campers, the military, and space explorers.
In cryosurgery, liquid nitrogen is used to fast-freeze cancerous tissues
and warts. This proven new technique kills the cancerous area and allows
surgeons to safely remove the dead tissue.
Gases and Undersea Exploration
Throughout history, humans have tried to explore the little-known world
of the deep seas. Even with modern diving gear, the deep oceans are a
dangerous place for humans. The air that a diver breathes to stay alive
underwater can itself be one of the greatest hazards. That’s because of the
tremendous pressure exerted by the waters above a diver. For roughly
every 10 metres of depth, water pressure on the diver’s body adds the
equivalent of one unit of atmospheric pressure (Figure 11.31).
The air that a diver breathes (mainly nitrogen and oxygen) must equal
the pressure of the surrounding water if the diver’s lungs are to stay
inﬂated. Of course, this gas pressure increases as a diver goes deeper.
As the gas pressure increases, the diver’s bloodstream and body tissues
absorb higher and higher volumes of gases.
Beyond depths of roughly 40–60 metres,
the increased volumes of gas in the diver’s body
can cause nitrogen narcosis. When nitrogen
narcosis strikes, normal feelings become danger-
ously exaggerated. A diver may experience a
blissful giddiness, along with disorientation and
impaired judgement. This condition is called
“rapture of the deep.” Divers in this state
have been known to remove their breathing
apparatus to swim like ﬁsh, mistake up for
down, or simply lose track of how long they
have been underwater.
At the other extreme, a diver’s normal sense
of caution may degenerate into irrational fear or
even panic. A panicked diver may do the very
Figure 11.31
about ﬁve times higher than normal.
At 50 m underwater, a diver experiences pressure
Chapter 11  The Behaviour of Gases • MHR 465
Electronic Learning Partner
Your Chemistry 11 Electronic
Learning Partner has a demon-
stration of CO2 ﬁre extinguish-
ers and the chemistry behind
their use.
Unit Issue Prep
What gases are produced as a
result of human technologies
such as fuel-burning engines?
worst thing— rush to the surface without pausing to decompress on the
way up. Why is this dangerous?
The dissolved gases such as nitrogen in the diver’s bloodstream are
under pressure. This is much like the carbon dioxide that is dissolved in a
can of soda. If the diver returns to the surface too quickly, these dissolved
gases behave similarly to the gas in soda when a can is opened. The gases
escape from the blood as bubbles in the diver’s blood vessels. These bub-
bles can block the ﬂow of blood. They produce a painful and potentially
fatal condition called “the bends.”
Both nitrogen narcosis and the bends make prolonged deep diving a
risky business. They limit both the safe depth and safe duration of human
diving. Even skilled professional divers rarely descend beyond about
50 metres. Also, they rarely remain at that depth for much more than
30 minutes.
Section Wrap-up
In this section, you learned about some technological products
and applications involving gases. You also learned that a knowledge of
gases is important in other areas of study, such as medicine and deep-sea
exploration.
In Chapter 12, you will ﬁnd out about the ideal gas law. This law
covers the many different gas laws you explored in this chapter. You will
also discover a practical application for Dalton’s law of partial pressures.
You will learn how to do stoichiometric calculations for reactions that
consume or produce a gas. In the laboratory, you will have a chance
to produce and collect a gas. At the end of the next chapter, you will
examine some of the chemistry that takes place in our atmosphere.
Section Review
1
2
3
4
5
6
C
Why is fuel-cell technology, in its present state, not a pollution-free
alternative to the internal combustion gasoline engine?
K/U
Describe three industrial uses for liquid nitrogen.
MC
How might covering apples with nitrogen or carbon dioxide
gas preserve them longer through the winter?
K/U
How does a hyperbaric oxygen chamber work to assist
human healing?
MC
Look up the standard mixture of gases for scuba diving tanks.
What problem arises in using nitrogen gas in scuba tanks? How is this
problem solved?
MC
What does lightning (or bacteria) do to the nitrogen in the diatom-
ic gas in order to make the atoms useful to plants? Use what you know
about compounds and elements to answer this question.
7
MC
Interview the science teachers at your school. Are there any
compressed gas cylinders in the school? Ask the teachers about the
appropriate safety precautions for compressed gases. Then prepare a
short safety report on compressed gases in your school.
466 MHR • Unit 4  Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
Review
Reﬂecting on Chapter 11
Summarize this chapter in the format of your
choice. Here are a few ideas to use as guidelines.
• Describe the structure of solids, liquids, and
gases in simple terms.
• Compare the intermolecular forces that hold
solids together with those that hold liquids and
gases together.
• Use the kinetic molecular theory to describe the
behaviour of ideal gases.
• Explain Boyle’s law.
• Explain Charles’ law.
• Explain Gay-Lussac’s law.
• Describe how gases under pressure are the cause
of some of the natural wonders of our Earth.
• Describe how gases under pressure have many
industrial and medical uses.
• Explain Dalton’s law of partial pressure.
Reviewing Key Terms
For each of the following terms, write a sentence
that shows your understanding of its meaning.
atmospheres
Boyle’s law
closed system
Condensation
Dalton’s law of partial
absolute zero
Charles’ law
combined gas law
fuel cell
Gay-Lussac’s law
kilopascals
mmHg
pressure-relief valve
standard temperature
and pressure (STP)
standard temperature
standard atmospheric
pressure
pressures
fusible plugs
ideal gas
Kelvin scale
kinetic molecular theory
of gases
pascal
standard atmospheric
pressure
standard ambient
temperature and
pressure (SATP)
Knowledge/Understanding
1. Gases behave differently than solids and
liquids. Using what you know about forces
between molecules, explain some of these
differences.
2. Using the kinetic molecular theory, answer
each of the following questions.
(a) What does it mean when we say that the
pressure of a gas has increased?
(b) What does it mean when we say that the
temperature of a gas has decreased?
3. (a) Give a real example that illustrates
Boyle’s law.
(b) Give an example that illustrates Charles’ law.
4. What is the kinetic molecular theory
explaination for 0 K?
5. Explain Gay-Lussac’s law in terms of the
motion of gas particles.
6. Explain Dalton’s law of partial pressures in
terms of the motion of gas particles.
7. How is a volcano an example of a natural
occurrence in which pressures of gases are of
major importance?
8. List four major and four minor components of
the atmosphere.
9. How is pure oxygen used medically and
industrially?
10. Nitrogen is one of the most important industri-
al substances produced on Earth. Why is it so
important industrially?
11. Would the column of mercury in a barometer
be shorter at the top of a mountain or at the
base of the mountain? Explain.
12. Using the kinetic molecular theory, explain
why the density of a gas is less than that of a
liquid. (Density is mass per unit of volume.)
13. A weather balloon containing helium is
released into the atmosphere. As it rises, atmos-
pheric pressure and temperature both decrease.
Explain why the size of the balloon increases.
Inquiry
14. Below are two diagrams showing a trapped gas.
The volume of the gas in container A can be
changed to become the same volume as the gas
in container B. Describe how you could do this
in the laboratory.
Chapter 11  The Behaviour of Gases • MHR 467
nitrogen, at a pressure of 101.3 kPa. What
volume will the nitrogen occupy at this
temperature?
21. A 75.3 L sample of oxygen gas at 25.7˚C is
cooled until its ﬁnal volume becomes 10 L.
If the pressure remains constant, what is the
ﬁnal temperature (in ˚C)?
22. Calculate the volumes that each of the
following gases would occupy at STP.
(a) 22.4 L of oxygen at 75˚C and 700 torr.
(b) 100 cm3 of nitrogen at 20˚C and 150.0 kPa.
(c) 45 mL of neon at −50.˚C and 200 kPa.
23. A birthday balloon contains 2.0 L of air at STP.
What volume will the balloon have at SATP?
24. A mixture of neon and argon gases is collected
at 102.7 kPa. If the partial pressure of the neon
is 52.5 kPa, what is the partial pressure of
argon?
25. A 250 mL glass vessel is ﬁlled with krypton gas
at a pressure of 700 torr at 25.0˚C. If the glass
vessel is made to withstand a pressure of
2.0 atm, to what maximum temperature (in ˚C)
can you safely heat the ﬂask?
26. A cylinder with a moveable piston contains
hydrogen gas collected at 30˚C. The piston is
moved until the volume of the hydrogen is
halved. The pressure inside the container has
increased to 125 kPa at 30˚C. What was the
initial pressure inside the cylinder?
27. Argon gas is used inside light bulbs because it
is a plentiful inert gas. 650 cm3 of argon gas at
STP is heated in order to double its volume at
101.3 kPa. What is the ﬁnal temperature (in ˚C)?
28. A truck leaves Yellowknife in early January
when the temperature is −30.0˚C. The tires of
the truck are inﬂated to 210 kPa. Four days
later, the truck arrives in California where the
temperature is 30.0˚C. What is the air pressure
in the tires when the truck arrives at its
destination?
29. Methane (CH4), a natural gas, is stored in a
100 L tank at −10˚C and a pressure of
125 atm. The gas is used to provide fuel for
a furnace that heats a country home during the
winter. The furnace consumes an average of
500 L of methane a day. How long will this
supply of methane last if it is burned at 450˚C
at a pressure of 102 kPa?
A
B
15. You have carried out investigations to deter-
mine the relationship between pressure and
volume, and between temperature and volume.
How could you investigate the relationship
between pressure and temperature?
(a) Write up a procedure to determine the
relationship between the pressure and
temperature of a gas.
(b) Identify any problems with your procedure.
How could you overcome these problems?
(c) What materials will you need?
(d) What variables will you hold constant?
(e) What variable will you change?
(f) What variable will you measure?
16. The pressure exerted on 0.25 L of nitrogen is
120 kPa. What volume will this gas occupy at
60 kPa if the temperature and number of moles
is constant?
17. Ammonia gas, NH3(g), is used in the production
of fertilizer. At 55.0˚C, a sample of ammonia
gas is found to exert a pressure of 7.5 atm.
What pressure will the gas exert if its volume is
reduced to one ﬁfth of its original volume at
55.0˚C?
18. A 35.0 L sample of dry air at 750 torr is com-
pressed to a volume of 20 L. What is the ﬁnal
pressure exerted on the gas if the temperature
remains constant?
19. A 25 g sample of dry air in a large party
balloon at 20˚C occupies a volume of 20 L. If
the temperature is increased to 40˚C at constant
pressure, how large will the balloon become?
20. A sample of nitrogen gas has a volume of
10 L at 101.3 kPa and 20˚C. To preserve
biological tissue, the nitrogen gas is cooled
to −190˚C, almost the temperature of liquid
468 MHR • Unit 4  Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
30. Neon gas is widely used as the luminous gas in
signs. A sample of neon has a volume of 5.5 L
at 750 torr at 10.0˚C. If the gas is expanded to a
volume of 7.5 L at a pressure of 400 torr, what
will its ﬁnal temperature be (in ˚C)?
31. Halogen lamp bulbs are usually ﬁlled with
bromine or iodine vapour at 5.0 atm pressure.
When turned on, the glass bulb can heat up to
more than 1150˚C. If room temperature is 20˚C,
what will the pressure in the bulb be when it
reaches its operating temperature?
32. Helium gas is stored in a steel cylinder with a
volume of 100 L at 20˚C. The pressure gauge on
the cylinder indicates a pressure of 25 atm. The
cylinder is used to blow up a weather balloon
at 25˚C. If the ﬁnal pressure in the cylinder
and the balloon is 1.05 atm, how large will the
balloon be?
33. A scuba diver is swimming 30.0 m below the
surface of Lake Ontario. At this depth, the
pressure of the water is 4.0 atm and the temper-
ature is 8.0˚C. A bubble of air with a volume of
5.0 mL escapes from the diver’s mask. What
will the volume of the bubble be when it breaks
the surface of the water? The atmospheric
pressure is 101.3 kPa and the temperature of
the water is 24.0˚C.
Communication
34. The weather person on television reports that
the barometric pressure is 100.2 kPa. How
high a column of mercury will this air pressure
support?
35. Convert each of the following pressures:
(a) 1.5 atm to kPa
(b) 135.5 kPa to mm Hg
(c) 750 mm Hg to torr
36. On a visit to your doctor, your blood pressure
is taken. The reading is 125.0 mm Hg systolic
and 80.0 mm Hg diastolic. What is your blood
pressure in kPa?
37. Convert the following temperatures.
(a) −185.5˚C to K
(b) 125 K to ˚C
38. Do research to ﬁnd out how carbonated drinks
get their “ﬁzz.” Prepare a short PowerPoint™
presentation to the class that describes the
manufacture of a typical soft drink.
Making Connections
39. Coal is a fossil fuel that is burned to obtain
energy. However, carbon dioxide (CO2) gas is
produced whenever coal is burned. What are
the beneﬁts and risks of burning coal to obtain
energy? What are the alternatives?
(a) Do research to answer these questions.
(b) Should the government shut down all
coal-burning power plants in Canada to help
prevent global warming? Carry out this
debate with your class. Divide the class into
the executives of a coal-burning power plant,
and scientists representing an environmen-
talist group.
40. Interview a doctor or nurse who works at a hos-
pital. Find out how compressed gases are used
at the hospital, and what safety precautions
are taken.
41. Suppose you are a member of a consulting ﬁrm
that is approached by the Ministry of the
Environment. You are asked to prepare a report
on how the government can help reduce CO2
and CH4 gas emissions. Both gases are impor-
tant greenhouse gases that may be causing
global warming.
(a) Identify the information you will need to
prepare this report. This may take the form
of a list of questions.
(b) Research the answers to your questions.
(c) Prepare a short report giving suggestions on
how the Canadian government could help
reduce CO2 and CH4 gas emissions.
Answers to Practice Problems and
Numerical Section Review Questions
Practice Problems: 1. 1.0 × 103 kPa 2. 1644 L  3. 4.5 cm3
4. 0.01 L  5.(a) 298 K (b) 310 K (c) 423 K  6.(a) 100˚C
(b) –175˚C (c) 152˚C  8. 3.86 × 102 mL 9. 2.1 L  10. 606˚C
11. 957˚C  12. 127 L  13. 2.71 × 102 kPa 14. 18.8 atm
15. –16˚C  16. 31˚C  17. 163 mL  18. 0.43 atm  19. 148 K
20. 310˚C  21. 6.4 × 102 kPa 22. 300.6 kPa  23. 14 kPa,
27 kPa, 75 kPa  24. 1.08 × 102 kPa 25. 0.70 atm
Section Review:  11.1 3.(a) liquid (b) gas (c) solid
11.2 1.(a) 206 kPa (b) 0.841 atm (c) 1.14 × 103 torr
(d) 80.0 kPa  4. 1.04 L  5. 152 kPa  6. 811 torr
11.3 2.(a) 52.1 kPa (b) 8.3 L  11.4 1. 148 K
Chapter 11  The Behaviour of Gases • MHR 469
470
Exploring Gas Laws
You are probably used to sharing scientiﬁc ideas and observations with
your classmates as you work in pairs or in small groups. If you are famil-
iar with Internet chat rooms and e-mail, you may even share your ideas
with people around the world. Sharing scientiﬁc ideas is an essential part
of scientiﬁc discovery. Back in the early nineteenth century, the ideas that
led to the complete gas laws were shared between colleagues in much the
same way that you share scientiﬁc ideas with your classmates.
During the nineteenth century, scientists across Europe organized
academies, or science societies. (This practice still exists today.)
Belonging to an academy allowed much more communication among
scientists. They read the papers and reports that other scientists had
published, wrote letters, and held meetings to discuss ideas. They worked
together to develop many important theories and laws, including the
gas laws.
In this chapter, you will study more of the gas laws. Although these
laws were discovered almost 200 years ago, they are still accepted today.
You will learn how the gas laws allow you to solve many problems
involving gas behaviour. You will also learn about some of the modern
applications and technological advances associated with the gas laws.
You will have a chance to test the gas laws through your own experiments
and to compare your results with those of early scientists. Finally, you
will learn about some of the gas reactions that occur in our atmosphere.
C h a p t e r   P r e v i e w
12.1 The Ideal Gas Law
12.2 Applications of the Ideal
Gas Law
12.3 Gas Law Stoichiometry
12.4 Atmospheric Reactions
and Pollution
C o n c e p t s   a n d   S k i l l s
Yo u   W i l l   N e e d
Before you begin this chapter,
review the following concepts
and skills:
(cid:2) manipulating equations
algebraically, and
applying them to solve
problems (Chapter 11,
section 11.4)
using correct signiﬁcant
digits in problem solving
(Chapter 1, section 1.2)
converting an amount
in grams to an amount in
moles, and then to a num-
ber of atoms or molecules
(Chapter 5, section 5.3)
solving stoichiometry
problems, including writ-
ing balanced equations
(Chapter 4, section 4.1
and Chapter 7, section 7.1)
How did sharing scientiﬁc
observations lead to the
gas laws?
Chapter 12  Exploring Gas Laws • MHR 471
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
12.1
The Ideal Gas Law
Near the beginning of the nineteenth century, Joseph Gay-Lussac experi-
mented with the volumes of gases. He found that adding two volumes
of gas to one volume of gas produced only two volumes of gas. Puzzled,
Gay-Lussac tried adding three volumes of gas to one volume. The result
was still two! When he tried adding one volume of gas to a second
volume of gas, again the result was two. What was going on?
In England, around the same time, John Dalton studied the masses
of compounds as they reacted to produce products. After Dalton read
about the similar work of other scientists, such as Lavoisier and the
British scientist Joseph Priestley, he contacted Gay-Lussac. He described
his results and hypotheses to Gay-Lussac. In 1808, both men published
their theories. After examining the theories of Dalton and Gay-Lussac, an
Italian scientist named Amedeo Avogadro formulated a hypothesis that
combined their theories.
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
state Avogadro’s hypothesis,
and explain how it con-
tributes to our understanding
of the reactions of gases
describe the quantitative
relationships that exist
among pressure, volume,
temperature, and amount
of substance, based on the
ideal gas law
solve quantitative problems
involving the ideal gas law
use and convert appropriate
units to express pressure
and temperature
communicate your under-
standing of the following
terms: law of combining
volumes, law of multiple
proportions, Avogadro’s
hypothesis, molar volume,
ideal gas law
Joseph Louis
Gay-Lussac
French
1778-1853
John Dalton
Amedeo Avogadro
English
1766-1844
Italian
1776-1856
\Figure
laws that we use today.
The information that was shared by these three scientists led to the gas
The Molar Volume of Gases
Gay-Lussac measured the volumes of gases before and after a reaction.
His research led him to devise the law of combining volumes: When gases
react, the volumes of the reactants and the products, measured at equal
temperatures and pressures, are always in whole number ratios. For
example, 2 volumes of hydrogen gas react with 1 volume of oxygen gas
to produce 2 volumes of water vapour.
472 MHR • Unit 4  Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
John Dalton examined the masses of compounds before and after a
reaction. Dalton’s research led him to propose the law of multiple
proportions: The masses of the elements that combine can be expressed
in small whole number ratios.
By combining these ideas, Avogadro related the volume of a gas to the
amount that is present (calculated from the mass). Avogadro divided
Dalton’s mass ratios by the molar masses of the elements to obtain the
mole ratios. He realized that these mole ratios were the same as the vol-
ume ratios that Gay-Lussac had obtained. For example, 1 L of hydrogen
gas reacts with 1 L of chlorine gas. Avogadro decided that there must be
the same number of molecules in each litre of gas. Thus, Avogadro’s
hypothesis was formulated: Equal volumes of all ideal gases at the same
temperature and pressure contain the same number of molecules.
Figures 12.2, 12.3, and 12.4 show the three reactions that produced
Gay-Lussac’s confusing observations. You can see that the mole ratios are
the same as the volume ratios. Today our knowledge of atoms and mole-
cules helps us understand Gay-Lussac’s results. We know that gases are
made of molecules that may contain more than one atom.
hydrogen gas
2 H2(g)
2 mol
2 volumes
+
+
oxygen gas
1 O2(g)
1 mol
1 volume
water vapour
2 H2O(g)
2 mol
2 volumes
Figure 12.2
Hydrogen and oxygen gases combine to form water vapour.
Language
LINK
The word symposium comes
from the ancient Greeks. A
symposium was a gathering
of intellectuals to drink, feast,
and talk. All sorts of new ideas
arose from these meetings.
The participants took away
the new ideas to work on them
further. Then they brought
their ﬁndings back to the next
symposium.
Many scientiﬁc laws are given
the name of one person. It
is important to remember, how-
ever, that most laws are the
culmination of many scientists’
work over a long time. Science
would never move forward
without ideas being shared.
Look up the word “symposium”
in a dictionary. What meaning
does it have today? Do a quick
Internet search of the word
“symposium.” What modern
symposiums can you ﬁnd?
What subjects do they cover?
As a class, hold a symposium
about gas balloons. Research
hot air balloons and helium
balloons. Also research any
other information about bal-
loons, the history of ballons,
and balloon travel that
interests you. Prepare papers
and posters to share your
information.
hydrogen gas
1 H2(g)
1 mol
1 volume
+
+
chlorine gas
1 Cl2(g)
1 mol
1 volume
hydrogen chloride gas
2 HCl(g)
2 mol
2 volumes
Figure 12.3
Hydrogen and chlorine gases combine to form hydrogen chloride gas.
Chapter 12  Exploring Gas Laws • MHR 473
hydrogen gas
3 H2(g)
3 mol
3 volumes
+
+
nitrogen gas
1 N2(g)
1 mol
1 volume
ammonia gas
2 NH3(g)
2 mol
2 volumes
Figure 12.4
Hydrogen and nitrogen combine to form ammonia gas.
Avogadro’s hypothesis can be written as a mathematical law, shown here.
Avogadro’s Law
Avogadro’s law gives us a mathematical relationship between the
volume of a gas (V) and the number of moles of gas present (n).
n α V    or    n = kV or
n1
V1
= n2
V2
where n = number of moles
V = volume
k = a constant
The next Sample Problem
involves the combined gas law.
Review this law in section 11.4
before continuing.
Based on Avogadro’s law, one mole of a gas occupies the same volume as
one mole of another gas at the same temperature and pressure. The molar
volume of a gas is the space that is occupied by one mole of the gas. Molar
volume is measured in units of L/mol. You can ﬁnd the molar volume of
a gas by dividing its volume by the number of moles that are present (V
n ).
Look at the Sample Problem below to ﬁnd out how to calculate molar
volume. Then complete the following Thought Lab to ﬁnd the molar
volumes of carbon dioxide gas, oxygen gas, and methane gas at STP.
Sample Problem
The Molar Volume of Nitrogen
Problem
A resealable 1.30 L container has a mass of 4.73 g. Nitrogen gas,
N2(g), is added to the container until the pressure is 98.0 kPa at
22.0˚C. Together, the container and the gas have a mass of 6.18 g.
Calculate the molar volume of nitrogen gas at STP.
What Is Required?
You need to ﬁnd the volume of one mole of nitrogen (the molar
volume) at STP.
Continued ...
474 MHR • Unit 4  Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 474
What Is Given?
Set out all the data in a table like the one shown below.
Situation 1:  in the container
Situation 2:  at STP
Pi = 98.0 kPa
Vi = 1.30 L
Ti = 22.0˚C, or 295 K
mi = 6.18 g − 4.73 g = 1.45 g
(Subtract the mass of the container.)
n i = ?
Pf = 101.3 kPa
Vf = ?
Tf = 0˚C, or 273 K
mf = 1.45 g
(The mass remains the same.)
n f = n i = ?
Plan Your Strategy
Algebraic method
Step 1 Calculate the number of moles of nitrogen gas (ni) by
dividing the mass of the nitrogen in the container by
the molar mass of nitrogen gas (28.02 g/mol).
n = m
M
Step 2 Use the combined gas law from Chapter 11 to ﬁnd the
volume of nitrogen at STP (Vf).
PROBLEM TIP
In the Sample Problem, you
will see two different methods
of solving the problem: the
algebraic method and the
ratio method. Choose the
method you prefer to solve
this type of problem.
Step 3 Use the volume (Vf) and the number of moles (nf = ni) to
ﬁnd the molar volume (V
volume of one mole of gas.
n ). The molar volume is the
Molar volumes = V
n
Ratio method
Step 1 Calculate the number of moles of nitrogen gas (ni) by
dividing the mass of the nitrogen in the container by the
molar mass of nitrogen gas (28.02 g/mol).
n = m
M
Step 2 Since the pressure increases from 98.0 kPa to 101.3 kPa,
the volume will decrease. Multiply the initial volume by a
pressure ratio that is less than 1. Since the temperature
decreases from 295 K to 273 K, the volume will decrease
further. Multiply the initial volume by a temperature ratio
that is less than 1.
Step 3 Since there is less than 1 mol of nitrogen gas present, the
volume of 1 mol of nitrogen gas (the molar volume) will be
greater than the volume you calculated in step 2. To ﬁnd
the molar volume, multiply by a mole ratio that is greater
than 1.
Continued ...
Chapter 12  Exploring Gas Laws • MHR 475
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 475
Act on Your Strategy
Algebraic method
Step 1 Calculate the number of moles.
n = m
M
=
1.45 g
28.02 g/mol
= 0.0517 mol
Step 2 Find the volume of nitrogen at STP.
= PfVf
Tf
PiVi
Ti
∴Vf = PiViTf
TiPf
= 98.0 kPa × 1.30 L × 273 K
295 K × 101.3 kPa
= 1.16 L
Step 3 Find the molar volume.
Molar volume = V/n
=
1.16 L
0.0517 mol
= 22.4 L/mol
Therefore, the molar volume of nitrogen at STP is 22.4 L/mol.
Ratio method
Step 1 Calculate the number of moles.
n = m
M
=
1.45 g
28.02 g/mol
= 0.0517 mol
Step 2 Vf is the ﬁnal volume of the nitrogen gas.
Vf = 1.30 L × 98.0 kPa
101.3 kPa
× 273 K
295 K
= 1.16 L
Step 3 Vm is the volume of 1 mol of the nitrogen gas.
Vm = 1.16 L × 1.00 mol
0.0517 mol
= 22.4 L
The molar volume is equal to the volume Vm divided by 1.00
mol. Thus the molar volume is 22.4 L/mol.
Check Your Solution
The answer is expressed in the correct units. It agrees with the
accepted value. There are three signiﬁcant digits in the answer. This
is consistent with the least number of signiﬁcant digits in the question.
Continued ...
476 MHR • Unit 4  Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 476
Practice Problems
1. At 19˚C and 100 kPa, 0.021 mol of oxygen gas, O2(g), occupy a
volume of 0.50 L. What is the molar volume of oxygen gas at this
temperature and pressure?
2. What is the molar volume of hydrogen gas, H2(g), at 255˚C and
102 kPa, if a 1.09 L volume of the gas has a mass of 0.0513 g?
3. A sample of helium gas, He(g), has a mass of 11.28 g. At STP, the
sample has a volume of 63.2 L. What is the molar volume of this
gas at 32.2˚C and 98.1 kPa?
4. In the Sample Problem, you discovered that the molar volume of
nitrogen gas is 22.4 L at STP.
(a) How many moles of nitrogen are present in 10.0 L at STP?
(b) What is the mass of this gas sample?
ThoughtLab
Molar Volume of Gases
Two students decided to calculate the molar
volumes of carbon dioxide, oxygen, and methane
gas. First they measured the mass of an empty
150 mL syringe under vacuum conditions. This
ensured that the syringe did not contain any air.
Next they ﬁlled the syringe with 150 mL of carbon
dioxide gas. They measured and recorded the
mass of the syringe plus the gas. The students
repeated their procedure for oxygen gas and for
methane gas.
Finally, the students found the temperature
of the room to be 23.0˚C (296 K). They found the
pressure to be 98.7 kPa. They took these values
to be the temperature and pressure of the three
gases. The students’ results are given in the table.
Procedure
1. Copy the table into your notebook.
2. Calculate the molar volume of carbon dioxide
gas at the given temperature and pressure,
and at STP. Write your calculations and
answers in the table.
3. Do the same calculations for oxygen and
methane gas. Write your calculations and
answers in the table.
Analysis
1. Compare the three molar volumes at STP.
What do you observe?
2. The accepted molar volume of a gas at STP
is 22.4 L/mol. Use this value to calculate the
percent error in your experimental data for
each gas.
Three Gases at 296 K and 98.7 kPa
Gas
Volume of gas (V)
Mass of empty syringe
Mass of gas + syringe
Mass of gas (m)
Molar mass (M)
Number of moles of gas (n = m/M)
Volume of gas at STP (273 K and  101.3 kPa)
Molar volume at STP (MV = V/n)
carbon dioxide
oxygen
methane
150 mL
25.08 g
25.34 g
150 mL
25.08 g
25.27 g
150 mL
25.08 g
25.18 g
Chapter 12  Exploring Gas Laws • MHR 477
In the Thought Lab, you found that the molar volume of one gas is roughly
the same as the molar volume of another gas at the same temperature and
pressure. In fact, the molar volume of an ideal gas at STP is 22.4 L/mol.
Figure 12.5 shows a balloon with a volume of 22.4 L compared to some
common objects. This is a fairly large volume of gas. For example, a
basketball has a volume of only 7.5 L.
What are the temperature and
pressure at STP? Go back to
section 11.4 to remind yourself.
Figure 12.5
The other objects are shown for comparison.
One mole of any gas at STP occupies 22.4 L (22.4 dm3). How large is 22.4 L?
In Chapter 11, you learned that temperature, pressure, and volume are
related. Based on Avogadro’s law, the number of moles is related to the
temperature, pressure, and volume of a gas. Therefore, Avogadro’s law can
be applied to solve gas problems involving moles and volume, when the
temperature and pressure remain constant. Figure 12.6 explains the rela-
tionship among temperature, pressure, volume, and number of moles of
a gas.
The following Sample Problems show you how to do gas calculations
using Avogadro’s law.
Patm
Pgas
Pgas = Patm
Gas
n increases
fixedT
Patm
Pgas
V increases
Patm
Pgas
More molecules
increase collisions:
Pgas > Patm
V increases until
Pgas = Patm
At a temperature (T ), a given amount of a gas (n) produces a pressure (P ).
Figure 12.6
When more gas is added, the number of moles (n) increases. This results in more molec-
ular collisions with the container walls, thus increasing the pressure of the gas. The
volume (V ) of the gas increases until the pressure is again equal to the pressure of the
surroundings.
478 MHR • Unit 4  Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
Sample Problem
Volumes of Gases
Problem
What is the volume of 3.0 mol of nitrous oxide, NO2(g), at STP?
What Is Required?
You need to ﬁnd the volume of nitrous oxide at STP (Vf) .
What Is Given?
You know that 1.00 mol of a gas occupies 22.4 L at STP.
∴ ni = 1.0 mol
Vi = 22.4 L
nf = 3.0 mol of NO2
Plan Your Strategy
Algebraic method
Use Avogadro’s law:
ni
Vi
= nf
Vf
Cross multiply to solve for Vf, the unknown volume of NO2.
Ratio method
There are 3 mol of nitrous oxide. Thus, the volume of nitrous
oxide at STP must be larger than the volume of 1 mol of gas at
STP. Multiply by a mole ratio that is greater than 1.
Act on Your Strategy
PROBLEM TIP
In these Sample Problems, you
will see two different methods
of solving the problem: the
algebraic method and the
ratio method. Choose the
method you prefer to solve
this type of problem.
Algebraic method
Vf = nfVi
ni
= 3.0 mol × 22.4 L
1.00 mol
= 67 L
Ratio method
Vf = 22.4 L × 3.0 mol
1.0 mol
= 67 L
Therefore, there are 67 L of nitrous oxide.
Check Your Solution
The signiﬁcant digits and the units are all correct.
The volume of nitrous oxide is three times the volume of 1 mol of
gas at STP. This makes sense, since there are 3 mol of nitrous oxide.
Chapter 12  Exploring Gas Laws • MHR 479
Sample Problem
Moles of Gas
Problem
Suppose that you have 44.8 L of methane gas at STP.
(a) How many moles are present?
(b) What is the mass (in g) of the gas?
(c) How many molecules of gas are present?
What Is Required?
(a) You need to calculate the number of moles.
(b) You need to calculate the mass of the gas.
(c) You need to calculate the number of molecules.
What Is Given?
The gas is at STP. Thus 1.00 mol of gas has a volume of 22.4 L.
You know that one mole contains 6.02 × 1023 molecules. There are
44.8 L of gas.
Plan Your Strategy
Algebraic method
(a) Use Avogadro’s law. Solve for the number of moles by cross
multiplying.
(b) Multiply the number of moles (n) by the molar mass (M) to
ﬁnd the mass of the gas (m).
m = n × M
(c) Multiply the number of moles (n) by the Avogadro constant
(6.02 × 1023) to ﬁnd the number of molecules.
# of molecules = n × 6.02 × 1023 molecules/mol
Ratio method
(a) The volume of the unknown gas is 44.8 L. Since the volume
is greater than 22.4 L, there is more than 1 mol of gas. To ﬁnd
the unknown number of moles (n), multiply by a volume ratio
that is greater than 1.
(b) Multiply the number of moles (n) by the molar mass (M) to
ﬁnd the mass of the gas (m).
m = n × M
(c) Multiply the number of moles (n) by the Avogadro constant
(6.02 × 1023) to ﬁnd the number of molecules.
# of molecules = n × 6.02 × 1023 molecules/mol
Continued ...
480 MHR • Unit 4  Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 480
Act on Your Strategy
Algebraic method
= nf
(a) ni
Vf
Vi
nf = niVf
Vi
= 1.00 mol × 44.8 L
22.4 L
= 2.00 mol
(b) Find the molar mass of methane, CH4.
1C = 1 × 12.01 g/mol
4H = 4 × 1.01 g/mol
= 16.05 g/mol
MCH4
m = n × M
= 2.00 mol × 16.05 g/mol
= 32.1 g
(c) # molecules = 2.00 mol × 6.02 × 1023 molecules
mol
= 1.20 × 1024 molecules
Ratio method
(a) n = 1.00 mol × 44.8 L
22.4 L
= 2.00 mol
(b) Find the molar mass of methane, CH4.
1C = 1 × 12.01 g/mol
4H = 4 × 4.04 g/mol
= 16.05 g/mol
MCH4
m = n × M
= 2.00 mol × 16.05 g/mol
= 32.1 g
(c) # molecules = 2.00 mol × 6.02 × 1023 molecules
mol
= 1.20 × 1024 molecules
Therefore, 2.00 mol of methane are present. The mass
of the gas is 32.1 g. 1.20 × 1024 molecules are present.
Check Your Solution
The signiﬁcant digits are correct.
The volume of methane is double the volume of 1 mol of gas.
It makes sense that 2 mol of methane are present. It also makes
sense that the number of molecules present is double the
Avogadro constant.
Chapter 12  Exploring Gas Laws • MHR 481
PROBLEM TIP
To solve many of these
problems, try setting up a
proportion and solving by
cross multiplication.
Table 12.1 Molar Volume
of Several Real Gases at STP
Gas
helium, He
neon, Ne
argon, Ar
hydrogen, H2
nitrogen, N2
oxygen, O2
carbon
dioxide, CO2
Molar volume
(L/mol)
22.398
22.401
22.410
22.430
22.413
22.414
22.414
ammonia, NH3
22.350
Practice Problems
5. A balloon contains 2.0 L of helium gas at STP. How many moles of
helium are present?
6. How many moles of gas are present in 11.2 L at STP? How many
molecules?
7. What is the volume, at STP, of 3.45 mol of argon gas?
8. A certain set of conditions allows 4.0 mol of gas to be held in
a 70 L container. What volume do 6.0 mol of gas need under
the same conditions of temperature and pressure?
9. At STP, a container holds 14.01 g of nitrogen gas, 16.00 g of oxygen
gas, 66.00 g of carbon dioxide gas, and 17.04 g of ammonia gas.
What is the volume of the container?
10. (a) What volume do 2.50 mol of oxygen occupy at STP?
(b) How many molecules are present in this volume of oxygen?
(c) How many oxygen atoms are present in this volume of oxygen?
11. What volume do 2.00 × 1024 atoms of neon occupy at STP?
Volumes of Real Gases
You know that ideal gases have a volume of 22.4 L at STP. Do real gases
have the same volume? The volumes of several real gases at STP are given
in Table 12.1. All the volumes are very close to 22.4 L/mol, the molar
volume of an ideal gas. Scientists have decided that 22.4 L/mol is an
acceptable approximation for any gas at STP when using gas laws.
Although the volumes are the same, one mole of a gas will have a differ-
ent mass and density than one mole of another gas. (See Figure 12.7.)
22.4 L
22.4 L
22.4 L
He
N2
O2
At STP, gases such
Figure 12.7
as helium, nitrogen, and oxygen
behave as ideal gases. They have
a molar volume of 22.4 L.
n  = 1 mol
P = 1 atm (760 torr)
T = 0 ˚C (273 K)
V = 22.4 L
Number of gas particles
= 6.022 x 10 23
Mass = 4.003 g
d = 0.179 g/L
n = 1 mol
P = 1 atm (760 torr)
T = 0 ˚C (273 K)
V = 22.4 L
Number of gas particles
= 6.022 x 10 23
Mass = 28.02 g
d = 1.25 g/L
n = 1 mol
P = 1 atm (760 torr)
T = 0 ˚C (273 K)
V = 22.4 L
Number of gas particles
= 6.022 x 10 23
Mass = 32.00 g
d = 1.43 g/L
482 MHR • Unit 4  Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
Look back at Table 12.1. It
gives more accurate molar vol-
umes for several gases. Using
what you have learned about
the way real gases behave,
explain why these molar
volumes are slightly different
from the molar volume of an
ideal gas.
A Deeper Look: Real Gas Deviations
Do real gases always behave like ideal gases? At STP, you have seen
that most real gases behave like ideal gases. At high pressures and/or
low temperatures, however, gases no longer behave ideally. To understand
why, recall the characteristics of an ideal gas, according to the kinetic
molecular theory. (You learned this in Chapter 11.)
• Gas molecules have insigniﬁcant volume of their own.
• Molecules have no attractive forces between each other or with their
container.
• Molecules move in perfectly straight lines.
• Collisions are completely elastic and, thus, do not use up energy.
These characteristics led to the ideal gas law. They are accurate enough
for most applications. They are not perfect, however. In fact, most gases
fall short of these characteristics in many ways:
• The particles of a real gas have a signiﬁcant volume of their own.
• Molecules do attract each other.
• Molecules do not necessarily move in straight lines.
• Collisions are not completely elastic.
At high pressures and/or low temperatures, gases have smaller volumes.
This means that the gas molecules are closer together. Since they are
closer together, the molecules interact more than when they are far apart.
It is no longer true to say that the molecules have no attractive forces
between each other or with their container. Part A of Figure 12.8 illus-
trates how this affects the pressure of a gas. Also, since the total volume
is smaller, the amount of space taken up by the gas molecules is more
important. You can no longer ignore the volume of the gas molecules.
Part B of Figure 12.8 illustrates that gas molecules do occupy part of the
volume of the container.
(A) Because parti-
Figure 12.8
cles are attracted to each other,
the pressure is reduced. (B) Since
particles take up space, the total
volume of empty space is smaller
than the volume of the container.
A
B
Scientists who want more accuracy in their experiments have adapted
the ideal gas law to reﬂect the behaviour of real gases. In later chemistry
courses, you will learn more about this corrected version of the ideal gas
law, called the Van der Waals equation.
To summarize, at low pressures and high temperatures, most gases
behave as ideal gases. Under any conditions that allow attractive forces
between molecules to occur, gases no longer behave as an ideal gas. They
behave as real gases.
Chapter 12  Exploring Gas Laws • MHR 483
History
LINK
The French chemist, Antoine
Lavoisier (1743–1794), was the
ﬁrst person to notice the gas-
volume relationship. He
observed water decomposing
to give two volumes of hydro-
gen and one volume of oxygen.
He mentioned this relationship
in his 1789 textbook Eléments
de la Chemie.
Arriving at the Ideal Gas Law
In the Sample Problem earlier, you used three steps to ﬁnd the molar
volume of nitrogen gas. After calculating the number of moles, you
calculated the ﬁnal volume using the combined gas law. Then you used
Avogadro’s law to ﬁnd the volume of one mole of nitrogen. There is an
easier way to do problems like this—by combining the two gas laws.
After Avogadro’s work, it did not take scientists long to connect V α n
(Avogadro’s law) with V α T
P (the combined gas law).
V α n
V α T
P
∴V α nT
P
∴PV
= R, where R is a constant
nT
As you know, all gases behave in a similar way. The universal gas
constant (R), which applies to all gases, was derived for the ﬁnal equation
given above. Examine the calculation below to see how R was derived.
For one mole of gas at STP,
P = 101.3 kPa
T = 273 K
V = 22.4 L
n = 1.00 mol
R = PV
nT
= 101.3 kPa × 22.4 L
1.00 mol × 273.15 K
= 8.31
kPa·L
mol·K
Electronic Learning Partner
Go to the Chemistry 11
Electronic Learning Partner
for an interactive simulation
on the ideal gas law.
When it is measured more accurately, the universal gas constant (R)
has a value of 8.314  kPa·L
resulting equation is an efﬁcient tool for solving many problems that
involve gases.
mol·K . This was the ﬁnal piece of the equation. The
The ideal gas law states that the pressure multiplied by the volume is
equal to the number of moles multiplied by the universal gas constant and
the temperature.
PV = nRT
Guidelines for Using the Ideal Gas Law
• Always convert the temperature to kelvins (K).
• Always convert the masses to moles (mol).
• Always convert the volumes to litres (L).
• Using the ideal gas law will be easier if you always convert the
pressures to kilopascals (kPa). Then you can memorize the value
of R (8.314  kPa·L
mol·K ) and use it for every calculation. If you happen to
forget the value of R, you can calculate it by ﬁnding R for 1 mol of
gas at STP.
484 MHR • Unit 4  Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
Go back to section 11.2 to
review the units for pressure.
Converting the Units of the Universal Gas Constant
Some people prefer to use a converted value of R, rather than converting
all the pressures to kilopascals, as suggested in the guidelines above.
What are the units for R if the pressure is given in atmospheres?
8.314 kPa·L
mol·K
×
1atm
101.3 kPa
= 0.08206
atm·L
mol·K
What are the units for R if the pressure is given in torr (mm Hg)?
8.314
kPa·L
mol·K
× 760 mmHg
101.3 kPa
= 62.37
mmHg·L
mol·K
Since R is an exact constant, always express it with four signiﬁcant digits.
Do not worry about changing the signiﬁcant digits of R in your calcula-
tions. Always keep four digits, and then ﬁx the number of signiﬁcant
digits in your answer.
The diagram below illustrates the evolution of the ideal gas law. It is
a brief summary of what you have learned so far in this section. The
following Sample Problems show you how to do calculations using the
ideal gas law.
Concept Organizer
The Evolution of the Ideal Gas Law
Boyle’s law
I
P∝P
V
Charles’ law
V∝T
Gay-Lussac’s law
P∝T
PV
T
PV = nRT
n∝V
Dalton’s iaw of
multiple proportions
Gay-Lussac’s law of
combining volumes
experimental
derivation of R
Sample Problem
Calculating Molar Volume Using PV = nRT
Problem
Use the ideal gas law to calculate the molar volume of a gas at
standard ambient temperature and pressure (SATP). The conditions
for SATP are 298 K and 100 kPa.
What Is Required?
You need to ﬁnd the molar volume, MV = V
n
for your answer will be in mol/L.
, at SATP. The units
Continued ...
Chapter 12  Exploring Gas Laws • MHR 485
PROBLEM TIP
The molar volume is in
L/1.00 mol. If you let
n = 1.00 mol, you only need
to ﬁnd V.
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 485
What Is Given?
P = 100 kPa
n = 1.00 mol
R = 8.314 kPa·L/mol·K
T = 298 K
Plan Your Strategy
Let PV = nRT, and solve for V. Then substitute the known values
into the equation.
Act on Your Strategy
PV = nRT
∴V = nRT
P
= 1.00 mol × 8.314 kPa·L/mol·K × 298 K
100 kPa
= 24.8 L
The molar volume of a gas at SATP is 24.8 L/mol.
Check Your Solution
The molar volume is in units of L/mol. 24.8 L/mol is slightly larger
than the 22.4 L/mol molar volume at STP. This is the expected
result, since the pressure has decreased and the temperature has
increased.
Sample Problem
A Laughing Matter
Problem
Dentists sometimes use laughing gas (dinitrogen oxide, N2O) to keep
patients relaxed during dental procedures. A cylinder of laughing gas
has a diameter of 23.0 cm and a height of 140 cm. The pressure is
108 kPa, and the temperature is 294 K. How many grams of laughing
gas are in the cylinder?
What Is Required?
You need to ﬁnd the mass (in g) of laughing gas in a cylinder at
108 kPa and 294 K.
What Is Given?
P = 108 kPa
V = πr2h, where r = 11.5 cm and h = 140 cm
Continued ...
486 MHR • Unit 4  Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 486
R = 8.314 kPa·L/mol·K
T = 294 K
Plan Your Strategy
Step 1 Use the formula for the volume of a cylinder (πr2h) to
approximate the volume of the gas inside.
Step 2 Solve the ideal gas equation for n. Put the known values
into the equation to ﬁnd the number of moles present (n).
Step 3 Calculate the molar mass (M) of dinitrogen oxide. Use it
to ﬁnd the mass (m) of the gas present.
Act on Your Strategy
Step 1 Find the volume of the cylinder.
V = πr2h
= π × 11.52 cm2 × 140 cm
= 5.73 × 104 cm3
= 57.3 L
Step 2 Use the gas law to ﬁnd the number of moles.
PV = nRT
∴n = PV
RT
=
108 kPa × 57.3 L
8.314 kPa·L/mol·K × 294 K
= 2.53 mol
Step 3 Calculate the mass of the gas.
For N2O, the molar mass is
2N = 2 × 14.01 g/mol
1O = 1 × 16.00 g/mol
MN2O = 44.02 g/mol
For 2.53 mol, the mass (m) is
m = n × M
= 2.53 mol × 44.02 g/mol
= 111 g
Therefore, 111 g of laughing gas is in the cylinder.
Check Your Solution
The answer is in grams, which is the unit you were asked for.
There are three signiﬁcant digits. This is consistent with the least
number of signiﬁcant digits in the question.
Practice Problems
12. 4.00 L of ammonia gas in a container holds 2.17 mol at 206 kPa.
What is the temperature inside the container?
Continued ...
Chapter 12  Exploring Gas Laws • MHR 487
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 487
13. How many kilograms of chlorine gas are contained in 87.6 m3
at 290 K and 2.40 atm? Hint: 1 m3 = 1000 L
14. Calculate the volume of 3.03 g of hydrogen gas at a pressure
of 560 torr and a temperature of 139 K.
15. A 6.0 × 102 L reaction tank contains 5.0 mol of oxygen gas and
28 mol of nitrogen gas. If the temperature is 83˚C, what is the
pressure of the oxygen, in kPa?
Section Wrap-up
In this section, you learned that the ideal gas law was derived from
Avogadro’s law and the combined gas law. You can use the ideal gas law
to calculate the pressure, temperature, volume, or number of moles of
a gas. In the next section, you will learn how to apply the ideal gas law
to identify unknown gases on the basis of their densities and/or molar
masses.
Remember that you can manipulate the ideal gas law to solve for any
variable.
P = nRT
V
V = nRT
P
n = PV
RT
T = PV
nR
The universal gas constant (R ) always has the same value:
8.314 kPa·L/mol·K. (You need to use an alternative value of R if
pressure is given in atmospheres or in torr.)
Section Review
1
2
3
4
5
6
I
I
How many grams of sulfur dioxide are in 36.2 L at STP?
At certain conditions, 20 mol of a gas occupy 498 L. What volume
do 35 mol occupy?
I
What is the pressure of 0.76 mol of gas at 48˚C in 8.0 L?
How many grams of bromine gas, Br2, are in 3.12 L at a pressure of
I
2.4 atm and a temperature of −20˚C? How many molecules of bromine
gas are there?
I
What is the temperature of 6.02 mol of hydrogen sulﬁde in a 132 L
tank at 0.95 atm?
K/U
What was Avogadro’s hypothesis? Explain how Avogadro
contributed to our understanding of gases and the relationships
among the properties of gases.
7
K/U
1.00 m3 of regular air at 1.0 atm is compressed to one eighth
of the volume at a constant temperature. What is the pressure
contribution of the nitrogen? Hint: See the Table 11.2 in Chapter 11,
section 11.4.
P R O B E W A R E
If you have access to probe-
ware, do the Gas Laws lab, or
a similar lab available from a
probeware company.
488 MHR • Unit 4  Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
Applications of
the Ideal Gas Law
Studying gases and their properties becomes more interesting when you
realize that your own body is a container for gases. Your lungs hold air, an
important solution of gases that you need to live. As well, there is the
embarrassing type of gas, called methane, that results from the digestive
process. How many moles of oxygen do your lungs hold? Using the laws
and properties you have learned, you can now calculate this fact about
your own body. (See Figure 12.9.)
12.2
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
solve more quantitative
problems using the ideal
gas law
determine the molar mass
of an unknown gas through
experimentation
Biology
LINK
As you breathe in, your
diaphragm moves down and
your rib cage moves out to
increase the volume of your
lungs. As the volume increas-
es, the air pressure in your
lungs decreases. Air from the
outside rushes in to ﬁll the
expanded volume. This is an
application of Boyle’s law. In
the same way, your lungs
decrease in volume when you
exhale. The resulting increase
in pressure pushes air out of
your lungs.
Your lungs hold about 4 L of air. When you breathe out,
Figure 12.9
only 500 mL of air is expelled. The same amount of air is taken in when
you inhale one breath. If air contains 20% oxygen gas, how many moles
of oxygen gas do your lungs contain at 37˚C and 100 kPa?
In this section, you will learn more about two properties of a gas that
are closely related to molar volume: density and molar mass. You have
already encountered these properties, but now you will use them to help
you with your gas calculations.
Chapter 12  Exploring Gas Laws • MHR 489
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
In this book, we use a capital
M to symbolize molar mass.
When working with solutions,
you may see M used to
express the molar concentra-
tion of a solution (for example,
6 M HCl(aq). Make sure that
you do not become confused!
Always check to make sure
that you understand what
M is referring to.
Density and Molar Mass
As you learned in the last section, the molar volume of a gas is deﬁned as
the space that is occupied by one mole of the gas. It is always given in
units of L/mol.
The density of a gas is similar to the density of a solid or a liquid.
Density is found by dividing mass by volume. The density of a gas is
usually reported in units of g/L.
The molar mass of a gas refers to the mass (in g) of one mole of the
gas. You can calculate molar mass by adding the masses of atoms in the
periodic table. You can also calculate molar mass by dividing the mass of
a sample by the number of moles that are present. Molar mass is always
expressed in the units g/mol. Table 12.2 summarizes molar volume,
density, and molar mass.
Table 12.2 Molar Volume, Density, and Molar Mass
Molar volume
Unit
L/mol
Density
g/L
Molar mass
g/mol
Meaning
volume/amount
mass/volume
Calculations
Molar volume =
Volume
Number of moles
Density =
Mass
Volume
MV = V/n
D = m/V
mass/amount
Molar mass = Sum of molar masses
of the atoms in the compound
or
Molar mass =
Mass
Number of moles
M = m/n
Molar volume (L/mol), density
(g/L), and molar mass (g/mol)
are closely related. You can
calculate each property using
the other two. Analyze the
units to discover the exact
relationship.
Dense Gases Can Be Deadly
You have learned that the volume of a gas at a certain temperature and
pressure is the same as the volume of any other gas at the same tempera-
ture and pressure. For example, all gases have the approximate volume
of 22.4 L at STP. The molecular masses of different gases, however, are all
different. This means that each gas has a different density, or mass per
unit of volume. (Look back at Figure 12.7 to see three examples.)
Understanding the densities of gases can be useful in the everyday
world. For example, miners who drill deep into the ground must know
which gases are present, and which have the highest densities. (See
Figure 12.10.) They must take appropriate safety precau-
tions to avoid explosions, poisoning, or suffocation.
On December 3, 1984, an industrial accident in
Bhopal, India, released a large quantity of methyliso-
cyanate, CH3NCO, a dense gas, into the air. This highly
irritating and toxic gas caused the death of more than
3000 people living nearby. The Chemistry Bulletin on
the next page gives an example of a natural disaster
involving a dense gas. Figure 12.11, on page 492,
illustrates a popular use for gases that are less dense
than air.
Dense gases sit at the bottoms of pits, such as
Figure 12.10
mines and wells. Miners must understand the behaviour of these
gases to avoid accidents. For example, dense carbon dioxide gas
can cause suffocation.
490 MHR • Unit 4  Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
Chemistry Bulletin
The Killing Lakes of Cameroon
On August 15, 1984, a cloud of deadly gas
burst from Lake Monoun in Cameroon, a coun-
try in western Africa. Thirty-seven people died
from suffocation. Two years later, on August
21, 1986, Lake Nyos, a larger and deeper lake,
ejected a full cubic kilometre of the same gas.
The gas travelled silently into neighbouring vil-
lages, killing 1700 people and thousands of
livestock. What was this toxic gas?
Lake Nyos and Lake Monoun both sit in
volcanic craters. The lakes are hazardous
because of their volcanic origin, even though
both volcanoes are dormant. Volcanoes are
vents through Earth’s crust. They carry magma,
a mixture of molten rock and dissolved gases,
to the surface of Earth. When magma rises to
Earth’s surface in volcanoes, the pressure is
decreased. The gases come out of solution and
expand.
Magma contains a large quantity of dis-
solved carbon dioxide and minerals. These are
released from the magma into the ground water
under a volcano’s crater. Lake Nyos and Lake
Monoun are both fed at the bottom by volcanic
springs of mineral-rich carbonated ground
water. In some crater lakes, there is enough
water circulation for the carbon dioxide to bub-
ble up from the bottom and be released at the
surface. The surface waters of Lake Nyos and
Lake Monoun, however, do not mix with deep-
er waters. The carbon dioxide remains at the
bottom. Volcanic springs continue to supply
the lakes with carbon dioxide, which remains
trapped at the bottom. Fresher surface water
sits on this dense lower layer.
Scientists believe that the tragedies at Lake
Nyos and Lake Monoun were caused by a dis-
ruption of the water layers, perhaps triggered
by a landslide, an earthquake, or even a strong
wind. Lower carbonated water was suddenly
released into the upper water. As it moved up
to the surface, the pressure on the gas
decreased while the temperature increased. As
a result, the carbon dioxide gas rapidly bub-
bled out of solution. At Lake Nyos, the sudden
release of the lower lake water into the upper
layers caused a plume of water and gas to rise
high into the air.
How did this massive release of carbon
dioxide cause so many deaths? Carbon dioxide
gas is one-and-a-half times as dense as air.
It sinks to the ground and displaces the oxy-
genated air we need to breathe. The invisible,
odourless carbon dioxide that was released
from Lake Nyos and Lake Monoun settled
on the ground. It travelled rapidly down the
slopes into populated regions. People quickly
became unconscious and died of suffocation.
Carbon dioxide continues to accumulate at
the bottoms of both lakes. An international
team of scientists is developing a plan to
release this carbon dioxide by controlled
degassing. They plan to insert long pipes deep
into both lakes and suck up some of the dense
bottom water. This will create a pressure differ-
ence and cause a fountain of gas-rich water to
jet from the pipes.
Making Connections
1. Calculate and compare the density of one
mole of CO2(g) with the density of one mole
of N2(g) at STP. (Nitrogen gas is the main
constituent of air.) Explain the signiﬁcance
of your calculations.
2. How is carbonated water produced
artiﬁcially, and what is it used for?
Do research to ﬁnd out.
Chapter 12  Exploring Gas Laws • MHR 491
Web
LINK
www.school.mcgrawhill.ca/
resources/
Many accidents have
occurred because of dense
gases in mines. Which gases
are dangerous? What safety
precautions should be taken?
To learn more, go to the web
site above. Go to Science
Resources, then to Chemistry
11 to ﬁnd out where to go next.
History
LINK
In World War I, a highly
irritating gas called phosgene,
COCl2, was used against the
Allied troops. Phosgene is
about 3.4 times more dense
than air. In concentrations
above 50 ppm, it causes the
lungs to ﬁll up with ﬂuid. This
results in diminished lung
capacity, and subsequent col-
lapse of the heart. Phosgene
can bring about death within
hours.
Helium balloons and hot air balloons also depend on the density of
Figure 12.11
gases. These objects are ﬁlled with gases that are less dense than air. Therefore, they
are able to ﬂoat.
In the following Sample Problem, you will use the ideal gas law to ﬁnd
the density of nitrogen gas.
Sample Problem
Finding the Density of Nitrogen Gas
Problem
Nitrogen gas makes up almost 80% of our atmosphere. What is the
density of pure nitrogen gas, in g/L, at 12.50˚C and 126.63 kPa?
What Is Required?
Find the density of nitrogen gas, in g/L, at 12.50˚C
and 126.63 kPa pressure.
What Is Given?
P = 126.63 kPa
T = 12.50˚C
Plan Your Strategy
Step 1 Change the temperature to kelvins. The temperature in this
question is given to two decimal places. Therefore, use a
conversion factor with two decimal places: + 273.15.
Step 2 Calculate the molar mass (M) of nitrogen gas, N2, using the
molar mass in the periodic table.
Step 3 Since the volume is not given, set it as 1.00 L. Since the
pressure is given in kilopascals, use R = 8.314 kPa·L/mol·K.
Substitute the numbers and units for P, T, R, and V into the
ideal gas law equation. Solve for n.
Continued ...
492 MHR • Unit 4  Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 492
Step 4 Convert n to the mass of nitrogen (m) by multiplying the
number of moles by the molar mass (M) of N2.
Step 5 Find the density by dividing the mass by the volume (1.00 L).
Act on Your Strategy
Step 1 T = (12.50˚C + 273.15)
= 285.65 K
Step 2 MN2
= 2 × 14.01 g/mol
= 28.02 g/mol
Step 3 PV = nRT
∴ n = PV
RT
=
(126.63 kPa)(1.00 L)
(8.314 kPa·L/mol·K)(285.65 K)
−2 mol
= 5.3320 × 10
Step 4 The mass of N2 is
m = n × M
= (5.3348 × 10
= 1.4940 g
−2 mol)(28.02 g/mol)
Step 5 The mass of 1.00 L of nitrogen gas is 1.494 g. By dividing this
by the volume, 1.00 L, we obtain a density of 1.494 g/L.
Check Your Solution
When the units cancel out in the ideal gas equation, mol remains.
When units cancel in the density equation, g/L remain.
The least number of digits in the question is four. Therefore, the
answer should have four signiﬁcant digits, which it does.
Practice Problems
16. Oxygen makes up about 20% of our atmosphere. Find the density
of pure oxygen gas, in g/L, for the conditions in the Sample
Problem: 12.50˚C and 126.63 kPa.
17. Find the density of butane gas, C4H10, (in g/L) at SATP
conditions: 298 K and 100 kPa.
18. The atmosphere of the imaginary planet Xylo is made up entirely
of poisonous chlorine gas, Cl2. The atmospheric pressure of this
inhospitable planet is 155.0 kPa, and the temperature is 89˚C.
What is the density of the atmosphere?
19. The atmosphere of planet Yaza, from the same star system as
Xylo, is made of ﬂuorine gas, F2 . The density of the atmosphere
on Yaza is twice the density of the atmosphere on Xylo. The
temperature of both planets is the same. What is the atmospheric
pressure of Yaza?
Chapter 12  Exploring Gas Laws • MHR 493
Molar Mass of a Gas
You can ﬁnd the molar mass of a gaseous element or compound in the
same way that you ﬁnd the molar mass of any other element or compound:
by adding up the masses of the atoms. You can also ﬁnd the molar mass
by dividing the mass by the number of moles. (See Figure 12.12.)
C O U R S E
C H A L L E N G E
How can you use what you
learn in this Sample Problem to
help you identify the gas given
off by water plants? You will
apply your learning later on,
in the Chemistry Course
Challenge.
Figure 12.12
paper? How could you determine it in a laboratory?
How could you determine the molar mass of vaporized iodine gas on
In the laboratory, calculating the molar mass of an unknown gas can help
you identify it. The next Sample Problem will demonstrate this.
Sample Problem
Using Molar Mass to Identify an Unknown Gas
Problem
A scientist isolates 2.366 g of a gas. The sample occupies a volume of
800 mL at 78.0˚C and 103 kPa. Use these data to calculate the molar
mass of the gas. Is the gas most likely to be bromine, krypton, neon,
or ﬂuorine?
What Is Given?
P = 103 kPa
V = 800 mL
m = 2.366 g
R = 8.314 kPa·L/mol·K
T = 78.0˚C
What Is Required?
You need to ﬁnd the number of moles. Then you need to use the
mass and the number of moles to ﬁnd the molar mass of the gas.
Continued ...
494 MHR • Unit 4  Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 494
Plan Your Strategy
Convert the temperature to kelvins. Solve PV = nRT for n. Then
substitute in the known values to ﬁnd the number of moles. Finally,
set up a proportion to ﬁnd the number of grams that would be in one
mole, using the equation M = m
the mass, and n is the number of moles.
n , where M is the molar mass, m is
Act on Your Strategy
T(K) = T(˚C) + 273
= 78.0˚C + 273
= 351 K
Using the ideal gas law,
PV = nRT
∴ n = PV
RT
=
103 kPa × 0.800 L
8.314 kPa·L/mol·K × 351 K
= 0.0282 mol
M = m
n
=
2.366 g
0.0282 mol
= 83.9 g/mol
The molar mass of the gas is 83.9 g/mol.
To identify the gas, compare the molar masses of the four
gases mentioned.
Bromine, Br2, has a molar mass of 2 × 79.9 g/mol = 141.8 g/mol .
Krypton, Kr, has a molar mass of 83.8 g/mol.
Neon, Ne, has a molar mass of 20.2 g/mol.
Fluorine, F2 , has a molar mass of 2 × 18.9 g/mol = 38.0 g/mol.
Therefore, the gas must be krypton.
Check Your Solution
The units of the answer are g/mol, the correct units for molar mass.
The answer has three signiﬁcant digits, equal to the least number of
digits in the question.
The answer is probably correct, since it is so close to the molar
mass of one of the given gases.
In the following investigation, you will ﬁnd the molar mass of an
unknown gas. You will use this mass to identify the gas.
The ideal gas law gives great ﬂexibility for solving many different
types of problems. After the investigation, you will ﬁnd another Sample
Problem. It illustrates how you can use the ideal gas law with methods
you have previously learned, to identify an unknown gas. Practice
problems are located at the end of this Sample Problem.
Chapter 12  Exploring Gas Laws • MHR 495
S K I L L   F O C U S
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
Communicating results
Calculating the Molar
Mass of an Unknown Gas:
Teacher Demonstration
Cigarette lighters contain a gaseous fuel that
burns quickly. It produces a large amount of heat
using only a small amount of gas. Your teacher
will measure the volume and mass of a sample
of this gas. Then you will use these data to
calculate the molar mass of the gas.
Materials
4 L beaker or plastic pail
500 mL graduated cylinder
disposable cigarette lighter
needle nose pliers
plastic wrap
balance or scale
tap water
thermometer
barometer
hair dryer
Your teacher will take the following Safety
Precautions and perform the following steps.
Safety Precautions
• Remember that this gas is ﬂammable. Do not
try to produce ﬂames with the lighters. Before
beginning, check that there are no ﬂames (such
as lit Bunsen burners) in the laboratory.
• If water is spilled on the ﬂoor, wipe it up
immediately so that no one steps in it.
• Release all the gas collected into an operating
fume hood after the investigation. Expel the
remaining gas in the lighter outside before dis-
posing of the lighter.
Procedure
1. Use pliers to remove the striker, ﬂint, and
spring from the disposable lighter.
496 MHR • Unit 4  Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
2. Fill the 4 L beaker (or pail) about two-thirds
full of tap water. Determine the temperature
of the tap water. Use this measurement to
approximate the temperature of the gas.
3. Brieﬂy immerse the lighter in the water, then
shake it dry. Use the hair dryer on a low or
cool setting to dry the lighter as much as
possible. This is to set a standard for drying
the empty lighter later.
overheat the lighter.
Do not
CAUTION
4. Determine the mass of the lighter.
5. Fill the graduated cylinder with water. Cover
the cylinder tightly with a piece of plastic
wrap. With your hand over the plastic wrap,
place the cylinder upside down into the
beaker. Make sure that no air bubbles are
trapped in the cylinder. Slide the plastic
wrap away. A water-ﬁlled measuring tube
to collect gas that has been created. The gas
will displace the water as it rises, giving an
accurate measurement.
gas collected
cigarette
lighter
water
6. As shown in the diagram, hold the lighter
underwater, below the graduated cylinder in
the beaker. Carefully depress the button on
the lighter to release gas into the cylinder.
The entire lighter does not need to be emp-
tied. Just gather enough gas for an accurate
measurement.
7. Add tap water to the beaker (or pail), or lift
the cylinder, so that the water inside the cylin-
der is at exactly the same level as the water in
the beaker. This equalizes the pressure in the
cylinder with the pressure of the atmosphere.
Record the volume of the gas collected when
the water levels are equal inside and outside
the cylinder.
8. Dry the lighter with the hair dryer. Measure
its mass.
9. Record the air pressure in the room.
10. Wash your hands.
Analysis
1. (a) Subtract the ﬁnal mass of the lighter from
its initial mass. This will give you the mass
of the gas used.
(b) Use the volume, the mass, the temperature
of the water, and the air pressure to calcu-
late the number of moles of gas.
2. Use the mass of the gas and the number of
moles to calculate the molar mass.
Conclusions
3. The gas in the lighter has the formula CnH2n+2.
(a) Use the periodic table to calculate the
molar masses of the compounds with n = 1
to n = 5.
(b) Identify the gas in the lighter. You will
learn how to name this gas in Chapter 13.
4. How do your results compare with the
theoretical molar mass calculated from the
periodic table?
5. Calculate the percent error for your results.
6. What were the sources of error?
Chapter 12  Exploring Gas Laws • MHR 497
Methane gas,
Figure 12.13
CH4, is used as a fuel for Bunsen
burners. Suppose that you are
given a container of an unknown
gas. What methods could you use
to ﬁnd out if it is methane?
Sample Problem
Identifying a Compound Using
Percent Composition and the Ideal Gas Law
Problem
As geologists study the area where an ancient marsh was located,
they discover an unknown gas seeping from the ground. They collect
a sample of the gas, and take it to a lab for analysis. Lab technicians
ﬁnd that the gas is made up of 80.0% carbon and 20.0% hydrogen.
They also ﬁnd that a 4.60 g sample occupies a volume of 2.50 L at
1.50 atm and 25.0˚C. What is the molecular formula of the gas?
What Is Required?
You need to ﬁnd the molecular formula (and thus the identity)
of an unknown gas.
What Is Given?
P = 1.50 atm
V = 2.50 L
m = 4.60 g
R = 8.314 kPa·L/mol·K
T = 25.0˚C
The percentage composition of the gas is 80.0% carbon
and 20.0% hydrogen.
Plan Your Strategy
Step 1 Find the empirical formula of the gas, using the molar masses
of carbon and hydrogen and the percent compositions.
Step 2 Solve the ideal gas law for the number of moles. First change
the temperature to kelvins. Then change the pressure to
kilopascals and use R = 8.314 kPa·L/mol·K. (You could also
use R = 0.08206 atm·L/mol·K.)
Step 3 Find the molar mass (M ) of the compound by dividing the
mass of the sample (m) by the number of moles (n) in the
sample.
Step 4 Compare the molar mass of the unknown gas with the molar
mass of the empirical formula. To ﬁnd the molecular formula,
multiply the empirical formula by the ratio of the two molar
masses.
Act on Your Strategy
Step 1 Find the empirical formula. Assume that the total mass of the
sample is 100.0 g. Thus the mass of the carbon in the sample
is 80.0% × 100.0 g = 80.0 g. The mass of the hydrogen is
20.0% × 100.0 g = 20.0 g.
498 MHR • Unit 4  Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
Continued ...
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 498
Now ﬁnd the number of moles of carbon and hydrogen
using the formula n = m
M
For carbon,
n =
80.0 g
12.01 g/mol
= 6.67 mol
For hydrogen,
n =
20.0 g
1.01 g/mol
= 20.0 mol
Finally, ﬁnd the simplest mole ratio of the two elements in
the compound. This will be the empirical, or simplest, formula
of the gas.
The ratio of the elements in the compound is
6.67
6.67
mol of C to
mol of H
20.0
6.67
or 1.0 mol of C to 3.0 mol of H
The empirical formula of the unknown gas is CH3.
Step 2 Use the ideal gas law.
T = (25.0˚C + 273)
= 298 K
PV = nRT
∴n = PV
RT
If you convert the units of R …
R = 0.08206 atm·L/mol·K
If you convert the pressure to kPa …
P = 1.50 atm × 101.3 kPa/atm
= 152 kPa
n =
=
(1.50 atm)(2.50 L)
(0.08206 atm·L/mol·K)(298 K)
n =
(1.52 kPa)(2.50 L)
(8.314 kPa·L/mol·K)(298 K)
= 0.153 mol
= 0.153 mol
Step 3 Find the molar mass.
M = m
n
=
4.60 g
0.153 mol
= 30.1 g/mol
Step 4 Find the molecular formula.
The molar mass of the compound is 30.1 g/mol.
The molar mass of the empirical formula, CH3, is 15.04 g/mol.
Ratio of molar masses = 30.07 g/mol
15.04 g/mol
= 2.00
Thus, the molecular formula of the unknown gas is twice the
empirical formula.
CH3 × 2 = C2H6
Continued ...
Chapter 12  Exploring Gas Laws • MHR 499
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 499
Check Your Solution
In step 2, the units in the ideal gas equation cancel out to give moles.
C2H6 is a reasonable answer for the molecular formula of the gas,
since it is a simple integer ratio of the two molar masses.
Practice Problems
20. A 1.56 L gas sample has a mass of 3.22 g at 100 kPa and 281 K.
What is the molar mass of the gas?
21. 2.0 L of haloethane has a mass of 14.1 g at 344 K and 1.01 atm.
What is the molar mass of haloethane?
22. A vapour has a mass of 0.548 g in 237 mL, at 373 K and 755 torr.
What is the molar mass of the vapour?
23. The mass of a 5.00 L evacuated container is 125.00 g. When the
container is ﬁlled with argon gas at 298 K and 105.0 kPa, it has
a mass of 133.47 g.
(a) Calculate the density of argon under these conditions.
(b) What is the density of argon at STP?
24. A gaseous compound contains 92.31% carbon and 7.69%
hydrogen by mass. 4.35 g of the gas occupies 4.16 L at 22.0˚C
and 738 torr. Determine the molecular formula of the gas.
Section Wrap-up
In this section, you learned how density and molar mass are related to
the ideal gas law. You also learned how to identify an unknown substance
by calculating its molar mass, both theoretically and in the laboratory.
Before you continue, take the time to complete the following Section
Review questions. They will help you remember what you have learned.
Section Review
1
2
I
I
What is the density of methane, CH4(g), if 4.5 mol are in 100 L?
8.1 g of a gas occupy 12.3 L of space at 27˚C and 8 atm.
(a) What is the molar mass of the gas?
(b) What might the gas be?
3
I
A gas that consists of only nitrogen and oxygen atoms is found to
contain 30% nitrogen. A 9.23 g sample of the gas occupies 2.2 L
at STP. What is the gas?
4
I
You are given a sample of an unknown gas. Describe how you can
identify the gas in the laboratory. What measurements will you take?
What apparatus might you need?
5
K/U
How can the densities of two gases at STP be different, even
though their volumes are the same?
Unit Issue Prep
You will be debating a question
related to gas pollution in the
Unit Issue. How does the
density of a gas determine
whether the gas pollutes
Earth’s surface or the
atmosphere?
500 MHR • Unit 4  Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
Gas Law Stoichiometry
Many chemical reactions in everyday life involve gases. Figure 12.14
shows a common reaction that has a gas as a reactant. Other reactions,
such as the electrolyzation of salt to give chlorine gas, have gases as
products. To carry out an accurate and efﬁcient reaction, scientists must
know the number of moles of all the reactants. When one or more of the
reactants is a gas, this means using the ideal gas law.
12.3
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
perform stoichiometric
calculations involving the
number of moles, number of
atoms, number of molecules,
mass, and volume of sub-
stances in a balanced
chemical reaction
determine the molar
volume of hydrogen in
an investigation
Figure 12.14
calcium oxide.
In this photograph, oxygen gas reacts with calcium to produce
You have already learned that the ideal gas law can be used to solve for
different variables in several different types of situations. As you may
recall, the term “stoichiometry” refers to the relationship between the
number of moles of the reactants and the number of moles of the products
in a chemical reaction. In this section, you will learn how to use
Gay-Lussac’s law of combining volumes and the ideal gas law to solve
stoichiometric problems that involve gases.
Volume to Volume Stoichiometry
At the beginning of this chapter, you were introduced to Gay-Lussac’s
law of combining volumes: When gases react, the volumes of the reactants
and the products, measured at equal temperatures and pressures, are
always in whole number ratios. As well, you learned that the mole ratios
from a chemical equation are the same as the ratios of the volumes of
the gases.
This information will help you with a certain type of gas stoichio-
metry problem. When a gas reacts to produce another gas, you can use
Gay-Lussac’s law of combining volumes to ﬁnd the volumes of the gases.
The following Sample Problem shows you how.
Go back to the beginning of
this chapter. Make sure that
you understand why the mole
ratios are the same as the
volume ratios.
Chapter 12  Exploring Gas Laws • MHR 501
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
Sample Problem
Gay-Lussac’s Law of Combining Volumes
Problem
Ammonia is produced by a reaction of nitrogen gas and hydrogen
gas. The chemical equation for the reaction is
N2(g) + 3H2(g) → 2NH3(g)
Suppose that 12.0 L of nitrogen gas reacts with hydrogen gas at the
same temperature and pressure.
(a) What volume of ammonia gas is produced?
(b) What volume of hydrogen is consumed?
What Is Required?
(a) Calculate the volume of ammonia gas produced when 12.0 L of
nitrogen gas reacts.
(b) Calculate the volume of hydrogen gas used up by the reaction.
What Is Given?
From the equation, you know that 12.0 L of nitrogen gas is used.
The mole ratios from the equation are
2 mol NH3(g)
1 mol N2(g)
3 mol H2(g)
1 mol N2(g)
Plan Your Strategy
You know that the mole ratios of the volumes of gases are the same
as the ratios of the volumes. Therefore, you can use the mole ratios
to ﬁnd the volumes of ammonia gas and hydrogen gas. You do not
need to use the temperature and pressure, since they remain the
same in this problem.
Act on Your Strategy
(a) Let x be the volume of ammonia gas.
2 mol NH3(g)
1 mol N2(g)
= x L NH3(g)
12.0 L N2(g)
(12.0 L N2(g))
2 mol NH3(g)
1 mol N2(g)
= x L NH3(g)
12.0 L N2(g)
x = 24.0 L NH3(g)
(12.0 L N2(g))
Therefore, 24.0 L of ammonia gas is produced.
Continued ...
502 MHR • Unit 4  Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 502
(b) Let y be the volume of hydrogen gas.
3 mol H2(g)
1 mol N2(g)
3 mol H2(g)
1 mol N2(g)
=
=
y L H2(g)
12.0 L N2(g)
y H2(g)
12.0 L N2(g)
(12.0 L N2(g))
(12.0 L N2(g) )
y = 36.0 L H2(g)
Therefore, 36.0 L of hydrogen gas is consumed.
Check Your Solution
The number of signiﬁcant digits in the answer is the same as the
number of signiﬁcant digits in the question.
The mole ratio of ammonia to nitrogen is 2:1. Thus, it makes sense
that the volume of ammonia gas is twice the volume of nitrogen gas.
The mole ratio of hydrogen to nitrogen is 3:1. It makes sense that the
volume of hydrogen gas is three times the volume of nitrogen gas.
Practice Problems
25. Use the following balanced equation to answer the questions
below.
2H2(g) + O2(g) → 2H2O(g)
(a) What is the mole ratio of oxygen gas to water vapour?
(b) What is the volume ratio of oxygen gas to water vapour?
(c) What is the volume ratio of hydrogen gas to oxygen gas?
(d) What is the volume ratio of water vapour to hydrogen gas?
26. 1.5 L of propane gas are burned in a barbecue. The following
equation shows the reaction. Assume all gases are at STP.
C3H8(g) + 5O2(g) → 3CO2(g) + 4H2O(g)
(a) What volume of carbon dioxide gas is produced?
(b) What volume of oxygen is consumed?
27. Use the following equation to answer the questions below.
SO2(g) + O2(g) → SO3(g)
(a) Balance the equation.
(b) 12.0 L of sulfur trioxide, SO3(g), are produced at 100˚C.
What volume of oxygen is consumed?
(c) What assumption must you make to answer part (b)?
28. 2.0 L of gas A react with 1.0 L of gas B to produce 1.0 L of gas C.
All gases are at STP.
(a) Write the balanced chemical equation for this reaction.
(b) Each molecule of gas A is made of two identical “a” atoms.
That is, gas A is really a2(g). In the same way, each molecule of
gas B is made of two identical “b” atoms. What is the chemical
formula of gas C in terms of “a” and “b” atoms?
Chapter 12  Exploring Gas Laws • MHR 503
Solving Gas Stoichiometry Problems
Earlier in this course, you learned how to do stoichiometry calculations.
To solve gas stoichiometry problems, you will incorporate the ideal gas
law into what you learned previously. The following steps will help you
do this.
How to Solve Gas Stoichiometry Problems
1. Write a balanced equation for the reaction.
2. Write the given information under the appropriate reactants and
products. Put a question mark under the reactant or product for
which information is needed.
3. Convert all amounts to moles.
4. Compare molar amounts using stoichiometry ratios from the
balanced equation. Solve for the unknown molar amount.
5. Convert the new molar amount into the units required. You may
multiply by a conversion factor, or use a set of conditions with
the ideal gas law, PV = nRT.
Using the Ideal Gas Law for the Gaseous Product of a Reaction
The best way to ﬁnd out how to do a stoichiometry problem using the
ideal gas law is to study an example. In the following Sample Problem,
you will use a balanced equation and the ideal gas law to ﬁnd the volume
of a gas produced. (Refer to Chapter 4, section 4.1, if you want to review
how to write balanced equations.)
Sample Problem
Mass to Volume Stoichiometry
Problem
Ancient alchemists liked to use strong sulfuric acid to produce
dramatically dangerous effects. One interesting reaction occurs when
sulfuric acid reacts with iron metal to produce gas and an iron(II)
compound. What volume of gas is produced when excess sulfuric
acid reacts with 40.0 g of iron at 18.0˚C and 100.3 kPa?
What Is Required?
Calculate the volume of gas that is produced when sulfuric acid
reacts with iron under speciﬁc temperature and pressure conditions.
What Is Given?
Reactants: sulfuric acid and iron
Products: an iron(II) compound and a gas
Mass of iron = 40.0 g
Temperature = 18.0˚C
Pressure = 100.3 kPa
Continued ...
504 MHR • Unit 4  Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 504
Plan Your Strategy
Step 1 Write a balanced equation for the chemical reaction.
Step 2 Find the number of moles of iron present. Use this value,
along with the mole ratios from the balanced equation, to
ﬁnd the number of moles of gas produced.
Step 3 Use the ideal gas law. You know the number of moles of gas,
the temperature, and the pressure. (Do not forget to change
the temperature to kelvins.) Solve for the volume of the gas.
Act on Your Strategy
Step 1 Write the balanced equation. (This reaction is a single
displacement reaction.)
Fe(s) + H2SO4(aq) → H2(g) + FeSO4(aq)
40.0 g
? L
Step 2 Find the number of moles of iron, and the number
of moles of gas.
To ﬁnd the number of moles of iron, divide the mass by
the molar mass. You can ﬁnd the molar mass of iron in
the periodic table: 55.85 g/mol. Note: If the reactant was a
compound, such as FeCl2 , you would need to calculate the
molar mass by adding the molar masses of all the atoms.
n = m
M
=
40.0 g Fe
55.85 g/mol
= 0.716 mol Fe
From the balanced equation, the mole ratio is
1 mol H2
1 mol Fe
Use this ratio to ﬁnd the number of moles of hydrogen gas formed by
the reaction.
n mol H2
0.716 mol Fe
n mol H2
0.716 mol Fe
= 1 mol H2
1 mol Fe
= 1 mol H2
1 mol Fe
(0.716 mol Fe)
(0.716 mol Fe)
Web
LINK
www.school.mcgrawhill/
resources
One of the problems with air
bags (see Figure 12.15 on the
next page) is that they can
harm a child or small adult
because too much gas is pro-
duced. To ﬁnd out what volume
of nitrogen gas in an air bag is
safe for a child, go to the web
site above. Go to Science
Resources, then to Chemistry
11 to ﬁnd out where to go next.
Use the volume you ﬁnd to
calculate the mass of NaN3(s)
that is needed to produce this
volume at 22.0˚C and 105 kPa.
n = 0.716 mol H2
Step 3 Use the ideal gas law to solve for the volume, since all the
other quantities are now known.
First change the temperature to kelvins.
18.0˚C + 273 = 291 K
You now have all the values you need to solve for volume.
P = 100.3 kPa
n = 0.716 mol
R = 8.314 kPa·L/mol·K
T = 291 K
Continued ...
Chapter 12  Exploring Gas Laws • MHR 505
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 505
PV = nRT
∴V = nRT
P
= 0.716 mol × 8.314 kPa·L/mol·K × 291 K
100.3 kPa
= 17.3 L
Therefore, 17.3 L of hydrogen gas is produced by this reaction at
18.0˚C and 100.3 kPa.
Check Your Solution
The answer is slightly less than the molar volume of hydrogen gas
at STP. Since less than one mole of hydrogen gas was formed, this
seems reasonable.
Practice Problems
29. Engineers design automobile air bags that deploy almost instantly
on impact. To do this, an air bag must provide a large amount
of gas in a very short time. Many automobile manufacturers use
solid sodium azide, NaN3, along with suitable catalysts, to pro-
vide the gas that is needed to inﬂate the air bag. The balanced
equation for this reaction is
2NaN3(s) → 2Na(s) + 3N2(g)
(a) What volume of nitrogen gas will be produced if 117.0 g of
sodium azide are stored in the steering wheel at 20.2˚C and
101.2 kPa?
(b) How many molecules of nitrogen are present in this volume?
(c) How many atoms are present in this volume?
30. 0.72 g of hydrogen gas, H2, reacts with 8.0 L of chlorine gas, Cl2, at
STP. How many litres of hydrogen chloride gas, HCl, are produced?
31. How many grams of baking soda (sodium hydrogen carbonate,
NaHCO3), must be used to produce 45 mL of carbon dioxide gas
at 190˚C and 101.3 kPa in a pan of mufﬁns? (The mole ratio of
NaHCO3 to CO2 is 2:1.)
32. How much zinc (in grams) must react with hydrochloric acid to
produce 18 mL of gas at SATP? (Hint: Zinc chloride, ZnC(cid:2)2(s) is
a product.)
Air bags must be
Figure 12.15
tested thoroughly before being
manufactured for public use.
C H E M
FA C T
An automobile air bag ﬁlls
up with about 65 L of nitrogen
gas in approximately 27 ms.
This can prevent a driver from
being seriously injured. The
sodium that is produced is
extremely caustic, however.
It reacts with iron(III) oxide
as follows:
6Na(s) + Fe2O3(s) →
3Na2O(s) + 2Fe(s)
33. 35 g of propane gas burned in a barbecue, according to the
The sodium oxide then reacts
with carbon dioxide and water
vapour.
Na2O(s) + 2CO2(g) + H2O(g) →
2NaHCO3(s)
The sodium hydrogen carbon-
ate that is produced is a
harmless substance. It is
better known as baking soda.
following equation:
C3H8(g) + 5O2(g) → 3CO2(g) + 4H2O(g)
All the gases are measured at SATP.
(a) What volume of water vapour is produced?
(b) What volume of oxygen is consumed?
34. What mass of oxygen is reacted to produce 0.62 L of water vapour
at 100˚C and 101.3 KPa? Start by balancing the following equation:
H2(g) + O2(g) → H2O(g)
506 MHR • Unit 4  Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
Including Water Vapour Pressure in Gas Calculations
You can collect many gases by allowing them to bubble up
through water into a container that is ﬁlled with water. (See
Figure 12.16). This is the method your teacher used to collect
the gas in Investigation 12-A. Unfortunately, molecules of water
vapour mix with the gas sample. To avoid error, the pressure that
was contributed by the water vapour must be subtracted when
ﬁnding the pressure of the gas.
As an example, consider hydrogen gas, which is often
collected over water. The hydrogen that is collected is a mixture
of hydrogen and water vapour. As you learned from Dalton’s law
of partial pressures in Chapter 11, the pressure of this mixture is
Ptotal = Phydrogen + Pwater vapour
To ﬁnd the partial pressure of dry hydrogen, subtract the pressure
of the water vapour from the total pressure.
Phydrogen = Ptotal − Pwater vapour
The pressure of the water vapour is the same for any gas that is collected
at a particular temperature. For example, the pressure of water vapour at
25˚C is 3.17 kPa. Table 12.3 gives the pressure of water vapour at different
temperatures.
When using the ideal gas law for a gas collected over water, you
must correct the pressure before you substitute it into the gas law. The
following Sample Problem shows you how to do this.
Sample Problem
Calculating the Volume
of a Gas Collected Over Water
Problem
A student reacts magnesium with excess dilute hydrochloric acid to
produce hydrogen gas. She uses 0.15 g of magnesium metal. What
volume of dry hydrogen does she collect over water at 28˚C and
101.8 kPa?
What Is Required?
You need to ﬁnd the volume of hydrogen collected over water
in this reaction.
What Is Given?
T = 28.0˚C
P = 101.8 kPa
Mass of magnesium (m) = 0.15 g
Pressure of water vapour at 28˚C = 3.78 kPa
This is an
Figure 12.16
efﬁcient and convenient method
for collecting hydrogen gas.
Unfortunately molecules of water
vapour mix with the gas sample.
Table 12.3
Pressure of Water Vapour
Temperature (˚C) Pressure (kPa)
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
1.94
2.06
2.20
2.34
2.49
2.64
2.81
2.98
3.17
3.36
3.56
3.78
4.00
4.24
Continued ...
Chapter 12  Exploring Gas Laws • MHR 507
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 507
Plan Your Strategy
Step 1 Write a balanced chemical equation for the reaction.
Step 2 Calculate the number of moles of magnesium by dividing the
mass given (m) by the molar mass of magnesium (M). Use the
number of moles of magnesium, along with the mole ratio
from the equation, to calculate the number of moles of
hydrogen gas produced by the reaction.
Step 3 Convert the temperature to kelvins. Since the hydrogen is
collected over water, subtract the pressure of the water vapour
at 28˚C from the atmospheric pressure.
Step 4 Use the ideal gas law to ﬁnd the unknown volume (V) of
hydrogen gas.
Act on Your Strategy
Step 1 The balanced chemical equation is
Mg(s) + 2HCl(aq) → MgCl2(aq) + H2(g)
0.15 g
? L
Step 2 Find the number of moles of magnesium.
From the periodic table, the molar mass
of magnesium is 24.31 g/mol.
n = m
M
=
0.15 g
24.31 g/mol
= 6.2 × 10
−3 mol
The mole ratio of hydrogen gas to magnesium
in this reaction is
1 mol H2
1 mol Mg
Using the mole ratio,
n mol H2
6.2 × 10−3 mol
= 1 mol H2
1 mol Mg
Cross multiply to get
(6.2 × 10−3 mol Mg)
n = 6.2 × 10−3 mol
n mol H2
6.2 × 10−3 mol Mg
= 1 mol H2
1 mol Mg
(6.2 × 10−3 mol Mg)
Step 3 Convert the temperature and pressure to kelvins.
T = (28˚C + 273)
= 301 K
The pressure that is exerted by the hydrogen gas is
Phydrogen = 101.8 kPa − 3.78 kPa
= 98.0 kPa
Continued ...
508 MHR • Unit 4  Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 508
Step 4 Use the ideal gas law.
PV = nRT
∴V = nRT
P
= (6.2 × 10−3 mol)(8.314 kPa·L/mol·K)(301 K)
(98.0 kPa)
= 0.16 L
The student collects 0.16 L of dry hydrogen.
Check Your Solution
The ﬁnal answer is rounded to two signiﬁcant digits. This
is the least number of signiﬁcant digits in the question.
The mass of the magnesium is a small number. Therefore,
the volume of the hydrogen produced is also a small number.
Using the Ideal Gas Law for the Gaseous Reactant of a Reaction
So far, you have used the ideal gas law for reactions with a gas product.
You can also use the ideal gas law for reactions with a gas as a reactant.
The following Sample Problem shows you how to do this.
Sample Problem
Space Shuttle Science: Gas as a Reactant
Problem
When astronauts travel in a space shuttle
(Figure 12.17), carbon dioxide must be removed
from the air they breathe. One method is to bubble
the air in the shuttle though a solution of lithium
hydroxide. The lithium hydroxide converts any
carbon dioxide into lithium carbonate.
2LiOH(aq) + CO2(g) → Li2CO3(aq) + H2O((cid:2))
(You learned about a different method in
Chapter 7 using solid LiOH.) Air containing 25.0 L
of carbon dioxide is passed through 1.5 mol/L LiOH
solution over a 20 min period. The atmospheric
pressure in the shuttle is 0.85 atm, and the
temperature is 28.3˚C. What mass of lithium
carbonate is produced?
Note: Although the air is bubbled through an
aqueous solution, you do not need to consider the
pressure of the water vapour. This is because you
are dealing with the reactant not the product.
Continued ...
Figure 12.17
Chapter 12  Exploring Gas Laws • MHR 509
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 509
What Is Required?
Find the mass of lithium carbonate that is produced when 25.0 L
of carbon dioxide is bubbled through an aqueous solution of lithium
hydroxide.
What Is Given?
2LiOH(aq) + CO2(g) → Li2CO3(aq) + H2O((cid:2))
V = 25.0 L
1.0 L
1.5 mol/L T = 28.3˚C
P = 0.85 atm
Plan Your Strategy
Step 1 Convert the temperature to kelvins. Convert the pressure
from atm to kPa, or use R = 0.8206 atm·L/mol·K.
Step 2 Use the ideal gas law to ﬁnd the number of moles of
carbon dioxide that reacts.
Step 3 Use the stoichiometry of the equation to determine the
number of moles of lithium carbonate produced.
Step 4 Use the periodic table to determine the molar mass of lithium
carbonate. To ﬁnd the mass of lithium carbonate produced,
multiply the number of moles by the molar mass.
Act on Your Strategy
Step 1 Convert the temperature and pressure.
T = 28.3˚C + 273
= 301 K
0.85 atm × 101.3 kPa
1 atm
= 86 kPa
Step 2 Find the number of moles of CO2(g).
PV = nRT
∴n = PV
RT
=
(0.85 atm)(25.0 L)
(0.08206 atm·L/mol·K)(301 K)
= 0.86 mol
Therefore, 0.86 mol of CO2(g) passes through
the LiOH solution.
Step 3 Find the number of moles of Li2CO3 produced.
From the balanced equation, we know that 1 mol
of carbon dioxide produces 1 mol of lithium carbonate.
n mol Li2CO3
0.86 mol CO2
= 1 mol Li2CO3
1 mol CO2
Continued ...
510 MHR • Unit 4  Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 510
(0.86 mol CO2)
n mol Li2CO3
0.86 mol CO2
= 1mol Li2CO3
1mol CO2
(0.86 mol CO2)
n = 0.86 mol of Li2CO3
Step 4 Find the molar mass of Li2CO3. Then ﬁnd the mass
of Li2CO3 produced.
MLi2CO3
= (2 × 6.94 + 12.01 + 3 × 16.00) g/mol
= 73.89 g/mol
Thus, the mass of Li2CO3 produced is
m = n × M
= 0.86 mol × 73.89 g/mol
= 64 g
Therefore, 64 g of Li2CO3 is produced in this reaction.
Check Your Solution.
The answer has two signiﬁcant digits. This is the least number
of signiﬁcant digits in the question.
When the units cancel in the ideal gas equation, mol remains.
When the units cancel in the ﬁnal calculation, g remains.
The answer seems reasonable.
Practice Problems
35. Oxygen, O2, reacts with magnesium, Mg, to produce 243 g of
magnesium oxide, MgO, at 101.3 kPa and 45˚C. How many litres
of oxygen are consumed? Start by writing the balanced equation.
36. Zinc reacts with nitric acid to produce 34 L of dry hydrogen gas
at 900 torr and 20˚C. How many grams of zinc are consumed?
37. 0.75 L of hydrogen gas is collected over water at 25.0˚C and
101.6 kPa. What volume will the dry hydrogen occupy at
103.3 kPa and 25.0˚C?
38. 3070 kg of coal burns to produce carbon dioxide. Assume that the
coal is 95% pure carbon and the combustion is 80% efﬁcient.
(Hint: The mole ratio of C(s) to CO2(g) is 5:4.) How many litres of
carbon dioxide are produced at SATP?
39. When 7.48 g of iron reacts with chlorine gas, 21.73 g of product
is formed.
(a) How many moles of chlorine are used?
(b) What is the formula for the product?
(c) Write the equation for the reaction that occurs.
Now you have a chance to do an exciting investigation: the reaction
of magnesium metal with strong acid. Remember to take appropriate
safety precautions and follow your teacher’s directions when working
with the acid.
Chapter 12  Exploring Gas Laws • MHR 511
S K I L L   F O C U S
Predicting
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
1 L beaker or bowl
water at room temperature
6.0 mol/L hydrochloric acid, HCl
6 to 7 cm piece of magnesium ribbon
10 to 15 cm piece of copper wire
steel wool
barometer and thermometer
clamp and ring stand (optional)
6 mol/L HCl
100 mL graduated cylinder
1 L beaker or bowl
magnesium ribbon
copper wire
stopper
water
Procedure
1. Prepare a table, in your notebook. Show
Trial 2
(if time permits)
Trial 1
your calculations.
Observations and Results
Observations
mass of magnesium
ribbon (g)
temperature of water (˚C)
barometric pressure (kPa)
volume of hydrogen
collected (mL → L)
vapour pressure of water
at this temperature (kPa)*
The Production
of Hydrogen Gas
In this investigation, you will produce hydrogen
gas by reacting strong acid with magnesium
metal.
Mg(s) + 2HCl(aq) → MgCl2(aq) + H2(g)
You will collect the hydrogen gas over water in a
graduated cylinder.
Question
What is the molar volume of dry hydrogen gas at
STP? Calculate it using the volume of hydrogen
gas that you produce and the mass of one reactant.
Prediction
Predict the volume of hydrogen gas that will
be produced. Use the mass of the magnesium
and the balanced chemical equation given above.
Assume 100% yield, and use regular stoichi-
ometry. Organize your calculations clearly.
Safety Precautions
• Before beginning this investigation, check that
there are no open ﬂames (such as lit Bunsen
burners) in the laboratory.
• The acid that you are using in this investiga-
tion is strong enough to burn. Wear your safety
glasses and lab apron at all times. Handle the
acid carefully. Wipe up any spills of water or
acid immediately. If you accidentally spill any
acid on your skin, wash it off immediately with
large amounts of cool water.
• When you have ﬁnished the investigation, you
can safely wash the products down the sink.
You must dilute them, however, by running
water down afterward.
Materials
scale or balance
100 mL graduated cylinder
stopper with two holes to ﬁt graduated cylinder
512 MHR • Unit 4  Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
Trial 2
(if time permits)
Trial 1
get into the cylinder. Hold or clamp the tube
into place. Watch the reaction proceed.
Record your observations in your notebook.
Results
number of moles of
magnesium (mol)
volume of collected
dry hydrogen at STP (L)
molar volume of hydrogen
at STP (L/mol)
*Find the pressure of the water vapour in Table 12.3,
or ask your teacher.
2. Obtain a piece of magnesium ribbon that is
about 6 to 7 cm long. Use steel wool to clean
the outside of the ribbon. Measure the mass
of the ribbon.
3. Use the mass of the magnesium and the
balanced equation to predict the volume of
hydrogen gas that will be produced. Show
your calculations in your notebook.
4. Fill the beaker (or bowl) about half full of
water at room temperature. Measure the
temperature of the water. (You will use this
temperature to approximate the temperature
of the gas produced.)
5. Measure and record the barometric pressure.
6. Add 15 mL of water to the graduated cylinder.
Then, very carefully, pour 10 to 15 mL of
6 mol/L HCl into the graduated cylinder.
Very slowly and carefully, pour water at room
temperature down the sides of the cylinder
until the cylinder is completely ﬁlled. Your
objective in pouring the water this way is to
avoid mixing it with the acid at the bottom of
the cylinder.
avoid adding water to an acid. Be particularly
careful during this step.
Normally you should
CAUTION
7. Attach the magnesium ribbon to the copper
wire. Dangle the magnesium in the graduated
cylinder. The magnesium should hang 1 to
2 cm below the stopper. Put the stopper in
the cylinder. Do not worry if a small amount
of water overﬂows out of the cylinder.
8. Hold your gloved ﬁnger over the holes in the
stopper. Tip the cylinder upside down into
the 1 L beaker. Be careful that no air bubbles
9. Add water, at room temperature, to the beaker
until the level of the water inside the cylinder
is exactly the same as the level of the water in
the beaker. This equalizes the pressure of the
hydrogen gas with the air pressure outside the
tube. Note: Another way to equalize the pres-
sure is to raise the graduated cylinder slightly
to align the water levels.
10. Record the volume of the trapped gas.
11. All the magnesium should be used up by the
reaction, since it is the limiting reagent. If any
magnesium ribbon does remain after the reac-
tion, rinse it with water, dry it with a paper
towel, and measure its mass. To ﬁnd the mass
of the magnesium used up by the reaction,
subtract the ﬁnal mass from the initial mass.
12. Empty and clean all your apparatus. Clean
your work space. Wash your hands.
Analysis
1. Calculate the molar volume of hydrogen. Use
the volume of the H2 gas, and the water tem-
perature. Also, use the barometric pressure
minus the pressure of the water vapour.
2. Use the combined or ideal gas law to translate
the conditions to STP. Redo the calculations.
Conclusions
3. What was the class average for the molar vol-
ume of dry hydrogen gas at STP? How close
was your molar volume to the class average?
4. How close was your molar volume to the
accepted molar volume of a gas at STP?
Calculate the percent error for your molar
volume.
5. How would your results have been different
had you not cleaned the magnesium ribbon
before you used it?
6. What were some possible sources of error in
your investigation?
Chapter 12  Exploring Gas Laws • MHR 513
Chapter 12  Exploring Gas Laws • MHR 513
Web
LINK
www.school.mcgrawhill.ca/
resources/
What kind of company or
industry uses, produces, or
sells hydrogen gas? What is
hydrogen gas used for? What
safety precautions must be
taken when handling it? To
answer these questions, go to
the web site above. Go to
Science Resources, then to
Chemistry 11 to ﬁnd out where
to go next.
Section Wrap-up
In this section, you learned how to use Gay-Lussac’s law to calculate vol-
umes of gases in a gas reaction. You also learned how to use the ideal gas
law to ﬁnd the volumes of gases used or produced in reactions. Building
on Dalton’s law of partial pressures, from Chapter 11, you learned how
to calculate the molar volume of a gas collected over water. Finally, you
learned, ﬁrst-hand, how to produce hydrogen gas in a laboratory.
In the next section, you will see how gases in the atmosphere inter-
act with the Sun’s light. You will also ﬁnd out about the dangers of gas
pollution.
Section Review
1
2
3
4
5
6
K/U
Gay-Lussac’s law of combining volumes provides a short-cut for
some gas calculations. What type of gas reaction lets you use this law?
K/U
What values should you measure in the laboratory in order to
calculate the molar volume of a gas?
C
Why is it necessary to correct the pressure of a gas that is collected
over water? How would you do this?
K/U
Which will occupy a greater volume: 2.0 mol of nitrogen gas
at STP or 1.9 mol of oxygen gas at SATP? Explain.
I
2.0 L of hydrogen gas reacts with oxygen at 5˚C and 99 kPa.
How many litres of water vapour are produced?
I
13 g of lead reacts with hydroﬂuoric acid to produce hydrogen
gas at 22˚C and 88.3 kPa.
(a) Describe the apparatus you would need to carry out this reaction
in the laboratory.
(b) How many litres of dry hydrogen gas are collected?
7
I
Plants consume carbon dioxide gas as they produce sugar
during photosynthesis.
6CO2 + 6H2O → C6H12O6 + 6O2
To produce 50 g of sugar, C6H12O6, how many litres of gas at SATP
does a sugar beet need to consume?
8
I
28 L of oxygen gas reacts with 52 L of hydrogen gas in an 80 L
vessel at 25˚C and 3.0 atm.
(a) How many grams of water are produced? Hint: Find out which
reagent will be used up by the reaction.
(b) What will the pressure be in the cylinder after the reaction if all
of the water that is formed condenses and is removed?
9
MC
After completing the Web Link task on this page, prepare a
brochure for an imaginary hydrogen manufacturing company. Your
brochure should advertise the many uses of your product. It must also
contain safety information for the customer.
514 MHR • Unit 4  Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
Atmospheric Reactions
and Pollution
It is a warm summer weekend, so you decide to visit a national park. It is
nice to be away from all that pollution. But are you bringing the pollution
with you? Take a look at Figure 12.18. How did these campers get to the
park? Cars and buses release gaseous pollution into the air. On the other
hand, what would it be like to live without vehicles? Can we compromise
in a way that protects the environment while maintaining a reasonable
standard of living?
12.4
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
explain Canadian initiatives
to improve air quality
communicate your under-
standing of the following
terms: chloroﬂuorocarbons
(CFCs), Montréal Protocol
Figure 12.18
the same time. How?
These campers are enjoying the environment, but they are harming it at
Fortunately many people are now aware of issues such as pollution
from car exhaust and ozone depletion. At the same time, Canadian chemi-
cal and related industries employ about 250 000 people and generate tens
of billions of dollars annually. These industries make the products that
entertain, feed, clothe, and keep Canadians comfortable. When discussing
atmospheric chemistry and pollution, we must consider two important
inﬂuences: the economy and the environment.
In this section, you will look at the chemistry that takes place among
the gases in the atmosphere. You will examine an important gas called
ozone and the pollutants that affect this gas.
Gas Chemistry in the Atmosphere
Many important chemical reactions take place in the atmosphere. All
these reactions involve gases. There are two main types of gas chemistry
in the atmosphere:
• interactions between gases already present in the atmosphere
• interactions between atmospheric gases and gases produced by
processes on Earth
Chapter 12  Exploring Gas Laws • MHR 515
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
mesosphere
stratosphere
protective natural
ozone layer
troposphere
limit of most clouds
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
)
m
k
(
e
d
u
t
i
t
l
A
Most ozone is
Figure 12.20
located about 25 km above Earth’s
surface. This is a very thin level,
however. If all the ozone in the
atmosphere were compressed, it
would be only a few millimetres
thick.
The Ozone Cycle
High in the atmosphere, a gas called ozone, O3, absorbs ultraviolet (UV)
radiation from the Sun. The radiation separates the ozone into oxygen gas,
O2, and an oxygen atom. After passing through a few more steps, ozone
is re-formed when molecules of oxygen gas combine with oxygen atoms.
By absorbing energy from the Sun in this way, ozone prevents harmful
UV radiation from reaching Earth’s surface. Figure 12.19 illustrates the
cycle that occurs as ozone is formed, absorbs UV radiation, and breaks up.
Figure 12.20 shows where ozone is located in the atmosphere.
UV radiation
A
UV  radiation
B
oxygen
molecule
oxygen
atom
C
ozone molecule
The ozone cycle: (A) Oxygen gas in the atmosphere absorbs energy from
Figure 12.19
the Sun. Each oxygen molecule breaks up into two oxygen atoms. (B) An oxygen atom
combines with a molecule of oxygen gas to form ozone. Another molecule is needed to
absorb extra energy. (C) Ozone absorbs ultraviolet radiation and breaks up again into
oxygen gas and an oxygen atom.
Pollutants in the Atmosphere
Gases from living and non-living processes on Earth’s surface interact
with the gases in the atmosphere. For example, oxygen and carbon diox-
ide in the air are involved in animal and plant respiration. A forest ﬁre
burns plants to produce carbon dioxide gas. On a more damaging level,
human technology and industrial processes produce many polluting
gases. As you will learn in Chapter 14, burning fossil fuels is a major
source of gas pollution in the atmosphere.
Chloroﬂuorocarbons (CFCs) are an important class of polluting gases
that are not usually caused by burning fossil fuels. CFCs are stable and
harmless near the ground. When they make their way up into the atmos-
phere, however, they interact and interfere with atmospheric processes. In
particular, these gases interfere with the production and reactions of
ozone, O3. You will learn more about CFCs later in this section.
Smog was
Figure 12.21
originally deﬁned as a mixture
of smoke and fog. Today it can
also be photochemical, caused
by sunlight breaking down air
pollutants.
Ozone Near the Ground
Ozone does not only exist high up in the stratosphere. It is also present
much closer to us, in the troposphere: the layer of the atmosphere that
lies directly over Earth. Ozone near the ground is largely produced
when nitrogen oxide gas from car and truck exhaust fumes reacts with
oxygen gas in sunlight. Ozone is a major component of smog in cities.
(See Figure 12.21.)
516 MHR • Unit 4  Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
At this level, ozone is a pollutant with a harsh odour. In humans and
animals, it causes respiratory problems, including coughing, wheezing,
and eye irritation. It retards plant growth, reduces the productivity of
crops, and damages forests. Concentrations of ozone as low as 0.1 ppm
(parts per million) can decrease photosynthesis by 50%. In addition, it
damages plastics, breaks down rubber, and corrodes metals.
Careers
in Chemistry
Environmental Technician
Gases in the atmosphere (such as carbon
dioxide and methane) allow heat from the Sun
to enter the atmosphere and prevent it from
leaving again. This is called the greenhouse
effect. Thanks to the greenhouse effect, Earth
remains fairly warm, with an average tempera-
ture of about 15.5˚C. Without this effect, Earth’s
temperature would be about −18˚C.
Human activities over the last hundred
years have caused the level of carbon dioxide
and other gases in the atmosphere to increase.
As a result, more heat is trapped in Earth’s
atmosphere. According to Environment Canada,
Canada’s average temperature has risen by about
1˚C over the last century. This is causing more
frequent and more intense winter storms.
Change from the Ground Up
How can we decrease the production of green-
house gases? One way is to focus on the sources
of these gases. As global warming increases,
chemists who study atmospheric processes will
be more in demand.
Change begins with accurate measurements.
Environmental technicians assess and monitor
pollution levels in air, water, and soil. To become
an environmental technician, you need a high
school diploma, with advanced-level credits in
mathematics, English, and science (preferably
chemistry or physics). You also need a two- or
three-year community college program in
environmental technology.
Environmental technicians gather gas samples from
smokestacks and PCBs from transformers. They also set
up equipment in the ﬁeld to create baseline studies and
monitor changes in the environment.
Make Career Connections
Human Resource Development Canada has
ofﬁces in every province. It also has a web
site where you can access descriptions and
requirements for many careers, including
that of environmental technician. What other
environmental career opportunities can you
locate? Prepare a brief report of your ﬁndings,
and present it to the class.
CFCs and Ozone Depletion
As you learned earlier, chloroﬂuorocarbons (CFCs) are chemicals that
interfere with the ozone cycle high up in the atmosphere. CFCs are non-
toxic, nonﬂammable compounds that contain atoms of chlorine, carbon,
and ﬂuorine. These gases are human-made compounds that were released
into the atmosphere primarily from refrigeration and aerosol devices.
In 1928, Thomas Midgley invented the ﬁrst CFC compound. Because
they were useful but safe, they were referred to as “miracle compounds.”
In particular, dichlorodiﬂuoromethane, CCl2F2, also known as Freon, was
discovered to be an efﬁcient refrigerant.
Chapter 12  Exploring Gas Laws • MHR 517
Because of Freon, household refrigeration became common. In fact, much
of our modern-day life style ﬁrst became possible because of CFCs.
By 1974, millions of tonnes of CFCs had been produced (see Figure 12.22).
At the University of California, chemists F. Sherwood Rowland and Mario
Molina began to wonder where all of these CFCs ended up. They realized
that CFCs are chemically very stable. However, they began to calculate
what happens when CFCs are exposed to high levels of radiation far up in
the atmosphere. As it turned out, their fears were well-founded. In 1985,
British scientists in the Antarctic noticed a large decrease in the ozone
layer above the Antarctic. A “hole” in the ozone layer was beginning to
form. In 1995, Rowland and Molina, along with a third ozone scientist,
won the Nobel Prize for their work with CFCs.
How CFCs Attack Ozone
Today we know that CFCs high in the atmosphere break apart under
ultraviolet radiation to produce chlorine atoms. These chlorine atoms
destroy ozone molecules.
Cl + O3 → ClO + O2
The product, ClO, reacts with an oxygen atom and releases the chlorine
atom. The chlorine atom attacks another ozone molecule. Over time, one
chlorine atom can destroy thousands of ozone molecules. Figure 12.23
illustrates this process for the CFC trichloroﬂuoromethane, CCl3F.
Eventually the chlorine atom reacts with a different compound in the
atmosphere to form a stable, less harmful product.
CFCs have been
Figure 12.22
used as refrigerants, coolants
in home and automobile air
conditioners, and propellants
in aerosol containers such as
hair sprays.
A
radiation from the Sun
breaks down the CFC molecule
B
chlorine atom breaks free
C
chlorine atom collides with
ozone molecule
F
oxygen gas is produced and
the chlorine atom is free to
attack more ozone
E
ClO collides with oxygen atom
oxygen gas
D
chlorine picks up oxygen atom
to become ClO
The breakdown of a CFC by ultraviolet radiation produces single chlorine
Figure 12.23
atoms that attack and destroy ozone. Because the chlorine atoms are released, they
attack ozone again and again in a chain reaction.
Although they are the most abundant ozone-depleting substance, CFCs
are not the only culprits. Other chemicals that damage the ozone layer
include methyl bromide, CH3Br, carbon tetrachloride, CCl4, and halons
such as carbon triﬂuorobromide, CF3Br.
518 MHR • Unit 4  Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
The Effects of Ozone Depletion
How do we know that CFCs and other ozone-destroying
molecules are having an effect on the atmosphere? As
Figure 12.24 illustrates, ozone levels over Canada and
other parts of the world have decreased signiﬁcantly
since the late 1970s.
With reduced ozone levels, more ultraviolet
radiation from the Sun reaches Earth. Among
humans, UV-induced skin cancer and eye damage
are becoming a serious threat. The increased levels
of radiation also damage phytoplankton in fresh
and marine ecosystems. Since phytoplankton are
the base of the aquatic food chain, this damage
affects all other water species. As you learned
earlier, the presence of ozone close to Earth damages
crops and forests. A lack of ozone in the atmosphere,
however, also reduces the yield of crops, such as barley
and canola, and harms forests.
Improving Air Quality
What has happened since the discovery that CFCs and other chemicals
were harming the ozone layer? The chemical industry has invented and
produced environmentally friendly refrigerants. All new cars produced
in North America have air conditioners that contain ozone-friendly
refrigerants. Used CFCs from older refrigeration units are being recycled
so that they do not escape into the atmosphere. A lot has already been
accomplished, but more remains to be done.
Much of the positive activity comes from an international agreement
called the Montréal Protocol. This agreement was signed in Montréal,
Canada, on September 16, 1987. It has been successful in drastically
reducing the use of CFCs worldwide. The Montréal Protocol is particular-
ly signiﬁcant because, for the ﬁrst time, individual countries put a
common planetary goal ahead of their own economic interests.
The Montréal Protocol stated that the production and consumption
of all substances that deplete the ozone layer would be phased out by the
year 2000 in developed countries. (Methyl chloroform would be phased
out by 2005.) The chemicals that are named in the agreement include
CFCs, halons, carbon tetrachloride, methyl chloroform, and methyl
bromide. Once CFC production and consumption are stopped, scientists
hope that the ozone layer will recover within 50 or 60 years. The success
of the Montréal Protocol depends however, on the co-operation of both
developed and developing countries.
Section Wrap-up
In this section, you learned how ozone high in the atmosphere interacts
with UV light from the Sun. In addition, you learned where CFCs come
from, and how they damage the ozone layer. Finally, you saw that the
Montréal Protocol is striving to prevent further ozone damage.
Ozone thinning is
Figure 12.24
still occurring over the northern
hemisphere, as shown here. The
dark blue in the centre indicates
the presence of an ozone “hole.”
C H E M
FA C T
In 1993, a scientiﬁc link was
established between ozone
depletion and increases in
ultraviolet radiation. It was
found that increased exposure
to UV-B radiation causes
skin cancer, the formation of
cataracts, and the suppression
of the human immune system.
Research has shown skin
cancer to be as common as
all other types of cancer com-
bined. Sunscreens can protect
humans from the risk of some
skin cancers. Unfortunately
they do not appear to provide
protection against damage to
the immune system.
Chapter 12  Exploring Gas Laws • MHR 519
Canadians
in Chemistry
Parisa Ariya was born in Tehran, the capital of
Iran. She chose atmospheric chemistry for a
career. Scientists in this ﬁeld study the transfor-
mation of molecules in the atmosphere (the layer
of gases surrounding Earth). They also study the
atmosphere’s interactions with oceans, land, and
living things. After studying in several countries,
Dr. Ariya became a professor at McGill University
in Montréal.
Dr. Parisa Ariya
One of Dr. Ariya’s particular areas of interest is
halogen chemistry. Halogens such as chlorine, Cl,
and bromine, Br, occur naturally in ocean waters.
As well, they enter ocean waters as run-off from
human activities. The oceans emit these halogens
into the atmosphere. There they react with, and
destroy, ozone, O3.
Ariya and her students are trying to deter-
mine what kinds of halogens exist in Earth’s
atmosphere, how quickly they are produced and
degraded, and what their major sources are. As
they ﬁnd answers to these questions, they may
be able to recommend ways to reduce halogens
in the oceans and atmosphere. They may also
develop ways to modify halogens’ reactions with
ozone and other gases so that the halogens do
less harm.
Another of Ariya’s research interests is
sulfur, S. She and her students are studying its
atmospheric reactions with ozone and hydrogen
peroxide, H2O2. Through ﬁeld studies, laboratory
experiments, and modelling, they are trying to
determine the impacts of such reactions.
“You can enjoy nature through sports,” says
Dr. Ariya, who is an avid soccer player and swim-
mer. “But as a scientist you also enjoy nature
intellectually, methodically. Science keeps the
mind alive because you’re constantly learning.
Science is fun!”
Unit Issue Prep
Research the Ontario
Drive-Clean program. How
is pollution from car exhausts
being regulated by the
government? Search for
information in preparation
for the Unit Issue.
Section Review
1
2
3
4
5
C
Describe the cycle that ozone goes through as it absorbs ultraviolet
radiation. Use a diagram.
C
Compare the effects of ozone near the ground with its effects high
in the atmosphere.
K/U
What are chloroﬂuorocarbons? How do they affect the ozone layer?
K/U
Describe the Montréal Protocol. Why is it so signiﬁcant?
MC
Canadian scientists developed the Brewer Ozone Spectrophoto-
meter, a state-of-the-art ozone-measuring device. It is the most accurate
ozone-measuring device in the world. Use the Internet or reference
books to ﬁnd out how the Brewer Ozone Spectrophotometer works.
Report your ﬁndings to the class.
520 MHR • Unit 4  Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
Review
Reﬂecting on Chapter 12
Summarize this chapter in the format of your
choice. Here are a few ideas to use as guidelines:
• Describe Avogadro’s hypothesis, and explain
how it relates to the properties of gases.
• Explain how the ideal gas law came about.
Describe how to use it to calculate gas
properties.
• Explain how to use the ideal gas law for
stoichiometric problems involving gases as
reactants or products in a chemical reaction.
• Describe how to identify an unknown gas using
the ideal gas law.
• Explain the importance of ozone, and describe
the action of CFCs on ozone. Explain what the
Montréal Protocol has done for the ozone issue.
Reviewing Key Terms
For each of the following terms, write a sentence
that shows your understanding of its meaning.
law of combining
volumes
law of multiple
proportions
molar volume
ideal gas law
chloroﬂuorocarbons
(CFCs)
Avogadro’s hypothesis
Montréal Protocol
Knowledge/Understanding
1. (a) How did the work of John Dalton and Joseph
Gay-Lussac lead to Avogadro’s hypothesis?
(b) How does Avogadro’s hypothesis help us to
understand gas behaviour and gas reactions?
2. (a) What is the law of multiple proportions?
(b) State Gay-Lussac’s law of combining
volumes.
(c) How are the two laws related? What useful
problem-solving gas law did they lead to?
3. What is the molar volume of an ideal gas
at STP?
4. What are the characteristics of an ideal gas?
How is it different from a real gas?
5. Is the density of one mole of hydrogen gas at
STP the same as the density of one mole of
oxygen gas at STP? Explain your answer.
6. (a) Additional gas is added to a container with a
ﬁxed volume. What happens to the pressure
and temperature of the gas?
(b) A balloon ﬁlled with gas experiences a drop
in pressure. What happens to the volume of
the gas?
7. A student reacts a sample of zinc with
hydrochloric acid. He collects the gas as it
bubbles through water. How will this student
need to correct his measurements? Explain
your answer.
8. What are the effects of ozone pollution near
the ground?
9. Why are high levels of ultraviolet radiation
potentially dangerous?
10. How is the Montréal Protocol attempting to
improve future air quality?
Inquiry
11. As you work on gas reactions in the laboratory,
your barometer shatters. Now it is impossible
to measure the pressure of the room.
(a) Design a simple investigation that allows
you to calculate the pressure of the room.
Assume you have a thermometer.
(b) Identify the materials and equipment you
will need to carry out the investigation.
(c) Which variables will you hold constant?
Which will you change? Which will you
measure?
12. What volume does each amount of helium
occupy at STP?
(a) 1.00 mol
(b) 12.5 mol
(c) 100.0 g
13. How many molecules are in 0.250 m3 of
oxygen at STP?
14. What volume does 2.00 mol of oxygen occupy
at 750 torr and 30.0˚C?
15. What volume does 1.50 g of nitrogen gas
occupy at 100.0˚C and 5.00 atm?
16. Oxygen that is needed in a school laboratory
is stored in a pressurized 2.00 L cylinder.
25.0 g of oxygen is contained in the cylinder
at 20.0˚C. Under what pressure is the oxygen
stored?
17. Propane, C3H8, that is needed for a barbecue
is stored in a 40.0 dm3 metal cylinder. The
pressure gauge on the cylinder reads 25.0 atm
Chapter 12  Exploring Gas Laws • MHR 521
at 20.0˚C. What mass of propane is in the
cylinder? (Hint: 1 dm3 = 1 L)
18. Find the density (in g/L) of each
atmospheric gas.
(a) oxygen at 1000 torr and 30.0˚C
(b) helium at 10.0 atm and 20˚C
19. (a) Pressurized CO2 is used in the soft-drink
manufacturing industry. How many grams
of carbon dioxide are in a 500.0 cm3 tank
at −50.0˚C and 2.00 atm?
(b) How many grams of oxygen does this tank
a volume of 2.2 L. What is the molecular
formula of the liquid?
26. Methanol has potential to be used as an alter-
native fuel. It burns in the presence of oxygen
to produce carbon dioxide and water.
CH3OH((cid:2)) + O2(g) → CO2(g) + 2H2O(g)
(a) Balance this equation.
(b) 10 L of oxygen is completely consumed at
STP. What volume of CO2 is produced?
(c) What mass of methanol is consumed in
this reaction?
hold at the same temperature and pressure?
27. A student wants to prepare carbon
20. 9.0 g of an unknown gas is stored in a 5.00 L
metal tank at 0.0˚C and 202.0 kPa. To identify
the gas, investigators decide to ﬁnd out its
molecular mass.
(a) What is the molecular mass of the gas?
(b) What is the gas?
21. A 25.0 L tank, stored at −20.0˚C, contains
10.0 g of helium and 10.0 g of hydrogen gas.
(a) What is the total number of moles of gas
in the tank?
(b) What is the total pressure (in kPa) in
the tank?
(c) What is the partial pressure of helium in
the tank?
22. A 60.0 g sample of nitrogen gas is stored in
a 5.0 L tank at a pressure of 10.0 atm. At what
temperature (in ˚C) is the gas stored?
23. A 13.4 g sample of an unknown liquid is
vapourized at 85.0˚C and 100.0 kPa. The
vapour has a volume of 4.32 L. The percentage
composition of the liquid is found to be 52.1%
carbon, 13.2% hydrogen, and 34.7% oxygen.
What is the molecular formula of the liquid?
24. An unlabelled bottle of an unknown liquid
is found on a shelf in a laboratory storeroom.
10.0 g of the liquid is vaporized at 120.0˚C and
5.0 atm. The volume of the vapour is found to
be 568.0 cm3. The liquid is found to be made
up of 84.2% carbon and 15.8% hydrogen.
What is the molecular formula of the liquid?
25. A 4.2 g sample of a volatile liquid contains
1.0 g of carbon and 0.25 g of hydrogen. The rest
of the liquid is chlorine. When the sample is
vaporized at 101.0 kPa and 60.0˚C, it occupies
522 MHR • Unit 4  Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
dioxide using sodium carbonate and dilute
hydrochloric acid.
Na2CO3(s) + 2HCl(aq) → 2NaCl(aq) + CO2(g) + H2O((cid:2))
How much sodium carbonate should the
student react with excess hydrochloric acid
to produce 1.00 L of carbon dioxide at 24.0˚C
and 760 torr?
28. A scientist makes hydrogen gas in the laborato-
ry by reacting calcium metal with an excess of
hydrochloric acid.
Ca(s) + 2HCl(aq) → CaCl2(aq) + H2(g)
The scientist reacts 5.00 g of calcium and
collects the hydrogen over water at 25.0˚C
and 103.0 kPa. What volume of dry hydrogen
is produced?
29. A chemist collects oxygen over water at 22.0˚C
and 105.0 kPa using the following reaction:
2KClO3(s) → 2KCl(s) + 3O2(g)
What volume of dry oxygen is obtained if the
chemist heats 25.0 g of potassium chlorate?
30. Ammonia, a useful fertilizer, is produced
by the following reaction:
CH4(g) + H2O((cid:2)) + N2O(g) → 2NH3(g) + CO2(g)
500.0 g of methane reacts with excess H2O
and N2O. At 27.0˚C and 1.20 atm, what
volume of ammonia gas is produced?
31. Hydrochloric acid dissolves limestone, as
shown in the following chemical equation:
CaCO3(s) + 2HCl(aq) → CaCl2(aq) + CO2(g) + H2O((cid:2))
12.0 g of CaCO3 reacts with 110 mL of 1.25
mol/L HCl. At 22.0˚C and 99.0 kPa, what
volume of carbon dioxide is produced?
32. Butane from a disposable lighter burns
according to the following equation:
C4H10(g) + O2(g) → CO2(g) + H2O((cid:2))
(a) Balance this chemical equation.
(b) How many grams of butane are needed
to produce 300.0 mL of carbon dioxide at
50.0˚C and 1.25 atm? How many grams of
oxygen are needed?
Communication
33. Draw a concept map showing the connections
between the following gas laws:
• Boyle’s law
• Charles’ law
• Gay-Lussac’s law
• the combined gas law
• the ideal gas law
• Gay-Lussac’s law of combining volumes
• Dalton’s law of partial pressures
34. Prepare a poster that will explain the relation-
ships between the pressure, volume, and
temperature of a gas to students in a younger
grade.
35. Express the ideal gas constant in each
of the following units.
(a) kPa·L/mol·K
(b) atm·L/mol·K
(c) torr·L/mol·K
Making Connections
36. Complex carbohydrates are starches that
your body can convert to glucose, a type of
sugar. Simple carbohydrate foods contain
glucose, ready for immediate use by the human
body. Breathing and burning glucose, C6H12O6,
produces energy in a jogger’s muscles, accord-
ing to the following unbalanced equation:
C6H12O6(aq) + O2(g) → CO2(g) + H2O(g)
Just before running, Myri eats two oranges.
The oranges give her body 25 g of glucose to
make energy. The temperature outside is 27˚C,
and the atmospheric pressure is 102.3 kPa.
Although 21% of the air Myri breathes in is
oxygen, she breathes out about 16% of this oxy-
gen. (In other words, she only uses about 5%.)
(a) How many litres of air does Myri breathe
while running to burn up the glucose she
consumed?
(b) How many litres of water vapour does she
produce? How many litres of carbon dioxide
gas does she produce?
(c) Suppose that the water vapour Myri breathes
out is condensed to its liquid form. If the
density of the water is 1.0 g/mL, what is its
volume?
37. Sulfur dioxide reacts with oxygen in air to
produce sulfur trioxide. The sulfur trioxide
then reacts with water to produce sulfuric
acid. Write balanced chemical equations for
these reactions.
38. Write a story to describe what your life
would be like if you did not participate in any
polluting activities (such as riding in petrole-
um-powered cars) or use any products (such as
plastic) that cause pollution. Include as many
pollution-causing products as possible.
Answers to Practice Problems and
Short Answers to Section Review Questions:
Practice Problems:  1. 24 L/mol  2. 42.8 L/mol
3. 25.9 L/mol  4.(a) 0.446 mol (b) 12.5 g  5. 0.089 mol
6. 0.500 mol, 3.01 × 1023 molecules  7. 77.3 L
8. 1.0 × 102 L  9. 78.38 L  10.(a) 56. 0 L
(b) 1.51 × 1024 molecules (c) 3.01 × 1024 atoms  11. 74.4 L
12. 45.7 K  13. 626 kg  14. 23.3 L  15. 25 kPa  16. 1.71 g/L
17. 2.35 g/L  18. 3.65 g/L  19. 578 kPa  20. 48.2 g/mol
21. 2.0 × 102 g/mol 22. 71.3 g/mol  23.(a) 1.69 g/L
(b) 1.78 g/L  24. C2H2 25.(a) 1:2 (b) 1:2 (c) 2:1 (d) 1:1
26.(a) 4.5 L (b) 7.5 L  27.(b) 6.00 L  28.(b) a4b2 29.(a) 65.0 L
(b) 1.63 × 1024 molecules (c) 3.25 × 1024 atoms  30. 16 L
31. 0.20 g  32. 0.047 g  33.(a) 79 L (b) 98 L  34. 0.32 g  35. 79 L
36. 1.1 × 102 g  37. 0.71 L  38. 4.8 × 106 L  39.(a) 0.201 mol
(b) FeCl3
Section Review: 12.1: 1. 104 g  2. 8.7 × 102 L
3. 2.5 × 102 kPa  4. 58 g; 2.2 × 1023 molecules 5. –19˚C
7. 6.2 atm  12.2: 1. 0.72 g/L  2.(a) 2.0 g/mol (b) hydrogen gas
3. N2O4 12.3: 5. 2.0 L  6.(b) 1.7 L  7. 41 L  8.(a) 1.1 × 102 g
(b) 0.075 atm
Chapter 12  Exploring Gas Laws • MHR 523
U N I T   4   An  Issue  to  Analyze
The Costs of
Getting Around
Many people blame the government for not enforcing
sufﬁcient regulations to protect and clean up the envi-
ronment. New, cleaner technologies have been devel-
oped by science. Why don’t we use them? The fact is,
Canadians are accustomed to a comfortable lifestyle,
and may not be willing to change it. How would you
feel about stricter government regulations that affected
your transportation and recreation?
human health. It is estimated that many cases of bron-
chitis, asthma, and even early death could be eliminat-
ed, by removing sulfur from fossil fuels before burning
them. This process is possible, but it costs money.
Ultimately, these additional costs would be paid by
the consumer — you!
Often, Canadians do not appreciate or approve of
government efforts to reduce automobile emissions.
Some people were angry when, decades ago, the gov-
ernment asked them to switch to unleaded gasoline.
Even now, many people remove factory-installed,
pollution-reducing resonators and catalytic converters
from their new cars. They do this in an effort to
increase the power of their vehicles.
Environment Canada has copious amounts of
research suggesting that reducing automobile emis-
sions would improve the health of Canadians. The
restrictions that would make these improvements,
however, have not yet been enforced. For example,
motorboats can be equipped with motors that are near-
ly silent and that do not dump oil into the water.
Because these cleaner, quieter motors are more expen-
sive, most boaters still use the old cheaper motors.
To what extent should individuals be allowed
to make such choices? Should the good of the
community and the overall environment have a higher
priority than personal choice?
Plan and Present
As a class, you will debate the following proposal:
All vehicles must meet strict environmentally-
friendly emissions standards. Any vehicles, new or
old, that do not meet these standards must not be used
until they are upgraded to the new emission stan-
dards. Individual owners must pay for this upgrading.
Those individuals who cannot afford to upgrade their
vehicles will be obliged to rely on public transportation.
Background
People have always turned to the cheapest and
most efﬁcient technologies. In the last few centuries,
fossil fuels such as coal and oil were discovered in
large amounts. These fuels were also very efﬁcient,
producing large amounts of energy. It is only recently
that we have become aware of the environmental
consequences of our use of fossil fuels.
Today, we are attempting to reduce environmental
harm. Coal- and oil-burning engines have been
replaced by cleaner gas-burning engines. Many engines
are equipped with “scrubbers” that help remove toxins
before releasing gases into the atmosphere. Most envi-
ronmental problems have not been solved, however.
Automobile emissions are one of our most serious
environmental problems today.
Automobiles expel an enormous amount of
toxins into the air every day. Besides harming the
environment, these toxins are also dangerous to
524 MHR • Unit 4  Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
There are many angles to this issue. You may wish
to consider motorboat engines, private vehicles, com-
mercial vehicles such as transport trucks, and the
development and availability of public transportation.
1
2
3
4
5
6
Before starting your research, make a journal entry
describing what you think of the proposal.
Look at the people listed below. How would each
person react to the proposal? Why? For each
person, write two comments expressing that
person’s point of view.
(a) someone your age who lives in a rural area
where there is no public transportation at all
(b) someone your age who lives downtown in a city
with excellent public transportation
(c) a commercial truck driver who uses thousands of
litres of fuel each week
(d) a used-car salesperson
(e) an autoworker
Write a counterpoint or amendment to the
resolution in order to respond to each of the
comments in your answer to question 2.
Research the facts behind this situation. Before you
start, brainstorm some speciﬁc questions to
research. Some suggestions are given below.
• What gases do cars and trucks emit?
• Why are these gases harmful?
• What emission standards might be set?
• Who uses the most fuel?
• What standards do other developed
countries have?
• What standards (if any) are in place in third
world countries?
Predict two future consequences of not adopting
the resolution, and two consequences of adopting it.
You will be assigned a viewpoint in a debate of the
proposal. Prepare your arguments and participate
in the debate.
Evaluate the Results
1
Did your class come to a conclusion about the
proposal? Was a compromise reached, or are some
parties still unsatisﬁed?
2
3
List any solutions or suggestions your class devel-
oped. Are these suggestions likely to work? Why or
why not?
Suppose you were a member of the government
who had to decide on this issue.
(a) Now that you have debated the issue, what is
your decision?
Assessment
After you have explored this issue,
Assess the debate based on feedback from your
classmates. How could you improve your debating
skills?
Assess your research skills during the course of
analyzing this issue. How have your skills
improved?
(b) How will you respond to special interest
groups who approach you and disagree with
your decision?
4
How do you think the issue of vehicle emissions
will be addressed in the future?
Web
LINK
To help you with your research, visit www.school.
mcgrawhill.ca/resources/; go to Science Resources,
then to Chemistry 11 for web site suggestions.
Unit 4 An Issue to Analyze • MHR 525
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
Review
Knowledge/Understanding
In your notebook, write the letter of the best
answer for each of the following questions.
1. Which of the following statements is not con-
sistent with the kinetic molecular theory?
(a) Gases react with each other in simple whole
number ratios of volumes.
(b) Particles in the gaseous state move slower
than particles in the liquid state.
(c) The particles of a solid are strongly attracted
to each other.
(d) Gas particles move in all directions, in
straight lines.
(e) Elements combine in simple ratios to
form compounds.
2. Gases that obey the postulates of the kinetic
molecular theory:
(a) are not affected by pressure
(b) behave according to Charles’ law at very low
temperatures only
(c) are called ideal gases
(d) are affected by a change in pressure, which
causes particles to move faster
(e) are called real gases
3. After it has been driven for several hours, a car
tire heats up. As a result, the tire pressure
increases. This is an example of:
(a) Boyle’s law
(b) Charles’ law
(c) Avogadro’s law
(d) Gay-Lussac’s law
(e) Torricelli’s relationship
4. At 20˚C, a moving piston reduces the volume of
a cylinder by one half. The gas pressure inside
the cylinder will:
(a) decrease by one half
(b) double
(c) increase by one half
(d) remain the same
(e) cause the gas particles to speed up
5. A weather balloon ﬂoats up into the
atmosphere. The air pressure decreases as the
balloon ﬂoats higher. Assuming the tempera-
ture remains constant, the balloon:
(a) increases in volume
(b) decreases in volume
526 MHR • Unit 4  Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
(c) maintains a steady height in the moving
air currents
(d) maintains a constant volume
(e) remains in the stratosphere
6. An engineer experiments with different air
mixtures in a car tire. First, she removes the air
from a tire and ﬁlls it with pure nitrogen. She
measures the pressure exerted inside the tire,
then adds a measured amount of helium. After
measuring the pressure a second time, she
adds a certain amount of argon. This engineer
is investigating:
(a) Boyle’s law
(b) Dalton’s law of partial pressures
(c) Charles’ law
(d) Gay-Lussac’s law
(e) The combined gas law
7. Avogadro made an important contribution
to the understanding of gases when he
concluded that:
(a) The molar volume of a gas is 24.8 L at STP.
(b) Any volume of a gas contains
6.02 × 1023 molecules.
(c) At the same temperature and pressure, equal
volumes of gases contain equal numbers
of molecules.
(d) PV = nRT
(e) As the temperature of a gas increases, so
does its pressure and volume.
8. At constant temperature, the pressure-volume
relationship of an ideal gas is governed by:
(a) Boyle’s law
(b) Avogadro’s law
(c) The fact that pressure and temperature are
directly related
(d) Gay-Lussac’s law
(e) The fact that temperature and volume are
directly related
9. Which if the following sets of coefﬁcients will
balance this chemical equation?
NaN3(s) → Na(s) + N2(g)
(a) 3, 2, 2
(b) 2, 2, 3
(c) 1, 2, 1.5
(d) 1, 2, 3
(e) 1, 1, 2
10. Which of the following compounds is not
responsible for removing ozone from the
stratosphere?
(a) carbon dioxide
(b) chloroﬂuorocarbons
(c) methyl bromide
(d) CCl2F2
(e) carbon tetrachloride
14. Boyle’s law gives the relationship between the
pressure and volume of a gas at constant tem-
perature. Avogadro’s law gives the relationship
between the number of moles and the volume
of a gas.
(a) Write these two relationships in equation
form, using k as a constant.
(b) What is the relationship between pressure
11. The main reason why the Montréal Protocol is
and number of moles?
so important is:
(a) It cuts down on greenhouse gases in
our atmosphere.
15. (a) At constant pressure, the temperature, in
kelvins, is doubled. What effect will this
have on a gas? Explain.
(b) It protects our oceans.
(c) It brought industrialized countries together
to sign an environmental agreement reducing
the production of carbon dioxide from fuel
emissions from vehicles and industries.
(d) It preserves our Arctic regions.
(e) It cuts down on ozone depleting gases in
our atmosphere.
Inquiry
12. A group of students measured the effect of
pressure on the volume of different gases.
One group observed the effect of pressure on
pure oxygen gas. The other group observed
pure nitrogen gas. The results obtained are
shown below.
Pressure (kPa)
Volume O2 (mL)
Volume N2 (mL)
60.0
80.0
120.0
160.0
200.0
333.0
250.0
166.5
125.0
100.0
212.8
156.2
104.0
78.8
63.4
(a) On the same set of axes, plot a graph of P
versus V for oxygen and for nitrogen. Use a
different colour for each gas.
(b) For each of the volumes given, calculate a
value for the inverse of the volume (1/V).
(c) On the same set of axes, plot a graph of P
versus 1/V. Use a different colour for
each gas.
(d) What conclusions can you make from the
graphs that you have drawn?
13. What is a real gas? How does it differ in the
laboratory from an ideal gas?
(b) At constant pressure, the temperature, in
degrees Celcius, is doubled. How is this
different from the situation in part (a)? How
will the effect on a gas be different? Explain.
(c) At constant temperature, the pressure on a
gas is reduced by a factor of 5. What effect
will this have on the volume of a gas? Why?
16. A sample of oxygen gas occupies a volume of
10.0 L at 546 K. At what temperature (in ˚C)
would the gas occupy a volume of 5.0 L?
17. A sample of nitrogen gas occupies 11.20 L at
0˚C and 101.3 kPa. How many moles of
nitrogen are there in this sample? Explain.
18. The chemical equation below describes what
happens when a match is struck against a
rough surface to produce light and heat.
P4S3(s) + O2(g) → P4O10(g) + SO2(g)
(a) Balance this chemical equation.
(b) If 5.3 L of oxygen gas were consumed,
how many litres of sulfur dioxide would
be produced?
19. A 250.0 mL balloon, full of pure helium
at 101.3 kPa, is subjected to a pressure of
125.0 kPa at a constant temperature. What is
the ﬁnal volume of the balloon?
20. A sample of chlorine gas is used as a pool
disinfectant. The sample occupies a volume of
500 mL in a cylinder with a moveable piston.
The piston forces the gas out into the water
when needed. The gas is stored at 25.0 atm at
standard temperature. If the temperature
remains unchanged and the piston compresses
the gas to 220 mL, what is the pressure inside
the cylinder?
Unit 4 Review • MHR 527
21. A sample of air occupies a volume of 35.75 L at
25.0˚C and 101.3 kPa. What pressure is needed
to reduce the volume of air to 9.85 L at 25.0˚C?
22. Hydrogen gas occupies a volume of 500 dm3 at
125˚C. If the pressure remains constant, what
volume will the hydrogen occupy at 25.0˚C?
23. A sample of natural gas occupies a volume
of 350 L at 20.0˚C. The pressure remains
unchanged, and the temperature is increased
until the volume of natural gas becomes 385 L.
What is the ﬁnal temperature (in ˚C) of the gas?
24. A sample of gas is collected at 25˚C. If the
temperature of the gas is tripled and the
pressure on the gas is doubled, what portion
of the original volume of gas will remain?
25. For each blank cell in the table below, calculate
the missing quantity.
Initial
temperature
(˚C)
Final
temperature
(˚C)
Initial
pressure
(kPa)
Final
pressure
(kPa)
110.0
101.3
1.5 × 102
101.3
101.3
125.0
125.0
102.5
99.5
86.7
88.7
Initial
volume
(L)
Final
volume
(L)
5.0
25.0
750
35.5
1.00
450
10.0
25.5
500
100
0
35
85.0
27.0
100
0
150
45.5
85
26. A student collects 55.0 mL of hydrogen gas
over water at 23.0˚C and 750 torr. What
volume will the dry hydrogen occupy at 40˚C
and 775 torr?
27. A mixture of gases in a cylinder contains 0.85
mol of methane (CH4), 0.55 mol of oxygen, 1.25
mol of nitrogen, and 0.27 mol of propane
(C3H8). The pressure on the cylinder gauge
reads 2573 kPa. What pressure does each gas
exert in the cylinder?
28. What volume will a weather balloon occupy if
it contains 10 mol of air at 75.5 kPa and −45˚C?
29. A 180 mL light bulb contains approximately
5.8 × 10−3 mol of argon in a 20˚C room. What is
the pressure of the argon inside the light bulb?
30. A 13.65 L vessel contains 0.750 mol of chlorine
at 135 kPa. What is the temperature of the
chlorine gas (in ˚C)?
31. Nitrogen gas is used to produce ammonia
fertilizer. A sample of gas occupies a 2500 L
528 MHR • Unit 4  Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
tank at 5.5 atm and 27.5˚C. What is the mass
of nitrogen in the tank?
32. Ethanol vapour burns in air according to the
following equation:
2C2H5OH(g) + 6O2(g) → 4CO2(g) + 6H2O((cid:2))
If 2.5 L of ethanol burns at STP, what volume
of oxygen is required? What volume of carbon
dioxide will be produced?
33. The head of a match contains approximately
0.75 g of diphosphorus trisulﬁde. When the
match is struck on a rough surface, it explodes
into ﬂame producing diphosphorus pentaoxide
and sulfur dioxide (this is a slightly different
reaction from that in question 18). What
volume of sulfur dioxide will be produced if
the temperature is 26.5˚C and the pressure
is 102.8 kPa?
34. Nitrogen monoxide, NO, is one of the gases
that is responsible for smog. It is produced in
various ways, one of which is during the
combustion of ammonia.
4NH3(g) + 5O2(g) → 4NO(g) + 6H2O((cid:2))
If 25.0 L of ammonia reacts with 27.5 L of oxy-
gen at STP, what mass of nitrogen monoxide
will be produced?
35. When baking a tray of blueberry mufﬁns, you
need to use baking soda (sodium hydrogen car-
bonate). The baking soda acts as a leavening
agent, causing the mufﬁn dough to rise as it
bakes. One of the reactions that occurs during
baking is:
2NaHCO3(s) → Na2CO3(s) + H2O((cid:2)) + CO2(g)
Suppose your recipe calls for 5 mL (approxi-
mately 3.0 g) of baking soda. What volume of
carbon dioxide will be generated at 195˚C and
100 kPa to make the dough rise?
36. An anesthetic used in hospitals after World
War II was made up of 64.8% carbon, 13.67%
hydrogen, and 21.59% oxygen. It was found
that a 5.0 L sample of this anesthetic had a
mass of 16.7 g at STP. What is the molecular
formula of this gas?
37. When you peel an orange, you usually smell a
pleasant, tangy odour. This odour is due to the
presence of a chemical compound called an
ester. The ester in orange peel is made up of
69.8% carbon, 18.6% oxygen, and 11.6%
hydrogen. When 53 g of this compound is
vapourized at 125˚C and 102 kPa, it is found to
occupy a volume of 1.0 L. What is the molecu-
lar formula of this compound?
38. Each time you inhale, you take in about 0.50 L
of air. How many molecules of each of the
following gases do you inhale in one breath at
22˚C and 101.3 kPa?
(a) nitrogen
(b) oxygen
(c) argon
(d) carbon dioxide
39. The space shuttle orbits Earth at an altitude of
approximately 300 km. Canadian astronauts
worked outside the shuttle using the Canadarm
to repair a satellite. They were working in what
is commonly referred to as a vacuum. However,
accurate measurements show that the atmos-
pheric pressure at this altitude is 1.33 × 10−9
kPa. Facing the sun, the average temperature
is 223˚C. How many molecules of gas are there
in one litre of this so-called “vacuum” in
outer space?
Communication
40. Deﬁne each of the following:
(a) Charles’ law
(b) standard temperature
(c) standard pressure
(d) ideal gas
(e) Gay-Lussac’s law
41. Convert each of the following temperatures
as indicated:
(a) 250.1˚C to kelvins
(b) 373 K to degrees Celcius
(c) absolute zero to degrees Celcius
42. Convert each of the following pressure values
as indicated:
(a) 725 torr to kPa
(b) 105.1 kPa to torr
(c) 1.4 × 102 kPa to atm
(d) 320 torr to atm
43. Prepare a concept map to explain the depletion
of ozone in the atmosphere. Include details on
the different chemicals responsible. Also, make
sure you include information on how this
depletion occurs.
Making Connections
44. Nitrogen monoxide is used to produce nitric
acid, a widely used industrial compound.
Unfortunately, this same gas is also partly
responsible for the production of smog and
acid rain. Research the amount of nitrogen
monoxide produced by an average automobile
per hour.
(a) Estimate the number of cars in your commu-
nity (assume two cars per family). Calculate
the number of grams of nitrous oxide
released into the air in your area per hour at
rush hour.
(b) Approximately how many grams of nitrogen
monoxide are produced per day in a large
city such as Toronto, Montréal, or Vancouver?
45. During World War II, Allied pilots carried
lithium hydride tablets taped inside their life
belts. Research why this was done. Hint: Look
for chemical reactions involving lithium
hydride that might be useful for these pilots.
46. The Montréal Protocol is an agreement between
industrialized nations to reduce the amount of
ozone-depleting chemicals released into the
atmosphere. Do research to discover answers to
these questions:
(a) What amount of ozone-depleting chemicals
was released in a typical year before the
Montréal Protocol was signed?
(b) What amount of ozone-depleting chemicals
was released this year (or in the most recent
year you can ﬁnd)?
(c) Compare the two values. Have there been
any measurable decreases? By how much?
(d) How does Canada compare to the other
countries in the agreement?
C O U R S E
C H A L L E N G E
Planet Unknown
In the Course Challenge, you will collect and analyze an
unknown gas.
• What laboratory techniques have you learned that
could help you identify an unknown gas?
• How do you collect a gas?
• What gases are used and produced by plants?
Unit 4 Review • MHR 529
Hydrocarbons
and Energy
U N I T   5   C O N T E N T S
CHAPTER  13
The Chemistry of Hydrocarbons
CHAPTER  14
Energy Trapped in Hydrocarbons
UNIT  5  PROJECT
Consumer Chemistry
UNIT 5 OVERALL  EXPECTATIONS
What are the structures of dif-
ferent types of hydrocarbons?
What are the properties of
hydrocarbons?
What energy changes occur
when hydrocarbons are
combusted?
How do hydrocarbons affect
our lives? How do they affect
the environment?
Unit Project Prep
Look ahead to the end-of-unit
project, “Consumer Chemistry.”
Start thinking now about the
consumer item that you would like
to investigate. As you study this
unit, plan how you will investigate
the chemical nature of the product
you have chosen.
530
Think of what the world must have
been like 560 million years ago.
Temperatures were much warmer
than they are now. Lush green
vegetation covered much of the
North American landscape. Through
photosynthesis, these ancient plants
(like plants today) stored energy
from the Sun as food. Abundant
marine life ﬁlled the oceans. Other
animals thrived on the land.
Humans did not yet exist.
Today our society relies heavily
on the remains of ancient forests
and long-dead marine life. From
these remains, we manufacture
products such as the gasoline that
fuels cars and the plastic wrap
that covers the sandwich in your
lunch. How does this incredible
transformation take place?
In this unit, you will learn about
fossil fuels. Fossil fuels are carbon
compounds that have been produced
over millions of years from the
remains of ancient living things.
You will examine the structures
and properties of many hydrocarbon
compounds that we obtain from
fossil fuels. As well, you will ﬁnd
out how these compounds can be
reﬁned to produce many useful
materials.
Later in this unit, you will
discover how modern society
obtains energy from hydrocarbons.
532
The Chemistry
of Hydrocarbons
Did you know that you have bark from a willow tree in your medicine
cabinet at home? The model at the bottom right of the opposite page
shows a compound that is found naturally in willow bark. This chemical
is called salicin. It is a source of pain relief for moose, deer, and other
animals that chew the bark. For thousands of years, Aboriginal people in
Canada and around the world have relied on salicin’s properties for the
same pain-relieving purpose.
The model at the bottom left of the opposite page shows a close
relative of salicin. Scientists made, or synthesized, this chemical near the
end of the nineteenth century. It is called acetyl salicylic acid (ASA). You
probably know it better by its brand name, Aspirin™.
Chemists refer to salicin, ASA, and more than ten million other
chemicals like them as organic compounds. An organic compound is a
molecular compound of carbon. Despite the tremendous diversity of
organic compounds, nearly all of them share something in common. They
are structured from a “backbone” that consists of just two kinds of atoms:
carbon and hydrogen.
Compounds that are formed from carbon and hydrogen are called
hydrocarbons. In this chapter, you will explore the sources, structures,
properties, and uses of hydrocarbons — an enormous class of compounds.
As well, you will learn how scientists and engineers use the properties
of hydrocarbons to produce a seemingly inﬁnite variety of chemicals
and products.
How can just two
elements, carbon
and hydrogen,
account for 90% of
all the biological
matter on Earth?
C h a p t e r   P r e v i e w
13.1 Introducing Organic
Compounds
13.2 Representing
Hydrocarbon
Compounds
13.3 Classifying
Hydrocarbons
13.4 Reﬁning and Using
Hydrocarbons
C o n c e p t s   a n d   S k i l l s
Yo u   W i l l   N e e d
Review the following concepts
and skills before you begin this
chapter:
identifying characteristics
of covalently bonded
compounds (Chapter 3,
sections 3.1, 3.3, 3.4.)
relating physical properties
to the polarity of molecules
and intermolecular forces
(Chapter 3, section 3.3;
Chapter 8, section 8.2)
drawing Lewis structures
and structural formulas
(Chapter 3, sections 3.2, 3.3)
Chapter 13  The Chemistry of Hydrocarbons • MHR 533
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
13.1
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
identify the origins and
major sources of hydro-
carbons and other organic
compounds
communicate your under-
standing of the following
terms: organic compound,
hydrocarbons, petroleum
Cyanides (containing carbon
bonded to nitrogen, CN) and
carbides, (such as calcium
carbide, CaC2) are compounds
that contain carbon, but
scientists classify them as
inorganic. The same is true of
carbonates, such as sodium
hydrogen carbonate, NaHCO3
(baking soda). Why are car-
bonate compounds inorganic,
rather than organic,
compounds?
Language
LINK
Acetylsalicylic acid (ASA) was
ﬁrst produced commercially
under the brand name
Aspirin by Frederick Bayer
and Company in 1897. The
word “aspirin” comes from
“a,” for acetyl, and “spir,” for
spirea. Spirea is a genus of
plants that is another natural
source of salicylic acid.
Introducing Organic Compounds
As stated in the chapter opener, an organic compound is a molecular com-
pound of carbon. There are a few exceptions to this deﬁnition, however.
For example, scientists classify oxides of carbon, such as carbon dioxide
and carbon monoxide, as inorganic. However, the vast majority of carbon-
containing compounds are organic.
Organic Compounds: Natural and Synthetic
Organic compounds abound in the natural world. In fact, you probably ate
sugar or starch at your last meal. Sugars, starches, and other carbohydrates
are natural organic compounds. So are fats, proteins, and the enzymes
that help you digest your food. Do you wear clothing made from wool,
silk, or cotton? These are natural organic compounds, too. So are the
molecules of DNA in the nuclei of your cells.
Until 1828, the only organic compounds on Earth were those that
occur naturally. In that year, a German chemist named Friedrich Wohler
synthesized urea—an organic compound found in mammal urine—from
an inorganic compound, ammonium cyanate. (See Figure 13.1.) This was
a startling achievement. Until then, chemists had assumed that only living
or once-living organisms could be the source of organic compounds. They
believed that living matter had an invisible “vital force.” According to
these early chemists, this vital (life) force made organic matter fundamen-
tally different from inorganic (non-living) matter.
Urea
When Friedrich Wohler (1800–1882) synthesized urea, he wrote a letter
Figure 13.1
to his teacher. In his letter, he said, “I must tell you that I can make urea without the
use of kidneys…Ammonium cyanate is urea.” About 20 years earlier, Wohler’s teacher,
Jons Jakob Berzelius (1779–1848), had invented the system that distinguishes organic
substances from inorganic substances.
534 MHR • Unit 5  Hydrocarbons and Energy
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
During the mid-1850s, chemists synthesized other organic
compounds, such as methane and ethanol, from inorganic chemicals.
Eventually chemists abandoned their vital-force ideas. We still use the
terms “organic” and “inorganic,” however, to distinguish carbon-based
compounds from other compounds. For example, sugar is an organic
compound since it is carbon based. Salt is inorganic since it contains
no carbon.
During the last century, the number of synthetic (human-made)
organic compounds has skyrocketed. Chemists invent more than 250 000
new synthetic organic chemicals each year. With almost endless varia-
tions in properties, chemists can synthesize organic compounds to make
products as diverse as life-giving drugs, and toys. Nearly all medicines,
such as painkillers, cough syrups, and antidepressants, are based on
organic compounds. Perfumes, food ﬂavourings, materials such as rubber
and plastic, and fabrics such as nylon, rayon, and polyester are all organic
compounds as well.
The next ExpressLab gives you a chance to make one such product.
It is up to you to decide what purpose it could have.
ExpressLab
Making Polymer Putty
Polymers are a fundamental part of your life.
They also happen to be organic. Polymers are
long molecular chains that are made up of
smaller molecular units called monomers.
Natural polymers include cellulose (the “ﬁbre” in
your food) and DNA. Synthetic polymers include
plastics, polystyrene (see below), and the material
you will produce in this activity.
CH2CHCH2CHCH2CH
Polystyrene is an example of a polymer.
Safety Precautions
Avoid inhaling the powdered borax. It may
cause an allergic reaction. Wash your hands
after working with the putty.
Procedure
1. Measure about 45 mL of white glue into a
250 mL beaker. Add an equal amount of warm
water and a few drops of food colouring.
2. Measure 15 mL of solid borax into another
250 mL beaker. Add 60 mL of warm water. Stir
for about 2 min. Note: You may ﬁnd that not
all of the solid borax dissolves. This is all right.
3. Pour 30 mL of the borax solution into the
glue mixture. Then quickly and thoroughly stir
the mixture.
4. Remove the material from the beaker,
and “experiment” with it. Here are a few
suggestions. Record your observations.
• Hold the putty in one hand. Put your other
hand below the putty, and let the putty
slowly ooze into it.
• Pull the putty apart slowly.
• Pull the putty apart quickly.
• Try bouncing the putty.
5. If time permits, you may wish to try changing
the ratio of borax to glue to water. Test
your results.
6. Dispose of any excess borax solution as
directed by your teacher.
Analysis
1. Compare the properties of the starting
materials with the properties of the product.
Is the putty a solid or a liquid? Explain.
2. What practical applications for this product
can you think of?
Chapter 13  The Chemistry of Hydrocarbons • MHR 535
C O U R S E
C H A L L E N G E
Why does society depend on
fossil fuels? What are they
used for? In the Course
Challenge at the end of this
book, you will investigate a
different type of fossil fuel
from an imaginary planet.
The Origins of Hydrocarbons and Other Organic Compounds
Most hydrocarbons and other organic compounds have their origins deep
below Earth’s present surface. In the past, as now, photosynthetic organ-
isms used energy from the Sun to convert carbon dioxide and water into
oxygen and carbohydrates, such as sugars, starches, and cellulose. When
these organisms died, they settled to the bottom of lakes, rivers, and ocean
beds, along with other organic matter. Bacterial activity removed most of
the oxygen and nitrogen from the organic matter, leaving behind mainly
hydrogen and carbon.
Over time, the organic matter was covered with layers of mud and
sediments. As layer upon layer built up, heat and tremendous pressure
transformed the sediments into shale and the organic matter into solid,
liquid, and gaseous materials. These materials are the fossil fuels — coal,
oil, and natural gas — that society depends on today. (See Figure 13.2.)
Canadians
in Chemistry
Dr. Raymond Lemieux
Raymond Lemieux was born into a carpenter’s
family in 1920 at Lac La Biche, Alberta. He
obtained a B.Sc. degree at the University of
Alberta and a Ph.D. at McGill University in
Montréal. Lemieux then worked brieﬂy at Ohio
State University, where he met Dr. Virginia
McConaghie. They were married and soon moved
to Saskatoon, Saskatchewan. There Lemieux
became a senior researcher at a National
Research Council (NRC) laboratory.
Raymond Lemieux (1920–2000)
In 1953, while at the NRC lab, Lemieux conquered
what some have called “the Mount Everest of
organic chemistry.” He became the ﬁrst person
to completely synthesize sucrose, or table sugar.
Sucrose is a carbohydrate with the chemical for-
mula C12H22O11 . It is the main sugar in the sap of
536 MHR • Unit 5  Hydrocarbons and Energy
plants such as sugar beets and sugar cane.
Sucrose is related to glucose, C6H12O6, and
other sugars.
Lemieux continued his research at the
University of Ottawa, and then at the University
of Alberta in Edmonton. He was especially inter-
ested in how molecules “recognize” each other
and interact in the human body. For example,
different blood groups, such as group A and
group B, are determined by carbohydrate mole-
cules that differ by only a single sugar. The body
is able to recognize these speciﬁc sugars and
adapt its response to foreign substances, such
as bacteria and transplanted organs.
Since it was hard to obtain natural samples of
the body sugars that Lemieux wanted to study, he
found ways to synthesize them. This was ground-
breaking research. Seeing the practical applica-
tions of his research, Lemieux was instrumental
in starting several chemical companies. Today
these companies make products such as antibi-
otics, blood-group determinants, and immunizing
agents that are speciﬁc to various human blood
groups. They also make complex carbohydrates
that absorb antibodies from the blood in order
to prevent organ transplant rejection.
Lemieux and his wife had six children and a
number of grandchildren. With all that he had
accomplished in life, Lemieux said, “My proudest
achievement is my family.” His autobiography,
titled Explorations with Sugar : How Sweet It Was,
was published in 1990.
Geology
LINK
The origin of fossil fuels,
depicted in Figure 13.2, is
based on a theory called the
biogenic theory. Most geolo-
gists accept this theory. A
small minority of geologists
have proposed an alternative
theory, called the abiogenic
theory. Use print and
electronic resources to
investigate the following:
• the main points of each
theory, and the evidence
used to support these
points
• the reasons why one
theory is favoured over
the other
Record your ﬁndings in the
form of a brief report. Include
your own assessment of the
two theories.
Coal is formed mainly from
the remains of land-based
plants.
Origin of Fossil Fuels
Petroleum (crude oil) is
formed mainly from the
remains of marine-based
microscopic plants,
plant-like organisms, and
animal-like organisms.
Natural gas may form
under the same conditions
as petroleum.
Ancient eras that had higher carbon dioxide concentrations, as well as
Figure 13.2
warmer climates, gave rise to abundant plant and animal life on land and under water.
Over time, as these organisms died, the organic substances that made up their bodies
were chemically transformed into the materials known today as fossil fuels.
Sources of Hydrocarbons
Sources of hydrocarbons include wood, the products that result from
the fermentation of plants, and fossil fuels. However, one fossil fuel —
petroleum — is the main source of the hydrocarbons that are used for
fuels and many other products, such as plastics and synthetic fabrics.
Petroleum, sometimes referred to as crude oil, is a complex mixture
of solid, liquid, and gaseous hydrocarbons. To understand the importance
of petroleum in our society, you need to become better acquainted with
hydrocarbons. Your introduction begins, in the next section, with
carbon — one of the most versatile elements on Earth.
Section Review
1
(a)
K/U
Name three compounds that you know are organic.
(b)
(c)
K/U
Name three compounds that you know are inorganic.
K/U
Name three compounds that may be organic, but you do not
know for sure.
2
3
4
K/U
What are the origins of hydrocarbons and other organic
compounds?
K/U
Identify at least two sources of hydrocarbons and other organic
compounds.
C
Design a concept map (or another kind of graphic organizer) to
show the meanings of the following terms and the relationships among
them: organic compound, inorganic compound, hydrocarbon, fossil
fuels, petroleum, natural gas.
5
K/U
Copy the following compounds into your notebook. Identify each
carbon as organic or inorganic, and give reasons for your answer. If
you are not sure whether a compound is organic or inorganic, put a
question mark beside it.
(a) CH4
(b) CH3OH
(c) CO2
(d) HCN
(e) C6H6
(f) NH4SCN
(g) CH3COOH
(h) CaCO3
Chapter 13  The Chemistry of Hydrocarbons • MHR 537
13.2
Representing Hydrocarbon
Compounds
Examine the three substances in Figure 13.3. It is hard to believe that they
have much in common. Yet each substance is composed entirely of carbon
atoms. Why does the carbon atom lead to such diversity in structure? Why
do carbon compounds outnumber all other compounds so dramatically?
The answers lie in carbon’s atomic structure and behaviour.
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
demonstrate an under-
standing of the bonding
characteristics of the carbon
atom in hydrocarbons
draw structural
representations of aliphatic
hydrocarbon molecules
demonstrate the arrange-
ment of atoms in isomers
of hydrocarbons using
molecular models
communicate your under-
standing of the following
terms: expanded molecular
formula, isomers, structural
model, structural diagram
Each of these
Figure 13.3
substances is pure carbon. What
makes carbon a “chemical
chameleon?”
Figure 13.4 outlines three key properties of carbon. Throughout this
section and the next, you will explore the consequences of each of these
properties.
Properties of Carbon
Carbon has four bonding electrons. This electron
structure enables carbon to form four strong covalent
bonds. As a result, carbon may bond to itself, as well
as to many different elements (mainly hydrogen,
oxygen, and nitrogen, but also phosphorus, sulfur, and
halogens such as chlorine).
Figure 13.4
Three key properties of carbon
538 MHR • Unit 5  Hydrocarbons and Energy
Carbon can form strong single,
double, and triple bonds with itself.
This allows carbon to form long
chains of atoms—something that
very few other atoms can do. In
addition, the resulting compounds
are fairly stable under standard
conditions of temperature and
pressure.
Carbon atoms can bond
together to form a variety of
geometrical structures. These
structures include straight
chains, branched chains, rings,
sheets, tubes, and spheres. No
other atom can do this.
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
Math
LINK
Graph the data in the table
below. Note: Bond energy is
the amount of energy that is
needed to break a chemical
bond.
Some Average Bond
Energies
Bond
Bond energy (kJ/mol)
C
C
C
Si
Si
C
C
C
Si
Si
346
610
835
226
318 (estimate)
C H
Si H
413
318
Infer a relationship between
the stability of a compound and
bond energy. Then suggest a
reason why there are many
more carbon-based com-
pounds than silicon-based
compounds.
Representing Structures and Bonding
You have written chemical formulas for inorganic compounds such as
ammonia, NH3, and calcium carbonate, CaCO3 . As well, you have
represented these compounds using Lewis diagrams, and perhaps other
models. Such compounds are fairly small, so they are easy to represent
using these methods. Many organic compounds — such as methane, CH4,
and ethanol, C2H6O — are also fairly small. With patience, you might even
ﬁgure out how to draw a Lewis diagram for cholesterol, C27H46O! Most
hydrocarbons and other organic compounds are quite large, however.
They are also structurally complex. Therefore chemists have devised other
methods to represent them, as explained below.
Using Expanded Molecular Formulas to Represent Hydrocarbons
One method that chemists use to represent a large molecule is the
expanded molecular formula. This type of formula shows the groupings
of atoms, and it often gives an idea of molecular structure. For example,
the chemical formula for propane is C3H8. This formula tells you that
propane contains three carbon atoms and eight hydrogen atoms. It gives
no clue, though, about the way in which the atoms are bonded together.
Propane’s expanded molecular formula is CH3CH2CH3 . As you can see
from this formula, the expanded molecular formula gives a clearer idea of
atomic arrangement. It implies that a CH3 group is attached to a CH2
group, which is attached to another CH3 group.
Writing expanded molecular formulas becomes more helpful when
you are dealing with larger hydrocarbons. For example, C6H14 is a
component of gasoline. It is also used as a solvent for extracting oils
from soybeans and other edible oil seeds. Depending on how the carbon
and hydrogen atoms are bonded together, C6H14 can have any of the ﬁve
structural arrangements shown in Figure 13.5. Each arrangement has a
different name.
CH3CH2CH2CH2CH2CH3
CH3CH(CH3)CH2CH2CH3
CH3C(CH3)2CH2CH3
The Five
Isomers of
C6H14
CH3CH2CH(CH3)CH2CH3
CH3CH(CH3)CH(CH3)CH3
Figure 13.5
Expanded molecular formulas for ﬁve structural arrangements of C6H14
Keep in mind that all ﬁve of these arrangements have the same chemical
formula: C6H14. Compounds that have the same formula, but different
structural arrangements, are called isomers. Hexane, for example, is one
isomer of C6H14. You will learn more about isomers as you study this
chapter.
Chapter 13  The Chemistry of Hydrocarbons • MHR 539
C H E M
FA C T
The number of isomers of an
organic compound increases
greatly as the number of
carbon atoms increases. For
example, C5H12 has three iso-
mers, C6H14 has ﬁve isomers,
and C8H18 has 18 isomers.
C30H62, a large hydrocarbon,
has over four billion isomers!
The expanded molecular formulas of C6H14 give you a better idea
of the arrangement of the carbon and hydrogen atoms in its ﬁve possible
isomers. You can use other methods as well, however, to represent hydro-
carbons and other organic compounds. These methods are outlined below.
Using Structural Models to Represent Hydrocarbons
A structural model is a three-dimensional representation of the structure
of a compound. There are two kinds of structural models: ball-and-stick
models and space-ﬁlling models. Figure 13.6 shows ball-and-stick models
for the ﬁve isomers of C6H14. Notice that they show how the carbon and
hydrogen atoms are bonded within the structures.
CH3CH2CH2CH2CH2CH3
CH3CH(CH3)CH(CH3)CH3
The Five
Isomers of
C6H14
CH3CH(CH3)CH2CH2CH3
CH3C(CH3)2CH2CH3
CH3CH2CH(CH3)CH2CH3
C6H14 can have any one of these ﬁve structural arrangements. How do the
Figure 13.6
ball-and-stick models compare with the expanded molecular formulas for C6H14? How
does each isomer differ from the rest?
540 MHR • Unit 5  Hydrocarbons and Energy
A space-ﬁlling model, such as the one in Figure 13.7, also shows the
arrangement of the atoms in a compound. As well, it represents the
molecular shape and the amount of space that each atom occupies within
the structure.
Electronic Learning Partner
To see an animation comparing
structural diagrams with
molecular formulas, go to
your Chemistry 11 Electronic
Partner now.
Figure 13.7
A space-ﬁlling model for hexane, one of the isomers of C6H14
Using Structural Diagrams to Represent Hydrocarbons
A structural diagram is a two-dimensional representation of the structure
of a compound. (In some chemistry textbooks, structural diagrams are
called structural formulas.) There are three kinds of structural diagrams:
complete structural diagrams, condensed structural diagrams, and line
structural diagrams. As you can see in Figure 13.8, each serves a speciﬁc
purpose in describing the structure of a compound.
In the next investigation, you will have an opportunity to make your
own models of the isomers of several organic compounds.
H
C
C
H
H
H
C
H
H
H
HHH
CH3
C
C
C H
CH3
CH
CH2
CH2
CH3
HH
H
A complete structural
diagram shows all the atoms
in a structure and the way
they are bonded to one another.
Straight lines represent the bonds
between the atoms.
A condensed structural
diagram simpliﬁes the presenta-
tion of the structure. It shows the
bonds between the carbon atoms
but not the bonds between the
carbon and hydrogen atoms.
Chemists assume that these
bonds are present. Notice how
much cleaner and clearer this
diagram is, compared with the
complete structural diagram.
A line structural diagram is
even simpler than a condensed
structural diagram. The end of
each line, and the points at which
the lines meet, represent carbon
atoms. This kind of diagram gives
you a sense of the three-dimen-
sional nature of a hydrocarbon.
Note: Line structural diagrams
are used only for hydrocarbons,
not for other organic compounds.
Figure 13.8
Comparing complete, condensed, and line structural diagrams
Chapter 13  The Chemistry of Hydrocarbons • MHR 541
S K I L L   F O C U S
Predicting
Analyzing and interpreting
Communicating results
Modelling concepts
Procedure
1. Construct three-dimensional models of the
three isomers of C5H12. Use your predictions
to help you. As you complete each model,
draw a careful diagram of the structure. Your
diagram might be similar to the one below.
2. Repeat step 1 for each isomer of C3H9N .
Analysis
1. In what ways were your completed models
similar to your predictions? In what ways
were they different?
2. How do the models of each compound help
you understand the concept of isomers?
Conclusion
3. How accurately do you think your models
represent the real-life structural arrangements
of C5H12 and C3H9N ?
Applications
4. In earlier units, you considered how the
structure and polarity of molecules can affect
the boiling point of a compound. For each
compound you studied in this investigation,
predict which isomer has the higher boiling
point. Explain your prediction.
5. Construct models for C7H16. How many
isomers are possible?
Modelling Organic
Compounds
Figure 13.6 showed you that an organic com-
pound can be arranged in different structural
shapes, called isomers. All the isomers of a com-
pound have the same molecular formula. In this
investigation, you will make two-dimensional
and three-dimensional models of isomers. Your
models will help you explore the arrangements
of the atoms in organic compounds.
Question
How do models help you visualize the isomers of
organic compounds?
Predictions
Predict the complete, condensed, and line
structural diagrams for the three isomers of
C5H12. Then predict the complete and condensed
structural diagrams for the four isomers of C3H9N .
Materials
paper and pencil
molecular modelling kit
These representations of the hydrocarbon ethane, C2H6,
were made using different modelling kits. Your school
may have one or more of these kits available.
542 MHR • Unit 5  Hydrocarbons and Energy
C H E M
FA C T
When is an isomer not an
isomer? When it is exactly the
same compound! The hydro-
carbon C6H14 has only ﬁve
isomers. Examine these two
representations for one of
them, hexane.
CH3 CH2
CH2 CH2
CH2 CH3
CH2
CH2 CH3
CH2
CH3
CH2
You might think that these are
different isomers, but they are
actually the same. The struc-
ture on the bottom is just a
bent version of the structure
on the top. Think about a
length of chain. You can lay it
out straight, or you can bend it.
The chain is still a chain in
either case. It just looks differ-
ent. Naming a compound helps
you recognize the difference
between a true isomer and a
structure that just looks like an
isomer.
Section Wrap-up
The names of the isomers of hydrocarbons and other organic compounds
are quite different from the names of inorganic compounds. For example,
go back to the structural diagrams shown in Figure 13.8. They all repre-
sent the same isomer of C6H14. Its name is 2-methylpentane. Now look at
Figure 13.9. It shows the names and condensed structural diagrams for the
four other isomers of C6H14. Why do these names look so different from
the names of inorganic compounds? Scientists have devised a systematic
way to communicate all the possible atoms and structures for each
organic compound— all in its name! In the next section, you will learn the
rules for naming hydrocarbons. You will also learn how to interpret the
information that hydrocarbon names communicate.
CH3
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH3
hexane
CH3
CH3
CH2
CH
CH2
CH3
3-methylpentane
CH3
CH3
CH
CH CH3
2,3-dimethylbutane
CH3
CH3
CH3
C
CH2
CH3
2,2-dimethylbutane
CH3
Figure 13.9
Four of the ﬁve isomers of C6H14
Section Review
1
2
3
4
5
K/U
Identify the three properties of carbon that allow it to form such a
great variety of compounds.
I
Chose one of the hydrocarbon molecules in this section to represent,
using as many different kinds of models as you can. Identify each
model you used.
C
You have seen the expanded molecular formulas and condensed
structural diagrams for the ﬁve isomers of C6H14. Draw the complete
and line structural diagrams for each of these isomers.
C
Draw the complete, condensed, and line structural diagrams for
the isomers of C5H12. How many true isomers did you draw? (See the
ChemFact above to help you interpret this question.)
C
Many organic compounds contain elements such as oxygen,
nitrogen, and sulfur, as well as carbon and hydrogen. For example,
think about ethanol, CH3CH2OH. Draw complete and condensed
structural diagrams for ethanol. Can you draw a line structural
diagram for ethanol? Explain your answer.
Chapter 13  The Chemistry of Hydrocarbons • MHR 543
13.3
Classifying Hydrocarbons
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
demonstrate an understand-
ing of the carbon atom by
classifying hydrocarbons
and by analyzing the bonds
that carbon forms in aliphat-
ic hydrocarbons
name alkanes, alkenes, and
alkynes, and draw structural
representations for them
describe some of the physi-
cal and chemical properties
of hydrocarbons
determine through experi-
mentation some of the
characteristic properties of
saturated and unsaturated
hydrocarbons
communicate your under-
standing of the following
terms: alkanes, aliphatic
hydrocarbons, saturated
hydrocarbons, homologous
series, alkenes, unsaturated
hydrocarbons, cis-trans
isomer, alkynes, cyclic
hydrocarbons
Language
LINK
The name “aliphatic”
comes from the Greek word
aleiphatos, meaning “fat.”
Early chemists found these
compounds to be less dense
than water and insoluble in
water, like fats. “Aliphatic”
now refers to the classes of
hydrocarbons called alkanes,
alkenes, and alkynes.
Chemists group hydrocarbons and other organic compounds into the
categories shown in Figure 13.10. The International Union of Pure and
Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) has developed a comprehensive set of rules
for naming the compounds within each category. Using these rules, you
will be able to classify and name all the hydrocarbon compounds that you
will encounter in this unit.
The names that are based on the IUPAC rules are called systematic
names. During your study of organic chemistry, you will also run across
many common names for organic compounds. For example, the system-
atic name for the organic acid CH3CO2H is ethanoic acid. You are probably
more familiar with its common name: vinegar.
Hydrocarbons
aliphatics
aromatics
alkanes
alkenes
alkynes
hydrocarbon derivatives
such as alcohols, esters
(the compounds that give
fruits their aromas), and
amines (components of
amino acids)
This concept map illustrates a system for classifying organic compounds.
Figure 13.10
In this chapter, you will explore only part of the family of organic compounds—the
aliphatic hydrocarbons shown by the boldface type.
Alkanes
Alkanes are hydrocarbon molecules that are joined by single covalent
bonds. They are the simplest hydrocarbons. Methane, CH4, is the simplest
alkane. It is the main component of natural gas. Alkanes are aliphatic
hydrocarbons: organic compounds in which carbon atoms form chains
and non-aromatic rings.
Figure 13.11 on the next page compares the structural formulas of
methane and the next three members of the alkane family. Notice three
facts about these alkanes:
1. Each carbon atom is bonded to the maximum possible number of
atoms (either carbon or hydrogen atoms). As a result, chemists refer to
alkanes as saturated hydrocarbons.
2. Each molecule differs from the next molecule by the structural unit
–CH2–. A series of molecules like this, in which each member increases
by the same structural unit, is called a homologous series.
3. A mathematical pattern underlies the number of carbon and hydrogen
atoms in each alkane. All alkanes have the general formula CnH2n+2,
where n is the number of carbon atoms. For example, propane has
3 carbon atoms. Using the general formula, we ﬁnd that
Thus propane should have the formula C3H8, which it does.
2n + 2 = 2(3) + 2 = 8
544 MHR • Unit 5  Hydrocarbons and Energy
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
Why is methane the simplest
of all the millions of hydrocar-
bons? Hint: Recall what you
know about chemical bonding
and the common valences of
elements.
H
H
C H
H
H
methane
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
propane
H
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
ethane
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
H
C
H
butane
H
C
H
H
Figure 13.11
four alkanes. In what ways are they similar? In what ways are they different?
Carefully examine these four molecules. They are the ﬁrst
Figure 13.12 illustrates these three important facts about alkanes. Study
the two alkanes, then complete the Practice Problems that follow.
CH3
CH3
+
−CH2
− →
CH3
ethane
CH3
CH2
propane
How are these
Figure 13.12
two alkanes similar? How are
they different? Use the ideas and
terms you have just learned to
help you answer these questions.
Practice Problems
1. Heptane has 7 carbon atoms. What is the chemical formula of
heptane?
2. Nonane has 9 carbon atoms. What is its chemical formula?
3. An alkane has 4 carbon atoms. How many hydrogen atoms does
it have?
4. Candle wax contains an alkane with 52 hydrogen atoms. How
many carbon atoms does this alkane have?
Properties of Alkanes
Alkanes (and all other aliphatic compounds) have an important physical
property. They are non-polar. As you know from Chapter 8, non-polar
molecules have fairly weak intermolecular forces. As a result, hydrocar-
bons such as alkanes have relatively low boiling points. As the number
of atoms in the hydrocarbon molecule increases, the boiling point
increases. Because of this, alkanes exist in a range of states under
standard conditions.
Chapter 13  The Chemistry of Hydrocarbons • MHR 545
Many industries rely on alkane
hydrocarbons. The states of
these hydrocarbons can
affect how they are stored at
industrial sites. For example,
methane is a gas under
standard conditions. In what
state would you expect a large
quantity of methane to be
stored? What safety precau-
tions would be necessary?
Table 13.1 compares the sizes (number of atoms per molecule) and boil-
ing points of alkanes. Notice how the state changes as the size increases.
Table 13.1 Comparing the Sizes and Boiling Points of Alkanes
Size (number of
atoms per molecule)
Boiling point
range (°C)
Examples of products
1 to 5
5 to 16
below 30
gases: used for fuels to cook and heat homes
30 to 275
liquids: used for automotive, diesel, and jet
engine fuels; also used as raw materials for the
petrochemical industry
16 to 22
over 250
over 18
over 400
heavy liquids: used for oil furnaces and
lubricating oils; also used as raw materials to
break down more complex hydrocarbons into
smaller molecules
semi-solids: used for lubricating greases and
paraffin waxes to make candles, waxed paper,
and cosmetics
over 26
over 500
solid residues: used for asphalts and tars in the
paving and roofing industries
Naming Alkanes
The IUPAC system for naming organic compounds is very logical and
thorough. The rules for naming alkanes are the basis for naming the other
organic compounds that you will study. Therefore it is important that you
understand how to name alkanes.
Naming Straight-Chain Alkanes
Recall that carbon can bond to form long, continuous, chain-like struc-
tures. Alkanes that bond in this way are called straight-chain alkanes.
(They are also called unbranched alkanes.) Straight-chain alkanes are
the simplest alkanes. Table 13.2 lists the names of the ﬁrst ten straight-
chain alkanes.
Table 13.2 The First Ten Straight-Chain Alkanes
Name
Number of carbon atoms
Expanded molecular formula
methane
ethane
propane
butane
pentane
hexane
heptane
octane
nonane
decane
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
CH4
CH3CH3
CH3CH2CH3
CH3(CH2)2CH3
CH3(CH2)3CH3
CH3(CH2)4CH3
CH3(CH2)5CH3
CH3(CH2)6CH3
CH3(CH2)7CH3
CH3(CH2)8CH3
The root of each name (highlighted in colour) serves an important
function. It tells you the number of carbon atoms in the chain. The
sufﬁx -ane tells you that these compounds are alkane hydrocarbons.
Thus the root and the sufﬁx of one of these simple names provide the
complete structural story of the compound.
546 MHR • Unit 5  Hydrocarbons and Energy
Naming Branched-Chain Alkanes
The naming rules for straight-chain alkanes can, with a few additions,
help you recognize and name other organic compounds. You now know
that the name of a straight-chain alkane is composed of a root (such as
meth-) plus a sufﬁx (-ane). Earlier in the chapter, you saw the isomers of
C6H14. Figure 13.13 shows one of them, called 2-methylpentane.
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH
CH2
CH2
Figure 13.13
2-methylpentane
Notice four important facts about 2-methylpentane:
1. Its structure is different from the structure of a straight-chain alkane.
Like many hydrocarbons, this isomer of C6H14 has a branch-like
structure. Alkanes such as 2-methylpentane are called branched-chain
alkanes. (The branch is sometimes called a side-chain.)
2. The name of this alkane has a preﬁx (2-methyl-) as well as a root
and a sufﬁx. Many of the hydrocarbons you will name from now on
have a preﬁx.
3. This alkane has a single CH3 unit that branches off from the main
(parent) chain of the compound.
4. There is another CH3 unit bonded to a CH2 unit at the right end of the
chain. This is not another branch. It is a bend in the parent chain.
Before continuing, refer to the ChemFact on page 543. Make sure that
you understand why the CH3 unit is not another branch.
Rules for Naming Alkanes
The names of branched-chain alkanes (and most other aliphatic com-
pounds) have the same general format, as shown in Figure 13.14. This
format will become clearer as you learn and practise the rules for naming
hydrocarbons. To start, read the steps on the next page to see how
2-methylpentane gets its name.
2-methylpentane is a simple example of a branched hydrocarbon.
Later you will see more complicated examples.
prefix
+
root
+
suffix
indicates the name of the
branch or branches and
their locations on the main
(parent) carbon chain
indicates the number of
carbon atoms in the
main (parent) chain
indicates the type of
compound: ane—alkane,
ene—alkene, yne—alkyne
Figure 13.14
Parts of a hydrocarbon name
The root and the sufﬁx of an
alkane name do not tell you
directly about the number of
hydrogen atoms in the com-
pound. If you did not know the
molecular formula of heptane,
for example, how would
you still know that heptane
contains 16 hydrogen atoms?
Language
LINK
You are probably familiar with
the origins of some of the roots
that are used for naming
organic compounds, especially
the roots for naming alkanes
with ﬁve or more carbons. The
roots for the ﬁrst four alkanes
may be unfamiliar, however.
Use a comprehensive diction-
ary (one that gives information
about word origins) to ﬁnd out
the meanings of the roots
meth- through dec-.
Chapter 13  The Chemistry of Hydrocarbons • MHR 547
Naming 2-Methylpentane
Step 1
Find the longest continuous chain
(the parent chain). It does not have
to be straight. The number of
carbons in the parent chain forms
the root of the name.
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH
CH2
CH2
Step 2
Identify any branches that are
present. Then number the main
chain from the end that gives the
lowest number to the ﬁrst location
at which branching occurs.
CH3
CH3
5
CH3
1
CH
2
CH2
3
CH2
4
Step 3
Identify the location of any branches
with numbers. Use the number of
carbons in each branch to name it.
CH3
CH3
5
CH3
1
CH
2
CH2
3
CH2
4
(cid:2) You name a branch based on the
appropriate root name for the
number of carbons it contains. You
change the ending to –yl, however.
(IUPAC rules identify branches by
using the -yl ending.)
(cid:2) The parent chain for 2-methylpen-
tane is not straight. It is bent.
(cid:2) There are ﬁve carbons in the
longest chain, as highlighted.
Therefore the root of the name
is -pent-.
(cid:2) Since the compound contains only
single carbon-carbon bonds, the
sufﬁx of the name is -ane.
(cid:2) So far, then, you have pentane as
part of the name.
(cid:2) There is only one branch here.
Since the branch is closer to the
left end of the molecule, you num-
ber the carbon at the left end “1.”
Then you number the other main
chain carbons consecutively.
(cid:2) Here there is only one carbon.
Instead of calling the branch
methane, you replace the -ane
ending with -yl. So the name for
this branch is methyl.
(cid:2) You also give the branch name a
number. The number indicates
which carbon in the main chain it
is bonded with. Here the branch is
bonded with the number 2 carbon
in the main chain. So the numeral
2 is added to the preﬁx.
(cid:2) You now have the full preﬁx name
for the compound: 2-methyl.
Step 4
Put the complete compound name together in this general form:
preﬁx + root + sufﬁx. The name of the compound is
2-methyl + pent + ane = 2-methylpentane.
The structure of an alkane can be much more complex than the structure
of 2-methylpentane. For instance, there can be many branches bonded to
the main chain, and the branches can be quite long. As a result, you need
to know several other IUPAC rules for naming branched-chain alkanes
and other aliphatic compounds.
548 MHR • Unit 5  Hydrocarbons and Energy
Additional IUPAC Rules for Naming
Branched-Chain Alkanes and Other Aliphatic Compounds
1. If there are two or more of the same type of branch, give each branch a
position number. Also, use multiplying preﬁxes such as di- (meaning
2), tri- (meaning 3), and tetra- (meaning 4) to indicate the number of
branches.
CH3
CH3
CH3
C
CH2
CH
CH3
CH3
Figure 13.15
of the main ingredients in gasoline.
This compound is 2,2,4-trimethylpentane, an isomer of C8H18. It is one
2. Put commas between numbers, and hyphens between numbers
and letters.
3. When possible, put numbers in ascending order. (For example, the
compound in Figure 13.15 compound is 2,2,4-trimethylpentane, not
4,2,2-trimethylpentane.)
4. If there is more than one type of branch, name the branches in alpha-
betical order. Determine the alphabetical order by using the ﬁrst letter
of the root (for example, -methyl-or-ethyl-), not the multiplying preﬁx
(for example, di- or tri-).
CH3
CH3
C
CH CH2
CH3
CH3
CH2
CH3
Figure 13.16
3-ethyl-2,2-dimethylpentane
5. If more than one chain could be the main chain (because they are the
same length), choose the chain that has the most branches attached.
CH3
CH3
CH
CH CH2
CH3
CH CH3
CH3
Figure 13.17
3-ethyl-2,4-dimethylpentane
Now practise naming the compounds in the Practice Problem below. Work
slowly and patiently. The names become more challenging as you proceed.
Practice Problems
5. Name each compound.
(a)
CH3
(b)
CH3
CH3
CH
CH2
CH3
CH3
C
CH3
CH3
Continued ...
Chapter 13  The Chemistry of Hydrocarbons • MHR 549
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 549
(c)
CH2
CH3
CH3
CH
CH2
CH
CH
CH3
CH2
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
C
CH2
C
CH2
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH2
CH2
C
CH2
C
CH3
(d)
(e)
CH3
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH3
Drawing Alkanes
As you learned earlier in this chapter, three kinds of diagrams can be used
to represent the structure of a hydrocarbon. The easiest kind is probably
the condensed structural diagram. When you are asked to draw a con-
densed structural diagram for an alkane, such as 2,3-dimethylhexane,
you can follow several simple rules. These rules are listed below. After
you have studied the rules, use the Practice Problems to practise your
alkane-drawing skills.
Rules for Drawing Condensed Structural Diagrams
1. Identify the root and the sufﬁx of the name. In 2,3-dimethylhexane,
for example, the root and sufﬁx are -hexane. The -hex- tells you that
there are six carbons in the main chain. The -ane tells you that the
compound is an alkane. Therefore this compound has single carbon-
carbon bonds only.
2. Draw the main chain ﬁrst. Draw it straight, to avoid mistakes caused
by a fancy shape. Do not include any hydrogen atoms. You will need
to add branches before you ﬁnalize the number of hydrogen atoms on
each carbon. Leave space beside each carbon on the main chain to
write the number of hydrogen atoms later.
C
C
C
C
C
C
3. Choose one end of your carbon chain to be carbon number 1. Then
locate the carbon atoms to which the branches must be added. Add
the appropriate number and size of branches, according to the preﬁx in
the name of the compound. In this example, 2,3-dimethyl tells you that
there is one methyl (single carbon-containing) branch on the second
C H E M
FA C T
You have learned how the
non-polar nature of alkanes
affects their boiling point.
This non-polarity also affects
another physical property: the
solubility of alkanes in water.
For example, the solubility
of pentane in water is only
5.0 × 10−3 mol/L at 25°C.
Hydrocarbon compounds,
such as those found in crude
oil, do not dissolve in water.
Instead they ﬂoat on the sur-
face. This physical property
helps clean-up crews minimize
the devastating effects of an
oil spill.
550 MHR • Unit 5  Hydrocarbons and Energy
carbon of the main chain, and another methyl branch on the third
carbon of the main chain. It does not matter whether you place both
branches above the main chain, both below, or one above and one
below. The compound will still be the same.
CH3
C
C
C
C
C
C
CH3
4. Finish drawing your diagram by adding the appropriate number of
hydrogen atoms beside each carbon. Remember that each carbon has a
valence of four. So if a carbon atom has one other carbon atom bonded
to it, you need to add three hydrogen atoms. If a carbon atom has two
other carbon atoms bonded to it, you need to add two hydrogen atoms,
and so on.
carbon number 3:
bonded to 3 C‘s + 1 H = 4 bonds
CH3
CH3
CH CH
CH2
CH3
CH3
carbon number 1:
bonded to 1 C + 3 H‘s = 4 bonds
carbon number 4:
bonded to 2 C‘s + 2 H‘s = 4 bonds
Practice Problems
6. Draw a condensed structural diagram for each alkane.
(a) 3-ethyl-3,4-dimethylhexane
(b) 2,3,4-trimethylpentane
(c) 5-ethyl-3,3-dimethylheptane
(d) 4-butyl-6-ethyl-2,5-dimethylnonane
7. One way to assess how well you have learned a new skill is to
identify mistakes. Examine the following compounds and their
names. Identify any mistakes, and correct the names.
(a) 4-ethyl-2-methylpentane
CH3
CH3
CH
CH2
CH
CH3
(b) 4,5-methylhexane
CH2
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH2
CH2
CH CH
CH3
CH3
Continued ...
Chapter 13  The Chemistry of Hydrocarbons • MHR 551
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 551
(c) 3-methyl-3-ethylpentane
CH3
CH3
CH2
C
CH2
CH3
CH2
CH2
CH3
Alkenes
Did you know that bananas are green when they are picked? How do they
become yellow and sweet by the time they reach your grocer’s produce
shelf or your kitchen? Food retailers rely on a hydrocarbon to make the
transformation from bitter green fruit to delicious ripe fruit. The hydrocar-
bon is ethene. It is the simplest member of the second group of aliphatic
compounds: the alkenes.
Alkenes are hydrocarbons that contain one or more double bonds.
Like alkanes, alkenes can form continuous chain and branched-chain
structures. They also form a homologous series. As well, they are non-
polar, which gives them physical properties similar to those of alkanes.
Alkenes are different from alkanes, however, in a number of ways.
First, their bonds are different, as indicated by their sufﬁxes. As you
will recall, the -ane ending tells you that alkane compounds are joined by
single bonds. The -ene ending for alkenes tells you that these compounds
have one or more double bonds. A double bond involves four bonding
electrons between two carbon atoms, instead of the two bonding electrons
in all alkane bonds. Examine Figure 13.18 to see how the presence of a
double bond affects the number of hydrogen atoms in an alkene.
single bond
H
H
H
H
C C
H
H
Ethane
C2H6
H
C
H
C
H
H
double bond
H
H
H
H
C C
Ethene
C2H4
2 hydrogen atoms must be
removed in order to free
up 2 bonding electrons
the 2 bonding electrons
are then shared between
the 2 carbon atoms
the molecule then contains a
double bond with a new ratio of
carbon atoms to hydrogen atoms
H
C
H
C H
H
H H
H
H
C
C
H
H
This diagram shows how an ethane molecule can become an ethene
Figure 13.18
molecule. The two hydrogen atoms that are removed from ethane often form hydrogen
gas, H2(g).
552 MHR • Unit 5  Hydrocarbons and Energy
The general formula for an alkene is CnH2n. You can check this against
the next two members of the alkene series. Propene has three carbon
atoms, so you would expect it to have six hydrogens. Butene has four car-
bon atoms, so it should have eight hydrogens. The formulas for propene
and butene are C3H6 and C4H8, so the general formula is accurate. Note,
however, that the general formula applies only if there is one double bond
per molecule. You will learn about alkenes with multiple double bonds in
future chemistry courses.
Properties of Alkenes
The general formula for alkenes implies that at least two carbon atoms
in any alkene compound have fewer than four bonded atoms. As a result,
chemists refer to alkenes as unsaturated compounds. Unlike saturated
compounds, unsaturated hydrocarbons contain carbon atoms that can
potentially bond to additional atoms.
Unsaturated compounds have physical and chemical properties that
differ from those of saturated compounds. For example, the boiling points
of alkenes are usually slightly less than the boiling points of similar-sized
alkanes (alkanes with the same number of carbon atoms). This difference
reﬂects the fact that the forces between molecules are slightly less for
alkenes than for alkanes. For example, the boiling point of ethane is
–89˚C, whereas the boiling point of ethene is –104˚C. On the other hand,
both alkenes and alkanes have a low solubility in water. Alkenes, like all
aliphatic compounds, are non-polar.
The double bond in alkenes has important consequences for their
chemical properties. Alkenes are much more reactive than alkanes. For
example, alkenes react with halogens in the absence of light, but alkanes
do not.
The chemical reactivity of alkenes makes them a popular choice
among chemical engineers. For example, nearly half of the ethene used
industrially is in the plastics industry. Beverage containers, boil-in-the-bag
food pouches, milk bottles, motor oil bottles, many toys, shrink-wrap, and
plastic bags are all based on the small ethene molecule. (See Figure 13.19.)
The ethene in these products undergoes a process called polymerization.
In polymerization, hundreds of ethene molecules are reacted and strung
together to make long chains of molecules. Another alkene, propene,
undergoes a similar process and thus increases the variety of possible
polymers.
On the previous page, you learned that ethene is used to ripen fruit.
How does this work? When a fruit ripens, enzymes in the fruit begin to
produce ethene gas. The ethene is responsible for the colour change, as
well as the softening and sweetening that occur as the fruit ripens. Food
chemists have learned that they can suppress ethene production (and
delay ripening) by keeping fruits at a low temperature as they are
transported. Once the fruits reach their ﬁnal destination, ethene can be
pumped into the fruit containers to hasten the ripening process. No
wonder you can get such a variety of fresh fruit at the supermarket!
In the next investigation, you will use reactivity to identify saturated
and unsaturated compounds in some everyday products. Saturated and
unsaturated compounds play an important part in healthy eating, as you
will discover.
Figure 13.19
from ethene
Plastics made
P R O B E W A R E
If you have access to probe-
ware, do the Properties of
Hydrocarbons lab, or a similar
lab available from a probeware
company.
Chapter 13  The Chemistry of Hydrocarbons • MHR 553
S K I L L   F O C U S
Predicting
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
Conducting research
Comparing the Reactivity
of Alkanes and Alkenes
Because of differences in reactivity, you can use
aqueous potassium permanganate, KMnO4(aq),
to distinguish alkanes from alkenes. When the
permanganate ion comes in contact with unsatu-
rated compounds, such as alkenes, a reaction
occurs. The permanganate ion changes to become
manganese dioxide. This is shown by a colour
change, from purple to brown. When the per-
manganate ion comes in contact with saturated
compounds, such as alkanes, that have only
single bonds, no reaction occurs. The colour of
the permanganate does not change.
Question
How can you use aqueous potassium
permanganate in a test to identify unsaturated
compounds in fats and oils?
Predictions
Predict whether each substance to be tested will
react with aqueous potassium permanganate. (In
part, you can base your predictions on what you
know about saturated and unsaturated fats from
the media, as well as from biology and health
classes.)
MnO −
4 (aq)
unsaturated
compounds
MnO2(s)
Safety Precautions
MnO −
4 (aq)
saturated
compounds
no change
Do not spill any KMnO4(aq) on your clothing or
skin, because it will stain. If you do accidentally
spill KMnO4(aq) on your skin, remove the stain
using a solution of sodium bisulﬁte.
Materials
test tubes (13 × 100 mm)
test tube rack
stoppers
medicine droppers
hot plate
5.0 mmol/L KMnO4(aq)
water bath
samples of vegetable oils, such as varieties of
margarine, corn oil, and coconut oil
samples of animal fats, such as butter and lard
Aqueous potassium permanganate was added to the two
test tubes on the left. One test tube contains an alkane
compound. The other test tube contains an alkene
compound. Which is which?
554 MHR • Unit 5  Hydrocarbons and Energy
4. Dispose of the reactants as directed by your
teacher.
Analysis
1. On what basis did you make your
predictions? How accurate were they?
2. Did any of your results surprise you? Explain
your answer.
Conclusion
3. Is there a connection between your results
and the unsaturated or saturated compounds
in the substances you tested? Explain your
answer.
Application
4. Investigate the possible structures of some of
the compounds (fatty acids) that are contained
in various fats and oils. Use both print and
electronic resources. See if you can verify a
link between the tests you performed and the
structures of these fats and oils. Check out
compounds such as trans-fats (trans-fatty
acids) and cis-fats (cis-fatty acids). Record
your ﬁndings, and compare them with your
classmates’ ﬁndings.
Procedure
1. Read steps 2 and 3. Design a table to
record your predictions, observations, and
interpretations. Give your table a title.
2. Place about two full droppers of each test
substance in the test tubes. Use a different
dropper for each substance, or clean the
dropper each time. Melt solids, such as butter,
in a warm water bath (40°C to 50°C). Then test
them as liquids.
3. Use a clean dropper to add one dropper full
of potassium permanganate solution to each
substance. Record your observations.
Chapter 13  The Chemistry of Hydrocarbons • MHR 555
CH3
CH2
CH3
CH2
C
CH2
Figure 13.20
Naming Alkenes
The names of alkenes follow the same format as the names of alkanes:
preﬁx + root + sufﬁx. The preﬁxes and the steps for locating and identify-
ing branches are the same, too. The greatest difference involves the double
bond. The sufﬁx -ene immediately tells you that a compound has at least
one double bond. The rest of the necessary information—the location of
the double bond, and the number of carbon atoms in the main chain—is
communicated in the root. Follow the steps below to ﬁnd out how to
name the compound in Figure 13.20.
Biology
LINK
Step 1
Naming 2-Ethyl-1-Butene
According to many nutrition
scientists, foods that contain
double or triple bonds
(unsaturated compounds) are
healthier for us than foods that
contain single bonds (saturat-
ed compounds). Research
the implications of including
unsaturated and saturated fats
and oils in your diet. Use a
library, the Internet, or any
other sources of information.
Decide on a suitable format in
which to present your ﬁndings.
Find the longest continuous chain
that contains the double bond. (This
step represents the main difference
from naming alkanes.)
CH3
CH2
CH3
CH2
C
CH2
Step 2
Number the main chain from the end
that is closest to the double bond.
CH3
CH2
CH3
4
CH2
3
C
2
CH2
1
(cid:2) Here you number the main chain
from the right side of the chain.
This ensures that the double bond
gets the lowest possible position
number.
Step 3
To create the preﬁx, identify and
locate the branches with numbers.
CH3
CH2
CH3
CH2
C
CH2
(cid:2) The main chain must contain the
double bond, even though it may
not be the longest chain.
(cid:2) Here it is possible to have a main
chain of ﬁve carbons. However,
this chain would not include the
double bond. Instead, choose the
shorter chain with only four car-
bons. This chain includes the dou-
ble bond. We now have part of the
root, along with the sufﬁx: -butene.
(cid:2) You need the number that locates
the double bond. Here the double
bond is between carbon number 1
and carbon number 2. Which
should you use? Logic and the
IUPAC rules suggest that you
should use the lowest possible
number. Therefore the double
bond is located with the number 1.
So the root and sufﬁx of the name
are -1-butene.
If there is more than one branch,
remember to put the branches in
alphabetical order.
(cid:2) There are two carbons in the
branch that is attached to the
number 2 carbon of the main
chain. Therefore the preﬁx is
2-ethyl-. (Make sure that you
understand why -ethyl is used.)
Step 4
Use the formula preﬁx + root + sufﬁx to put the name together. The full
name of this compound is 2-ethyl-1-butene. Remember that a hyphen is
placed between numbers and letters, and commas are placed between
consecutive numbers.
556 MHR • Unit 5  Hydrocarbons and Energy
(cid:2)
CH3
CH3
CH CH CH
CH3
Figure 13.21
CH3
CH
C
CH3
CH3
Each carbon atom
Figure 13.22
is bonded four times, once for
each valence electron.
In 2-ethyl-1-butene, the double bond and the branch are near each other
on the carbon chain. What happens if the double bond is close to one end
of the carbon chain, but the branches are close to the other end? For
example, how would you name the compound in Figure 13.21?
The methyl branch is close to the right end of the main chain. The
double bond is close to the left end of the main chain. Therefore you
need to follow the rule in step 2: the double bond has the lowest possible
position number. Now you can combine the name as follows:
• The 5-carbon main chain is numbered from the left. The double bond is
given the number 2 (because 2 is lower than 3). The root and the sufﬁx
are -2-pentene.
• The preﬁx is 4-methyl- since there is a 1-carbon branch on the fourth
carbon of the main chain.
• The complete name is 4-methyl-2-pentene.
Although the compounds you have just named have different structural
formulas, they both have the same molecular formula: C6H12. These
compounds are both isomers of C6H12! You worked with structural iso-
mers earlier in this chapter. You have seen that isomers can be made by
rearranging carbon and hydrogen atoms and creating new branches. Now
you will learn that isomers can also be made by rearranging double bonds.
Drawing Alkenes
You draw alkenes using the same method you learned for drawing
alkanes. There is only one difference: you have to place the double bond
in the main chain. Remember the valence of carbon, and be careful to
count to four for each carbon atom on the structure. (Figure 13.22 gives
an example of another alkene, 2-methyl-2-butene.) Be especially careful
with the carbon atoms on each side of the double bond. The double bond
is worth two for each carbon! Now complete the Practice Problems to
reinforce what you have learned about naming and drawing alkenes.
Practice Problems
8. Name each hydrocarbon.
(a)
CH3
(b)
CH3
CH2
CH2
CH CH
CH2
CH3
CH2
CH2
C
C
CH
CH3
CH2
CH2
CH22
CH3
(c)
CH3
CH3
CH CH C
CH
CH2
CH3
CH3
CH
CH2
CH2
CH3
Continued ...
Chapter 13  The Chemistry of Hydrocarbons • MHR 557
PROBLEM TIP
The easiest way to tell whether
or not isomers are true isomers
is to name them. Two struc-
tures that look different may
turn out to have the same
name. If this happens, they
are not true isomers.
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 557
9. Draw a condensed structural diagram for each compound.
(a) 2-methyl-1-butene
(b) 5-ethyl-3,4,6-trimethyl-2-octene
10. You have seen that alkenes, such as C6H12, can have isomers. Draw
condensed structural formulas for the isomers of C4H8. Then name
the isomers.
cis-2-Butene
trans-2-Butene
CH3 CH3
C
C
H
H
CH3
H
C
C
H
CH3
Figure 13.23
These diagrams
show the cis and trans isomers of
2-butene. Notice that the larger
methyl groups are on the same
side of the double bond (both
above) in the cis isomer. They are
on opposite sides (one above and
one below) in the trans isomer.
Electronic Learning Partner
Go to the Electronic Learning
Partner to ﬁnd out more about
cis-trans isomers.
Cis-Trans (Geometric) Isomers
You have seen that isomers result from rearranging
carbon atoms and double bonds in alkenes. Another
type of isomer results from the presence of a double
bond. It is called a cis-trans isomer (or geometric
isomer). Cis-trans isomers occur when different
groups of atoms are arranged around the double bond.
Unlike the single carbon-carbon bond, which can
rotate, the double carbon-carbon bond remains ﬁxed.
Figure 13.23 shows one of the compounds you have
worked with already: 2-butene.
Remember these general rules:
• To have a cis-trans (geometric) isomer, each carbon in the
bond must be attached to two different groups.
• In a cis isomer, the two larger groups are attached to each
C
C
C
double
C
double
bond on the same side.
• In a trans isomer, the two larger groups are attached to each
C
C
double bond on opposite sides.
Like all isomers, cis-trans isomers have different physical and chemical
properties. For example, the cis-2-butene isomer has a boiling point of
3.7˚C, while the trans-2-butene isomer has a boiling point of 0.9˚C.
Practice Problems
11. Draw and name the cis-trans isomers for C5H10.
12. Why can 1-butene not have cis-trans isomers? Use a structural
diagram to explain.
13. Like other isomers, two cis-trans isomers have the same atomic
weight. They also yield the same elements when decomposed.
How might you distinguish between two such isomers in the lab?
14. C6H12 has four possible pairs of cis-trans isomers. Draw and name
all four pairs.
558 MHR • Unit 5  Hydrocarbons and Energy
Chemistry Bulletin
Elastomer Technology: Useful or Harmful?
What do tires and chewing gum have in
common? They are both made of elastomers:
any substance you can pull or ﬂex. Elastomer
molecules can be crosslinked, or chemically
linked, to produce rubber that retains its shape.
You can ﬁnd elastomers and/or rubber in many
everyday products, such as running shoes,
tires, underwear, and bubble gum.
Elastomers are a type of polymer, or giant
molecule. To form a polymer such as an elas-
tomer, many small molecules are connected to
form a chain with thousands of repeating units.
Elastomer technology is useful in medicine.
Muscles and arteries contain giant molecules,
called elastin, that make muscles and arteries
contract. Doctors can give artiﬁcial arteries to
people with severe heart problems or other
diseases. Unfortunately these artiﬁcial arteries
do not last long enough. Can they be replaced
by a new type of elastomer?
Judit Puskas
Dr. Judit Puskas holds Canada’s ﬁrst Industrial
Research Chair in Elastomer Technology at the
University of Western Ontario in London,
Ontario. She thinks that an elastomer called
polyisobutylene, along with some of its deriva-
tives, looks promising. In the future, it may be
used to make better artiﬁcial arteries. It may
also be useful for other implants, since it can
imitate the rubber-like properties of elastin.
Although elastomers and rubber have many
helpful and useful properties, they can also
cause problems. For example, rubber is used to
make safe tires for cars, trucks, and other vehi-
cles. These tires wear out and must be changed
regularly. As a result, Canada and the United
States accumulate 275 million used tires every
year! What can be done with these used tires?
Scrap tires that are left in piles may catch
on ﬁre. Since tires usually burn with incom-
plete combustion, many dangerous and
polluting gases are emitted into the environ-
ment. In addition, burning tires can leak oil
and aromatic hydrocarbons into the soil.
Thus they can contaminate drinking water
in the area.
Tire manufacturers try to reduce waste
by making tires that last longer. Unfortunately,
when these durable radial tires break down,
they disintegrate into small airborne particles,
instead of large pieces as older tires do. This
“tire dust” contains latex rubber, which is an
allergen. As well, tire dust is small enough to
be breathed deeply into the lungs. Tire dust
may be one reason why asthma is becoming
more common in North America.
Since tires are made of hydrocarbons, scrap
tires can be used as a fuel source. Tire derived
fuel (TDF) is used in power plants, paper mills,
and cement kilns. Environmentalists are con-
cerned, however, that incomplete combustion
may result in the release of toxins.
Making Connections
A large company is proposing to build a
cement kiln to produce cement. It will use
scrap tires as fuel. Divide the class into various
stakeholders, such as
• local citizens
• an environmental group
• the company
• the provincial ministry of the environment
•the owners of a scrap tire storage facility
Debate the proposal.
Chapter 13  The Chemistry of Hydrocarbons • MHR 559
Alkynes
Carbon and hydrogen atoms can be arranged in many ways to produce a
great variety of compounds. Yet another way involves triple bonds in the
structure of compounds. This bond structure creates a class of aliphatic
compounds called alkynes. Alkynes are aliphatic compounds that contain
one or more triple bonds.
Naming and Drawing Alkynes
Both double and triple bonds are multiple bonds. Therefore alkynes are
unsaturated hydrocarbons, just as alkenes are. To name alkynes and draw
their structures, you follow the same rules that you used for alkenes. The
only difference is the sufﬁx -yne, which you need to use when naming
alkyne compounds. Also, remember to count the number of bonds for
each carbon. An alkyne bond counts as three bonds.
As you might expect, the presence of a triple bond in alkynes makes
their physical and chemical properties different from those of alkanes and
alkenes. A structure with a triple bond must be linear around the bond.
(See Figure 13.24.) This means that the shapes of alkynes are different
from the shapes of alkanes and alkenes. As well, the triple bond makes
the molecule much more reactive — even more so than the double bond.
In fact, few alkynes occur naturally because they are so reactive.
Alkynes are similar to both alkanes and alkenes because they form a
homologous series. Alkynes have the general formula of CnH2n−2. So, for
example, the ﬁrst member of the alkyne series, ethyne, has the formula
C2H2. (You may know this compound by its common name: acetylene.)
The next member, propyne, has the formula C3H4.
CH3
C
C
CH CH3
CH3
Alkynes are linear
Figure 13.24
around the triple bond, as these
examples show.
Practice Problems
15. Name each alkyne.
(a)
CH3
CH3
C
C
C
CH3
(b)
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH2
CH3
CH
CH2
C
C
CH
CH2
CH2
CH3
16. Draw a condensed structural diagram for each compound.
(a) 2-pentyne
(b) 4,5-dimethyl-2-heptyne
(c) 3-ethyl-4-methyl-1-hexyne
(d) 2,5,7-trimethyl-3-octyne
560 MHR • Unit 5  Hydrocarbons and Energy
Cyclic Hydrocarbons
You have probably heard the term “steroid” used in the context of athlet-
ics. (See Figure 13.25.) Our bodies contain steroids, such as testosterone
(a male sex hormone) and estrone (a female sex hormone). Steroids also
have important medicinal uses. For example, budesonide is a steroid
that is used to treat asthma. One of the most common steroids is
cholesterol. This compound is essential to your normal body functions,
but it has been linked to blocked artery walls and heart disease, as well.
Steroids have also been associated with misuse, especially at the
Olympics and other sporting events. Some athletes have tried to gain an
advantage by using steroids to increase their muscle mass.
H3C OH
H3C
O
testosterone
H3C O
HO
estrone
Steroids are organic compounds. Our bodies make steroids naturally.
Figure 13.25
Steroids may also be synthesized in chemical laboratories. What do the structures of
these steroids have in common?
What do steroids have to do with hydrocarbons? Steroids are
unsaturated compounds. Although they are complex organic molecules,
their basic structure centres on four rings of carbon atoms. In other words,
steroids are built around ring structures of alkanes and alkenes.
Hydrocarbon ring structures are called cyclic hydrocarbons. They
occur when the two ends of a hydrocarbon chain join together. In order to
do this, a hydrogen atom from each end carbon must be removed, just as
in the formation of a multiple bond. (See Figure 13.26 on the next page.)
Chapter 13  The Chemistry of Hydrocarbons • MHR 561
You should have no trouble recognizing cyclohexane as a member of
the alkane family. Notice, however, that cycloalkanes, such as cyclohexa-
ne, have two fewer hydrogen atoms compared with other alkanes. Thus
they have the general formula CnH2n. (This is the same as the general for-
mula for alkenes.)
Naming and Drawing Cyclic Hydrocarbons
To draw the structure of a cyclic hydrocarbon, use a line diagram in a
ring-like shape, such as the one shown in Figure 13.26. Each carbon-
carbon bond is shown as a straight line. Each corner of the ring represents
a carbon atom. Hydrogen atoms are not shown, but they are assumed to be
present in the correct numbers.
H
H
H
C C
H
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
lose
2 H‘s
H
H
C C
H
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
H
C C
H
H
bond
formation
hexane
C6H14
H
C
H
H
H C
H
H
C
C
H
C
C
H
H
H
H
H
+ 2H
cyclohexane
C6H12
Figure 13.26
How hexane, C6H14, can become cyclohexane, C6H12
Because of the ring structure, the naming rules for cyclic hydro-
carbons, including cycloalkanes and cycloalkenes, are slightly different
from those for alkanes and alkenes. Below are four examples to illustrate
the naming rules.
To draw cyclic hydrocarbons, start with the rules you learned for
drawing other types of compounds. To place multiple bonds and branches,
you have the option of counting in either direction around the ring.
Naming Cyclic Hydrocarbons
Example 1: You can still use the general formula: preﬁx + root + sufﬁx. In
Figure 13.27, there are only single carbon-carbon bonds. There are also ﬁve
corners (carbon atoms) in the ring, which is the main chain. Since there are
no branches, the name of this compound is cyclopentane. Notice the addi-
tion of cyclo- to indicate the ring structure.
Example 2:  When naming cyclic compounds, all carbon atoms in the ring
are treated as equal. This means that any carbon can be carbon number 1.
In Figure 13.28, only one branch is attached to the ring. Therefore the
carbon that the branch is attached to is carbon number 1. Because this
branch automatically gets the lowest possible position number, no position
number is required in the name. Thus the name of this compound is
methylcyclohexane.
Figure 13.27
CH3
Figure 13.28
562 MHR • Unit 5  Hydrocarbons and Energy
Example 3:  When two or more branches are on a ring structure, each must
have the lowest possible position number. Which way do you count the
carbons around the ring? You can count in either direction around the ring. In
Figure 13.29, a good choice is to make the ethyl branch carbon number 1 and
then count counterclockwise. This allows you to sequence the branches in
alphabetical order and to add the position numbers in ascending order. So
the name of this structure is 1-ethyl-3-methylcyclohexane.
Example 4:  In Figure 13.30, there is a double bond, represented by the
extra vertical line inside the ring structure. You must follow the same rules
as for alkenes. That is, the double bond gets priority for the lowest number.
This means that one of the carbon atoms, on either end of the double bond,
must be carbon number 1. The carbon atom at the other end must be carbon
number 2. Next you have to decide in which direction to count so that the
branch gets the lowest possible position number. In this compound, the
carbon atom on the bottom end of the double bond is carbon number 1.
Then you can count clockwise so that the methyl group on the top carbon
of the ring has position number 3. (Counting in the other direction would
give a higher locating number for the branch.) The name of this structure
is 3-methyl-1-cyclohexene.
CH3
CH2
CH3
Figure 13.29
CH3
Figure 13.30
Practice Problems
17. Name each compound.
(a)
CH3
CH2
CH3
(e)
(b)
H3C
CH3
(f)
H3C
CH3
(c)
(d)
CH3
(g)
CH3CH2
(h)
CH3
CH3
CH2
CH2
CH3
CH3
CH2CH3
CH3
CH3
CH2CH3
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH3
18. Draw a condensed structural diagram for each compound.
(a) 1,2,4-trimethylcycloheptane
(e) 1,3-ethyl-2-methylcyclopentane
(b) 2-ethyl-3-propyl-1-cyclobutene (f) 4-butyl-3-methyl-1-cyclohexene
(c) 3-methyl-2-cyclopentene
(g) 1,1-dimethylcyclopentane
(d) cyclopentene
(h) 1,2,3,4,5,6-hexamethyl
cyclohexane
You have now had some experience naming and drawing aliphatic
compounds. In the next investigation, you will develop a more
thorough understanding of them by examining their structural and
physical properties.
Chapter 13  The Chemistry of Hydrocarbons • MHR 563
S K I L L   F O C U S
Predicting
Modelling concepts
Analyzing and interpreting
Structures and Properties
of Aliphatic Compounds
To compare the properties of alkanes, alkenes,
and alkynes, you will be working with com-
pounds that have the same number of carbon
atoms. First, you will construct and compare
butane, trans-2-butene, 2-butyne, and cyclobu-
tane. You will use a graph to compare the boiling
points of each compound. Next, you will use
what you have just observed to predict the rela-
tive boiling points of pentane, trans-2-pentene,
2-pentyne, and cyclopentane. You will construct
and compare these structures and graph their
boiling points.
Question
How can constructing models of butane,
trans-2-butene, 2-butyne, and cyclobutane help
you understand and compare their physical
properties?
Predictions
Predict the structural formula for each com-
pound. After completing steps 1 to 4, predict
what the graph of the boiling points of pentane,
trans-2-pentene, 2-pentyne, and cyclopentane
will look like.
Materials
molecular model kits
reference books
Procedure
1. Construct models of butane, trans-2-butene,
2-butyne, and cyclobutane.
2. Examine the structure of each model. Draw a
diagram of it in your notebook.
3. If possible, rotate the molecule around each
carbon-carbon bond to see if this changes the
appearance of the structure.
4. Look up the boiling points of these four
compounds in the table below. Draw a bar
graph to compare the boiling points.
5. Repeat steps 1 to 3 for pentane, trans-2-
pentene, 2-pentyne, and cyclopentane.
6. Predict the relative boiling points for these
four compounds. Use a reference book to ﬁnd
and graph the actual boiling points.
Comparing the Boiling Points
of Four-Carbon Compounds
Compound
Boiling point (°C)
butane
trans-2-butene
2-butyne
cyclobutane
–0.5
0.9
27
12
Analysis
1. What are the differences between the
multiple-bond compounds and the alkanes?
2. What type of compound has the highest
boiling point? What type has the lowest
boiling point?
Conclusion
3. Identify possible reasons for the differences in
boiling points between compounds.
Application
4. Compare the boiling points of cyclopentane
and cyclobutane. Use this information to
put the following compounds in order from
highest to lowest boiling point: cyclohexane,
cyclobutane, cyclopropane, cyclopentane.
Use a reference book to check your order.
564 MHR • Unit 5  Hydrocarbons and Energy
CH3
CH3
C
CH3
CH3
Figure 13.31
alkane?
Can you name this
CH3
CH3
C
Figure 13.32
alkyne?
C
CH CH3
Can you name this
Summary: Rules for Naming and Drawing Aliphatic Compounds
Naming Alkanes
• Find the longest continuous chain. This is the parent (main) chain.
Number the parent chain so that the branches have the lowest
possible position numbers.
• Locate any branches. Use the number of carbons in each branch to
name it (for example, ethyl). Give it a position number.
• When writing the parts of the name, separate two numbers by a
comma. Separate a number from a word by a hyphen.
• Write the preﬁx. Each branch has a position number. Write the
branches in alphabetical order. More than one of each type of branch
is shown by di-, tri-, and so on.
• Write the root. This depends on the number of carbons in the main
chain.
• Write the sufﬁx -ane. (See Figure 13.31 for practice.)
Drawing Alkanes
• In a straight line, draw the carbon atoms in the parent (main) chain.
The number of carbon atoms is indicated by the root of the name.
• Give position numbers to the carbon atoms in the parent chain.
Attach all the branches to their appropriate parent chain carbon
atoms.
• Add enough hydrogen atoms and bonds for each carbon atom to have
four bonds.
Naming Alkenes and Alkynes
• Find the longest continuous chain containing the multiple bond. This
is the parent chain. Number the parent chain so that the multiple
bond has the lowest possible position number.
• Locate any branches. Identify the position number and number of
carbons for each branch.
• When writing the parts of the name, separate two numbers by a
comma. Separate a number from a word by a hyphen.
• Write the preﬁx. Each branch has a position number. Write the
branches in alphabetical order. More than one of each type of
branch is shown by di-, tri-, and so on.
• Write the root. This includes the position number of the multiple
bond and the name for the number of carbon atoms in the parent
chain.
• Write the sufﬁx -ene for alkenes and -yne for alkynes. (See Figure
13.32 for practice.)
Drawing Alkenes and Alkynes
• In a straight line, draw the carbon atoms in the parent chain. The
number of carbon atoms is indicated by the root of the name. Place
the multiple bond between two carbon atoms in the chain, as
indicated by the number in the name.
• Give position numbers to the carbon atoms in the parent chain.
Attach all the branches to their appropriate parent chain carbon
atoms.
• Add enough hydrogen atoms and bonds for each carbon atom to have
four bonds.
Chapter 13  The Chemistry of Hydrocarbons • MHR 565
CH2
CH3
CH3
CH2
CH3
Figure 13.33
cycloalkene?
Can you name this
Naming Cycloalkanes
• Identify the branches.
• Number the carbons in the ring, in either direction, so that the
branches have the lowest possible position numbers.
• Write the preﬁx, as for naming alkanes.
• Write the root -cyclo- plus the name for the number of carbon
atoms in the ring. For example, a ﬁve-carbon ring would have the
root -cyclopent-.
• Write the sufﬁx -ane.
Drawing Cycloalkanes
• Draw the ring, according to the root of the name.
• Choose one of the ring carbon atoms as carbon number 1. Place each
branch accordingly.
Naming Cycloalkenes and Cycloalkynes
• Identify the branches.
• Number the carbons in the ring, in either direction, so that the
multiple bond is between the two lowest numbers, and the branches
get the lowest possible position numbers.
• Write the preﬁx and root, as for cycloalkanes.
• Write the sufﬁx -ene for cycloalkenes or -yne for cycloalkynes.
(See Figure 13.33 for practice.)
Drawing Cycloalkenes and Cycloalkynes
• Draw the ring, according to the root of the name.
• Choose one of the ring carbon atoms as carbon number 1. Place the
multiple bond accordingly.
• Add each branch according to its type and position number.
Section Wrap-up
Now you know how to name and draw alkanes, alkenes, alkynes, and ring
compounds. In the next section, you will discover how petroleum, the
source of most hydrocarbons, can be separated into its components.
Section Review
1
(a)
K/U
What are the names of the three types of aliphatic compounds
that you studied in this section?
(b)
K/U
Which of these are saturated compounds, and which are unsat-
urated compounds? How does this difference affect their properties?
2
K/U
List the roots used to name the ﬁrst ten members of the alkane
homologous series. Indicate the number of carbon atoms that each
represents.
3
C
If water and octane are mixed, does the octane dissolve in the
water? Explain.
566 MHR • Unit 5  Hydrocarbons and Energy
4
(a)
K/U
Name each compound.
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH CH
CH CH
CH
CH
CH2
CH3
CH2
CH3
(b)
CH3
CH3
(d)
CH3
C
CH2
C
CH2
CH3
CH3
CH2
(c)
CH3
CH2
CH
C
CH CH
CH2
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH2
CH2
CH3
5
C
Draw a condensed structural diagram for each compound.
(a) 2,4-dimethyl-3-hexene
(b) 5-ethyl-4-propyl-2-heptyne
(c) 3,5-diethyl-2,4,7,8-tetramethyl-5-propyldecane
(d) trans-4-methyl-3-heptene
6
C
Draw and name all the isomers that are represented by each
molecular formula.
(a) C3H4
(b) C5H12
(c) C5H10
7
K/U
Identify any mistakes in the name and/or structure of
each compound.
(a) 3-methyl-2-butene
(b) 2-ethyl-4,5-methyl-1-hexene
CH3
CH3
C
C
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH2
CH3
8
C
What happens when there is more than one double bond or more
than one ring? Try to draw a condensed structural diagram for each of
the following compounds.
(a) propadiene
(b) 2-methyl-1,3-butadiene
(c) 1,3,5-cycloheptatriene
(d) cyclopentylcyclohexane
Chapter 13  The Chemistry of Hydrocarbons • MHR 567
13.4 Reﬁning and Using Hydrocarbons
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
describe the steps involved
in reﬁning petroleum to
obtain gasoline and other
useful fractions
explain the importance
of hydrocarbons in the
petrochemical industry
communicate your under-
standing of the following
terms: petrochemicals,
fractional distillation,
cracking, reforming
Is it possible to take hydrocarbons straight out of the ground and use them
as they are? Since the earliest recorded history, people have done just
that. In the past, people used crude oil that seeped up to Earth’s surface
to waterproof boats and buildings. They also used it to grease wheels and
even dress the wounds of animals and humans. As well, people burned
natural gas, mainly to supply lighting for temples and palaces.
Today hydrocarbons are extracted from the ground at well sites, then
processed further at reﬁneries. (See Figure 13.34.) The ﬁrst commercial oil
well in North America was located in southern Ontario’s Enniskillen
Township. It began production in 1858. At that time, kerosene (which was
used to fuel lamps) was the principal focus of the young petroleum indus-
try. Parafﬁn (for making candles) and lubricating oils were also produced,
but there was little demand for other hydrocarbon materials, such as gaso-
line.
Figure 13.34
This oil reﬁnery is in Clarkson, Ontario.
Reliance on hydrocarbons has increased substantially since the nineteenth
century. Our society now requires these compounds for fuel, as well as for
the raw materials that are used to synthesize petrochemicals.
Petrochemicals are basic hydrocarbons, such as ethene and propene, that
are converted into plastics and other synthetic materials. Petroleum is the
chief source of the petrochemicals that drive our cars and our economy.
Petroleum is not a pure substance, however. Rather, petroleum is a com-
plex mixture of hydrocarbons—mainly alkanes and alkenes—of varying
molecular sizes and states. Because petroleum is a mixture, its composi-
tion varies widely from region to region in the world. An efﬁcient process
is essential for separating and collecting the individual, pure hydrocarbon
components. Read on to learn about this process in greater detail.
568 MHR • Unit 5  Hydrocarbons and Energy
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
Using Properties to Separate Petroleum Components
Fractional distillation is a process for separating petroleum into its
hydrocarbon components. This process relies on a physical property—
boiling point. Each of the hydrocarbon components, called fractions, has
its own range of boiling points. At an oil reﬁnery, the separating (reﬁning)
of petroleum begins in a large furnace. The furnace vaporizes the liquid
components. The ﬂuid mixture then enters a large fractionation tower.
Figure 13.35 outlines how the various hydrocarbon fractions are separated
in the tower. (Note: The temperatures shown are approximate
boiling points for the hydrocarbon fractions.)
gases (up to 32˚C)
bubble cap
straight-run
gasoline
(32˚C–104˚C)
naptha
(104˚C–157˚C)
kerosene
(157˚C–232˚C)
gas oil
(232˚C–426˚C)
Web
LINK
www.school.mcgrawhill.ca/
resources/
Canada’s land mass has expe-
rienced dynamic changes over
tens of millions of years.
Climatic conditions, along with
the deposition of countless
remains of organisms, created
the areas in which petroleum
is found today. These areas are
called sedimentary basins.
Where are the sedimentary
basins? Are they all active
sites for oil and gas extraction?
How much oil and gas do sci-
entists estimate there is? How
do Canada’s reserves compare
with those of other petroleum-
producing nations? Go to the
web site above to “tap” into
Canada’s and the world’s
petroleum resources. Go to
Science Resources, then to
Chemistry 11 to ﬁnd out where
to go next. Decide on a
suitable format in which to
record your ﬁndings.
crude oil
fractionation
tower
steam
residue
This diagram
Figure 13.35
shows how petroleum is
separated into its hydrocarbon
fractions. Each fraction has a
different range of boiling points.
The tower separates the fractions
by a repeated process of heating,
evaporating, cooling, and
condensing.
Perforated plates, which are ﬁtted with bubble caps, are placed at various
levels in the tower. As each fraction reaches a plate where the temperature
is just below its boiling point, it condenses and liqueﬁes. The liquid
fractions are taken from the tower by pipes. Other fractions that are still
vapours continue to pass up through the plates to higher levels.
Several plates are needed to collect each fraction. Heavier hydro-
carbons (larger molecules) have higher boiling points. They condense ﬁrst
and are removed in the lower sections of the tower. The lighter hydrocar-
bons, with lower boiling points, reach the higher levels of the tower
before they are separated.
Chapter 13  The Chemistry of Hydrocarbons • MHR 569
Cracking and Reforming
Once the fractions are removed from the distillation tower, they may
be chemically processed or puriﬁed further to make them marketable.
(See Figure 13.36.) There has been a tremendous increase in the demand
for a variety of petroleum products in the early twentieth century. This
demand has forced the oil industry to develop new techniques to increase
the yield from each barrel of oil. These techniques are called cracking and
reforming.
Petroleum Fractionation Products
gases
condenser
gas
LPG (liquid petroleum gases)
straight-run
gasoline
high octane
gasoline
gas
recovery
and
separation
further
processing
chemicals
gasoline
straight-run
gasoline
catalytic
reforming
naphtha
kerosene
gas oil
hydro-
cracking
catalytic
cracking
heavy fuel oils
kerosene
furnace oil
diesel oil
asphalts
lubricating residue
petroleum coke
further
refining
waxes
crude
oil
steam
residue
vacuum
distillation
fractionation
tower
cooking
plastics
fibers
drugs
detergents
synthetic rubber
airplanes
automobiles
farming
home heating
jet fuel
rail roads/trucks
rail roads/trucks
factories
ships
roads
lubricating oil
wax paper
coke
Figure 13.36
Selected uses of petroleum fractions
Cracking was ﬁrst introduced in Sarnia, Ontario. This process uses heat to
break larger hydrocarbon molecules into smaller gasoline molecules.
Cracking is done in the absence of air and can produce different types of
hydrocarbons. For example, the cracking of propane can produce methane
and ethene, as well as propene and hydrogen. (See Figure 13.37.)
Electronic Learning Partner
500˚C–700˚C
The Chemistry 11 Electronic
Learning Partner has an ani-
mation that illustrates how a
fractionation tower works.
2 CH3CH2CH3
propane
CH4 + CH2
methane
ethene
CH2 + CH3CH CH2 + H2
propene
hydrogen
Figure 13.37
This chemical equation summarizes the cracking of propane.
570 MHR • Unit 5  Hydrocarbons and Energy
Reforming is another technique that uses heat, pressure, and catalysts to
convert large hydrocarbons into other compounds. Reforming can produce
larger hydrocarbons or a different type of hydrocarbon, called aromatic
compounds. (See Figure 13.38.) Aromatic compounds contain special ring
structures. You will learn about them in a later chemistry course.
Language
LINK
What is a catalyst? Use
reference books to ﬁnd out.
Cracking
Larger
Hydrocarbon
Heat
Catalyst
Smaller Hydrocarbon
+
Smaller Hydrocarbon
Reforming
Smaller Hydrocarbon
+
Smaller Hydrocarbon
Heat, Pressure
Catalyst
Larger
Hydrocarbon
Figure 13.38
Comparing cracking and reforming
Some of the products of the reﬁning process are transported to
petrochemical plants. These plants convert complex hydrocarbons,
such as naphtha, into simple chemical compounds, or a small
number of compounds, for further processing by other industries.
Canadian petrochemical plants produce chemicals such as
methanol, ethylene, propylene, styrene, butadiene, butylene,
toluene, and xylene. These chemicals are used as building blocks
in the production of other ﬁnished products. Nearly every room
in your school, your home, and your favourite shopping centre
contains, or is made from, at least one petrochemical product.
Yet, as you can see in Figure 13.39, petrochemicals represent
only a small fraction of society’s uses of petroleum.
In the next chapter, you will discover why hydrocarbons are
so highly valued as fuels. As well, you will unravel the mystery
of how so much energy can be locked up inside a hydrocarbon
molecule.
fuel 95%
petrochemicals
5%
plastics
detergents
drugs
synthetic fibres
synthetic rubber
Section Wrap-up
In this section, you learned that petrochemicals, an essential part of our
society and technology, are obtained from petroleum. You discovered how
petroleum is separated into its components by fractional distillation,
cracking, and reforming.
In this chapter, you learned a great deal about hydrocarbons. You
learned how hydrocarbons are formed in section 13.1. In sections 13.2
and 13.3, you learned to draw, classify, and name different hydrocarbons.
Finally, you learned about the practical side of hydrocarbons — how they
are produced and used in everyday life.
Petroleum
A tremendous
Figure 13.39
number of petrochemical prod-
ucts enrich your life. Yet they
still make up only about 5% of
what is produced from a barrel
of crude oil. A staggering 95%
of all petroleum is used as fuel.
Chapter 13  The Chemistry of Hydrocarbons • MHR 571
manipulate these polymers in various ways.
Polymer chemists have invented an amazing
array of materials. These include polyvinyl chlo-
ride (used to make garden hose and duct tape),
polyurethane (used to stuff teddy bears and
make spandex bicycle pants), and acrylonitrile-
butadiene-styrene, or ABS (used to make brakes
and other auto body parts).
Make Career Connections
What kind of education do polymer chemists
need for their jobs?
• Find out about polymer chemistry programs
that are offered by a university near you.
• Research different companies that employ
polymer chemists. If possible, interview a
polymer chemist who is employed by one of
these companies.
Careers
in Chemistry
Polymer Chemist
Bulletproof vests used to be heavy, bulky, and
uncomfortable. Stephanie Kwolek changed that.
Now police ofﬁcers, police dogs, and soldiers,
can wear light, strong bulletproof vests made of
a synthetic ﬁbre called Kevlar™. Kwolek (shown
above) developed Kevlar™ while working for the
DuPont chemical company. Kevlar™ ﬁrst came
into general use in 1971. It is ﬁve times stronger
than steel, gram for gram, but almost as light as
nylon. It is ﬂame resistant, resists wear and tear,
and does not conduct electricity. This versatile
material is used not only in bulletproof vests, but
also in other manufactured items, including hock-
ey helmets, ﬁreﬁghters’ suits, spacecraft shells,
and surgeons’ gloves.
Kwoluk’s branch of organic chemistry—poly-
mer chemistry—specializes in creating synthetic
materials that are cheaper, faster, and stronger
than natural materials. Polymer chemists often
work by stringing together thousands of atoms to
form long molecules called polymers. Then they
Section Review
Unit Project Prep
1
(a)
K/U
What physical property allows various fractions of crude oil
Before you choose a product
to investigate for the end-of-
unit Project, consider what
you have learned about
petrochemical products. What
compound is used to produce
most plastics, and thus almost
all products’ packaging?
to be separated in a fractionation tower?
(b)
C
What is this process of separation called? Brieﬂy describe it.
Include a diagram in your answer if you wish.
MC
Our society’s demand for petroleum products has increased
dramatically over the last century. Describe two techniques that can
be used to transform the petroleum fractions from a fractionation
tower, in order to meet this demand.
MC
List ﬁve types of petrochemicals that can be produced from reﬁned
hydrocarbons. Describe brieﬂy how each type has affected your life.
MC
Petrochemicals are not always helpful. Do research and prepare
a presentation illustrating the effects of petrochemicals on the
environment.
2
3
4
572 MHR • Unit 5  Hydrocarbons and Energy
Review
Reﬂecting on Chapter 13
Summarize this chapter in the format of your
choice. Here are a few ideas to use as guidelines:
• Identify the origins and sources of hydrocarbons
and other organic compounds.
• Describe the characteristics that enable carbon to
form so many, varied compounds.
• Distinguish among complete, condensed, and
line structural diagrams.
• Identify, draw, and name at least two examples
of each kind of hydrocarbon you studied:
alkanes, alkenes, alkynes, and cyclic
hydrocarbons.
• Demonstrate, using suitable examples, true
isomers of a hydrocarbon.
• Compare physical properties, such as boiling
point, of aliphatic compounds.
• Describe the processes and techniques that the
petrochemical industry depends on. Identify at
least ten products of this industry.
Reviewing Key Terms
For each of the following terms, write a sentence
that shows your understanding of its meaning.
aliphatic hydrocarbons
alkenes
cis-trans isomer
cyclic hydrocarbons
fractional distillation
homologous series
hydrocarbons
petrochemicals
reforming
structural diagram
unsaturated
hydrocarbons
alkanes
alkynes
cracking
expanded molecular
formula
geometric isomer
isomers
organic compound
petroleum
saturated hydrocarbons
structural model
5. What are isomers? Give one example of a set
of isomers for a molecular formula.
6. Describe how the boiling point changes as
the chain length of an aliphatic compound
increases. Explain why this happens.
7. Brieﬂy compare alkanes, alkenes, and alkynes.
(Give both similarities and differences.)
8. Describe the difference between structural
isomers and cis-trans isomers.
9. Name each compound.
(a)
CH3
CH2
CH2
CH3
(b)
CH3
CH3
(c)
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH
CH
CH CH3
CH3
(d)
CH2
CH3
CH3
CH2
CH CH CH3
CH2
CH3
10. For each structural diagram, write the IUPAC
name and identify the type of aliphatic
compound.
(a)
(b)
(c)
CH3
CH2
C
CH3
CH2CH3
CH3
CH3
Knowledge/Understanding
1. (a) What are the origins of most hydrocarbons
and other organic compounds?
(b) List three sources of hydrocarbons.
(c) What is the main s’ource of hydrocarbons
CH
C
CH
CH2
CH3
(d)
CH3
CH3
C
C
H
CH2
CH3
used for fuels?
(e)
2. List three factors that are required to change
biological matter into petroleum.
3. What are the key properties of the carbon atom
that allow it to form such diverse compounds?
4. Deﬁne the following terms: fractional
distillation, petrochemical.
CH3
CH2
CH3
CH2
C
CH3
CH3
CH2
CH
CH3
Chapter 13  The Chemistry of Hydrocarbons • MHR 573
11. Name the following isomers of 2-heptene.
16. Which combinations of the following structural
H
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH3
C
C
CH3
H
diagrams represent true isomers of C6H14?
Which structural diagrams represent the
same isomer?
(a)
CH3
CH3
H
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH3
C
C
H
CH3
CH
CH
CH3
CH3
(b)
CH3
12. Match the following names and structural
CH3
CH CH2
CH2
CH3
diagrams. Note that only four of the six names
match.
(a) cis-3-methyl-3-hexene
(b) trans-3-hexene
(c) trans-3-methyl-2-hexene
(d) trans-3-methyl-3-hexene
(e) cis-3-methyl-2-hexene
(f) cis-3-hexene
(A)
CH2
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH2
(B)
H
C
C
C
C
H
H
CH3
CH2
CH2
CH3
(C)
CH3
CH3
C
C
H
CH3
(D)
CH2
CH2
CH3
H
C
C
CH3
CH2
CH2
CH3
13. Is 1-methyl-2-cyclobutene the correct name for
a compound? Draw the structural diagram for
the compound, and rename it if necessary.
14. Explain why the rule “like dissolves like” is
very useful when cleaning up an oil spill on a
body of water.
15. Why is it impossible for the correct name of a
linear alkane to begin with 1-methyl?
574 MHR • Unit 5  Hydrocarbons and Energy
(c)
CH3 CH3
(d)
CH3
CH3
CH
CH2
CH2
CH3
CH CH
CH3
CH3
(e)
CH3
CH3
C
CH2
CH3
CH3
Inquiry
17. Someone has left two colourless liquids, each
in an unlabelled beaker, on the lab bench. You
know that one liquid is an alkane, and one is
an alkene. Describe a simple test that you can
use to determine which liquid is which.
18. Suppose that you were given a liquid in a
beaker labelled “C6H12.” Discuss how you
would determine whether the substance was an
alkane, a cycloalkane, an alkene, or an alkyne.
19.In Investigation 13-C, you constructed cyclobu-
tane. In order to construct this isomer, you had
to use springs for bonds.
(a) Why did you have to use springs?
(b) What do you think the bulging springs tell
you about the stability of cyclobutane in
real life?
Communication
20. Draw a complete structural diagram for each of
these compounds.
(a) 3-ethylhexane
(b) 1-butene
(c) 2,3-dimethylpentane
21. Draw a condensed structural diagram for
each of these compounds.
(a) methylpropane
(b) 1-ethyl-3-propylcyclopentane
(c) cis-3-methyl-3-heptene
(d) 3-butyl-4-methyl-1-octyne
(e) 4-ethyl-1-cyclooctene
22. (a) Draw three structural isomers of C5H12.
(b) Draw four cis-trans isomers of C8H16.
23. In a fractionation tower, the gaseous fractions
are removed from the top and the solid
residues are removed from the bottom.
(a) Explain why the fractions separate like this.
(b) A sample of crude oil was tested and found
to contain mostly smaller hydrocarbon mole-
cules, less than 15 carbon atoms long. From
what part of the tower would most of the
fractions of this sample be removed? Why?
24. Use a diagram to describe the steps involved in
reﬁning petroleum to obtain gasoline.
25. Draw a concept map to illustrate how hydro-
carbon molecules can start as crude oil and
end up as synthetic rubber.
26. Imagine that you are the owner of an oil reﬁnery.
Your main supply of crude oil contains a high
percent of longer-chain hydrocarbons (greater
than 15 carbon atoms per molecule). A new cus-
tomer is looking for a large supply of gasoline,
which contains 7- and 8-carbon molecules.
How will you meet your customer’s needs?
27. Place the following alkanes in order from
lowest to highest boiling point. Explain your
reasoning.
CH2
CH3
(a)
CH3
CH2
(b)
CH3
CH2
CH3
CH2
CH3
(c)
CH3
CH
CH3
(d)
CH3
CH2
CH2
CH3
28. Draw the complete, condensed, and line
structural diagrams for 2,3,4-trimethylpentane.
Discuss the main advantange of each type of
structural diagram.
Making Connections
29. List two ways in which ethene is important in
everyday life.
30. Research the similarities and differences in
drilling for oil offshore versus onshore. Write a
report of your ﬁndings.
31. The National Energy Board has estimated that
Canada’s original petroleum resources included
4.3 × 1011 m3 (430 billion cubic metres) of
oil and bitumen (a tar-like substance) and
1.7 × 1014 m3 (170 trillion cubic metres) of
natural gas. Canada’s petroleum-producing
companies have used only a small fraction
of these resources. Why, then, do you think
many people are so concerned about
exhausting them?
Answers to Practice Problems and
Short Answers to Section Review Questions:
Practice Problems: 1. C7H16 2. C9H20 3. 10  4. 25
5.(a) 2-methylbutane (b) 2,2-dimethylpropane
(c) 3-ethyl-2,5-dimethylheptane (d) 2,2,4,4-tetramethyl-
hexane (e) 2,2,4-trimethyl-4-propyloctane
7.(a) 2,4-dimethylhexane (b) 2,3-dimethylhexane
(c) 3-ethyl-3-methylhexane  8.(a) 3-hexene
(b) 3-propyl-2-heptene (c) 4-ethyl-2,3-dimethyl-4-octene
10. 2-butene, 1-butene, 2-methyl-1-propene
11. cis-2-pentene, trans-2-pentene  14. cis-2-hexene,
trans-2-hexene; cis-3-hexene, trans-3-hexene;
3-methyl-cis-2-pentene, 3-methyl-trans-2-pentene;
4-methyl-cis-2-pentene, 4-methyl-trans-2-pentene
15.(a) 4,4-dimethyl-2-pentyne (b) 3-ethyl-5-methyl-3
-propyl-1-hexyne  17.(a) 1-ethyl-3-methylcyclopentane
(b) 1,2,3,4-tetramethylcyclohexane (c) methylcyclobutane
(d) 3-methyl-5-propyl-1-cyclopentene
(e) 4-methyl-1-cyclooctene
(f) 5-ethyl-3,4-dimethyl-1-cyclononene
(g) 3,5-diethyl-1-cyclohexene
(h) 1-methyl-2-pentylcyclopentane
Section Review 13.1: 5.(a) organic (b) organic (c) inorganic
(d) inorganic (e) organic (f) inorganic (g) organic
(h) inorganic 13.3: 1.(a) alkane, alkene, alkyne
2. meth (1), eth (2), prop (3), but (4), pent (5), hex (6),
hept (7), oct (8), non (9), dec (10)  4.(a) 3-ethyl-2,4-
dimethylhexane  (b) 2,4,4-trimethyl-1-pentene
(c) 4-ethyl-3-propyl-1-hexyne
(d) 2-ethyl-3,4,5,6-tetramethyl-1-cycloheptene
6.(a) propyne, cyclopropene (b) pentane, 2-methylbutane,
2,2-dimethylpropane (c) 1-pentene, cis-2-pentene,
trans-2-pentene, 2-methyl-2-butene, 2-methyl-1-butene,
cyclopentane  13.4: 1.(a) boiling point
(b) fractional distillation
Chapter 13  The Chemistry of Hydrocarbons • MHR 575
576
Energy Trapped
in Hydrocarbons
The whole world runs on energy—and so do you! Fossil fuels provide
energy to power cars and heat buildings. Food provides energy to keep
your body alive and warm. Both sources of energy come from organic
compounds, such as hydrocarbons, sugars, and proteins.
Green plants, algae, and plankton trap the Sun’s energy through the
process of photosynthesis. After these organisms die, they are broken
down by natural processes. Their remains accumulate on Earth’s surface.
In some areas, these remains build up in thick layers, which are eventual-
ly covered by rock and soil. Under certain conditions, over billions of
years, pressure changes these layers into something new: fossil fuels.
Fossil fuels (such as coal, natural gas, and petroleum) are fuels that are
made from fossilized organic materials. The trapped energy from the Sun
is still present in fossil fuels. To use this energy, we need to extract it.
Combustion, or burning, is the most common way to extract energy from
fossil fuels.
In this chapter, you will explore the ways in which our society obtains
energy from fossil fuels. You will get a chance to measure exactly how
much energy is obtained from an organic substance by doing your own
combustion reaction. As well, you will learn how dangerous incomplete
combustion reactions can be.
fuel, air
mixture
spark plug
combustion occurring
here converts fuel
into energy
exhaust gases
Fossil fuels take
millions of years to
accumulate. They
are burned in min-
utes by the internal
combustion engine
of a car. How have
fossil fuels changed
your life? How long
do you think our
supplies of fossil
fuels will last?
C h a p t e r   P r e v i e w
14.1 Formation and
Combustion Reactions
14.2 Thermochemical
Equations
14.3 Measuring Energy
Changes
14.4 The Technology of Heat
Measurement
14.5 The Impact of Petroleum
Products
C o n c e p t s   a n d   S k i l l s
Yo u   W i l l   N e e d
Before you begin this chapter,
review the following concepts
and skills:
explaining bonding in
molecular compounds
(Chapter 3, section 3.3)
(cid:2) writing and balancing
chemical equations for
different reactions
(Chapter 4, section 4.1)
signiﬁcant digits
(Chapter 1, section 1.2)
problem solving in gas laws
(Chapter 12, section 12.3)
naming and drawing
aliphatic compounds
(Chapter 13, section 13.2)
Chapter 14  Energy Trapped in Hydrocarbons • MHR 577
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
14.1
Formation and
Combustion Reactions
One of our most common uses of hydrocarbons is as fuel. (See Figure
14.1.) The combustion of fossil fuels gives us the energy we need to travel
and to keep warm in cold climates. Fossil fuel combustion is also an
important source of energy in the construction and manufacturing indus-
tries. As well, many power plants burn natural gas when generating
electricity. Even goldsmiths use hydrocarbons, such as butane, as a heat
source when crafting gold jewellery. At home, we often burn fossil fuels,
such as natural gas, to cook our food.
How do we get energy from these compounds? In this section, you
will learn how complete and incomplete combustion can be expressed as
chemical equations. Combustion in the presence of oxygen is a chemical
property of all hydrocarbons. (In Chapter 13, you learned about some
physical properties of hydrocarbons, such as boiling point and solubility.)
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
(cid:2) write balanced chemical
equations for the complete
and incomplete combustion
of hydrocarbons
perform an experiment
to produce and burn a
hydrocarbon
recognize the importance of
hydrocarbons as fuels and
as precursors for the pro-
duction of petrochemicals
identify the risks and
beneﬁts of the uses of
hydrocarbons, for society
and the environment
communicate your under-
standing of the following
terms: complete combustion,
incomplete combustion
Figure 14.1
How are fossil fuels being used in these photographs?
578 MHR • Unit 5  Hydrocarbons and Energy
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
Chemistry Bulletin
Gesner distilled this oil again, and then
treated it with sulfuric acid and calcium oxide.
Finally he distilled the oil once more.
By 1853, Gesner had perfected his process.
In New York, he helped to start the North
American Kerosene Gas Light Company.
Gesner distinguished between three grades
of kerosene: grades A, B, and C. Grade C, he
said, was the best lamp oil. Grades A and B
could also be burned in lamps, but they were
dangerous because they could cause explosions
and ﬁres.
Although Gesner never knew, his grades
A and B kerosene became even more useful
than the purer grade C. These grades were
later produced from crude oil, or petroleum,
and given a new name: gasoline!
Gesner laid the groundwork for the
entire petroleum industry. All the basics of
later petroleum reﬁning can be found in his
technology.
Making Connections
1. In the early nineteenth century, whales
were hunted extensively for their oil,
which was used mainly as lamp fuel. When
kerosene became widely available, the
demand for whale oil decreased. Find out
what effect this had on whalers and whales.
2. How do you think the introduction of
kerosene as a lamp oil changed people’s
lives at the time? What conclusions can
you draw about the possible impact of
technology?
Lamp Oil and the Petroleum Age
Abraham Gesner was born in 1797 near
Cornwallis, Nova Scotia. Although Gesner
became a medical doctor, he was much more
interested in fossils. Gesner was fascinated by
hydrocarbon substances, such as coal, asphal-
tum (asphalt), and bitumen. These substances
were formed long ago from fossilized plants,
algae, ﬁsh, and animals.
When Gesner was a young man, the main
light sources available were ﬁre, candles, and
whale oil lamps. Gesner had made several
trips to Trinidad. He began to experiment with
asphaltum, a semisolid hydrocarbon from
Trinidad’s famous “pitch lake.” In 1846, while
giving a lecture in Prince Edward Island, he
startled his audience by lighting a lamp that
was ﬁlled with a fuel he had distilled from
asphaltum. Gesner’s lamp fuel gave more light
and produced less smoke than any other lamp
fuel the audience had ever seen used.
Gesner needed a more easily obtainable
raw material to make his new lamp fuel. He
tried a solid, black, coal-like bitumen from
Albert County, New Brunswick. This sub-
stance, called albertite, worked better than
any other substance that Gesner had tested.
Making Kerosene
One residue from Gesner’s distillation process
was a type of wax. Therefore, he called his
lamp fuel kerosolain, from the Greek word for
“wax oil.” He soon shortened the name to
kerosene. To produce kerosene, Gesner heated
chunks of albertite in a retort (a distilling ves-
sel with a long downward-bending neck). As
the albertite was heated, it gave off vapours.
The vapours passed into the neck of the retort,
condensed into liquids, and trickled down into
a holding tank. Once Gesner had ﬁnished the
ﬁrst distillation, he let the tank’s contents stand
for several hours. This allowed water and solid
to settle to the bottom. Then he drew off the oil
that remained on top.
Chapter 14  Energy Trapped in Hydrocarbons • MHR 579
Sour gas, H2S(g), is
Figure 14.2
sometimes “ﬂared off” (burned)
from an oil well. This combustion
produces sulfur dioxide gas,
which reacts with the water in
the atmosphere to produce acid
rain. Oil companies are now
making an effort to reduce this
type of pollution.
Complete and Incomplete Combustion
During a typical combustion reaction, an element or a compound reacts
with oxygen to produce oxides of the element (or elements) found in the
compound. Figure 14.2 shows an example of a combustion reactions.
Hydrocarbon compounds will burn in the presence of air to produce
oxides. This is a chemical property of all hydrocarbons. Complete
combustion occurs if enough oxygen is present. A hydrocarbon that
undergoes complete combustion produces carbon dioxide and water
vapour. The following equation shows the complete combustion of
propane. (See also Figure 14.3.)
C3H8(g) + 5O2(g) → 3CO2(g) + 4H2O(g)
If you burn a fuel, such as propane, in a barbecue, you want complete
combustion to occur. Complete combustion ensures that you are getting
maximum efﬁciency from the barbecue. More importantly, toxic gases
can result from incomplete combustion: combustion that occurs when not
enough oxygen is present. During incomplete combustion, other products
(besides carbon dioxide and water) can form. The equation below shows
the incomplete combustion of propane. Note that unburned carbon, C(s),
and carbon monoxide, CO(g), are produced as well as carbon dioxide
and water.
2C3H8(g) + 7O2(g) → 2C(s) + 2CO(g) + 2CO2(g) + 8H2O(g)
Figure 14.4 shows another example of incomplete combustion.
Go back to the equation for the complete combustion of propane. Notice
that the mole ratio of oxygen to propane for the complete combustion
(5 mol oxygen to 1 mol propane) is higher than the mole ratio for the
incomplete combustion (7 mol oxygen to 2 mol propane, or 3.5 mol oxy-
gen to 1 mol propane). These ratios show that the complete combustion
of propane used up more oxygen than the incomplete combustion. In
fact, the incomplete combustion probably occurred because not enough
oxygen was present. You just learned that incomplete combustion pro-
duces poisonous carbon monoxide. This is why you should never operate
a gas barbecue or gas heater indoors, where there is less oxygen available.
This is also why you should make sure that any natural gas or oil-burning
furnaces and appliances in your home are working at peak efﬁciency, to
reduce the risk of incomplete combustion. Carbon monoxide detectors are
a good safeguard. They warn you if there is dangerous carbon monoxide
in your home, due to incomplete combustion.
The yellow ﬂame of
Figure 14.4
this candle indicates that incom-
plete combustion is occurring.
Carbon, C(s), emits light energy in
the yellow wavelength region of
the visible spectrum.
Balancing Combustion Equations
Have you ever seen a construction worker
using an oxyacetylene torch? (See Figure
14.6.) A brilliant white light comes from
the torch as it cuts through steel. The
intense heat that is associated with this
ﬂame comes from the combustion of
ethyne, a very common alkyne. Ethyne
is also known as acetylene.
Propane burning in a propane torch:
Figure 14.3
A blue ﬂame indicates that complete combustion
is occurring.
580 MHR • Unit 5  Hydrocarbons and Energy
How do you write the balanced equation for the complete combustion of
acetylene (ethyne)? Complete hydrocarbon combustion reactions follow a
general format:
hydrocarbon + oxygen → carbon dioxide + water vapour
You can use this general format for the complete combustion of any
hydrocarbon, no matter how large or how small. For example, both
acetylene and propane burn completely to give carbon dioxide and water
vapour. Each hydrocarbon, however, produces different amounts, or mole
ratios, of carbon dioxide and water.
You have seen, written, and balanced several types of reaction
equations so far in this textbook. In the following sample problem, you
will learn an easy way to write and balance hydrocarbon combustion
equations.
Sample Problem
Complete Combustion of Acetylene
Problem
Write the balanced equation for the complete combustion of
acetylene (ethyne).
What Is Required?
You need to write the equation. Then you need to balance the atoms
of the reactants and the products.
What Is Given?
You know that acetylene (ethyne) and oxygen are the reactants. Since
the reaction is a complete combustion reaction, carbon dioxide and
water vapour are the products.
Plan Your Strategy
Step 1 Write the equation.
Step 2 Balance the carbon atoms ﬁrst.
Step 3 Balance the hydrogen atoms next.
Step 4 Balance the oxygen atoms last.
Act on Your Strategy
Step 1 Write the chemical formulas and states for the reactants and
products.
ethyne + oxygen → carbon dioxide
C2H2(g)
O2(g) →
CO2(g)
+
Step 2 Balance the carbon atoms ﬁrst.
C2H2(g) + O2(g) → 2CO2(g) + H2O(g)
(2 carbons)
(2 carbons)
+ water vapour
+
H2O(g)
Continued ...
Chapter 14  Energy Trapped in Hydrocarbons • MHR 581
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 581
Step 3 Balance the hydrogen atoms next.
C2H2(g) + O2(g) → 2CO2(g) + H2O(g)
(2 hydrogens)
(2 hydrogens)
Step 4 Balance the oxygen atoms last.
The product coefﬁcients are now set. Therefore, count the total num-
ber of oxygen atoms on the product side. Then place an appropriate
coefﬁcient in front of the reactant oxygen.
C2H2(g) + ?O2(g) → 2CO2(g) + H2O(g)
(4 + 1 oxygens)
You end up with an odd number of oxygen atoms on the product
side of the equation. When this happens, use a fractional coefﬁcient
so that the reactant oxygen balances. Here you have
C2H2(g) + 5
2
O2(g) → 2CO2(g) + H2O(g)
You may prefer to balance the equation with whole numbers. If so,
multiply everything by a factor that is equivalent to the denominator
of the fraction. Since the fractional coefﬁcient of O2(g) has a 2 in the
denominator, multiply all the coefﬁcients by 2 to get whole number
coefﬁcients.
2C2H2(g) + 5O2(g) → 4CO2(g) + 2H2O(g)
Check Your Solution
The same number of carbon atoms appear on both sides of the
equation.
The same number of hydrogen atoms appear on both sides of the
equation.
The same number of oxygen atoms appear on both sides of the
equation.
Sample Problem
Incomplete Combustion of 2,2,4-Trimethylpentane
Problem
2,2,4-trimethylpentane is a major component of gasoline.
Write one possible equation for the incomplete combustion of
2,2,4-trimethylpentane.
What Is Required?
You need to write the equation for the incomplete combustion of
2,2,4-trimethylpentane. Then you need to balance the atoms of the
reactants and the products. For an incomplete combustion reaction,
more than one balanced equation is possible.
Continued ...
582 MHR • Unit 5  Hydrocarbons and Energy
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 582
What is given?
You know that 2,2,4-trimethylpentane and oxygen are the reactants.
Since the reaction is an incomplete combustion reaction, the
products are unburned carbon, carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide,
and water vapour.
Plan Your Strategy
Draw the structural diagram for 2,2,4-trimethylpentane to ﬁnd
out how many hydrogen and oxygen atoms it has. Then write the
equation and balance the atoms. There are many carbon-containing
products but only one hydrogen-containing product, water.
Therefore, you need to balance the hydrogen atoms ﬁrst. Next
balance the carbon atoms, and ﬁnally the oxygen atoms.
Act on Your Strategy
CH3
CH3
CH3
C
CH2
CH CH3
+ O2 → C + CO + CO2 + H2O
CH3
(C8H18)
Count the carbon and hydrogen atoms, and balance the equation.
Different coefﬁcients are possible for the carbon-containing product
molecules. Follow the steps you learned in the previous sample
problem to obtain the balanced equation shown below.
CH3
CH3
CH3
C
CH2
CH CH3
+
15
2
O2 → 4C + 2CO + 2CO2 + 9H2O
CH3
CH3
CH3
or
2
CH3
C
CH2
CH CH3
+ 15O2 →
8C + 4CO + 4CO2 + 18H2O
CH3
Check Your Solution
The same number of carbon atoms appear on both sides of the
equation.
The same number of hydrogen atoms appear on both sides of the
equation.
The same number of oxygen atoms appear on both sides of the
equation.
Continued ...
Chapter 14  Energy Trapped in Hydrocarbons • MHR 583
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 583
Practice Problems
1. The following equation shows the combustion of
3-ethyl-2,5-dimethylheptane:
C11H24 + 17O2 → 11CO2 + 12H2O
(a) Does this equation show complete or incomplete combustion?
(b) Draw the structural formula for 3-ethyl-2,5-dimethylheptane.
2. (a) Write a balanced equation for the complete combustion of
pentane, C5H12.
(b) Write a balanced equation for the complete combustion of
octane, C8H18.
(c) Write two possible balanced equations for the incomplete
combustion of ethane, C2H6
3. (a) The ﬂame of a butane lighter is usually yellow, indicating
incomplete combustion of the gas. Write a balanced chemical
equation to represent the incomplete combustion of butane
in a butane lighter. Use the condensed structural formula
for butane.
(b) If you supplied enough oxygen, the butane would burn with
a blue ﬂame. Write a balanced chemical equation for the
complete combustion of butane.
4. The parafﬁn wax in a candle burns with a yellow ﬂame. If it had
sufﬁcient oxygen to burn with a blue ﬂame, it would burn rapidly
and release a lot of energy. It might even be dangerous! Write the
balanced chemical equation for the complete combustion of
candle wax, C25H52(s).
5. 4-propyldecane burns to give solid carbon, water vapour, carbon
monoxide, and carbon dioxide.
(a) Draw the structural formula for 4-propyldecane.
(b) Write two different balanced equations for the reaction
described in this problem.
(c) Name the type of combustion. Explain.
Large quantities of acetylene are produced each year by an inexpensive
process that combines calcium carbide and water. In the next investiga-
tion, you will use this process to produce your own acetylene.
584 MHR • Unit 5  Hydrocarbons and Energy
S K I L L   F O C U S
Predicting
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
Communicating results
The Formation and
Combustion of Acetylene
In this investigation, you will produce acetylene
(ethyne) gas by mixing solid calcium carbide
with water.
CaC2(s) + 2H2O((cid:2)) → C2H2(g) + Ca(OH)2(s)
Then you will combine the acetylene with
different quantities of air to determine the best
reaction ratio for complete combustion. Make
sure that you follow all the safety precautions
given in this investigation and by your teacher.
Question
What is the ideal ratio of fuel to air for the
complete combustion of acetylene (ethyne) gas?
Prediction
Air contains 20% oxygen, O2(g). How much air do
you think is needed for the complete combustion
of acetylene gas? Predict which proportion will
react best:
• 1
2 acetylene to  1
3 acetylene to  2
5 acetylene to  4
10 acetylene to  9
2 air
3 air
5 air
10 air.
• 1
• 1
• 1
Safety Precautions
• Be careful of the ﬂames from Bunsen burners.
Check that there are no ﬂammable solvents
close by. If your hair is long, tie it back.
Conﬁne loose clothing.
Materials
4 test tubes (100 mL)
4 rubber stoppers
grease pencil
ruler
400 mL beaker
tweezers
matches (or Bunsen burner and splints)
1 or 2 calcium carbide chips
phenolphthalein indicator
limewater
medicine dropper
distilled water
test tube tongs
Procedure
1. Make a table to record your observations.
Give your table a title.
2. Mark each test tube with a grease pencil to
2 ,  1
indicate one of the following volumes:  1
3 ,
5 , and  1
1
10 . To ﬁnd out where to mark the test
tube, measure the total length of the test tube
with a ruler. Then multiply the length by the
appropriate fraction. Measure the fraction
from the bottom of the test tube.
3. Fill the four test tubes completely with
distilled water.
4. Invert the four test tubes in a 400 mL beaker,
half full of distilled water. Make sure that the
test tubes stay completely full.
5. Add three to ﬁve drops of phenolphthalein to
the water in the beaker.
6. Using tweezers, drop a small chip of calcium
Do not touch
carbide into the water.
calcium carbide with your hands!
CAUTION
7. Capture the gas that is produced by holding
2 over the calcium
the test tube marked  1
carbide chip. Fill the test tube to the  1
2 mark
with the gas. Remove the test tube from the
beaker, still inverted. Let the water drain out.
Air will replace the water and mix with the
gas in the test tube. Insert a rubber stopper.
Invert the test tube a few times to mix the
acetylene gas with the air in the test tube.
Chapter 14  Energy Trapped in Hydrocarbons • MHR 585
8. Repeat step 7 with the other three test tubes.
Fill each test tube to the volume that you
5 , or  1
marked on it:  1
10 . After ﬁlling each
test tube, remove it from the water and insert
a rubber stopper.
3 ,  1
acetylene gas
calcium carbide
chip
Figure 14.5
9. Invert the ﬁrst test tube (1
2 full). Light a match
or a splint. Using test tube tongs, hold the test
tube inverted, and take out the stopper. Ignite
the gas in the test tube by holding the lighted
match or splint near the mouth of the test
If you are using a Bunsen
tube.
burner and wooden splints, take appropriate
safety precautions. Extinguish burning splints
by immersing them in water. Be aware of the
Bunsen burner ﬂame. Make sure that long hair
is tied back and loose clothing is conﬁned.
CAUTION
10. Immediately after the reaction in the test tube
occurs, use the medicine dropper to add about
1 mL of limewater to the test tube. Stopper
the test tube and shake it.
CAUTION
mouth of the test tube may be hot.
The
11. Record your observations of the gas when it
was ignited. Record your observations of what
happened when you added the limewater.
Describe any residue left on the test tube.
586 MHR • Unit 5  Hydrocarbons and Energy
12. Repeat steps 9 to 11 with the other test tubes
in order:  1
3 ,  1
5 , and then  1
10 full.
13. Dispose of all chemical materials as instructed
by your teacher.
Analysis
1. What happened to the phenolphthalein
indicator during the production of the gas?
Explain your observation. Note: phenolph-
thalein is an acid/base indicator.
2. What products may have formed during the
combustion of the gas? Support your answers
with experimental evidence. Note: Limewater
reacts with carbon dioxide to produce a milky
white solid.
Conclusions
3. (a) Write a balanced chemical equation for the
incomplete combustion of acetylene gas.
(b) Write a balanced chemical equation for the
complete combustion of acetylene gas.
4. The air that we breathe is approximately
3 ,  1
5 , or  1
20% oxygen. Think about the reaction you
just wrote for the complete combustion of
acetylene. Which ratio in this investigation
(1
2 ,  1
10 ) allowed the closest amount
of oxygen needed for complete combustion?
Support your answer with calculations. Do
the observations you made support your
answer? Explain.
Applications
5. An automobile engine requires a carburetor
or fuel injector to mix the fuel with air. The
fuel and air must be mixed in a particular
ratio to achieve maximum efﬁciency in the
combustion of the fuel. What might happen
if the fuel and air mixture is too rich (if there
is too much fuel)?
6. What does the limewater test indicate?
Write the balanced chemical equation for
the limewater test. Hint: Limewater is a dilute
solution of calcium hydroxide. A carbonate
forms.
In this section, you were introduced to the complete and incomplete com-
bustion of hydrocarbons. You learned that the complete combustion of a
hydrocarbon produces water and carbon dioxide. You also learned that
the incomplete combustion of a hydrocarbon produces additional prod-
ucts, such as unburned carbon and dangerous carbon monoxide. In the
investigation, you had the chance to make and combust a hydrocarbon.
In the next section, you will learn about an important factor of
combustion reactions: energy. The combustion of hydrocarbons produces
a large amount of energy. This is why they are so useful as fuels. How can
you include energy as part of a combustion or other equation? How can
you calculate the energy released by fossil fuels? You will learn the
answers to these questions in the rest of this chapter.
Section Review
1
2
K/U
What is the difference between incomplete and complete
hydrocarbon combustion reactions?
K/U
Explain why you would usually write (g) for the state of the
product water in these combustion reactions. When might you identify
the state of water as liquid?
3
(a)
K/U
Write the balanced equation for the complete combustion
of heptane, C7H16.
(b)
K/U
Write a balanced equation for the incomplete combustion
of 1-pentene, C5H10.
4
5
K/U
Natural gas is mainly methane gas. If you have a natural gas
furnace, stove, or water heater in your home, you must ensure that
these appliances are always running at peak efﬁciency. In other words,
the methane gas should undergo complete combustion so that carbon
monoxide is not produced. Write a balanced chemical equation
to show the complete combustion of methane gas. Write a second
balanced equation to show the incomplete combustion of methane gas.
C
All hydrocarbons have the chemical property of combustion in
the presence of oxygen. How do the complete combustion reactions
of methane, ethane, and propane differ? How are they similar?
Hint: Compare the balanced equations for the complete combustion
of each.
6
I
The complete combustion of ethane is given by the following
unbalanced equation:
C2H6(g) + O2(g) → CO2(g) + H2O(g)
(a) Balance this equation.
(b) If one mole of ethane is combusted, how many grams of water
vapour are produced?
(c) Assume that air contains 20% oxygen gas. What volume of air at
STP is needed for the complete combustion of one mole of ethane?
Chapter 14  Energy Trapped in Hydrocarbons • MHR 587
14.2
Thermochemical Equations
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
(cid:2) write thermochemical
equations
relate bond breaking and
bond making to endothermic
and exothermic energy
changes
communicate your under-
standing of the following
terms: exothermic,
thermochemical equation,
endothermic, bond energy
In the last section, you learned about acetylene, an important fuel in our
society (Figure 14.6). You balanced the equation for the complete combus-
tion of acetylene. You then produced acetylene in an investigation. What
you did not consider, however, was the most useful product that our soci-
ety gets from acetylene: heat energy. How can you represent the heat that
is released during combustion as part of a chemical equation?
For now, you will use the word “energy” to represent the heat in an
equation. In the next section, you will calculate numerical values for this
energy and use these energy values in chemical equations.
In previous science courses, you studied reactions that involve a
change in energy. Figure 14.7 reviews some important terms.
physical or
chemical change
temperature of surroundings
increases
heat lost
by a process
heat gained
by a process
physical or
chemical change
Figure 14.7
EXOTHERMIC
ENDOTHERMIC
temperature of surroundings
decreases
An exothermic reaction gives off heat. Combustion reactions are
exothermic reactions because they produce heat. Since the energy is a
product of the reaction, it is shown on the product side of the equation.
The combustion of acetylene is a good example of an exothermic
reaction:
2C2H2(g) + 5O2(g) → 4CO2(g) + 2H2O(g) + energy
When the energy is written as part of the chemical equation, the equation
is called a thermochemical equation.
An endothermic reaction absorbs heat energy. Energy must be added
to the reactants for an endothermic reaction to occur. Since the energy is
needed as a reactant, it is shown on the reactant side of the equation.
Have you ever noticed that perfume or rubbing alcohol feels cool on
your skin as it evaporates? The physical process of evaporation is
endothermic. Energy is taken away from the surface of your skin, so you
feel cool. The energy is added to the liquid alcohol or perfume solvent to
make it a gas. The following equation shows the endothermic evaporation
of isopropanol (a type of rubbing alcohol) from a liquid to a gas:
energy + CH3CHOHCH3((cid:2)) → CH3CHOHCH3(g)
How can you tell that this process is not a chemical reaction?
The combustion
Figure 14.6
of acetylene (ethyne) in an
oxyacetylene torch produces
the highest temperature (about
3300°C) of any known mixture
of combustible gases. Metal
workers can use the heat from
this combustion to cut through
most metal alloys.
588 MHR • Unit 5  Hydrocarbons and Energy
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
Bond Breaking and Bond Making
The formation of acetylene (ethyne) gas from its elements is an endother-
mic reaction. The combustion of acetylene, however, is exothermic. In
fact, it releases enough heat energy to cut steel! How can you explain
the formation and combustion of acetylene in terms of bonds being
broken and made? The answer to this question is fundamental to your
understanding of the energy changes that occur in chemical reactions.
energy
energy
bond breaking
endothermic
molecule
separate atoms
bond making
exothermic
energy
energy
separate atoms
molecule
This illustration shows bonds being broken and made during a chemical
Figure 14.8
reaction. If the bonds are strong, there is a large change in energy. If the bonds are
weak, there is a small change in energy.
A chemical bond is caused by the attraction between the electrons and
nuclei of two atoms. Energy is needed to break a chemical bond, just like
energy is needed to break a link in a chain. On the other hand, making a
chemical bond releases energy. The strength of a bond depends on how
much energy is needed to break the bond. (see Figure 14.8.)
A speciﬁc amount of energy is needed to break each type of bond.
When the same type of bond is formed, the same speciﬁc amount of
energy is released. The energy that is absorbed or released when breaking
or making a bond is called the bond energy. Bond energy is usually
measured in kilojoules (kJ). Table 14.1 shows some average bond energies.
From the table, you can see that 347 kJ of energy is needed to break
one mole of C — C bonds in a sample of propane or any other carbon.
Similarly, 347 kJ of energy is released if one mole of C — C bonds forms in
a sample of butane.
Every chemical reaction involves both bond breaking (reactant bonds
are broken) and bond making (product bonds are formed). Since there are
different types of bonds inside the reactant and product molecules, the
bond breaking and bond making energies are different. This results in a
net amount of energy for each reaction.
The next sample problem compares bond breaking and bond making
in a combustion reaction.
(a) Use a molecular model kit
to model the formation of
butane from its elements:
4C(s) + 5H2(g) → C4H10(g)
Compare the bonds you
break with the bonds
you form.
(b) Using Table 14.1, estimate
the energy needed to
break the bonds of
5 mol of hydrogen gas.
Compare this energy
with the energy produced
by making the bonds of
1 mol of butane gas.
Predict whether the
formation of butane
is exothermic or
endothermic.
(c) Look up “heat of
formation” in a reference
book such as The CRC
Handbook of Chemistry
and Physics to ﬁnd the
actual energy of this
reaction. Is it exothermic
(negative) or endothermic
(positive)?
Note: Since bond energies
are only a way of estimating
the energy produced by the
formation of a compound, your
answer will not agree with the
recognized value. Look at the
Thinking Critically question in
the Section Review to ﬁnd out
how to estimate the energy of
a formation reaction more
accurately.
Table 14.1 Average Bond Energies
Type of bond
H H
C C
C C
C C
C H
C O
C O
O H
O O (in O2)
Average energy
(kJ/mol)
432
347
614
839
413
358
745
467
498
Chapter 14  Energy Trapped in Hydrocarbons • MHR 589
Sample Problem
The Combustion of Acetylene
Problem
Consider bond breaking and bond making to explain why the
combustion of acetylene is exothermic. Then write a thermochemical
equation for the reaction, using the following balanced equation:
2C2H2(g) + 5O2(g) → 4CO2(g) + 2H2O(g)
What Is Required?
You need to describe what happens when the reactant bonds are
broken and what happens when the product bonds are formed. You
need to compare the energy that is absorbed when the reactant bonds
are broken with the energy that is released when the product bonds
are formed. Then you need to write a thermochemical equation,
using the word “energy.”
What Is Given?
You know that energy is absorbed when bonds are broken and
energy is released when bonds are formed. You also know that the
equation is exothermic. (Overall, energy is released in this reaction.)
Plan Your Strategy
Step 1 Describe what happens when the reactant bonds are broken.
Step 2 Describe what happens when the product bonds are formed.
Step 3 Compare the energy that is absorbed when the reactant bonds
are broken with the energy that is released when the product
bonds are formed.
Step 4 Write the thermochemical equation, using the word “energy.”
Act on Your Strategy
Step 1 The reactant bonds are broken. This process absorbs enough
energy to split the reactants into separate atoms.
energy
energy
1
+
2 C2H2
+
5 O2
bond
breaking
4 C +
4 H
+
10 O
PROBLEM TIP
• If the energy that is need-
ed to break the reactant
bonds is greater than the
energy that is released
when the product bonds
form, the reaction is
endothermic.
• If the energy that is need-
ed to break the reactant
bonds is less than the
energy that is released
when the product bonds
form, the reaction is
exothermic.
• If the reaction is
endothermic, the energy
is on the left side of the
equation.
• If the reaction is exother-
mic, the energy is on the
right side of the equation.
molecules
separate
atoms
Continued ...
590 MHR • Unit 5  Hydrocarbons and Energy
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 590
Step 2 The product bonds are made. This process releases energy as
the product molecules are formed.
4 C +
4 H
+
10 O
bond
making
4 CO2
+
2 H2O
+
energy2
energy
separate
atoms
molecules
Step 3 The combustion of acetylene is exothermic. Therefore, the
energy that is used when the reactant bonds are broken must
be less than the energy that is released when the product
bonds are formed.
energy
energy
energy2
energy
1
Step 4 The thermochemical equation is
2C2H2(g) + 5O2(g) → 4CO2(g) + 2H2O(g) + energy
Check Your Solution
The equation is exothermic, so the energy is on the product side of
the equation.
Practice Problems
6. The formation of propane from its elements is an exothermic
reaction. The combustion of propane is also exothermic.
(a) Write the balanced thermochemical equation for the formation
of propane.
(b) Write the balanced thermochemical equation for the
combustion of propane. (The balanced equation is on
page 580.)
(c) Consider the combustion of propane. Compare the energies
of bond breaking and bond making to explain why the reaction
is exothermic.
7. (a) Explain why the formation of ethene, C2H4(g), from its elements
is endothermic, while its combustion is exothermic.
(b) Write the balanced thermochemical equations for the formation
and the combustion of ethene.
PROBLEM TIP
Remember that different types
of bonds have different bond
energies. The bonds that are
broken in the reactants are dif-
ferent from the bonds that are
formed in the products. The net
energy for the entire reaction
is the difference between
energy1 and energy2.
Chapter 14  Energy Trapped in Hydrocarbons • MHR 591
So far, you have been using the word “energy” in thermochemical
equations to represent the net energy. It is preferable to have a numerical
value for the amount of energy when talking about endothermic and
exothermic processes. In the next section, you will see how the net
energy in a process can be measured. You will even measure some energy
values yourself!
Section Review
1
K/U
Choose the correct term in each box to describe the given
thermochemical equation. Name the organic compounds.
(a)
(b)
energy + 2C(s) + H2(g)
C2H2(g)
endothermic/exothermic
net energy is absorbed/released
CH4(g) + 2O2(g)
CO2(g) + 2H2O(g) + energy
endothermic/exothermic
net energy is absorbed/released
2
K/U
If an overall reaction is endothermic, which process involves
more energy: breaking the reactant bonds or making the product
bonds?
3
(a)
C
When energy is absorbed in a reaction to break the bonds in the
reactants, where does the energy go?
(b)
C
When energy is released to form the bonds in the products,
where does the energy go?
4
MC
Flour, sugar, eggs, and milk are combined and baked to produce
cookies.
(a) Is this reaction exothermic or endothermic? Explain.
(b) Write a word equation that includes the word “energy” to describe
this reaction.
5
K/U
In the MindStretch on page 589, you used bond energies to
estimate the energy of a reaction. Your estimated value was very
different from the actual value, however. This is because solid carbon
must become gaseous before reacting to form a hydrocarbon. The
change of state takes additional energy.
C(s) + 715 kJ → C(g)
Use the information above, along with the bond energies in Table 14.1,
to estimate the energy needed to form acetylene, C2H2(g), from its
elements.
2C(s) + H2(g) → C2H2(g)
Remember to consider the breaking of the H—H bonds, and the
forming of the C—H and C ———C bonds. Compare your answer with the
recognized value, 226.7 kJ/mol.
592 MHR • Unit 5  Hydrocarbons and Energy
Measuring Energy Changes
You have probably had plenty of experience with heating and cooling
materials around you. You know how to cool yourself by taking a cold
shower. You know how to heat hot chocolate on a stove. However, have
you ever stopped to think about what energy changes are occuring?
Where does the energy come from, and where does it go?
14.3
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
explain how mass, speciﬁc
heat capacity, and change in
temperature of an object
determine how much heat
the object gains or loses
solve problems using the
equation Q = mc∆T
communicate your under-
standing of the following
terms: thermal energy, heat,
temperature, ∆T, speciﬁc
heat capacity
Suppose that you are very thirsty, but the tap water is not cold enough.
Figure 14.9
How can you get the water as cold as you want it to be? Your experience tells you to add
ice to the water. How does the ice cool the water?
Any time that something is cooled or heated, a change in thermal energy
occurs. Thermal energy is the kinetic energy of particles of matter. In a
glass of tap water with ice (as shown in Figure 14.9), the water started out
warmer than the ice. Energy was transferred from the water to the ice. As
the ice absorbed the energy, the ice melted. As the water lost energy, the
water cooled.
These examples involve heat. Heat is the transfer of thermal energy
between objects with different temperatures. In this section, you will
study how to measure the quantity of thermal energy that is transferred
during a process involving an energy change.
Important Factors in Energy Measurement
How can you measure the change in energy when you add ice to water?
Temperature is a measure of the average kinetic energy of a system. You
have already had experience using a thermometer to measure temperature.
By placing a thermometer in the water, you can monitor the drop in
temperature when the ice is added. Temperature is an important factor
in heat energy changes. What other factors are important? Work through
the following ThoughtLab to ﬁnd out.
What other forms of energy
can you think of? Make a list,
starting with thermal energy.
How does drinking hot
chocolate warm you? Describe
the energy transfer that takes
place.
Chapter 14  Energy Trapped in Hydrocarbons • MHR 593
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
ThoughtLab
Factors in Heat Transfer
Two students performed an experiment to
determine what factors need to be considered
when determining the quantity of thermal energy
lost or gained by a substance undergoing an
energy change. They set up their experiment
as follows.
Part A
The students placed two different masses of
water, at the same initial temperature, in separate
beakers. They placed an equal mass of ice (from
the same freezer) in each beaker. Then they
monitored the temperature of each beaker.
Their results are listed in the table below.
Different Masses of Water
Beaker
Mass of water (g)
Initial temperature of water (˚C)
Mass of ice added (g)
Final temperature of mixture (˚C)
Temperature change (˚C)
1
60.0
26.5
10.0
9.7
16.8
2
120.0
26.5
10.0
17.4
9.1
Part B
The students placed equal masses of canola oil
and water, at the same initial temperature, in sep-
arate beakers. They placed equal masses of ice
(from the same freezer) in the two beakers. Then
they monitored the temperature of each beaker.
Their results are listed in the following table.
Different Liquids
Beaker
Mass of liquid (g)
Initial temperature of liquid (˚C)
Mass of ice added (g)
Final temperature of mixture (˚C)
Temperature change (˚C)
1 (canola oil)
2 (water)
60.0
35.0
10.0
5.2
29.8
60.0
35.0
10.0
16.9
18.1
Procedure
1. For each part of the experiment, identify
(a) the variable that was changed by the
students (the manipulated variable)
(b) the variable that changed as a result of
changing the manipulated variable (the
responding variable)
(c) the variables that were kept constant to
ensure a fair test (the controlled variables)
2. Interpret the students’ results by answering
the following questions.
(a) If ice is added to two different masses of
water, how does the temperature change?
(b) If ice is added to two different liquids, how
does the temperature change?
Analysis
Think about your interpretation of the students’
experiment and the discussion prior to this
ThoughtLab. What are three important factors to
consider when measuring the thermal energy
change of a substance?
The ThoughtLab gave you some insight into the factors that are important
when measuring energy changes. How can you use these factors to calcu-
late the quantity of heat that is transferred? First you must examine each
factor and determine its relationship to heat transfer. You will begin with
the most obvious factor: temperature. Then you will look at how the mass
of a substance affects the quantity of thermal energy it can store. Finally,
you will look at the type of substance and how it affects heat transfer.
594 MHR • Unit 5  Hydrocarbons and Energy
Temperature
In the summer, your body temperature is fairly close to
the temperature of your surroundings. You do not need
to wear extra clothing to keep warm. When winter hits
with ﬁerce winds and cold temperatures, however, dressing
warmly becomes a necessity. The temperature of your sur-
roundings is now much colder than your body temperature.
Heat is transferred from your body to your surroundings,
making you feel cold. The extra clothing helps to minimize
heat loss from your body. (See Figure 14.10.)
Temperature is directly related to heat transfer. A large
change in temperature indicates a large energy change.
A small change in temperature indicates a small energy
change. Therefore, temperature is an important factor when
calculating heat transfer. The temperature variable that is
used is the change in temperature. This is  symbolized by ∆T.
Mass of Substance
Did you know that 70% of Earth’s surface is covered with water? This
enormous mass of water absorbs and releases tremendous amounts of
heat energy. Water makes our climate more moderate by absorbing heat
in hot weather and releasing heat in cold weather. The greater the mass
of the water, the greater the amount of heat it can absorb and release.
(Areas without much water, such as deserts, experience huge variations
in temperature.) Therefore, mass is directly related to heat transfer. Mass
is a variable in the calculation of heat energy. It is symbolized by a
lower-case m.
How do you con-
Figure 14.10
trol the temperature of your body?
Type of Substance
In the ThoughtLab on page 594, you probably noticed that
the quantity of heat being transferred depends on the type
of substance. When you added equal masses of ice to the
same mass of oil and water, the temperature change of the
oil was almost double the temperature change of the water.
“Type of substance” cannot be used as a variable, however,
when calculating energy changes. Instead, we use a
variable that reﬂects the individual nature of different sub-
stances: speciﬁc heat capacity. The speciﬁc heat capacity
of a substance is the quantity of energy, in joules (J), that is
required to change one gram (g) of the substance by one
degree Celsius (˚C). The speciﬁc heat capacity of a sub-
stance reﬂects how well the substance can store energy.
A substance with a large speciﬁc heat capacity can absorb
and release more energy than a substance with a smaller
speciﬁc heat capacity. The symbol that is used for speciﬁc
heat capacity is a lower-case c. The units are J/g·˚C.
The speciﬁc heat capacity of water is relatively large:
4.184 J/g·˚C. This value helps to explain how water can
absorb and release enough energy to moderate Earth’s tem-
perature. Examine the values in Table 14.2. Notice that the
speciﬁc heat capacities of most substances are much lower
than the speciﬁc heat capacity of water.
Table 14.2 Speciﬁc Heat
Capacities of Various Substances
Substance
Elements
aluminum
carbon (graphite)
copper
gold
hydrogen
iron
Compounds
ammonia (liquid)
ethanol
water (solid)
water (liquid)
water (gas)
Other materials
air
concrete
glass
granite
wood
Specific heat capacity
(J/g ·˚C at 25˚C)
0.900
0.711
0.385
0.129
14.267
0.444
4.70
2.46
2.01
4.184
2.01
1.02
0.88
0.84
0.79
1.76
Chapter 14  Energy Trapped in Hydrocarbons • MHR 595
You have just considered three variables: change in temperature (∆T),
mass (m), and type of substance, which is characterized by speciﬁc heat
capacity (c). How can you combine these variables into a formula to
calculate heat transfer (Figure 14.11)?
heat energy
(J)
mass
(g)
change in temperature
(˚C or K)
specific heat capacity
(J/g ˚C)
.
depends on
type of substance
state of substance
Figure 14.11
Use this formula to calculate heat (Q) transfer.
How do you solve heat energy problems using Q = mc∆T? Go back to the
ThoughtLab. Some of the data in this ThoughtLab can be used to illustrate
the calculation of heat transfer, as shown below.
Sample Problem
Heat Transferred From Water to Ice
Problem
In the ThoughtLab on page 594, 10.0 g of ice was added to 60.0 g of
water. The initial temperature of the water was 26.5˚C. The ﬁnal
temperature of the mixture was 9.7˚C. How much heat was lost by
the water?
What Is Required?
You need to calculate the quantity of heat (Q) that was lost by the
water.
What Is Given?
You know the mass of the water. You also know the initial and ﬁnal
temperatures of the water.
Mass of water (m) = 60.0 g
Initial temperature (Ti) = 26.5˚C
Final temperature (Tf) = 9.7˚C
Why does water have such a
high speciﬁc heat capacity?
Do some research to ﬁnd out.
Hint: Water’s speciﬁc heat
capacity has something to do
with bonding.
Plan Your Strategy
You have enough information to solve this problem using Q = mc∆T.
Use the initial and ﬁnal temperatures to calculate ∆T. You need the
speciﬁc heat capacity (c) of liquid water. This is given in Table 14.2
(4.184 J/g·˚C). Because you are only concerned with the water, you
will not use the mass of the ice.
Continued ...
596 MHR • Unit 5  Hydrocarbons and Energy
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 596
Act on Your Strategy
Substitute the values into the following heat formula, and solve.
Remember that ∆T = Tf − Ti
Q = mc∆T
)(9.7˚C − 26.5˚C)
= (60.0 g)(4.184 J
g·˚C
J
g·˚C
= −4217.472 (g)(
= −4217.472 J
= −4.22 × 103 J (or − 4.22 kJ)
)(˚C)
The water lost 4.22 × 103 J of heat.
Check Your Solution
The water lost heat, so the heat value should be negative.
Heat is measured in joules or kilojoules. Make sure that the units
cancel out to give the appropriate unit for your answer.
Practice Problems
8. 100 g of ethanol at 25˚C is heated until it reaches 50˚C. How
much heat does the ethanol gain? Hint: Find the speciﬁc heat
capacity of ethanol in Table 14.2.
9. In Part A of the ThoughtLab on page 594, the students added ice
to 120.0 g of water in beaker 2. Calculate the heat lost by the
water. Use the information given for beaker 2, as well as speciﬁc
heat capacities in Table 14.2.
10. A beaker contains 50 g of liquid at room temperature. The beaker
is heated until the liquid gains 10˚C. A second beaker contains
100 g of the same liquid at room temperature. This beaker is also
heated until the liquid gains 10˚C. In which beaker does the
liquid gain the most thermal energy? Explain.
11. As the diagram on the next page illustrates, the sign of the heat
value tells you whether a substance has lost or gained heat ener-
gy. Consider the following descriptions. Write each heat value,
and give it the appropriate sign to indicate whether heat was lost
or gained.
(a) In Part A of the ThoughtLab on page 594, the ice gained the
heat that was lost by the water. When ice was added to 60.0 g
of water, it gained 4.22 kJ of energy. When ice was added to
120.0 g of water, it gained 4.6 kJ of energy.
Continued ...
Chapter 14  Energy Trapped in Hydrocarbons • MHR 597
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 597
Math
LINK
∆T
Tfinal − Tinitial
heat lost
heat gained
Heat values are often very
large. Therefore it is conven-
ient to use kilojoules (kJ) to
calculate heat. How does this
affect the units of the other
variables in the heat equation?
Does the speciﬁc heat capaci-
ty have to change? The follow-
ing diagram shows how units
must be modiﬁed in order to
end up with kilojoules.
Q = m· c · (cid:2)T
Units:
→
k J = k g ·
4.184 k J
k g · ˚C
˚C
mass-must be kg
Specific heat capacity
• must have kJ (top) and kg (bottom)
• Since ”k“ is on top andbottom, the
number stays the same
(b) When 2.0 L of water was heated over a campﬁre, the water
gained 487 kJ of energy.
(c) A student baked a cherry pie and put it outside on a cold win-
ter day. There was a change of 290 kJ of heat energy in the pie.
In the Sample Problem, heat was lost by the water.
Therefore the value of Q was negative. If the value
of Q is positive, this indicates that heat is gained
by a substance.
The heat equation Q = mc∆T can be rearranged
to solve for any of the variables. For example, in
Part B of the ThoughtLab on page 594, ice was
added to both canola oil and water. How can you
use the information given in Part B to calculate
the speciﬁc heat capacity of the canola oil?
Sample Problem
Calculating Specific Heat Capacity
Problem
Calculate the speciﬁc heat capacity of canola oil, using the
information given in Part B of the ThoughtLab on page 594. Note
that the ice gained 4.0 × 103 J of energy when it came in contact
with the canola oil.
What Is Required?
You need to calculate the speciﬁc heat capacity (c) of the canola oil.
What Is Given?
From the ThoughtLab, you know the mass (m) and the initial and
ﬁnal temperatures of the canola oil.
Mass of oil (m) = 60.0 g
Initial temperature (Ti) = 35.0˚C
Final temperature (Tf) = 5.2˚C
Continued ...
Canola oil is
Figure 14.12
a vegetable oil that is used in
salads and cooking.
598 MHR • Unit 5  Hydrocarbons and Energy
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 598
You also know the quantity of heat gained by the ice. This must be
the same as the heat lost by the oil.
Heat gained by the ice = Heat lost by the canola oil = 4.0 × 103 J
Plan Your Strategy
Rearrange the equation Q = mc∆T to solve for c. Then substitute the
values for Q, m, and ∆T (Tf − Ti) into the equation.
Act on Your Strategy
c = Q
m∆T
=
−4.0 × 103 J
(60.0 g)(5.2˚C - 35.0˚C)
= 2.2437
J
g·˚C
= 2.24
J
g·˚C
Check Your Solution
The speciﬁc heat capacity should be positive, and it is. It should
have the units
J
g·˚C .
Practice Problems
12. Solve the equation Q = mc∆T for the following quantities.
(a) m
(b) c
(c) ∆T
13. You know that ∆T = Tf − Ti. Combine this equation with the
heat equation, Q = mc∆T, to solve for the following quantities.
(a) Ti (in terms of Q, m, c, and Tf )
(b) Tf (in terms of Q, m, c, and Ti )
14. How much heat is required to raise the temperature of 789 g
of liquid ammonia, from 25.0˚C to 82.7˚C?
15. A solid substance has a mass of 250.00 g. It is cooled by 25.00˚C
and loses 4937.50 J of heat. What is its speciﬁc heat capacity?
Look at Table 14.2 to identify the substance.
16. A piece of metal with a mass of 14.9 g is heated to 98.0˚C. When
the metal is placed in 75.0 g of water at 20.0˚C, the temperature
of the water rises by 28.5˚C. What is the speciﬁc heat capacity of
the metal?
17. A piece of gold (c = 0.129 J/g˚C) with mass of 45.5 g and a
temperature of 80.5˚C is dropped into 192 g of water at 15.0˚C.
What is the ﬁnal temperature of the system? (Hint: Use the
equation Qw = −Qg.)
Chapter 14  Energy Trapped in Hydrocarbons • MHR 599
In this section, you learned that temperature, mass, and type of substance
are all important factors to consider when measuring heat change. You
saw how these factors can be combined to produce the heat equation:
Q = mc∆T
In the next section, you will learn how to use a calorimeter to measure
heat change. You will perform a heat transfer investigation of your own.
Using the knowledge you have gained in this section, you will then calcu-
late the speciﬁc heat capacity. As well, you will see why the Procedure
that was used in the ThoughtLab could be improved.
Section Review
1
2
3
K/U
Deﬁne the term “heat.”
I
What are three important factors to consider when measuring
heat energy?
I
In Part B of the ThoughtLab, 60.0 g of water was in beaker 2. The
initial temperature of the water was 35.0˚C, and the ﬁnal temperature
was 16.9˚C.
(a) Calculate the heat that was lost by the water in beaker 2.
(b) Where did the heat go?
4
I
When iron nails are hammered into wood, friction causes the nails
to heat up.
(a) Calculate the heat that is gained by a 5.2 g iron nail as it changes
from 22.0˚C to 38.5˚C. (See Table 14.2.)
(b) Calculate the heat that is gained by a 10.4 g iron nail as it changes
from 22.0˚C to 38.5˚C.
(c) Calculate the heat that is gained by the 5.2 g nail if its temperature
changes from 22.0˚C to 55.0˚C.
5
(a)
I
A 23.9 g silver spoon is put in a cup of hot chocolate. It takes
0.343 kJ of energy to change the temperature of the spoon from
24.5˚C to 85.0˚C. What is the speciﬁc heat capacity of solid silver?
(b)
I
The same amount of heat energy, 0.343 kJ, is gained by 23.9 g of
liquid water. What is the temperature change of the water?
6
C
The speciﬁc heat capacity of aluminum is 0.902 J/g˚C. The speciﬁc
heat capacity of copper is 0.389 J/g˚C. The same amount of heat is
applied to equal masses of these two metals. Which metal increases
more in temperature? Explain.
7
K/U
Explain why there is an energy difference between the following
reactions.
CH4(g) + 2O2(g) → CO2(g) + 2H2O(g) + 802 kJ
CH4(g) + 2O2(g) → CO2(g) + 2H2O((cid:2)) + 890 kJ
600 MHR • Unit 5  Hydrocarbons and Energy
14.4
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
describe some of the
physical and chemical
properties of hydrocarbons
apply calorimetric tech-
niques to the calculation
of energy changes
gather and interpret
experimental data, and solve
problems involving calorime-
try and the combustion of
hydrocarbons
communicate your under-
standing of the following
terms: isolated system,
calorimeter, calorimetry,
bomb calorimeter,
thermal equilibrium, heat of
combustion, heat of solution,
heat capacity, Calorie,
potential energy
The Technology of Heat
Measurement
Figure 14.13
How can you measure the energy in a substance?
In this unit, you have learned about the importance of hydrocarbons as
fuels. Hydrocarbons are useful because of the energy that is released when
they burn. It is often necessary, however, to know the amount of energy
that is released. For example, engineers need to know how much energy
is released from different fuels when they design an engine and choose an
appropriate fuel. Fireﬁghters need to know how much heat can be given
off by different materials so they can decide on the best way to ﬁght a
speciﬁc ﬁre. (See Figure 14.13.)
What about food—the fuel for your body? In order to choose an
appropriate and balanced diet, you need to know how much energy each
type of food releases when it is digested. Food energy is measured in
Calories. (You will learn more about Calories later in this section.)
How do you measure the quantity of energy that is produced? In this
section, you will focus on measuring heat changes. You will learn about
some technology and techniques to measure heat. You will then apply
what you have learned by performing your own heat experiments.
Calorimetry
In the ThoughtLab in section 14.3, two students used beakers with no lids
when they measured change in temperature. The students assumed that
energy was being exchanged only between the ice and the water. In fact,
energy was also being exchanged with the surroundings. As a result, the
data that the students obtained had a large experimental error. How could
the students have prevented this error?
Much of the technology in our lives is designed to stop the ﬂow of
heat. Your home is insulated to prevent heat loss in the winter and heat
gain in the summer. If you take hot soup to school for your lunch, you
probably use a Thermos to prevent heat loss to the environment.
Whenever there is a temperature difference between two objects,
thermal energy ﬂows from the hotter object to the colder object. When
you measure the heat being transferred in a reaction or other process,
you must minimize any heat that is exchanged with the surroundings.
Chapter 14  Energy Trapped in Hydrocarbons • MHR 601
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
stirrer
thermometer
styrofoam
cups
water
sample
being tested
To measure the heat ﬂow in a process, you need an
isolated system, like a Thermos. An isolated system stops
matter and energy from ﬂowing in or out of the system. You
also need a known amount of a substance, usually water. The
water absorbs the heat that is produced by the process, or it
releases heat if the process is endothermic. To determine the
heat ﬂow, you can measure the temperature change of the
water. With its large speciﬁc heat capacity (4.184 J/ g·˚C) and
its broad temperature range (0˚C to 100˚C), liquid water can
absorb and release a lot of energy.
Water, a thermometer, and an isolated system are the
basic components of a calorimeter. A calorimeter is a device
that is used to measure changes in thermal energy. (Figures
14.14 and 14.15 show two types of calorimeters.) The techno-
logical process of measuring changes in thermal energy is
called calorimetry.
A polystyrene
Figure 14.14
(coffee cup) calorimeter usually
consists of two nested poly-
styrene cups with a polystyrene
lid, to provide insulation from the
surroundings.
How Calorimeters Work
In a polystyrene calorimeter, a known mass of water is inside the poly-
styrene cup. The water surrounds, and is in direct contact with, the
process that produces the energy change. The initial temperature of the
water is measured. Then the process takes place and the ﬁnal temperature
of the water is measured. The water is stirred to maintain even energy
distribution, and the system is kept at a constant pressure. This type of
calorimeter can measure heat changes during processes such as dissolv-
ing, neutralization, heating, and cooling.
ignition
terminals
steel
chamber
holding
oxygen and
the sample
stirrer
thermometer
water
insulated
container
A bomb calorime-
Figure 14.15
ter is more sophisticated than a
polystyrene calorimeter.
A bomb calorimeter is used for the measurement of heat
changes during combustion reactions at a constant volume.
It works on the same general principle as the polystyrene
calorimeter. The reaction, however, takes place inside an inner
metal chamber, called a “bomb.” This “bomb” contains pure
oxygen. The reactants are ignited using an electric coil. A
known quantity of water surrounds the bomb and absorbs the
energy that is released by the reaction. You will learn more
about bomb calorimeters later in this section.
The law of conservation of energy states that energy can
be changed into different forms, but it cannot be created or
destroyed. This law allows you to calculate the energy change
in a calorimetry experiment. However, you need to make the
following assumptions:
• The system is isolated. (No heat is exchanged with the
surroundings outside the calorimeter.)
• The amount of heat energy that is exchanged with the
calorimeter itself is small enough to be ignored.
• If something dissolves or reacts in the calorimeter water, the
solution still retains the properties of water. (For example,
density and speciﬁc heat capacity remain the same.)
602 MHR • Unit 5  Hydrocarbons and Energy
Tools
& Techniques
The First Ice Calorimeter
A calorimeter measures the thermal energy that
is absorbed or released by a material. Today we
measure heat using joules (J) or calories (cal).
Early scientists accepted one unit of heat as the
amount of heat required to melt 1 kg of ice. Thus
two units of heat could melt 2 kg of ice.
The earliest measurements of heat energy
were taken around 1760, by a Scottish chemist
named Joseph Black. He hollowed out a chamber
in a block of ice. Then he wiped the chamber dry
and placed a piece of platinum, heated to 38˚C,
inside. He used another slab of ice as a lid. As the
platinum cooled, it gave up its heat to the ice. The
ice melted, and water collected in the chamber.
When the platinum reached the temperature of
the ice, Black removed the water and weighed it
to ﬁnd out how much ice had melted. In this way,
he measured the quantity of heat that was
released by the platinum.
In 1780, two French scientists, Antoine
Lavoisier and Pierre Laplace, developed the ﬁrst
apparatus formally called a calorimeter. Like
Black, they used the amount of melted ice to
measure the heat released by a material. Their
calorimeter consisted of three concentric cham-
bers. The object to be tested was placed in the
innermost chamber. Broken chunks of ice were
placed in the middle chamber. Ice was also
placed in the outer chamber to prevent any heat
reaching the apparatus from outside. As the
object in the inner chamber released heat, the ice
in the middle chamber melted. Water was drawn
from the middle chamber by a tube, and then
measured.
Lavoisier made many important contributions
to the science of chemistry. Unfortunately his
interest in political reform led to his arrest during
the French Revolution. He was beheaded after a
trial that lasted less than a day.
The original calorimeter used by Lavoisier and Laplace
When a process causes an energy change in a calorimeter, the change
in temperature is measured by a thermometer in the water. If you know
the mass of the water and its speciﬁc heat capacity, you can calculate the
change in thermal energy caused by the process. See Figures 14.16 and
14.17 for examples.
temperature of the
water decreases
temperature of the
water increases
water
water
endothermic
process
energy
exothermic
process
energy
Figure 14.16
such as ice melting
An endothermic process,
Figure 14.17
such as the combustion of propane
An exothermic process,
Chapter 14  Energy Trapped in Hydrocarbons • MHR 603
The energy change in a calorimetry experiment can be summarized
as follows:
Heat lost by the process = Heat gained by the water
or
Heat gained by the process = Heat lost by the water
In the next Sample Problem, you will use what you have just learned to
calculate the speciﬁc heat capacity of a metal. This problem is similar to
the calculation of the speciﬁc heat capacity of canola oil in section 14.3.
Here, however, a calorimeter is used to reduce the heat exchange to the
environment.
Sample Problem
Determining a Metal’s Specific Heat Capacity
Problem
A 70.0 g sample of a metal was heated to 95.0˚C in a hot water bath.
Then it was quickly transferred to a polystyrene calorimeter. The
calorimeter contained 100.0 g of water at an initial temperature of
19.8˚C. The ﬁnal temperature of the contents of the calorimeter was
22.6˚C.
(a) How much heat did the metal lose? How much heat did the
water gain?
(b) What is the speciﬁc heat capacity of the metal?
What Is Required?
(a) You need to calculate the heat lost by the metal (Qm ) and the
heat gained by the water (Qw).
(b) You need to calculate the speciﬁc heat capacity of the metal.
What Is Given?
You know the mass of the metal, and its initial and ﬁnal
temperatures.
Mass of metal (mm) = 70.0 g
Initial temperature of metal (Ti) = 95.0˚C
Final temperature of metal (Tf) = 22.6˚C
You also know the mass of the water, and its initial and ﬁnal
temperatures.
Mass of water (mw) = 100.0 g
Initial temperature of water (Ti) = 19.8˚C
Final temperature of water (Tf) = 22.6˚C
As well, you know the speciﬁc heat capacity of water: 4.184 J/g·˚C.
Continued ...
604 MHR • Unit 5  Hydrocarbons and Energy
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 604
Plan Your Strategy
(a) You have all the information that you need to ﬁnd the heat gained
by the water. Use the heat equation Q = mc∆T. To ﬁnd the heat
lost by the metal, assume that Qm = −Qw.
(b) Calculate the speciﬁc heat capacity of the metal by rearranging
the heat equation and solving for c.
It is very important that you do not mix up the given information.
For example, when solving for the thermal energy change of the
water, Qw, make sure that you only use variables for the water. You
must use the initial temperature of the water, 19.8˚C, not the initial
temperature of the metal, 95.0˚C. Also, remember that ∆T = Tf − Ti.
Act on Your Strategy
(a) Solve for Qw.
Qw = mwcw∆Tw
= (100.0 g)(4.184
J
g·˚C
)(22.6˚C − 19.8˚C)
= 1171.52 (g)(
= 1.2 × 103 J
J
g·˚C
)(˚C)
The water gained 1.2 × 103 J of thermal energy.
Solve for Qm .
Qm = −Qw
= −1.2 × 103 J
The metal lost 1.2 × 103 J of thermal energy.
(b) Solve for cm.
cm = Qm
mm∆Tm
=
−1.2 × 103 J
(70.0 g)(22.6˚C − 95.0˚C)
= 0.24 J/g·˚C
The speciﬁc heat capacity of the metal is 0.24 J/g·˚C.
Check Your Solution
The heat gained by the water is a positive value. The heat lost by the
metal is a negative value. The heat is expressed in joules. (Kilojoules
are also acceptable.)
The speciﬁc heat capacity of the metal is positive, and it has the
correct units.
Notice that all the materials in the calorimeter in the Sample Problem had
the same ﬁnal temperature. This is called thermal equilibrium.
Chapter 14  Energy Trapped in Hydrocarbons • MHR 605
Figure 14.18
Heat of Combustion
How much energy is needed for a natural gas water heater, like the one
shown in Figure 14.18, to heat the hot water in your home? It is probably
much more than you think! In the next Sample Problem, you will ﬁnd
out. You will also calculate the heat of combustion of a hydrocarbon: the
heat that is released when combustion occurs.
Sample Problem
Calculating Thermal Energy
Problem
Many homes in North America use natural gas for general heating
and for water heating. Like calorimeters, natural gas water heaters
have an insulated container that is ﬁlled with water. A gas ﬂame at
the bottom heats the water. A typical water heater might hold 151 L
of water.
(a) How much thermal energy is needed to raise the temperature of
151 L of water from 20.5˚C to 65.0˚C? Note: Make the same three
assumptions that you made for calorimeters.
(b) If it takes 506 g of methane to heat this water, what is the heat of
combustion of methane per gram?
What Is Required?
(a) You need to calculate the quantity of thermal energy (Q) needed
to heat 151 L of water.
(b) You need to calculate the heat released per gram of methane
burned.
What Is Given?
(a) You know the initial and ﬁnal temperatures of the water. You also
know the volume of the water.
Initial temperature (Ti) = 20.5˚C
Final temperature (Tf) = 65.0˚C
Volume = 151 L
As well, you know the speciﬁc heat capacity of water (c):
4.184 J/g·˚C or 4.184 kJ/kg·˚C.
(b) You know the mass of the methane. Mass of  methane (m) = 506 g
Plan Your Strategy
(a) This problem involves thermal energy and a change in tempera-
ture. You can use the heat equation Q = mc∆T. First calculate the
mass of 151 L of water. (Remember that the density of water at
room temperature is 1 g/mL, or 1 kg/L.) If you express the mass of
the water in kilograms, you must also use the appropriate speciﬁc
heat capacity of water: 4.184 kJ/kg·˚C.
Note: To keep the calculation simple, assume that the density of
the water remains the same when it is heated. (This is not strictly
true.)
Continued ...
606 MHR • Unit 5  Hydrocarbons and Energy
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 606
(b) Use the concept of heat lost = heat gained. Since a loss of heat
gives a negative value, use the following equation.
Qm = −Qw
To ﬁnd the heat per gram, divide the amount of heat by the mass
of methane.
Act on Your Strategy
(a) Mass of water = Volume × Density
= (151 L)(1 kg/L)
= 151 kg
Substitute into Q = mc∆T, and solve.
Q = mc∆T
= (151 kg)(4.184 kJ/kg·˚C)(65.0˚C − 20.5˚C)
= 28 114 (kg)(kJ/kg·˚C)(˚C)
= 2.81 × 104 kJ
Therefore, 2.81 × 104 kJ, or 28.1 MJ (megajoules), of energy is needed
to heat the water. (This is a great deal of energy!)
(b) Qm = −Qw
= −2.81 × 104 kJ
Divide the amount of heat by the mass of methane to ﬁnd the
heat per gram.
Qm (per gram) = Qm
mm
−2.81 × 104 kJ
506 g
= −55.5 kJ/g
=
This means that 55.5 kJ of thermal (heat) energy is released
for each gram of methane that burns.
Check Your Solution
(a) The water gains heat, so the heat value is positive.
Heat is expressed in kilojoules. (Joules are also acceptable.)
(b) The methane loses energy, so the heat value is negative. Since
this value is the heat per gram, the unit is kJ/g.
Practice Problems
18. A reaction lowers the temperature of 500.0 g of water in a
calorimeter by 1.10˚C. How much heat is absorbed by the
reaction?
19. Aluminum reacts with iron(III) oxide to yield aluminum oxide
and iron. The temperature of 1.00 kg of water in a calorimeter
increases by 3.00˚C during the reaction. Calculate the heat that
is released in the reaction.
Chapter 14  Energy Trapped in Hydrocarbons • MHR 607
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 607
20. 5.0 g of an unknown solid was dissolved in 100 g water in a
polystyrene calorimeter. The initial temperature of the water was
21.7˚C, and the ﬁnal temperature of the solution was 29.6˚C
(a) Calculate the heat change caused by the solid dissolving.
(b) What is the heat of solution per gram of solid dissolved?
21. A 92.0 g sample of a substance, with a temperature of 55.0˚C, is
placed in a polystyrene calorimeter. The calorimeter contains 1.00
kg of water at 20.0˚C. The ﬁnal temperature of the system is 25.2˚C.
(a) How much heat did the substance lose? How much heat did the
water gain?
(b) What is the speciﬁc heat capacity of the substance?
Heat of Solution
In Practice Problem 20, you calculated the thermal energy change
as a solid dissolved in water. This value is called the heat of solution:
the energy change caused by a substance dissolving. The following
ExpressLab deals with the heat of solution of a solid.
ExpressLab
The Energy of Dissolving
In this lab you will measure the heat of solution
of two solids.
4. Measure exactly 100 g of distilled water direct-
ly into your calorimeter.
Safety Precautions
• NaOH and KOH can burn skin. If you accidental-
ly spill NaOH or KOH on your skin, wash
immediately with copious amounts of
cold water.
Materials
balance and beakers or weigh boats
polystyrene calorimeter
thermometer and stirring rod
distilled water
2 pairs of solid compounds:
• ammonium nitrate and potassium hydroxide
• potassium nitrate and sodium hydroxide
Procedure
1. Choose one pair of chemicals from the list.
2. For each of the two chemicals, calculate
the mass required to make 100.0 mL of a
1.00 mol/L aqueous solution.
3. Measure the required mass of one of the
chemicals in a beaker or a weigh boat.
608 MHR • Unit 5  Hydrocarbons and Energy
5. Measure the initial temperature of the  water.
6. Pour one of the chemicals into the calorimeter.
Put the lid on the calorimeter.
7. Stir the solution. Record the temperature until
there is a maximum temperature change.
8. Dispose of the chemical as directed by your
teacher. Clean your apparatus.
9. Repeat steps 3 to 8, using the other chemical.
Analysis
1. For each chemical you used, calculate the heat
change per gram and the heat change per
mole of substance dissolved.
2. Which chemical dissolved endothermically?
Which chemical dissolved exothermically?
3. One type of cold pack contains a compartment
of powder and a compartment of water. When
the barrier between the two compartments is
broken, the solid dissolves in the water and
causes an energy change. What chemical
could be used in this type of cold pack? Why?
A Closer Look at Bomb Calorimetry
Polystyrene calorimeters are reasonably efﬁcient for measuring heat
changes during physical processes, such as dissolving and phase changes.
They can also be used to measure heat changes during chemical process-
es, such as neutralization. A stronger and more precise type of calorimeter
is needed, however, to measure the heat of combustion of foods, fuels, and
other materials. As you learned earlier, bomb calorimeters are used for
this purpose. (See Figure 14.19.)
Figure 14.19
polystyrene calorimeters.
Bomb calorimeters give more accurate measurements than
A bomb calorimeter has many more parts than a polystyrene calorimeter.
All of these parts can absorb or release small quantities of energy.
Therefore, you cannot assume that the heat lost to the calorimeter is small
enough to be negligible. To obtain precise heat measurements, you must
know or ﬁnd out the heat capacity of the bomb calorimeter. Heat capacity
is the ratio of the heat gained or lost by a system to the change in tempera-
ture caused by this heat. It is usually expressed in kJ/˚C. Unlike speciﬁc
heat capacity, which refers to a single substance, heat capacity refers to a
system. Thus, the heat capacity of a calorimeter takes into account the
heat that all parts of the calorimeter can lose or gain. (See Figure 14.20.)
Ctotal Cwater Cthermometer Cstirrer Ccontainer
+
+
=
+
Web
LINK
www.school.mcgrawhill.ca/
resources
Why do some solids dissolve
exothermically, while other
solids dissolve endothermical-
ly? What factors may be
involved? Research two
factors: lattice energies
and solvation energies. Go
to the web site above. Go to
Science Resources, then to
Chemistry 11 to ﬁnd out where
to go next. Report your results
to the class.
C H E M
FA C T
Have you ever strained a
muscle or sprained a joint? You
may obtain temporary relief by
applying the right heat of solu-
tion. A hot pack or cold pack
consists of a thick outer pouch
that contains water and a thin
inner pouch that contains a
salt. A squeeze on the outer
pouch breaks the inner pouch,
and the salt dissolves. Most
hot packs use anhydrous
CaCl2. Most cold packs use
NH4NO3. The change in tem-
perature can be quite large.
A cold pack, for instance, can
bring the solution from room
temperature down to 0˚C. The
usable time, however, is limited
to around half an hour.
heat
capacity
of
calorimeter
Figure 14.20
upper-case C. It is usually expressed in the unit J/˚C.
Heat capacity is symbolized by an
Chapter 14  Energy Trapped in Hydrocarbons • MHR 609
A bomb calorimeter is calibrated for a constant mass of water. Since the
mass of the other parts remain constant, there is no need for mass units in
the heat capacity value. The manufacturer usually includes the heat
capacity value(s) in the instructions for the calorimeter.
Heat calculations must be done differently when the heat capacity of a
calorimeter is included. The next Sample Problem illustrates this.
Sample Problem
Calculating Heat Change in a Bomb Calorimeter
Problem
A laboratory decided to test the energy content of peanut butter. A
technician placed a 16.0 g sample of peanut butter in the steel bomb
of a calorimeter, along with sufﬁcient oxygen to burn the sample
completely. She ignited the mixture and took heat measurements.
The heat capacity of the calorimeter was calibrated at 8.28 kJ/˚C.
During the experiment, the temperature increased by 50.5˚C.
(a) What was the thermal energy released by the sample of
peanut butter?
(b) What is the heat of combustion of the peanut butter per gram
of sample?
What Is Required?
(a) You need to calculate the heat (Q) lost by the peanut butter.
(b) You need to calculate the heat lost per gram of peanut butter.
What Is Given?
You know the mass of the peanut butter, the heat capacity of the
calorimeter, and the change in temperature of the system.
Mass of peanut butter (m) = 16.0 g
Heat capacity of calorimeter (C) = 8.28 kJ/˚C
Change in temperature (∆T) = 50.5˚C
Plan Your Strategy
(a) The heat capacity of the calorimeter takes into account the
speciﬁc heat capacities and masses of all the parts of the
calorimeter. Calculate the heat change of the calorimeter, Qcal,
using the equation
Qcal = C∆T
Note: C is the heat capacity of the calorimeter in J/˚C or kJ/˚C.
It replaces the m and c in other calculations involving speciﬁc
heat capacity.
First calculate the heat gained by the calorimeter. When the
peanut butter burns, the heat lost by the peanut butter sample
equals the heat gained by the calorimeter.
Qsample = −Qcal
610 MHR • Unit 5  Hydrocarbons and Energy
Continued ...
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 610
(b) To ﬁnd the heat of combustion per gram, divide the heat by the
mass of the sample.
Act on Your Strategy
(a) Qcal = C∆T
= (8.28kJ/˚C)(50.5˚C)
= 418.14(kJ/˚C)(˚C)
= 418 kJ
The calorimeter gained 418 kJ of thermal energy.
Qsample = −Qcal
= −418 kJ
The sample of peanut butter released 418 kJ of thermal energy.
(b) Heat of combustion per gram = Heat released
Mass of sample
−418 kJ
16.0 g
= −26.2 kJ/g
=
The heat of combustion per gram of peanut butter is −26.2 kJ/g.
Check Your Solution
Heat was lost by the peanut butter, so the heat value is negative.
Practice Problems
22. Use the heat equation for a calibrated calorimeter, Qcal = C∆T.
Recall that ∆T = Tf = Ti. Solve for the following quantities.
(a) C
(b) ∆T
(c) Tf (in terms of C, ∆T, and Ti )
(d) Ti (in terms of C, ∆T, and Tf )
23. A lab technician places a 5.00 g food sample into a bomb
calorimeter that is calibrated at 9.23 kJ/˚C. The initial temperature
of the calorimeter system is 21.0˚C. After burning the food, the
ﬁnal temperature of the system is 32.0˚C. What is the heat of
combustion of the food in kJ/g?
24. A scientist places a small block of ice in an uncalibrated bomb
calorimeter. The ice melts, gains 10.5 kJ (10.5 × 103 J) of heat and
undergoes a temperature change of 25.0˚C. The calorimeter under-
goes a temperature change of 1.2˚C.
(a) What mass of ice was added to the calorimeter? (Use the heat
capacity of liquid water.)
(b) What is the calibration of the bomb calorimeter in kJ/˚C?
Chapter 14  Energy Trapped in Hydrocarbons • MHR 611
It takes one calorie (small c) to
heat 1 g of water by 1˚C. What
mass of water can one Calorie
(large C) heat by 1˚C?
Food as a Fuel
Food is the fuel for your body. It provides you with the energy you need
to function every day. Unlike the peanut butter in the previous problem,
the food you digest is not burned. The process of digestion, however, is
very similar to burning. In fact, people often talk about “burning off
Calories.” When food is digested, it undergoes slow combustion (without
ﬂames!) as it reacts with the oxygen you breathe. Eventually this combus-
tion produces the materials that your body needs. It also releases carbon
dioxide and water vapour as waste.
Food contains
Figure 14.21
energy, which is usually
measured in Calories.
You have probably noticed that Calories are used more often than
kilojoules when discussing the energy in food (Figure 14.21). How are
these terms related?
For years, chemists used the calorie as a unit of energy. One calorie is
equal to 4.184 J. This is the amount of energy that is required to heat 1 g
of liquid water by 1˚C. The food Calorie (notice the upper-case C) is equal
to one thousand calories, or one kilocalorie. Therefore one food Calorie is
equal to 4.184 kJ.
You will recall that in the last sample problem, 16.0 g of peanut butter
released 418 kJ of energy. To translate a value in kilojoules into Calories,
multiply it by the fraction  1 Cal
4.184 kJ . For the Sample Problem,
418 kJ ×
1 Cal
4.184 kJ
= 100 Cal
Therefore, 16.0 g of peanut butter released 100 Cal of energy. Table 14.3
gives energy values in Calories for some foods.
Table 14.3 Energy Values for Some Common Foods
Food
Quantity
Energy (kJ) Energy (Cal)
almonds (shelled, whole)
75 g
apple
beef (broiled)
chicken (breast, broiled)
tuna (canned)
carrots (raw)
bread (white, enriched)
100 g
90 g
84 g
90 g
50 g
30 g
spaghetti (cooked)
148 g
olive oil
232 g (1 cup)
caramels (plain)
30 g (3 caramels)
1880
283
1330
502
740
80
340
690
8580
480
449
68
318
120
177
19
81
165
2051
115
612 MHR • Unit 5  Hydrocarbons and Energy
When you take in food energy, your body stores
excess food energy in the form of fat. If your body
needs energy later, it will use up some of this fat. This
is the secret behind hibernation. Why is excess energy
in your body stored as fat? Why is it not stored as
protein or carbohydrates? The next ThoughtLab will
examine these questions. You will do calculations to
ﬁnd out which substance releases the most heat when
burned.
Many mammals in the animal kingdom rely on fat
Figure 14.22
that is stored in their bodies. By surviving on fat reserves that are
stored during the autumn, bears can hibernate throughout the
winter without eating.
ThoughtLab
Energy Content in Fat and Carbohydrates
Procedure
1. For each substance, calculate the heat energy
released per gram of substance burned.
2. For each substance, calculate the heat of
combustion per mole of substance burned.
Analysis
1. Based on your calculations, which substance
stores more energy? How do you know?
Application
2. Investigate why fat produces more energy
than sugar when combusted. You may want
to research and compare the bond structures
of glucose and oleic acid.
By comparing the thermal energy that is released
when fats, proteins, and carbohydrates are
burned in a bomb calorimeter, you can compare
the energy that is stored in these compounds.
Natural fats are made up of various types of
fatty acids. Fatty acids are long chain organic
acids. The most common fatty acid in nature is
oleic acid.
Glucose is a common sugar in the body. Most
sugars that you ingest are broken down into glu-
cose before they are digested further. Collagen is
one of the most common proteins in your body.
Which compound releases more energy per
gram: a fat (assume oleic acid, C17H33COOH((cid:2))),
a carbohydrate such as sugar (assume glucose,
C6H12O6(s)), or a protein (assume collagen, molar
mass 300 000 g/mol)?
A sample of glucose is placed in a bomb
calorimeter, along with oxygen. The glucose is
completely burned. The process is repeated with
a sample of oleic acid and a sample of collagen.
The following results are recorded:
Compound
sugar
(glucose)
fat
(oleic acid)
protein
(collagen)
mass of compound (g)
1.35
initial temperature (˚C)
25.20
final temperature (˚C)
27.65
heat capacity of
calorimeter (kJ/˚C)
8.28
1.23
25.00
30.56
8.28
1.31
25.10
28.74
8.28
Chapter 14  Energy Trapped in Hydrocarbons • MHR 613
Comparing Fats and Hydrocarbons
One of the substances that you considered in the last ThoughtLab was
oleic acid. Oleic acid has a long hydrocarbon chain in each molecule.
This hydrocarbon chain is similar to the hydrocarbon chains of fossil
fuels, such as octane. (See Figure 14.23.)
oleic acid
CH2
CH3 CH2
CH2 CH2
CH2 CH2
CH2
CH2
CH
CH
2 CH2
2 CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CHCH CH CH2
CH2 CH2
CH2
CH
2 CH2
CH2
COOH
hydrocarbon chain
CH3
CH2
CH2 CH2
CH2
CH
2 CH2
CH3
octane
Which stores more energy:
saturated fat or unsaturated
fat? Do research to ﬁnd out.
Then compare the structures
of these two types of fat to
explain why.
Figure 14.23
combustion of fossil fuels must be similar to the heat of combustion of fats.
By comparing octane and oleic acid, you can see that the heat of
What is the relationship between the chemical bonds in a compound and
the amount of energy that the compound can store? You already know
that the net energy of a reaction equals the difference between the energy
absorbed when the reactant bonds are broken and the energy released
when the product bonds are formed. The size of the difference reﬂects
the strength of the bonds in the reactant molecules compared with the
strength of the bonds in the product molecules.
Figure 14.24 shows an exothermic reaction: the combustion of
methane. The stored energy of the products is less than the stored energy
of the reactants. Therefore, a net amount of energy is released by the
reaction. In an endothermic reaction, the stored energy of the products
is greater than the stored energy of the reactants.
Reactants
H
Products
H
C H +
OO
OCO
H
+
H
O
+
H
net energy
more stored energy
less stored energy
less stable
weaker bonds
more stable
stronger bonds
reactants
stored energy
products
difference = net energy
Figure 14.24
Energy stored in bonds
614 MHR • Unit 5  Hydrocarbons and Energy
Most of the energy change in a reaction is due to a change in the
potential energy (stored energy) of the bonds. All hydrocarbon fuels are
made of the same elements: carbon and hydrogen. They react to give the
same combustion products. As a result, the difference in the quantity of
heat energy that is released by any two hydrocarbons is directly related to
the stored energy in the bonds of these compounds. The next ThoughtLab
compares the heat energy that is released by the combustion of two fuels:
propane and butane.
ThoughtLab
Heat Combustion of Propane and Butane
Propane and butane are very common hydrocar-
bon fuels. As successive members of the alkane
family, they are closely related, but have a differ-
ent number of bonds. Does this difference in
the number of bonds affect the quantity of heat
released during combustion?
Samples of propane and butane were
completely burned in a bomb calorimeter. The
calorimeter was calibrated with a heat capacity
of 8.28 kJ/˚C. The observations are given in the
table below.
Procedure
1. Predict which compound will release the
greater quantity of energy per mole of gas.
2. Calculate the heat of combustion per mole for
each substance.
3. (a) Which substance has the higher heat of
combustion per mole?
(b) Draw complete structural diagrams of
propane and butane. Use these diagrams
to explain your answer to part (a).
Substance
propane
butane
Mass of
sample (g)
Initial
temperature (˚C)
Final
temperature (˚C)
1.50
1.50
25.00
25.00
34.03
33.87
Analysis
1. Was your prediction correct?
2. Find and compare the boiling points of
propane and butane. Which fuel would be
better for winter camping? Why?
The Combustion of Candles
So far in this chapter, you have focussed on gaseous hydrocarbons, such
as methane and acetylene. You have examined their heats of combustion
and various processes in which they are used. In your everyday life, you
may have encountered another type of hydrocarbon: parafﬁns. Parafﬁns
are long chain hydrocarbons. They are semisolid or solid at room
temperature. One type of parafﬁn has been a household item for cen-
turies —parafﬁn wax, C25H52(s), better known as candle wax. (See Figure
14.25.)
Like other hydrocarbons, the parafﬁn wax in candles undergoes com-
bustion when burned. It releases thermal energy in the process. In the fol-
lowing investigation, you will measure this thermal energy.
Parafﬁn wax can-
Figure 14.25
dles have been an important light
source for hundreds of years.
Chapter 14  Energy Trapped in Hydrocarbons • MHR 615
S K I L L   F O C U S
Predicting
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
The Heat of Combustion
of a Candle
You have probably gazed into the ﬂame of a
candle without thinking about chemistry! Now,
however, you will use the combustion of candle
wax to gain insight into the measurement of heat
changes. You will also evaluate the design of
this investigation and make suggestions for
improvement.
Question
What is the heat of combustion of candle wax?
Prediction
Will the heat of combustion of candle wax be
greater or less than the heat of combustion of
other fuels, such as propane and butane? Record
your prediction, and give reasons.
Safety Precautions
2. Set up the apparatus as shown in the diagram,
but do not include the large can yet. Adjust
the ring stand so that the small can is about
5 cm above the wick of the candle. The tip of
the ﬂame should just touch the bottom of the
small can.
3. Measure the mass of the candle and the lid.
4. Measure the mass of the small can and the
hanger.
5. Place the candle inside the large can on the
retort stand.
6. Fill the small can about two-thirds full of cold
water (10˚C to 15˚C). You will measure the
mass of the water later.
clothes
hanger
wire
retort stand
• Tie back long hair and conﬁne any loose
clothing. Before you light the candle, check
that there are no ﬂammable solvents near by.
small can
(such as a canned
vegetable can)
ring
clamp
Materials
balance
calorimeter apparatus (see the diagram to
the right)
thermometer
stirring rod
matches
water
candle
Procedure
1. Burn the candle to melt some wax. Use the
wax to attach the candle to the smaller can
lid. Blow out the candle.
large can
(such as
juice can)
candle
616 MHR • Unit 5  Hydrocarbons and Energy
small can lid
air holes
7. Stir the water in the can. Measure the
temperature of the water.
8. Light the candle. Quickly place the small can
Be care-
CAUTION
in position over the candle.
ful of the open ﬂame.
9. Continue stirring. Monitor the temperature of
the water until it has reached 10˚C to 15˚C
above room temperature.
10. Blow out the candle. Continue to stir. Monitor
the temperature until you observe no further
change.
11. Record the ﬁnal temperature of the water.
Examine the bottom of the small can, and
record your observations.
12. Measure the mass of the small can and the
water.
13. Measure the mass of the candle, lid, and any
drops of candle wax.
Analysis
1. (a) Calculate the mass of the water.
(b) Calculate the mass of candle wax that
burned.
2. Calculate the thermal energy that was
absorbed by the water.
3. Calculate the heat of combustion of the candle
wax per gram.
4. (a) Assume that the candle wax is pure
parafﬁn wax, C25H52(s). Calculate the heat
of combustion per mole of parafﬁn wax.
(b) Write a balanced thermochemical equation
for the complete combustion of parafﬁn
wax. Hint: You calculated the heat of com-
bustion per mole of parafﬁn wax in part (a).
The chemical equation is balanced for one
mole of C25H52(s). Therefore, you can use an
actual value for the energy in the equation.
Conclusions
5. (a) List some possible sources of error that may
have affected the results you obtained.
(b) Evaluate the design and the procedure of
this investigation. Consider the apparatus,
the combustion, and anything else you can
think of. Make suggestions for possible
improvements.
6. What if soot (unburned carbon) accumulated
on the bottom of the small can? Would this
produce a greater or a lower heat value than
the value you expected? Explain.
Chapter 14  Energy Trapped in Hydrocarbons • MHR 617
In this section, you considered the importance of fossil fuels in our socie-
ty, based on the energy that we can obtain from fuel combustion. You
have seen how thermal energy can be measured. You now know how
much energy can be extracted from molecules that stored solar energy
millions of years ago. Can our society continue to depend on this energy
source without harming the environment? What risks result from our use
of fossil fuels? You will explore these questions in the next section.
Go to a library, or access
the Internet. Complete a
brief research report on how
“no-drip” candles are made.
How does the composition
of these candles affect the
combustion of the parafﬁn?
Section Review
1
2
3
4
5
K/U
What is the difference between speciﬁc heat capacity and
heat capacity?
I
List two characteristics of a calorimeter that are necessary for
successful heat measurement.
I
A calorimeter is calibrated at 7.61 kJ/˚C. When a sample of coal is
burned in the calorimeter, the temperature increases by 5.23˚C. How
much heat was lost by the coal?
I
A reaction in a calorimeter causes 150 g of water to decrease in
temperature by 5.0˚C. What is the thermal energy change of the water?
I
A company claims that its new Calorie-reduced dessert has less
than 10 Cal per serving. To test this claim, a technician at the depart-
ment of Consumer and Corporate Affairs completely burns a serving of
the dessert in a bomb calorimeter. The temperature change is 4.86˚C.
The heat capacity of the calorimeter is 8.28 kJ/˚C. Is the company’s
claim correct?
6
(a)
C
In Chapter 13, you compared the boiling points, a physical
property, of some hydrocarbons. In this section, you compared the
heats of combustion, a chemical property, of propane, butane, and
parafﬁn. Use a reference book, such as The CRC Handbook of
Chemistry and Physics. Look up the following hydrocarbons:
methane, ethane, propane, butane, pentane, and hexane. Compare
their densities, melting points, boiling points, and heats of combus-
tion. Record your ﬁndings in charts and/or graphs. What patterns
do you observe? Which properties are physical, and which are
chemical? Explain.
(b)
C
Use your ﬁndings to estimate the heat of combustion of heptane.
7
MC
At a comfortable indoor temperature of 22˚C, your body is at a
higher temperature than its surroundings. Therefore, it is constantly
radiating heat to the environment. It needs, however, to maintain an
internal temperature of 37˚C. How does it replace the heat that it is
constantly losing to the environment?
8
K/U
A heat pack can be used to supply heat to injuries. One type of
heat pack is re-usable. It contains a supersaturated solution of a salt
and a disc of metal. When the metal disc is bent, the solute begins to
crystallize and releases heat. The pack can be reset by heating it in
boiling water, which causes the salt to dissolve again. How can you
account for the heat that is released by this kind of pack?
618 MHR • Unit 5  Hydrocarbons and Energy
The Impact of
Petroleum Products
Products made from petrochemicals (which are obtained from petroleum
and natural gas) have profoundly inﬂuenced your life. Because of petro-
chemicals, you can use numerous products that did not exist 50 years
ago (See Figures 14.26, 14.27, and 14.28). For example, one of the most
common materials around you—plastic — is made from petrochemicals.
The large numbers of petrochemicals that are used in manufacturing,
however, are insigniﬁcant when compared with the vast quantities of
hydrocarbons that are consumed each year as fossil fuels. As you learned
in Chapter 13, almost 95% of all petroleum that is extracted from the
ground is used as fuels and lubricants for vehicles.
Is there a cost for all that we obtain from hydrocarbons? Do these
amazing products carry any drawbacks? In this section, you will examine
some pros and cons of our society’s reliance on hydrocarbons. You will
begin to assess the beneﬁts and the risks of materials that you take for
granted and use every day.
14.5
S e c t i o n   P r e v i e w /
S p e c i f i c   E x p e c t a t i o n s
In this section, you will
assess some risks and
beneﬁts of hydrocarbon
use in our society
communicate your
understanding of the
following terms: risk, beneﬁt,
risk-beneﬁt analysis,
greenhouse gases, global
warming, sustainable
development
Figure 14.27
heat ﬂow and does not absorb water.
Polystyrene foam insulation, such as Styrofoam™, prevents
Materials such as
Figure 14.26
Gore-Tex® fabric (made from a
polymer of ethene) are important
in the outdoor activities industry.
Artiﬁcial hip joints allow
Figure 14.28
people who are disabled by arthritis to
walk again.
Chapter 14  Energy Trapped in Hydrocarbons • MHR 619
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
Hydrocarbons, such as fossil
fuels, carry both risks and
beneﬁts. In a group, brainstorm
to identify some risks and
beneﬁts.
Would you like to
Figure 14.29
have a coal-burning power plant
near your home? Some people
might be upset by this idea
because there is a health risk
caused by pollution from the
plant. Other people might think
that a coal-burning power plant
poses no threat at all. Who is
right? How do you decide?
Risks and Beneﬁts
A risk is a chance of possible negative or dangerous results. Riding a
bicycle carries the risk of falling off. Driving a car carries the risk of an
accident. Almost everything you do has some kind of risk attached.
Fortunately most risks are relatively small, and they may never happen.
Many of the activities that carry risks also carry beneﬁts. A beneﬁt is an
advantage, or positive result. For example, riding a bicycle provides the
beneﬁts of exercise, transportation, and enjoyment. When deciding to do
an activity, it may be a good idea to compare the risks and beneﬁts
involved. (See Figure 14.29.)
Risk-Beneﬁt Analysis
Knowing more about an issue helps you assess its risks and beneﬁts
more accurately. How can you make the most informed decision possible?
Follow these steps to do your own assessment of risks and beneﬁts, called
a risk-beneﬁt analysis.
Step 1 Identify possible risks and beneﬁts of the activity. Decide how to
research these risks and beneﬁts.
Step 2 Research the risks and beneﬁts. You need information from reliable
sources to make an accurate analysis.
Step 3 Weigh the effects of the risks and beneﬁts. You may ﬁnd that the
risks are too great and decide not to do the activity. On the other
hand, you may ﬁnd that the beneﬁts are greater than the risks.
Step 4 Compare your method for doing the activity with other possible
methods. Do you use the safest method to do the activity? One
method may be much safer than another.
In the next Sample Problem, you will see how a risk-beneﬁt analysis can
help you make informed decisions.
Sample Problem
Smoking
Problem
Many of your friends smoke, including some people you respect.
Lately you have been thinking about taking up smoking too. Should
you smoke? Perform a risk-beneﬁt analysis to help you decide.
What Is Required?
You need to perform a risk-beneﬁt analysis of smoking. This includes
identifying, researching, and weighing the risks and
beneﬁts of smoking. It also includes looking at different methods
of smoking, which might reduce the risk.
What Is Given?
The problem mentions that many of your friends smoke. This indi-
cates a possible beneﬁt of smoking—you will be imitating people
Continued ...
620 MHR • Unit 5  Hydrocarbons and Energy
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 620
you like and respect. You need to do some research to identify more
beneﬁts and risks.
Plan Your Strategy
Use these four steps to identify and assess the risks and beneﬁts
of smoking.
Step 1 Identify possible risks and beneﬁts.
Step 2 Research the risks and beneﬁts. Use the Internet, reference
books such as encyclopedias, and other sources to help you.
It is important to choose reliable sources from which to
obtain information.
Step 3 Weigh the risks and beneﬁts.
Step 4 Compare different methods of smoking. Is one method less
risky than another?
Act on Your Strategy
Step 1 Identify possible risks and beneﬁts.
Possible risks
Possible benefits
Smoking is hazardous to your health. Your friends smoke.
Smoking may help you relax.
At this point, the beneﬁts appear to outweigh the risks.
You need to do more research, however, to make an
informed decision.
Step 2 Research the risks and beneﬁts.
Further research on the Internet provides more information
on smoking risks:
Risks
Benefits
The tobacco smoke inhaled when smoking
contains many toxic substances, such as
carbon monoxide and ammonia gas.
Your friends smoke.
Smoking is the number one cause of lung
cancer, heart disease, and emphysema.
Smoking may help
you relax.
Smoking is addictive.
About 50% of smokers end up dying from
a tobacco-related disease.
Second-hand smoke harms the people
around you.
Step 3 Weigh the risks and beneﬁts of smoking.
The risks of smoking heavily outweigh the beneﬁts.
Step 4 Compare different methods of smoking. Is one method
less risky?
Smoking only one cigarette a day is less risky than smoking a
pack a day. You cannot count on this method, however. Any
kind of smoking is risky.
Continued ...
Chapter 14  Energy Trapped in Hydrocarbons • MHR 621
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 621
Practice Problems
Web
LINK
www.school.mcgrawhill.ca/
resources
To access more information
on solar panels, natural gas
heating, and the environmental
effects of burning fossil fuels,
go to the web site above. Go
to Science Resources, then to
Chemistry 11 to ﬁnd out where
to go next. Use this information
to help you answer Practice
Problem 26.
25. Your town is considering dumping its plastic waste in a nearby
lake. Identify possible risks and beneﬁts for this plan. Explain
where you could ﬁnd more information to help your town make
a decision.
26. Earth’s reservoir of fossil fuels, including natural gas, will not
last forever. As well, burning fossil fuels releases carbon dioxide
(a greenhouse gas) and other pollutants that can cause acid rain.
On the other hand, alternate energy sources, such as solar panels,
are more expensive. They can also be less reliable than using
fossil fuels. Perform a risk-beneﬁt analysis to decide if you should
heat your home using natural gas or solar panels. You will need to
do more research to make an informed decision. (See the Internet
Link on this page.)
Hydrocarbons: A Risky Business?
How do hydrocarbons beneﬁt our society? How do they affect the environ-
ment? What are the beneﬁts and risks of using hydrocarbon fuels and
petrochemicals? These are important questions for our global community.
See Figure 14.30 for some ideas.
Figure 14.30
Risks?
fossil fuels
petrochemicals
Beneﬁts?
622 MHR • Unit 5  Hydrocarbons and Energy
Hydrocarbon fuels have changed the way we live. Our dependence on
them, however, has affected the world around us. The greenhouse effect,
global warming, acid rain, and pollution are familiar topics on the news
today. Our use of petroleum products, such as oil and gasoline, is linked
directly to these problems.
The Greenhouse Effect and Global Warming
Roads, expressways, service stations, and parking lots occupy almost 40%
of Toronto. They are the result of our demand for fast and efﬁcient trans-
portation. Every day, Toronto’s vehicles produce nearly 16 000 t of carbon
dioxide by the combustion of fossil fuels. Carbon dioxide is an important
greenhouse gas. Greenhouse gases trap heat in Earth’s atmosphere and
prevent the heat from escaping into outer space. Scientists think that a
build-up of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere may lead to an increase in
global temperature, known as global warming. The diagram below shows
how these concepts are connected to fossil fuels.
Concept Organizer
Hydrocarbons and the Enviroment
Web
LINK
www.school.mcgrawhill.ca/
resources/
To learn more about green-
house gases, global warming,
and acid rain, go to the web
site above. Go to Science
Resources, then to Chemistry
11 to ﬁnd out where to go next.
Petroleum used to
produce products
such as lubricants
and plastics
Disposal of petroleum products
can leak oil into water systems;
plastics accumulate in dumps
Fossil fuels obtained from
deposits under the ground
• natural gas
• coal
• petroleum
Fuels are
transported
around the
world
Fossil fuels are burned
(e.g. gasoline, diesel fuel,
natural gas furnaces and
stoves
Oxides such
as SO2 and
NO2 emitted
Oil spills from ships
harm marine life
Carbon dioxide gas emitted
Combine with water
in the atmosphere
to produce acid rain
and snow
Builds up and traps excess
heat in Earth's atmosphere;
may lead to global warming
Acid Rain
The combustion of fossil fuels releases sulfur and nitrogen oxides. These
oxides react with water vapour in the atmosphere to produce acid rain.
Some lakes in northern Canada are “dead” because acid rain has killed
the plants, algae, and ﬁsh that used to live in them. Forests in Québec
and other parts of Canada have also suffered from acid rain.
Oil Spill Pollution
Our society demands a regular supply of fossil fuels. Petroleum is trans-
ported from oil-rich countries to the rest of the world. If an oil tanker
carrying petroleum has an accident, the resulting oil spill can be
disastrous to the environment.
Chapter 14  Energy Trapped in Hydrocarbons • MHR 623
Careers
in Chemistry
Oil Spill Advisor
Developed nations, such as Canada, depend
heavily on petroleum. Our dependence affects
the environment in many ways. Oil spills are a
dramatic example of environmental harm caused
by petrochemicals. In the news, you may have
seen oceans on ﬁre and wildlife choked with tar.
What can we do?
Obviously the best thing to do is to prevent oil
spills from taking place. Stricter regulations and
periodic inspections of oil storage companies
help to prevent oil leakage. Once an oil spill has
occurred, however, biological, mechanical, and
chemical technologies can help to minimize
harm to the environment.
Biological methods involve helpful micro-
organisms that break down, or biodegrade,
the excess oil. Mechanical methods depend on
machines that physically separate spilled oil
from the environment. For example, barriers
and booms are used to contain an oil spill and
prevent it from spreading. Materials such as
sawdust are sprinkled on a spill to soak up the oil.
Two main chemical strategies are also used
to clean up oil spills. In the ﬁrst strategy, gelling
agents are added to react with the oil. The reac-
tion results in a bulky product that is easier to
collect using mechanical methods. In the second
strategy, dispersing agents break up oil into small
droplets that mix with the water. This prevents
the oil from reaching nearby shorelines.
Dispersing agents work in much the same way
as a bar of soap!
The scientiﬁc advisor for an oil spill response
unit assesses a spill and determines the appropri-
ate clean-up methods. She or he acts as part of
a team of advisors. Most advisors have an M.Sc.
or Ph.D. in an area of expertise such as organic
chemistry, physical chemistry, environmental
chemistry, biology, oceanography, computer
modelling, or chemical engineering.
Oil spill response is handled by private and
public organizations. All these organizations look
for people with a background in chemistry. In
fact, much of what you are learning about
hydrocarbons can be related to oil spill response.
Hydrocarbon chemistry can lead you directly
to an important career, helping to protect the
environment.
Make Career Connections
Create a technology scrapbook. Go through the
business and employment sections in a newspa-
per. Cut out articles about clean-up technologies.
What kinds of companies are doing this work?
What can you learn about jobs in this ﬁeld? What
qualiﬁcations does a candidate need to apply for
this type of job?
Web
LINK
Everyday Oil Pollution
www.school.mcgrawhill.ca/
resources/
Go to the web site above to
learn about the famous oil spill
caused by the Exxon Valdez.
Go to Science Resources,
then to Chemistry 11 to ﬁnd out
where to go next. When and
where did this oil spill occur?
How did it affect the environ-
ment? What was done to clean
it up?
The biggest source of oil pollution comes from the everyday use of oil by
ordinary people. Oil that is dumped into water in urban areas adds to oil
pollution from ships and tankers. In total, three million tonnes of oil reach
the ocean each year. This is equivalent to having an oil spill disaster
every day!
A student from Thornhill, Ontario, did a home experiment to discover
how much oil remains in “empty” motor oil containers that are thrown
out. He collected 100 empty oil containers from a local gas station. Then
he measured the amount of oil that was left in each container. He found
an average of 36 mL per container. Over 130 million oil containers are
sold and thrown out in Canada each year. Using these ﬁgures, he
624 MHR • Unit 5  Hydrocarbons and Energy
Economy
Sustainable
Development
Environment
Welfare
of Society
Canada and other
Figure 14.31
members of the United Nations
endorse the principle of sustain-
able development. This principle
states that the world must ﬁnd
ways to meet our current needs,
without compromising the needs
of future generations.
calculated that nearly ﬁve million litres of oil are dumped into landﬁll
sites every year, just in “empty” oil containers!
Once oil reaches the environment, it is almost impossible to clean up.
Oil leaking from a landﬁll site can contaminate drinking water in the area.
Because oil can dissolve similar substances, pollutants such as chlorine
and pesticides, and other organic toxins, mix with the oil. They are
carried with it into the water system, increasing the problem.
Solutions to Environmental Problems
All of the problems described above hinge on our use of fossil fuels. Thus,
cutting back on our use of fossil fuels will help to reduce environmental
damage. Cutting back on fossil fuels, however, depends on the consumers
who buy petrochemicals and use fossil fuels. In other words, it depends
on you and the people you know.
Corporations that are looking for proﬁt have little incentive to change
their use of fossil fuels. For example, the technology is available to build
cars that can drive about 32 km on a single litre of fuel. Because this tech-
nology is not ﬁnancially proﬁtable, cars are still being produced that drive
about 8 km per litre of fuel. If consumers demand and purchase more
fuel-efﬁcient cars, however, car manufacturers will have an incentive to
produce such cars. Tougher government standards may also help to push
the vehicle industry towards greater fuel efﬁciency.
Governments can also bring about change by endorsing the principle
of sustainable development. This principle was introduced at the 1992
Earth Summit Conference. Sustainable development takes into account
the environment, the economy, and the health and needs of society.
(See Figure 14.31.)
Hydrocarbon fuels and products can beneﬁt our society if they are
managed well. They can cause great environmental damage, however,
if they are managed irresponsibly. With enough knowledge, you can
learn to make informed decisions on these important issues. Here are
some suggestions of ways you can reduce your consumption of petroleum
products. Why not choose one or more methods to practice? Or, brain-
storm with your classmates to think of other ways to reduce consumption.
• Contact your local government and local power companies. Suggest
using alternative fuels, such as solar energy and wind power.
• Ride a bicycle or walk more.
• Express your concerns by writing letters to the government or
to newspapers.
• Become more informed by researching issues that concern you.
• Fix oil leaks in vehicles, and avoid dumping oil down the sink.
• If you are cold at home, put on an extra sweater instead of
turning up the heat.
• Recycle and re-use petrochemical products, such as plastic
shopping bags.
• Repair a broken item rather than buying a new one.
Chapter 14  Energy Trapped in Hydrocarbons • MHR 625
Section Wrap-up
In this section, you learned about some of the risks and beneﬁts resulting
from our use of fossil fuels. We obtain gasoline, heating oil, jet fuel, diesel
fuel, fertilizers, and plastics from the oil and petroleum industry. Burning
fossil fuels, however, produces carbon dioxide (a greenhouse gas) and
other pollutants that lead to acid rain. Transporting oil also carries the
risk of oil spills. Do the beneﬁts of fossil fuels outweigh the risks?
Complete these Section Review questions to help you decide.
Section Review
1
2
3
4
5
K/U
You are about to try water-skiing for the ﬁrst time. Should you try
it? Will your activity affect the environment? How will you make your
decision?
(a) Describe the steps you would follow to do a risk-beneﬁt analysis.
(b) What are some possible risks and beneﬁts?
(c) Where might you ﬁnd the information you need to make a decision?
C
Identify three beneﬁts and three risks associated with the use of
petroleum products and petrochemicals.
C
Identify some steps that you can take to reduce your dependence
on petroleum.
MC
A construction company is planning to level a forest near your
home to build a strip mall with a large parking lot. Many people enjoy
walking in the forest, and many children play there. You have also
observed wildlife, such as rabbits, snakes, frogs, and many kinds of
birds living in the forest. In a group, brainstorm ways that the company
could consider the environment and human welfare, as well as the
economy. (Think of the economy as the owner of the property and the
stores that will be built.)
MC
Perform a risk-beneﬁt analysis of the petroleum industry. Use
the information in this section to help you identify possible risks and
beneﬁts. Use the Internet, or reference books to do more research on
these risks and beneﬁts.
6
MC
Impure coal and gasoline contain nitrogen and sulfur compounds
(NO(g) and S(s)). The combustion of nitrogen and sulfur produces oxides
that lead to acid rain.
(a) Balance the following six equations.
S8(s) + O2(g) → SO2(g)
S8(s) + O2(g) → SO3(g)
NO(g) + O2(g) → NO2(g)
SO2(g) + H2O((cid:2)) → H2SO3(aq)
SO3(g) + H2O((cid:2)) → H2SO4(aq)
NO2(g) + H2O((cid:2)) → HNO3(aq) + HNO2(aq)
(b) Suggest possible sources for the reactants O2(g) and H2O((cid:2)).
(c) Explain how these equations show the production of acid rain.
626 MHR • Unit 5  Hydrocarbons and Energy
Review
Reﬂecting on Chapter 14
Summarize this chapter in the format of your
choice. Here are a few ideas to use as guidelines:
• Describe how fossil fuels are an important
source of energy in our society.
• Describe how to write combustion equations,
and how to measure the heat changes caused by
physical processes such as dissolving.
• Describe the importance of isolating a system to
reduce heat ﬂow when measuring heat.
• Describe society’s use of fossil fuels, and the
resulting effects on the environment.
• Explain how to weigh the risks and beneﬁts of
an activity, and perform a risk-beneﬁt analysis.
This skill will help you make more informed
decisions on issues that affect society, the
economy, and the environment.
Reviewing Key Terms
For each of the following terms, write a sentence
that shows your understanding of its meaning.
beneﬁt
bond energy
calorimeter
∆T
complete combustion
exothermic
global warming
heat
heat of combustion
isolated system
risk
speciﬁc heat capacity
temperature
thermal equilibrium
bomb calorimeter
Calorie
calorimetry
combustion
endothermic
fossil fuels
greenhouse gases
heat capacity
incomplete combustion
potential energy
risk-beneﬁt analysis
sustainable development
thermal energy
thermochemical
equation
Knowledge/Understanding
1. (a) What are the products of the complete
combustion of a hydrocarbon?
(b) What products form if the combustion is
incomplete?
2. (a) Why can incomplete combustion be
dangerous if it occurs in your home?
(b) How can you tell, by looking at a ﬂame, that
incomplete combustion is taking place?
3. Indicate whether each process is endothermic
or exothermic.
(a) water evaporating
(b) a piece of paper burning
(c) rubbing your hands together
(d) clouds forming
4. How can a balanced thermochemical equation
tell you whether a chemical reaction is exother-
mic or endothermic?
5. Describe the relationship between the amount
of thermal energy that is released by water and
(a) the mass of water
(b) the temperature change of the water
6. Why is energy needed to sustain an
endothermic reaction?
7. (a) The combustion of parafﬁn, C25H52(s), is
exothermic. Explain why by comparing the
energy changes observed when chemical
bonds are broken and formed.
(b) The formation of 1-pentyne, C5H8((cid:2)), is
endothermic. Explain why by comparing the
energy changes observed when chemical
bonds are broken and formed.
8. Hydrogen is used as a fuel for the space shuttle
because it provides more energy per gram than
many other fuels. The combustion of hydrogen
is described by the following equation.
2H2(g) + O2(g) → 2H2O(g) + 484 kJ
(a) Is this reaction exothermic or endothermic?
(b) How much energy does the complete
combustion of 1 g of hydrogen provide?
9. Write a balanced chemical equation for each
reaction.
(a) complete combustion of 4-methyl-1-pentene,
C6H12((cid:2))
(b) incomplete combustion of benzene, C6H6((cid:2))
(c) incomplete combustion of propene, C3H6(g)
(d) complete combustion of 3-ethyhexane,
C8H18((cid:2))
10. List three assumptions that you make when
using a polystyrene calorimeter.
Chapter 14  Energy Trapped in Hydrocarbons • MHR 627
11. The same amount of heat is added to
aluminum (cAl = 0.900 J/g ·˚C) and nickel
(cNi = 0.444 J/g ·˚C). Which metal will have
a greater temperature increase? Explain.
12. Does propane burning in an outdoor barbecue
have a negative or positive heat of combustion?
Explain.
Inquiry
13. To make four cups of tea, 1.00 kg of water
is heated from 22.0˚C to 99.0˚C. How much
energy is needed?
14. Two different foods are burned in a calorimeter.
Sample 1 has a mass of 6.0 g and releases
25 Cal of heat. Sample 2 has a mass of 2.1 g
and releases 9.0 Cal of heat. Which food
releases more heat per gram?
15. A 3.00 g sample of a new snack food is burned
in a calorimeter. The 2.00 kg of surrounding
water change in temperature from 25.0˚C to
32.4˚C. What is the food value in Calories
per gram?
16. A substance is burned completely in a bomb
calorimeter. The temperature of the 2000 g of
water in the calorimeter rises from 25.0˚C to
43.9˚C. How much energy is released?
17. A horseshoe can be shaped from an iron bar
when the iron is heated to temperatures near
1500˚C. The hot iron is then dropped into a
bucket of water and cooled. An iron bar is
heated from 1500˚C and then cooled in 1000 g
of water that was initially at 20.0˚C. How much
heat energy does the water absorb if its ﬁnal
temperature is 65.0˚C?
18. A group of students decide to measure the
energy content of certain foods. They heat
50.0 g of water in an aluminum can by burning
a sample of the food beneath the can. When
they use 1.00 g of popcorn as their test food,
the temperature of the water rises by 24˚C.
(a) Calculate the heat energy that is released by
the popcorn. Express your answer in both
kilojoules and Calories per gram of popcorn.
(b) Another student tells the group that she has
read the label on the popcorn bag. The label
states that 30 g of popcorn yields 110 Cal.
What is this value in Calories per gram? How
628 MHR • Unit 5  Hydrocarbons and Energy
can you account for the difference between
the two values?
19. In Chapters 13 and 14, you have examined
many properties of hydrocarbons. Describe one
physical property and one chemical property of
hydrocarbons. Explain how these two proper-
ties vary from one hydrocarbon to another.
Describe how you might measure each property
in a lab.
20. A reaction in a calorimeter causes 250.0 g of
water to decrease in temperature by 2.40˚C.
How much heat did the reaction absorb?
21. A chemist wants to calibrate a new bomb
calorimeter. He completely burns a mass
of 0.930 g of carbon in a calorimeter. The
temperature of the calorimeter changes from
25.00˚C to 28.15˚C. If the thermal energy
change is 32.8 kJ/g of carbon burned, what
is the heat capacity of the new calorimeter?
What evidence shows that the reaction was
exothermic?
22. 200 g of iron at 350˚C is added to 225 g of
water at 10.0˚C. What is the ﬁnal temperature
of the iron-water mixture?
23. In this chapter, you learned that fats have
long hydrocarbon sections in their molecular
structure. Therefore, they have many C — C
and C—H bonds. Sugars have fewer C— C and
C — H bonds but more C— O bonds. Use Table
14.1 in this chapters. Explain why you can
obtain more energy from burning a fat than
from burning a sugar.
24. 2,2,4-trimethylpentane, an isomer of C8H18, is a
major component of gasoline.
(a) Write the balanced thermochemical
equation, using the word “energy,” for the
complete combustion of this compound. Use
C8H18((cid:2)) as the formula for the compound.
(b) What is the ideal ratio of fuel to air for
this fuel?
(c) In the previous unit, you learned how to
solve problems involving gases. Calculate
the volume of carbon dioxide, at 20.0˚C and
105 kPa, that is produced from the combus-
tion of 1.00 L of C8H18((cid:2)) . Note: The density
of C8H18((cid:2)) is 0.69 g/mL.
25. 100 g of calcium carbide is used to produce
acetylene in a laboratory, as you did in
Investigation 14-A.
(a) What volume of water (density 1.00 g/mL) is
needed to react completely with the calcium
carbide?
(b) What volume of acetylene gas will be
produced at STP when the calcium carbide
and water are mixed?
34. On an episode of The Nature of Things, Dr.
David Suzuki made the following comment:
“As a society and as individuals, we’re hooked
on it [oil].” Discuss his comment. Explain how
our society has beneﬁtted from hydrocarbons.
Describe some of the problems that are
associated with the use of hydrocarbons.
Also describe some possible alternatives for
the future.
Communication
26. Earlier in the chapter, you learned that
poisonous carbon monoxide can form during
incomplete hydrocarbon combustion. The use
of carbon monoxide detectors in homes and
businesses has reduced the number of deaths
due to carbon monoxide poisoning. Are all
carbon monoxide detectors the same?
Telephone your local ﬁre department, go to a
library, or search the Internet to ﬁnd out about
carbon monoxide detectors.
27. Design a poster or a brochure to explain the
concept of sustainable development to a
student in a much younger grade.
28. Prepare a concept map to illustrate the effects
of hydrocarbons on our society and the
environment.
Making Connections
29. When energy is wasted during an industrial
process, what actually happens to this energy?
30. Look at Table 14.3. Compare caramels with
raw carrots. Which food gives more Calories
per gram?
31. Petrochemical products, such as plastics, have
affected your life. Identify one beneﬁt and one
possible risk associated with the use of petro-
chemical products.
32. Deﬁne sustainable development. Suggest a
condition that you feel society must agree
on to achieve sustainable development.
33. The Hibernia Oil Field is located off the Grand
Banks of Newfoundland, on Canada’s east
coast. It started oil production in the fall of
1997. Research and write a report on some of
the risks and beneﬁts of this massive oil opera-
tion. Consider ecological, economic, and social
issues.
Answers to Practice Problems and
Short Section Review Questions:
Practice Problems 1.(a) complete  2.(a) C5H12 + 8O2 →
5Co2 + 6H2O (b) 2C8H18 + 25O2 → 16CO2 + 18H2O
(c) 6C2H6 + 15O2 → 4CO2 + 4CO + 4C + 18H2O,
3C2H6 + 6O2 → CO2 + CO + 4C + 9H2O,
3.(a) C4H10 + 4O2 → CO2 + CO + 2C + 5H2O
(b) 2C4H10 + 13O2 → 8CO2 + 10H2O
4. C25H52 + 38O2 → 25CO2 + 26H2O
5.(a) C13H28 + 9O2 → CO2 + 2CO + 10C + 14H2O,
C13H28 + 10O2 → 2CO2 + 2CO + 8C + 14H2O
(c) incomplete  6.(a) 3C(s) + 4H2(g) → C3H8(g) + energy
(b) C3H8(g) + 5O2(g) → 3CO2(g) + 4H2O(g) + energy
7.(b) energy + 2C(s) + 2H2(g) →
C2H4(g), C2H4(g) + 3O2(g) → 2CO2(g) + 2H2O(g) + energy
8. 6.2 × 103J  9. −4.6 × 103J 11.(a) +4.22 kJ, +4.6 kJ
12.(a) m = Q/c(cid:3)T (b) c = Q/m(cid:3)T (c) (cid:3)T = Q/mc
13.(a) TI = Tf − Q/mc (b) Tf = TI + Q/mc 14. 2.14 × 105 J
15. 0.7900 J/g•˚C, granite  16. 12.1 J/g•˚C  17. 15.5•˚C
18. −2.30 × 103 J  19. 1.26 × 104 J  20. 661 J/g
21.(a) −2.2 × 104 J, 2.2 × 104 J (b) 8.0 J/g•˚C
22.(a) C = Q/(cid:3)T (b) (cid:3)T = Q/C (c) Tf = TI + Q/C
(d) Ti = Tf − Q/C 23. −20.3 kJ/g  24.(a) 100 g (b) 8.75 kJ/˚C
Section Review: 14.1: 3.(a) C7H16 + 11O2 → 7CO2 + 8H2O
(b) C5H10 + 6O2 → 3CO2 + CO + C + 5H2O
4. CH4 + 2O2 → CO2 + 2H2O, 4CH4 + 6O2 →
CO2 + 2CO + C + 8H2O 6.(a) 2C2H6 + 7O2 →
4CO2 + 6H2O (b) 54 g (c) 392 L  14.2: 1.(a) endothermic,
net energy is absorbed, formation of ethyne (acetylene)
(b) exothermic, net energy is released, combustion of
methane  4.(a) endothermic  5. 197 kJ/mol
14.3: 3.(a) −4.54 × 103 J  4.(a) 38.1 J (b) 76.2 J (c) 76.2 J
5.(a) 0.237 J/g•˚C (b) 3.43˚C  6. copper  14.4: 3. −39.8 kJ
4. −3.1 × 103 J  5. 9.63 Cal, yes
14.5: 6.(a) S8 + 8O2 → 8SO2, S8 + 12O2 → 8SO3,
2NO + O2 → 2NO2 , SO2 + H2O → H2SO3,
SO3 + H2O → H2SO4, 2NO2 + H2O → HNO3 + HNO2
Chapter 14  Energy Trapped in Hydrocarbons • MHR 629
U N I T   5   Project
Consumer Chemistry
Background
As a consumer, you are continually being exposed to
new products. Some of these products can be contro-
versial. For example, foods such as tomatoes and
soybeans are genetically modiﬁed organisms (GMOs).
As a citizen of the world, it is your responsibility to
become informed. You should know what is in the
products you use. You should understand how to use
them appropriately and safely, and how to dispose of
them in a responsible manner.
Your project should include as many of these parts
as possible. Alternatively, assign one part to each team
working on a common product.
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
A creative and visually pleasing format (Use origi-
nal artwork/graphics, and/or images taken from
web sites, CD ROMS, or reference books.)
A description of all the ingredients in the product
(Give the common or IUPAC names, molecular or
ionic formulae, and structural diagrams for each
ingredient.)
A description of the packaging material (Give the
common or IUPAC names, molecular or ionic for-
mulae, and structural diagrams for the packaging
materials. Include recycling information.)
Any interesting historical information related to
the project
Environmental or health/safety concerns related to
speciﬁc ingredients or components of the product
and/or packaging
A description of how the product is manufactured
A list of the references you used to obtain
information
Challenge
Choose a common consumer item from the food, drug,
or hardware department of a local supermarket. Your
teacher may suggest a range of suitable products. If
you choose an item that is not from one of these
departments, your teacher must approve your choice.
Your task is to communicate (using text and graphics)
the chemical nature of the consumer product, and its
container or packaging.
Materials
If you choose to make a poster or pamphlet, you will
need art supplies and construction paper. You may
need other materials if you choose a different presenta-
tion format.
Design Criteria
Your project can take the form of a pamphlet, poster,
multimedia presentation, or other format of your
choice.
630 MHR • Unit 5  Hydrocarbons and Energy
Action Plan
1
Decide whether you will work individually, or in a
small group of two or three people.
Assessment
After you complete this project,
Assess the success of your project based on how
well your project meets the design criteria.
Assess your project based on how clearly the
chemistry concepts are conveyed.
Assess your project based on how interesting it is
to others in your class.
2
3
4
5
Decide which consumer product you would like to
research. If you are not sure of the suitability of
your choice, check with your teacher.
Prepare a brief design proposal to answer these
questions:
• Will you create a pamphlet, poster, or other
display?
• What information do you want to include?
• How large will your ﬁnal product be?
If you are working in a group, outline the duties to
be performed. Assign duties to each group member.
Research your project. Look for chemical structures
of ingredients, recycling codes, safety and WHMIS
considerations, additives to foods, etc. You may
wish to research in any of these areas:
• The Internet, at
http://www.school.mcgrawhill.ca/resources/
(Go to this web site. Go to Science Resources,
then to Chemistry 11 to ﬁnd out where to
go next.)
• Your local pharmacy (The pharmacist is a great
source of information on medicinal ingredients.)
• Your local library (Your librarian is a valuable
resource and can direct you to many sources of
information and reference materials.)
• The 1-800 number or web site address given on
the product’s packaging
6
Put your project together. Be creative in your lay-
out. Make sure that all the topics are covered in a
logical fashion. Be sure to include input from all
members of your group.
Evaluate
1
Is your project scientiﬁcally accurate?
Is it complete?
2
3
4
5
Did you include interesting or
unusual information?
Is your presentation colourful and
visually attractive?
Are your graphics clear and informative?
Did you pay close attention to detail?
Are all your references included in an
approved format?
Unit 5 Project • MHR 631
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
Review
Knowledge/Understanding
Multiple Choice
In your notebook, write the letter beside the best
answer for each question.
1. An alkane contains 5 carbon atoms. How many
hydrogen atoms does it contain?
(a) 5 hydrogen atoms
(b) 8 hydrogen atoms
(c) 10 hydrogen atoms
(d) 12 hydrogen atoms
(e) 14 hydrogen atoms
2. An alkyne contains 12 hydrogen atoms. What is
its chemical formula?
(a) C5H12
(b) C6H12
(c) C7H12
(d) C8H12
(e) C9H12
3. Which set of properties best describes a small
alkane, such as ethane?
(a) non-polar, high boiling point, insoluble in
water, extremely reactive
(b) non-polar, low boiling point, insoluble in
water, not very reactive
(c) polar, low boiling point, soluble in water,
not very reactive
(d) polar, high boiling point, insoluble in water,
not very reactive
(e) non-polar, low boiling point, soluble in
water, extremely reactive
4. Which equation shows the complete combus-
tion of propane?
(a) 2C2H6 + 7O2 → 4CO2 + 6H2O
(b) 2C2H6 + 5O2 → C + 2CO + CO2 + 6H2O
(c) 2C3H6 + 9O2 → 6CO2 + 6H2O
(d) C3H8 + 5O2 → 3CO2 + 4H2O
(e) 2C3H8 + 7O2 → 2C + 2CO + 2CO2 + 8H2O
5. Which situation describes an exothermic
reaction?
(a) The energy that is released to form the
product bonds is greater than the energy that
is used to break the reactant bonds.
(b) The energy that is released to form the
product bonds is less than the energy that is
used to break the reactant bonds.
(c) The energy that is released to form the
product bonds is equal to the energy that is
632 MHR • Unit 5  Hydrocarbons and Energy
used to break the reactant bonds.
(d) The energy that is used to break the product
bonds is greater than the energy that is
released to form the reactant bonds.
(e) The energy that is used to break the product
bonds is less than the energy that is released
to form the reactant bonds.
6. Beaker A contains 500 mL of a liquid. Beaker B
contains 1000 mL of the same liquid. What
happens when 200 kJ of thermal energy is
added to the liquid in each beaker?
(a) The temperature of the liquid increases the
same amount in both beakers.
(b) The temperature of the liquid decreases the
same amount in both beakers.
(c) The temperature of the liquid remains the
same in both beakers.
(d) The temperature change of the liquid in
Beaker B is twice as large as the temperature
change of the liquid in Beaker A.
(e) The temperature change of the liquid in
Beaker B is one half as large as the tempera-
ture change of the liquid in Beaker A.
Short Answer
7. Copy the table below into your notebook. Fill
in the blanks.
Name
ethane
Structural
diagram
CH3− CH3
Molecular
formula
C2H6
C3H4
Classification
alkane
1-ethyl-3-
methy-
cyclopentane
1, 2-dimethyl-
cyclobutane
CH3
H
C
C
CH3
CH2
CH2
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH2
C
CH3
CH3
CH
CH2
CH3
C4H6
(isomer 1)
C4H6
(isomer 2)
Structural
diagram
Molecular
formula
Classification
Homologous
series
General
formula
Structural
diagram
Name
Saturated or
unsaturated
CH3
CH2
CH
C
CH
CH2
CH3
alkane
alkene
alkyne
cylcoalkane
Name
trans-4-ethyl-
6-methyl-3-
heptene
4-ethyl-3,6-
dimethyl-5-
propyl-decane
8. Identify the error(s) in each structure.
(a) CH3 − CH3 − CH3
(b)
(c)
CH3
CH3
CH2
CH3
(d)
H
C
C
H
CH CH2
CH CH
9. Identify the error(s) in each name.
(a) 2-ethene
(b) 1,2,2-trimethylpropane
(c) 3, 5-dimethyl-4-ethyl-4-hexene
(d) 4-ethyl-2-pentene
10. Copy the table below into your notebook.
Complete it as follows:
• Write the general formulas for the
alkane, alkene, alkyne, and cycloalkane
homologous series.
• Draw the structural diagram for the third
member of each homologous series. Hint:
The ﬁrst member of the alkene series is
ethene, C2H4.
• Name the compound you drew.
• Indicate whether the compound you drew is
saturated or unsaturated.
11. Four fuels are listed in the table below. Equal
masses of these fuels are burned completely.
Fuel
Heat of combustion
at SATP (kJ/mol)
octane, C8H18((cid:2))
methane, CH4(g)
ethanol, C2H5OH((cid:2))
hydrogen H2(g)
5513
890
1367
285
(a) Put the fuels in order, from greatest to least
amount of energy provided.
(b) Write a balanced chemical equation for the
complete combustion of each fuel.
(c) Suggest one beneﬁt and one risk of using
hydrocarbon fuels.
12. You are given a 70 g sample of each of the fol-
lowing metals, all at 25˚C. You heat each metal
under identical conditions. Which metal will
be ﬁrst to reach 30˚C? Which will be last?
Explain your reasoning.
Metal
Platinum
Titanium
Zinc
Specific Heat
Capacity (J/g•˚C)
0.133
0.528
0.388
Inquiry
13. Design an investigation to differentiate between
these two compounds:
CH3(cid:2)CH2(cid:2)CH2(cid:2)CH2(cid:2)CH2(cid:2)CH3 and
CH3(cid:2)CH(cid:3)CH(cid:2)CH2(cid:2)CH2(cid:2)CH3
14. When kerosene, C12H26((cid:2)), is burned in a device
such a space heater, energy is released. Design
an investigation to determine the amount of
energy that is released, per gram of kerosene.
Discuss potential problems with using a
kerosene heater in a conﬁned area, such as a
camper trailer, where the supply of air may be
limited. Support your discussion with balanced
chemical equations.
Unit 5 Review • MHR 633
15. A group of students tested two white, crystalline
solids, A and B, to determine their heats of
solution. The students dissolved 10.00 g
of each solid in 100.0 mL of water in a
polystyrene calorimeter and collected the
temperature data. They obtained the following
data:
Time
Temperature (A)
Temperature (B)
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
15
20.1
25
29.8
31.9
32.8
33
33
32.8
32.5
32.2
31.9
25
18.8
16.7
15.8
15.2
15
15
15.2
15.5
15.8
16.1
16.4
(a) Graph the data in the table above, placing
time on the x-axis and temperature on the
y-axis. Use your graph to answer (b) to (d).
(b) Classify the heat of solution of each solid as
exothermic or endothermic.
(c) From the data given, calculate the heat of
solution for each solid. Your answer should
be in kJ/g.
(d) Is there any evidence from the data that the
students' calorimeter could have been more
efﬁcient? Explain your answer.
16. An unknown hydrocarbon gas was collected in
test tubes. It was mixed with pure oxygen gas
in the following ratios:
Test tube
% gas
% oxygen
1
2
3
4
75
50
33
25
25
50
67
75
ence of large amounts of carbon dioxide indi-
cates more complete combustion.) The follow-
ing results were recorded.
Test tube
Result of combustion
Carbon dioxide test
1
2
3
4
no sound; smoke
and black solid
formed
small pop; less
smoke; less black
solid
loud pop; no
smoke or black
solid
small pop; no
smoke or black
solid
remained almost
clear, so very little
CO2(g) present
turned slightly
milky so some
CO2(g) present
turned very
milky so alot of
CO2(g) present
turned slightly
milky so some
CO2(g) present
The gas may be methane, ethane, or propane.
(a) Write balanced chemical equations for the
complete combustion of methane, ethane,
and propane.
(b) Which test tube indicates the most complete
combustion? Why?
(c) Use your answer to question (b) and your
balanced chemical equations to determine
the most likely identity of the unknown gas.
Support your answer with a clear explana-
tion.
(d) Write one possible balanced equation for the
incomplete combustion of the gas you chose
in question (c).
(e) Both methane and propane are used in
Canada to heat homes. Discuss the possible
consequences if these gases are burned in
furnaces or appliances that do not have
adequate ventilation.
Communication
17. Use a concept map to trace the path of a
six-carbon hydrocarbon molecule as it goes
from its source in the ground, through process-
ing, into a can of paint. Describe each step in
its processing. Explain any changes that the
molecule undergoes.
A match was held up to the mouth of each test
tube to ignite the contents. Afterwards, limewa-
ter was added to each test tube to test for the
presence of carbon dioxide. (Note: The pres-
18. What do “saturated” and “unsaturated” mean
when applied to hydrocarbons? Give an exam-
ple of a saturated hydrocarbon and an example
of an unsaturated hydrocarbon.
634 MHR • Unit 5  Hydrocarbons and Energy
19. Why do alkanes and alkynes, unlike alkenes,
have no geometric isomers?
20. Explain why carbon is able to form so many
more compounds than any other element.
21. Discuss how you can determine whether the
following compounds are alkanes, cycloalka-
nes, alkenes, or alkynes, without drawing their
structural diagrams: C6H12, C4H6, C5H12, C7H14,
and C3H4.
22. Describe the information that is included in the
following thermochemical equation:
N2(g) + 3H2(g) → 2HN3(g) + 92.2 kJ
23. Deﬁne calorimetry. Describe two commonly
used calorimeters.
24. When taking a calorimetric measurement, why
do you need to know the heat capacity of the
calorimeter?
25. Describe two exothermic processes and two
endothermic processes.
26. Compare the following terms: speciﬁc heat
capacity and heat capacity.
(a) Write their symbols and their units.
(b) Write a mathematical formula in which each
term would be used.
Making Connections
27. You will often see numbers on gas pumps that
indicate how efﬁciently the fuel burns. A high-
er number indicates a more efﬁcient fuel. These
numbers refer to the “octane rating” of the fuel.
There is a direct relationship between the
octane rating and the degree of branching in
fuel hydrocarbons. The presence of branches
increases the efﬁciency of a fuel. Arrange the
following hydrocarbon compounds in order of
increasing octane rating: 2-methylhexane,
heptane, and 2,2,4-trimethylpentane. Explain.
28. When walking briskly, you use about 20 kJ of
energy per minute. One serving of a whole
wheat cereal (37.5 g) provides about 126 Cal
(food calories) of energy. Hint: 1 Cal = 4.184 kJ
(a) How long could you walk after eating one
serving of cereal?
(b) How far could you walk at 60 km/h?
29. As you learned in previous chapters, research
has been focused on using hydrogen gas as a
fuel. Hydrogen is being researched as a fuel. It
burns according to the following equation:
2H2(g) + O2(g) → 2H2O((cid:2))
The heat of combustion for hydrogen is
−141.5 kJ/g.
(a) Calculate the energy produced by the
combustion of one litre (0.702 kg) of octane,
C8H8((cid:2)), in gasoline. The heat of combustion
of octane is −41.3 kJ/g.
(b) Calculate the volume of hydrogen gas at
SATP that is required to produce the same
amount of energy as the octane in part (a).
(c) How could hydrogen gas be stored in order
to carry a practical amount in a passenger
vehicle? What possible danger might
this create?
30. Government leaders often use the perspectives
of human health and well-being, the environ-
ment, and the economy to study the risks and
beneﬁts of various fuels and alternatives.
Suppose you are a leader in a developing
country. You need to choose one of these
energy sources to meet your country's needs:
hydrocarbon fuels, hydroelectric power, or
nuclear energy. Write a small report, analyzing
each energy source from the three perspectives
given above. Which energy source would you
choose? Why?
C O U R S E
C H A L L E N G E
Planet Unknown
Consider the following as you continue to plan for
your Chemistry Course Challenge:
• How can you measure the energy content of a fossil
fuel in the laboratory?
• How can you calculate heat using mass, tempera-
ture change, and speciﬁc heat capacity?
• What conditions are necessary in order for a large
amount of fungus to be converted into a fossil fuel?
Unit 5 Review • MHR 635
C O U R S E   C H A L L E N G E
Assessment
Before starting this performance task, work with your
class to design a rubric.
Assess yourself on your ability to transfer the con-
cepts you learned in this course to the new con-
text of this project.
Assess yourself on your ability to apply the skills
and strategies of scientiﬁc inquiry.
Assess yourself on how well you communicated
your results to your audience.
Assess your ability to propose practical solutions
to science- and technology-based problems.
Planet Unknown
It is the year 3000, and space travel is common-
place. Nearly one trillion human beings inhabit
the Milky Way galaxy now. They reside on thou-
sands of planets that have been made habitable.
You are part of a scientiﬁc team that has been
sent to a newly discovered planet. Your team must
analyse the resources present on the planet. You
will also decide on the technological processes
needed to make the planet a safe place to live.
This will involve removing dangerous toxins from
the environment, and identifying possible sources
of fuel, oxygen, water, and food.
The newly discovered planet has an insulating
atmosphere and temperature range similar to
Earth’s. Each day on the planet is 25 Earth hours
long. Every day contains 8 hours of bright sun-
636 MHR • Course Challenge
light. However, the planet has no ocean, no
surface water, and no atmospheric water at all.
There is evidence that plant life once existed
on this planet. Without surface water, however,
there are no plants living on the planet’s surface
at the present time. A small population of bacteria
may be present.
One side of the planet contains a dry and
rocky desert, covered in part by a large crater.
A thick layer of rock covers the other side of the
planet. Under this rocky surface runs a wide net-
work of lava-tube tunnels. Scientists hypothesize
that a very large meteor may have struck the
planet at one time. The meteor knocked off a
chunk of the planet. This chunk now orbits the
planet as a moon.
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
Choose a name for the planet
you will explore.
Scientists believe that the enormous heat of
this collision decomposed all surface water into
hydrogen and oxygen gases. This explains the lack
of surface water on the planet. The heat also trig-
gered massive volcanic eruptions. These eruptions
resulted in the rocky surface and lava tunnels that
cover half the planet.
Fortunately, organic dirt deposits still exist
underground, in pockets beneath the lava rock.
These dirt deposits would be useful for growing
food. A sufﬁcient air supply, plant nutrients, and
light will also be necessary in order to grow food.
This challenge comprises ﬁve parts, each
featuring a unique challenge of its own. Each
part reﬂects the content of a unit from the
Chemistry 11 course you have completed. As
you work through the parts, you will apply your
knowledge from this chemistry course to make
this planet habitable.
In any hands-on
investigation, carefully consider and carry out
all necessary safety precautions.
CAUTION
Planet Unknown • MHR 637
P r e v i e w
In Part 1, you will use the skills
and content you learned
in Unit 1, Matter and Chemical
Bonding. In particular, you will
be applying your knowledge of
elements and the periodic table.
Part 1: Trends in Elements
Your science team has discovered some elemental metals on the planet.
After testing each element, you have obtained the information given in the
data chart below. You have not yet been able to obtain the atomic masses.
In addition, these are preliminary tests, so the degree of accuracy is not
high. However, you now have enough information to analyse the periodic
trends of these new elements.
Atomic
radius (nm)
Observations
Electronegativity
(Pauling)
Ionization
energy
(kJ/mol)
Melting
point (K)
632
1801
614
537
492
523
1784
1188
1330
1211
1.37
1.20
1.11
1.10
1.12
1.13
532
1295
1.15
537
1321
1.17
545
1352
silvery white; turns
yellow or pinkish in air
lustrous, silver, metallic
silvery white; can be
cut with a knife
silver metal; radioactive
soft, silver, malleable,
and ductile; gives an
intense yellow colour
when used as a
component in glass
bright silver, metallic;
gives a violet, wine red,
or grey colour when
used as a component
the salts of the metal
glow pale blue or green
in the dark; radioactive
bright silver; stable in
air; absorbs infrared
light when used as a
component in glass
A
B
C
D
E
0.164
0.180
0.188
0.189
0.183
F
0.182
0.181
0.180
G
H
I
J
0.199
0.180
silver metal
silver metal
1.19
1.20
548
596
1099
1580
Challenge
Analyse any periodic trends that appear in the data. Trends will be
similar to those in Earth’s periodic table. (Hint: Part of the list belongs
to a group. Another part of the list belongs to a period.)
1
I
Explain the periodic trends seen in the chart. How does your
explanation correlate with Earth’s periodic table? Which trends
on Earth’s periodic table increase from left to right? Which trends
generally increase from top to bottom? Which data do not seem to
ﬁt the trend? Can you suggest a possible explanation?
2
3
K/U
Which metal is more reactive, A or C? Which metal is the least
reactive, F or G? How do you know?
C
Assume that these metals are also present on Earth. Use Earth’s
periodic table to identify a possible element on Earth that matches
each unknown element. Explain your reasoning.
One of the geologists on your
team ﬁnds some fossilized
wood on the planet. She
attempts to ﬁnd the age of
the wood using carbon dating.
In carbon dating, the relative
amounts of carbon isotopes
are compared. Since carbon
isotopes decay at a regular
rate, this information can be
used to ﬁnd the age of carbon
compounds. However, the
isotopic ratios of carbon on
this planet are different from
those on Earth. The isotopic
ratios of carbon on this planet
are 80.2 % 12C, 19.3% 13C,
and 0.5% 14C.
(a) What are the isotopic
ratios of carbon on Earth?
(b) What is the average
molar mass of carbon
on the unknown planet?
638 MHR • Course Challenge
Part 2: Growing Food
In your explorations, your team discovers a particularly large under-
ground cavern. The cavern has a steady water source seeping out of phos-
phate rock. This trickling water picks up a weak concentration of phos-
phate ions as it ﬁlters through the rock. There is plenty of soil in this cav-
ern, although extra plant nutrients will need to be added on a regular
basis as crops are grown and harvested. This cavern may be an excellent
site for growing vegetables and other plants. A source of light will be
needed.
Challenge
To grow sufﬁcient crops, you will need large amounts of calcium
phosphate fertilizer. You can make this compound by combining the
phosphate solution in the stream with calcium cations. Simulate this reac-
tion in the laboratory. Design a procedure to ﬁnd the mass of dry calcium
phosphate precipitate. Mix 50 mL of a 0.10 mol/L aqueous solution of
sodium phosphate with sufﬁcient calcium nitrate to obtain a precipitate.
Filter the precipitate, dry it, and determine its mass.
1
2
3
4
5
K/U
Write the balanced chemical equation and net ionic equation for
the reaction described in the Challenge.
I
Write up a procedure for your investigation, and have your teacher
approve it before you begin. Before starting, discuss appropriate safety
precautions with your teacher. Wear eye protection. Wash your hands
after any contact with chemicals.
C
Prepare a detailed report to share your ﬁndings. Include all of your
observations and answers to the questions in Part 2.
I
In your report, compare the theoretical yield with the actual yield
of the product. Identify possible sources of error in your procedure.
I
If time permits, modify your procedure to improve your results.
Keep a detailed record of the changes you made to the procedure, the
observed beneﬁts, and the new percent yields obtained.
Think and Research
1
2
3
I
Using the reactant amounts from your experiment, what mass of
sodium nitrate would you expect to get from the reaction? How could
you collect this product to test your calculations?
I
Show the calculations you used to ﬁnd the amount of calcium
nitrate necessary to react with the phosphate solution.
I
If 600 L of 0.10 mol/L solution of sodium phosphate were reacted
with 10 kg of calcium nitrate, what would the limiting reagent be?
Extension
4
MC
What other modiﬁcations will you need to make the cavern
suitable for growing plants? For example, would you need to add other
nutrients as fertilizer? Do sources of these nutrients exist on the planet
already? Write the chemical equations for the reactions.
P r e v i e w
In Part 2, you will apply the skills
you learned in Unit 2, Quantities
in Chemical Reactions.
Planet Unknown • MHR 639
Part 3: What’s in the Water?
Life as we know it is impossible without water. Thus it is essential to
establish a good water source. Although there is no surface water of
any kind, the planet does have water — underground! Since this water
is constantly ﬁltered through underground rocks and soil, it contains
many dissolved substances. Some of these substances may be dangerous
to human health. These materials will have to be removed in order to
obtain clean water. How can you ﬁnd out what substances are present
in the water?
Challenge
Your teacher will give you a sample of water representing the planet’s
underground water. Analyse the chemical composition of the water sam-
ple. (Note that the sample you have may not be the same as the samples of
your classmates.)
There are several methods you can use to analyse speciﬁc components
of your sample. These may involve:
• titration
• precipitation
• acid-base tests
• evaporation
• distillation
1
2
I
Choose one or more methods to analyse your sample. Your teacher
will give you further guidance on the methods that are most useful for
your speciﬁc sample.
I
Write up a procedure for your investigation, and have your teacher
approve it before you begin. Before starting, discuss appropriate safety
precautions with your teacher. Wear eye protection, gloves, and an
apron.
3
C
After you have analysed your sample, prepare a detailed report.
Think and Research
1
2
I
What else might you need to know about your water sample?
How could you ﬁnd out?
C
Write a brief report that lists the different methods used to clean
water on Earth. Explain how each method works. Remember to include
diagrams and any relevant balanced chemical equations.
Extension
3
I
A large river of clean, fresh water ﬂows through the largest lava
tunnel. At point B, a small river ﬂows into the larger river. This
−).
smaller river contains dangerous levels of toxic nitrite ions (NO2
To prevent the smaller river from contaminating the larger one, you
have decided to limit the ﬂow of the small river. Safety standards per-
mit a maximum of 3.2 mg of nitrite per litre of water. The ﬂow of the
larger river is 1.2 × 104 L/s. The concentration of nitrite in the smaller
river is 51.2 ppm. What amount of water (in L/s) can be allowed to
enter the larger river from the smaller river?
P r e v i e w
This part will call upon what you
learned in Unit 3, Solutions and
Solubility. In particular, you will
review solutions, titrations, and
acid-base chemistry.
At point A, the river is clean.
At point C, however, the river
is contaminated with the toxic
nitrite ion. How can you contain
the pollution at point B?
640 MHR • Course Challenge
Part 4: Planetary Gases
The atmosphere of the planet is composed of the following gases:
argon (49.2%)
oxygen (30.8%)
nitrogen (14.6%)
hydrogen cyanide (2.3%)
carbon dioxide (1.3%)
ammonia (0.9%)
dinitrogen oxide (0.5%)
hydrogen sulﬁde (0.4%)
Although the atmosphere contains oxygen, it also contains gases that are
toxic to humans. Eventually, you hope to build a settlement inside a huge
synthetic bubble with its own safe atmospheric mixture of gases. First,
your team must ﬁnd an alternate source of oxygen gas. On Earth, plants
supply oxygen through the process of photosynthesis. This may be the
best method of providing a constant supply of breathable air for the settle-
ment bubble on the new planet. But do plants give off pure oxygen, or a
mixture of gases? How much oxygen does a certain mass of plants give off?
Challenge
Design an investigation to collect the gas given off by a certain mass of
Rotela water plants. Find the mass and volume of the gas. Use this data to
calculate the molar mass and molar volume of the gas. (Note: This experi-
ment will take several days to do correctly. If possible, do multiple trials.)
1
2
K/U
Write the balanced equations for photosynthesis and for cellular
respiration.
I
Write up a procedure for your investigation, and have your teacher
approve it before you begin. Before starting, discuss appropriate safety
precautions with your teacher. Wash your hands after handling the
Rotela plants.
3
I
Carry out your procedure. Use the volume and the mass of the gas,
along with the temperature of the water and pressure of the room, to
calculate the average molar mass and the molar volume of the gas.
4
C
Prepare a detailed report to share your ﬁndings. In your report,
compare the molar mass of the gas you calculated to the molar mass of
oxygen. Explain the difference between these values. Identify possible
sources of error in your procedure.
Think and Research
1
2
3
4
I
Your team sends a balloon 50 m up into the atmosphere of the
planet. The balloon contains 20.3 mol of helium gas. At a temperature
of 313 K, the balloon has a volume of 614 L. Assume that the universal
gas constant, R, has the same value as it would on Earth. What is the
atmospheric pressure on this planet at 313 K? What is it at 0˚C?
I
Use the pressure at 0˚C from the previous question. What is the
partial pressure of each of the components of the atmosphere?
I
What volume will 1.44 kg of oxygen gas occupy at the planet’s
atmospheric pressure? (Assume a temperature of 0˚C.)
I
Rearrange the ideal gas equation to calculate the molar volume for
any ideal gas on this planet at 0˚C.
P r e v i e w
In this part, you will use the skills
you learned in Unit 4, Gases and
Atmospheric Chemistry.
During cellular respiration,
plant cells use oxygen to break
down food into energy. Thus,
plants take in oxygen and give
off carbon dioxide. When in the
presence of light, plants also
take in carbon dioxide and
give off oxygen during photo-
synthesis. Does cellular respi-
ration use up the same amount
of oxygen that is given off by
photosynthesis? Do plants give
off a net amount of oxygen,
carbon dioxide, or a combina-
tion of the two? Do research
to ﬁnd out.
PROBLEM TIP
(a) Photosynthesis only
occurs during the hours
of sunlight. At night, only
respiration is taking
place. How might this
affect your investigation?
(b) Remember to include the
vapour pressure of water
in your calculations.
(c) Did the temperature or
pressure change over the
course of the experi-
ment? Design your inves-
tigation to include some
checks on this data.
Planet Unknown • MHR 641
P r e v i e w
This part draws upon the skills
and concepts you learned in
Unit 5. Your main focus will be
hydrocarbon fuels and the heat
equation.
Part 5: Finding Fuel
While exploring the lava tunnels, your team discovers a coal-like
substance. This substance may have originated as a fungus growing in
underground caves. When the meteor hit the planet, the caves collapsed.
Over millions of years, the pressure of the rock converted the organic
material into a fossil fuel.
Challenge
Your teacher will give you a sample of the coal-like substance discovered
on the planet. Design a calorimeter to measure the heat of combustion of
this substance. Decide whether this substance will be useful as a fuel.
1
2
3
I
Write up a procedure for your investigation, and have your teacher
approve it before you begin. Before starting, discuss appropriate safety
precautions with your teacher. Wear eye protection, and use care with
hot surfaces.
I
Carry out your procedure. Calculate the heat of combustion per
gram of your sample.
C
Prepare a detailed report to share your ﬁndings.
Think and Research
Your team has also discovered large pools of hydrocarbon oils on the
surface of the planet. The hydrocarbons seem similar to hydrocarbons on
Earth, and may have been formed in the same way. When analysed, the
oil proves to be composed entirely of compounds with the molecular
formula C7H16.
1
2
3
4
5
K/U
How might these hydrocarbon oils have originated?
K/U
Draw and name all the possible isomers that have this
molecular formula.
MC
What might be done with the open pools of oil? Give two
or three possibilities.
I
On another area of the planet, your team discovers a vent with
gas seeping from it. The gas is found to be 81.7% carbon and 18.3%
hydrogen by mass. The molecular mass of the gas is 44.11 g/mol.
What is the formula of the compound? Name the gas. Draw the struc-
tural formula of the compound.
MC
Suppose you decide to use the coal-like substance and the
pools of oil as fuel. How might your use of these fuels affect the
environment on the planet? What precautions will you take to prevent
environmental damage?
642 MHR • Course Challenge
Part 6: Final Presentation
What other challenges might humans face while developing this planet?
You may want to investigate a different problem. For example:
Unit 1
• Suppose matter on the new planet were not composed of electrons,
protons, and neutrons. Devise a new atomic theory of your own. Explain
how it works in “real life” on the planet. Make up a small, functional
periodic table with new, imaginary elements.
• Develop rules that explain the bonding between your new atoms.
How do these rules affect the reactivity of your elements and structure
of your compounds?
Unit 2
• Suggest reactions that may make life easier on the planet. Research and
perform these reactions in the laboratory. Write balanced equations, and
calculate percent yields in moles and in grams. Explain the purpose of
these reactions in the settlers lives.
Unit 3
• Suggest one or more substances that may already be dissolved in the
water on the newly-discovered planet. Test the solubility of the sub-
stance and plot solubility curves for the solute in water. Explain why
the substance is in the water, and how the substance will affect the life
of the settlers. For example, is it safe to drink? How can it be removed
from the water? Once extracted, can it be used for anything else?
Unit 4
• Choose a reaction producing a gas that may be useful to settlers on the
new planet. Research the reaction, then carry it out in the laboratory.
Collect the gas produced and determine its molar volume.
Unit 5
• Choose three of these compounds: NaOH, anhydrous CaCl2, LiBr, HCl,
anhydrous Na2SO4, AgNO3, KI, NH4NO3, Na2CO3·10H2O, and KMnO4.
Design an investigation to measure and compare the heats of solution
per mole of these chemicals. Choose one chemical based on its heat of
solution, and its safety for everyday use. Come up with a plan or device
that uses the heating or cooling effect produced by this process to help
the planet’s settlers remain comfortable.
Your presentation After preparing lab reports on one or more sections
of this Course Challenge, you will share your results in a class presenta-
tion. Assume this presentation is being made to the Canadian Minister
of Emigration, the Canadian Minister of the Economy, and a group of
business people who may wish to invest in the development of the planet.
• Provide your audience with solutions to the different scenarios and
problems you investigated. Be prepared to respond to other possible
questions and problems your audience (your class and teacher)
may raise.
• To enhance your presentation, try to include two or more of the
following: posters, brochures, drama, music, lab demonstrations, video
or audio clips, charts or graphs, surveys, models, multimedia, or web
pages with links.
Web
LINK
If you have time, work as
a class to create a web
site based on this Course
Challenge. Create a virtual
tour of your planet’s resources,
projected living spaces, and
scientiﬁc adaptations. Share
your ﬁndings with other grade
eleven classes in your
province over the Internet.
Planet Unknown • MHR 643
Appendix A
Answers to Numerical Chapter and Unit Review Questions
Chapter 1
5. (a) 4.0 × 102 mL; 10.0 mL; 1.0 × 102 mL
(b) 1.7 × 102 mL
6. (a) 1.0 × 104 g
(c) 52 cm3
7. (a) 1
(e) 5
(b) 4
(f) 4
8. (b) 5.7 × 103 km
9. (a) 8.73 mL
(c) 2.2 × 102 kg/L
(e) 1.225 × 104 L
10. (a) 6.21 × 104
(c) 6 × 102
11. 1.9 × 104 cm3
12. (a) 2.4 × 101 ˚C
(d) 2
(b) 2.23 × 10−1 m
(d) 1.0 × 103 cm3
(c) 1
(g) 5
(c) 5.700 × 103 km
(b) 1.1 × 105 m2
(d) 0.7
(f) 1.8 × 101 g/mL
(b) 3 × 101
(d) 1.72 × 101
(b) the tenths digit, to the right of the decimal
Chapter 2
6. (a) 7
(e) 79
(i) 28
(m) 9
34Se2−
(b) 7
(f) 2−
(j) 21
(n) 9
(c) 10
(g) Cr
(k) 3+
(o) 9
(d) 3−
(h) 24
(l) 19
(p) 0
7. 32 neutrons; 27 electrons
8. (a) 2.40 × 106
(b) 2.13 × 106
Chapter 3
2. (a) 1.79
(b) 1.35
(c) 1.28
(d) 0.40
14. (a) 1.55; 1.49; 2.43
(b) 2.41; 1.59; 1.39
(c) 1.62; 1.33; 1.26; 1.23; 1.30
16. (a) Ag, 1; Cl, 1
(c) P, 5; Cl, 1
(e) Ti, 4; O, 2
(g) Ca, 2; O, 2
Unit 1
42. (a) 21.5
(c) 19.3 kg/dm3
(e) 298˚C
(b) Mn, 2; P, 3
(d) C, 4; H, 1
(f) Hg, 2; F, 1
(h) Fe, 2; S, 2
(b) 58 cm3
(d) 17.5 g
44. 7, 7, 10, 32S2−, 16, 4He, 2, 4, 2, 38Ca, 18
Chapter 5
9. 40
10. 69.8 u
11. 72.71 u
12. K-39, 95.0%; K-40, 5.0%
13. (a) 2.84 × 10−3 mol
(c) 8.16 × 10−5 mol
(e) 0.126 mol
14. (a) 7.09 × 10−3 mol
644 MHR • Appendix A
(b) 5.17 × 10−1 mol
(d) 4.38 mol
(b) 1.23 mol
(c) 8.93 × 10−2 mol
(e) 2.69 mol
(d) 4.83 × 10−1 mol
(f) 9.27 × 10−4 mol
15. NH3: 17.0, 8.77 × 1023, 1.46, 5.84; H2O: 18.0, 1.58,
8.77 × 10−2, 2.63 × 10−1; Mn2O3 : 158, 1.05 × 101,
4.00 × 1022, 6.64 × 10−2; K2CrO4: 246, 2.37 × 1021,
3.92 × 10−3, 2.75 × 10−2; C8H8O3: 152, 2.00 × 103,
1.31 × 101, 2.49 × 102; Al(OH)3: 78.0, 6.66 × 104,
5.14 × 1026, 5.98 × 103
16. (a) 355
(c) 142
(e) 310
17. (a) 6.66 × 103
(c) 3.75 × 103
(e) 5.74 × 101
18. 2.11 × 1024
19. 1.3 × 1024
20. (a) 131
(c) 2.18 × 10−22
(e) 6.02 × 1023
(b) 74.1
(d) 252
(f) 183
(b) 3.35 × 102
(d) 1.45
(f) 2.05 × 10−2
(b) 131
(d) 7.89 × 1025
21. 3.01 × 1024
22. 6.57 × 1024
23. 4.53 × 1023
24. 192 g
25. Br-79, 55.0%; Br-81, 45.0%
26. (a) 1.00
(b) 84.9
27. (a) 14
(c) 4.2 × 10−3
32. (a) 2.65 × 10−4
33. 101 mg
(b) 16
(b) 1.19 × 10−1
Chapter 6
5. 2.64 g
6. (a) 9.9% C; 58.6% Cl; 31.4% F
(b) 80.1% Pb; 16.5% O; 0.3% H; 3.1% C
7. (a) 6.86 g
8. (a) 63.5%
9. 26.9 g
10. 168 g
11. C4H8O4
12. C12H4O2Cl4
13. (b) C3H8
14. C21H30O2
15. Na2Cr2O7
16. HgSO4
17. (a) Ca3P2O8
18. (a) C18H26O3N
19. V
(b) 1.74 g
(b) 127 kg
(b) Ca3(PO4)2
(b) C18H26O3N
20. C3H6O
21. 7
22. (a) 37.5% C; 4.2% H; 58.3% O
(b) C6H8O7
(c) C6H8O7
23. CO2, 1.37 g; H2O, 1.13 g
28. (a) 0.87 g
29. (b) 60.3%
30. (b) C9H8O4
(b) 0.56 g
(c) 1.0 × 102 kg
Chapter 7
6. 9.60 g
7. 8.0 × 1022
8. 292 g
9. (b) 8.94 g
10. 36.1 g
11. 2.04 g
12. 22.6 g
13. 1.65 g
14. 2.58 g
15. (a) 7.32 g
(c) 7.23 g
16. 53.7%
17. (a) 15.1 g
(c) 14.2 g
(c) 0.407 g S
(b) 34.2%
(b) 0.414 g
(d) 94.3%
(b) 270 g
19. (a) 3.24 g
23. 5.9 × 105 L air or 7.1 × 105 g air
24. (d) 7 × 10−2
Unit 2
29. (a) 6.02 × 1023 molecules; 1.21 × 1024 atoms
(b) 3.0 × 1024 ions
33. (a) 0.167 mol
(c) 3.01 × 1023 atoms
(c) 2.3 × 1024 atoms
(b) 1.00 × 1023 mol
34. 1.94 × 1023
35. 1.20 × 1022
37. 68.1% C; 13.7% H; 18.1% O
38. 2.84 g
42. (a) 0.015 mm
(b) 2.7 nm
Chapter 8
11. 6.25 g
12. (a) 25 g
(c) 2.50 mol/L
13. 96 mL
14. 1.2 ppm
15. 5.67 mol/L
16. 0.427 mol/L
17. (a) 9.89 g
18. (a) 1.7 mol/L
(b) 225 g
(b) 83 g
(b) 1.44 mol/L
19. (a) 0.381 mol/L
(b) 0.25 mol/L
20. 25.0 g
23. (b) approximately 90 g
(d) approximately 76˚C
24. approximately 380 g
25. 40˚C
29. 0.25 ppm; 250 ppb
Chapter 9
13. 1.5 × 10−2 mol/L
14. (a) 2.69 × 10−3 mol/L
(c) 0.999 mol/L
(c) approximately 145 g
(b) 1.88 × 10−2 mol/L
15. 0.104 mol/L
16. K+ = 6.67 × 10−2 mol/L; Ca2+ = 6.67 × 10−2 mol/L;
NO3
− = 0.200 mol/L
17. iron(III) chloride
18. (a) Ca2+ = 4.5 × 10−2 mol/L; Mg2+ = 2.4 × 10−2 mol/L
(b) Ca2+ = 1.8 × 103 ppm ; Mg2+ = 5.8 × 102 ppm
19. 1.4 × 10−2 mol
20. 12.2 g
22. (b) 0.01057 mol
24. (b) 0.09600%
Chapter 10
10. (b) half
13. (a) 1.0 × 103 g
14. 0.800 mol/L
15. 0.020 mol/L
16. 1.0 × 10−5 mol
18. (a) 2.399 mol/L
Unit 3
22. 3.6 × 10−3 g
23. 1.25 × 10−5 g
Chapter 11
16. 0.50 L
17. 37.5 atm
18. 1.31 × 103 torr
19. 21 L
20. 2.8 L
21. −233
22. (a) 16.2 L
(c) 109 mL
23. 2.2 L
24. 50.2 kPa
25. 3.7 × 102 ˚C
26. 62.5 kPa
27. 273˚C
(c) 120.4 g/mol
(b) 55 mol
(b) no (because 9.317%)
(b) 138 cm3
Appendix A • MHR 645
19. 202.6 mL
20. 56.8 atm
21. 368 kPa
22. 374 dm3
23. 49.3˚C
24. 1.5
25. 4.6; 6.2 × 102; 1.03 × 103; −15.8; 15.1; 88
26. 54.7 mL
27. 7.5 × 102 kPa, 4.8 × 102 kPa, 1.10 × 103 kPa,
2.4 × 102 kPa
28. 2.5 × 102 L
29. 78 kPa
30. 22.4˚C
31. 16 kg
32. 7.5 L, 5.0 L
33. 0.34 L
34. 29.5 g
35. 0.69 L
36. C4H10O
37. C10O2H20
38. (a) 9.7 × 1021 molecules
(b) 2.6 × 1021 molecules
(c) 1.2 × 1020 molecules
(d) 3.7 × 1018 molecules
39. 1.94 × 1011 mol
Chapter 14
8. (b) 121 kJ
13. 322 kJ
14. Sample 2
15. 4.93 Cal/g
16. 158 kJ
17. 188 kJ
18. (a) 5.0 kJ/g, 1.2 Cal/g
(b) 3.6 Cal/g
20. 2.51 kJ
21. 9.68 kJ/˚C
22. 39.3˚C
24. 1.1 × 103 L
25. (a) 56.2 mL
(b) 34.9 L
Unit 5
15. (c) −0.75 kJ/g, 0.42 kJ/g
28. (a) 26 min
29. (a) 2.90 × 104 kJ
(b) 2.6 km
(b) 2.52 × 103 L
28. 262 kPa
29. 68 days
30. −68˚C
31. 24 atm
32. 2.3 × 103 L
33. 21 mL
34. 752 mm
35. (a) 1.5 × 102
(c) 750
(b) 1.017 × 103
36. 1.666 × 101, 1.066 × 101
37. (a) 87.5
(b) −148
(b) 2.80 × 102 L
(b) 1.66 g/L
(b) 1.75 g
(b) 628 kPa
(c) 14.3 g
(b) 3.4 L; 3.4 L
Chapter 12
12. (a) 22.4 L
(c) 5.60 × 102 L
13. 6.72 × 1024
14. 50.4 L
15. 3.28 × 10−1
16. 9.68 × 102 kPa
17. 1.80 × 103 g
18. (a) 1.69 g/L
19. (a) 2.40 g
20. (a) 20 g/mol
21. (a) 7.46 mol
(c) 210 kPa
22. 12˚C
23. C2H6O ; C4H12O2
24. C8H18
25. CH3Cl
26. (b) 10 L
27. 4.35 g
28. 3.00 L
29. 7.33 L
30. 1.28 × 103 L
31. 1.70 L
32. (b) 0.206 g; 0.736 g
35. (a) 8.314 kPa•L/mol•K
(b) 0.08206 atm•L/mol•K
(c) 62.36 torr•L/mol•K
36. (a) 68 L
(c) 2.5 mL
Unit 4
16. 0˚C
17. 0.5000 mol
18. 2.0 L
646 MHR • Appendix A
Appendix B
Supplemental Practice Problems
UNIT 1
Chapter 1
1. A student measures the mass of ﬁve different ingots
of aluminum to be 28.6 g, 28.72 g, 28.5 g, 29.0 g,
28.6 g. What is the average mass of these ingots?
2. Label each as either a physical or a chemical
property.
(a) The boiling point of water is 100˚C.
(b) Chlorine gas reacts violently with sodium metal.
(c) Bromine has a brown colour.
(d) Sulfuric acid causes burns when it comes in
contact with skin.
3. The population of Canada is about 30 million.
Express this amount to the correct number of
signiﬁcant digits.
4. How many signiﬁcant digits are in the following
quantities?
(a) 624 students
(b) 22.40 mL of water
(c) 0.00786 g of platinum
10. Using only a periodic table (not the values for
atomic radius), rank the following sets of atoms in
order of increasing size.
(a) W, Cr, Mo
(c) I, Cl, F, Br
(e) Zn, Cd, Hg
(b) As, Ca, K
(d) Cl, P, Mg
11. Using only a periodic table (not the values for
ionization energy), rank the following sets of atoms
in order of increasing ionization energy.
(a) Ar, Xe, Ne
(c) Rb, Li, K
(b) P, Al, Cl
(d) Mg, Be, Ca
Chapter 3
12. Predict whether each of the following bonds has a
primarily ionic or covalent character.
(a) B−F
(c) Na−Cl
(b) C−H
(d) Si−O
13. Draw Lewis structures representing the following
ionic compounds.
(a) KBr
(c) MgCl2
(b) CaO
(d) Mg3N2
5. Round off the following measured quantities to the
14. Draw Lewis structures to represent the following
number of signiﬁcant digits speciﬁed.
(a) 9.276 × 103 m (2 signiﬁcant digits)
(b) 87.45 g (3 signiﬁcant digits)
(c) 93.951 kg (3 signiﬁcant digits)
6. The masses of several samples of titanium were
measured to be: 193.67g; 28.9 g; 78 g; 4.946 × 10−1 kg.
These samples were all put into an overﬂow can
together. The water displaced had a volume of
176.1 mL. What is the average density of the
titanium pieces?
7. Characterize each of the following occurrences as a
physical or as a chemical change.
(a) sugar is heated over a ﬂame and caramelises
(turns black)
(b) blood clots
(c) a rubber band is stretched until it snaps
(d) a match burns
(e) a grape is crushed
(f) salt is put on the roads in the winter, melting
the ice.
Chapter 2
8. Draw Lewis structures to represent each of the
following atoms.
(a) Mg
(d) B
(b) K
(e) C
(c) Ne
(f) Al
9. Draw Lewis structures to represent each of the
following ions.
(a) H+
(d) S2−
(b) K+
(e) Al3+
(c) F−
(f) Br−
covalent compounds.
(a) F2
(c) CO2
(e) NO
(b) CH4
(d) CO
(f) N2
15. For the previous problem, indicate any polar
covalent bonds with a partial negative or positive
charge on the appropriate atom.
16. Name each of the following ionic compounds.
(a) MgCl2
(c) FeCl3
(e) AlBr3
(b) Na2O
(d) CuO
17. Write the chemical formula for each of the following
compounds.
(a) aluminum bromide
(b) magnesium oxide
(c) sodium sulﬁde
(d) iron(II) oxide
(e) copper(II) chloride
18. Write the formula for each of the following.
(a) sodium hydrogen carbonate
(b) potassium dichromate
(c) sodium hypochlorite
(d) lithium hydroxide
(e) potassium permanganate
19. Name each of the following compounds.
(a) K2CrO4
(c) Na2SO4
(e) Sr3(PO4)2
(b) NH4NO3
(d) KH2PO4
Appendix B • MHR 647
20. Name each of the following covalent compounds.
(a) Cl2O7
(c) BF3
(e) N2O
(b) H2O
(d) N2O4
21. Write the formula for each of the following
compounds.
(a) tetraphosphorus decoxide
(b) nitrogen trichloride
(c) sulfur tetraﬂuoride
(d) xenon hexaﬂuoride
Chapter 4
22. Balance each of the following skeleton equations.
Classify each chemical reaction.
(a) Fe + Cl2 → FeCl2
(b) FeCl2 + Cl2 → FeCl3
(c) C4H10O + O2 → CO2 + H2O
(d) Al + H2SO4 → Al2(SO4)3 + H2
(e) N2O5 + H2O → HNO3
(f) (NH4)2CO3 → NH3 + CO2 + H2O
23. Write the product(s) of each of the following
chemical reactions. Also, identify the reaction type.
In the case of no reaction, state NR.
(a) MgCO3(s) →
(The magnesium carbonate is heated.)
(b) Ca(s) + Cl2(g) →
(c) NH4CO3(aq) + KOH(aq) →
(Group I ions, hydrogen ions, and ammonium
ions always form soluble ionic compounds.)
(d) I2(aq) + KBr(aq) →
(e) Na2CO3(aq) + MgCl2(aq) →
(Carbonate compounds form precipitates except
when they contain ions from Group I, hydrogen,
or ammonium. Group I ions form soluble ionic
compounds.)
(f) K(s) + O2(g) →
24. Balance the following chemical equation.
BiCl3 + NH3 + H2O → Bi(OH)3 + NH4Cl
25. Balance the equation.
NiSO4 + NH3 + H2O → Ni(NH3)6(OH)2 + (NH4)2SO4
26. Complete and balance if necessary, each of the
following nuclear equations.
−1e +
92U → 0
(a) 237
90Th → 231
(b) 231
84Po → 4
(c) 215
91Pa +
2He +
27. Write a balanced nuclear equation for each of the
following.
(a) Radon-233 decays with the emission of an alpha
particle.
(b) Actinium-228 decays with the emission of a beta
particle.
28. Complete and balance each of the following nuclear
equations.
11Na +
(a) 23
→ 23
12Mg + 1
0n
648 MHR • Appendix B
(b) 96
42Mo + 4
(c)
(d) 209
83Bi +
2He → 100
+ 1
43Tc +
1H → 29
14Si + 0
0?
84Po + 1
0n
→ 210
UNIT 2
Chapter 5
29. Gallium exists as two isotopes, Ga-69 and Ga-71.
(a) How many protons and neutrons are in each
isotope?
(b) If Ga-69 exists in 60.0% relative abundance, esti-
mate the average atomic mass of gallium using the
mass numbers of the isotopes.
30. Rubidium exists as two isotopes: Rb-85 has a mass of
84.9117 u and Rb-87 has a mass of 86.9085 u. If the
average atomic mass of rubidium is 85.4678, deter-
mine the relative abundance of each isotope.
31. You have 10 mL of isotopically labelled water, 3H2O.
That is, the water is made with the radioactive
isotope of hydrogen, tritium, 3H. You pour the
10 mL of tritium-labelled water into an ocean and
allow it to thoroughly mix with all the bodies of
water on the earth. After the tritium-labelled water
mixes thoroughly with the earth’s ocean water, you
remove 100 mL of ocean water. Estimate how many
molecules of 3H2O will be in this 100 mL sample.
(Assume that the average depth of the ocean is
5 km. The earth’s surface is covered roughly two-
thirds with water. The radius of the earth is about
6400 km.)
32. Calculate the molar mass of each of the following
compounds.
(a) Al2(CrO4)3
(b) C4H9SiCl3 (n-butyltrichlorosilane, an intermediate
in the synthesis of silicones)
(c) Cd(ClO3)2 · 2H2O (cadmium chlorate dihydrate,
an oxidizing agent)
33. How many atoms are contained in 3.49 moles of
manganese?
34. How many atoms are there in 8.56 g of sodium?
35. What is the mass of 5.67 × 1023 molecules of
pentane, C5H12?
36. Consider a 23.9 g sample of ammonium carbonate,
(NH4)2CO3.
(a) How many moles are in this sample?
(b) How many formula units are in this sample?
(c) How many atoms are in this sample?
Chapter 6
37. Pyridine, C5H5N , is a slightly yellow liquid with a
nauseating odour. It is ﬂammable and toxic by
ingestion and inhalation. Pyridine is used in the
synthesis of vitamins and drugs, and has many
other uses in industrial chemistry. Determine the
percentage composition of pyridine.
38. Bromine azide is an explosive compound that is
composed of bromine and nitrogen. A sample of
bromine azide was found to contain 2.35 g Br and
1.24 g N.
(a) Calculate the percentage by mass of Br and N in
bromine azide.
(b) Calculate the empirical formula of bromine azide.
(c) The molar mass of bromine azide is 122 g/mol.
Determine its molecular formula.
39. Progesterone is a female hormone. It is 80.2% C,
9.62% H and 10.2% O by mass.
(a) Determine the empirical formula of progesterone.
(b) From the given data, is it possible to determine
the molecular formula of progesterone? Explain
your answer.
40. Potassium tartrate is a colourless, crystalline solid. It
is 34.6% K, 21.1% C, 1.78% H, 42.4% O by mass.
(a) Calculate the empirical formula of potassium
tartrate.
(b) If the molar mass of potassium tartrate is
226 g/mol, what is the molecular formula of
potassium tartrate?
41. Menthol is a compound that contains C, H and O. It
is derived from peppermint oil and is used in cough
drops and chest rubs. When 0.2393 g of menthol is
subjected to carbon-hydrogen combustion analysis,
0.6735 g of CO2 and 0.2760 g of H2O are obtained.
(a) Determine the empirical formula of menthol.
(b) If each menthol molecule contains one oxygen
atom, what is the molecular formula of menthol?
42. Glycerol, C3H8O3, also known as glycerin, is used
in products that claim to protect and soften skin.
Glycerol can be purchased at the drug store. If
0.784 g of glycerol is placed in a carbon-hydrogen
combustion analyzer, what mass of CO2 and H2O
will be expected?
43. Calculate the percentage by mass of water in
potassium sulﬁte dihydrate, K2SO3 · 2H2O.
44. What mass of water is present in 24.7 g of cobaltous
nitrate hexahydrate, Co(NO3)2 · 6H2O?
45. A chemist requires 1.28 g of sodium hypochlorite,
NaOCl, to carry out an experiment, but only has
sodium hypochlorite pentahydrate, NaOCl · 5H2O in
the lab. How many grams of the hydrate should the
chemist use?
Chapter 7
46. Consider the equation corresponding to the
decomposition of mercuric oxide.
2HgO(s) → 2Hg(l) + O2(g)
What mass of liquid mercury is produced when
5.79 g of mercuric oxide decomposes?
47. Examine the following equation.
C3H8(g) + 5 O2(g) → 3 CO2(g) + 4 H2O(g)
(a) What mass of propane, C3H8, reacting with excess
oxygen, is required to produce 26.7 g of carbon
dioxide gas?
(b) How many oxygen molecules are required to react
with 26.7 g of propane?
48. Metal hydrides, such as strontium hydride, SrH2,
react with water to form hydrogen gas and the corre-
sponding metal hydroxide.
SrH2(s) + 2H2O(l) → Sr(OH)2(s) + 2H2(g)
(a) When 2.50 g of SrH2 is reacted with 8.03 × 1022
molecules of water, what is the limiting reagent?
(b) What mass of strontium hydroxide will be
produced?
49. Consider the following successive reactions.
reaction (1):  A → B
reaction (2):  B → C
If reaction (1) proceeds with a 45% yield and
reaction (2) has a 70% yield, what is the overall
yield for the reactions that convert A to C?
50. Disposable cigarette lighters contain liquid butane,
C4H10. Butane undergoes complete combustion to
carbon dioxide gas and water vapour according to
the skeleton equation below:
C4H10(l) + O2(g) → CO2(g) + H2O(l)
A particular lighter contains 5.00 mL of butane,
which has a density of 0.579 g/mL.
(a) How many grams of O2 are required to combust
all of the butane?
(b) How many molecules of water will be produced?
(c) Air contains 21.0% O2 by volume. What mass of
air is required to combust 5.00 mL of butane?
51. If the following reaction proceeds with a 75% yield,
how much diborane, B2H6, will be produced when
23.5 g of sodium borohydride, NaBH4 reacts with
50.0 g of boron triﬂuoride, BF3?
NaBH4(s) + BF3(g) → B2H6(g) + NaBH4(s)
UNIT 3
Chapter 8
52. What is the molar concentration of the solution
made by dissolving 1.00 g of solid sodium nitrate,
NaNO3, in enough water to make 315 mL of
solution?
53. What volume of 4.00 × 10−2 mol/L calcium nitrate
solution, Ca(NO3)2(aq) will contain 5.0 × 10−2 mol of
nitrate ions?
54. By the addition of water, 80.0 mL of 4.00 mol/L
sulfuric acid, H2SO4, is diluted to 400.0 mL. What is
the molar concentration of the sulfuric acid after
dilution?
55. How many moles of NaOH are in 100.0 mL of
0.00100 mol/L NaOH solution?
Appendix B • MHR 649
56. If a burette delivers 20 drops of solution per 1.0 mL,
how many moles of HCl(aq) are in one drop of a 0.20
mol/L HCl solution?
67. A sample of lemon juice was found to have a pH of
2.50. What is the concentration of hydronium ions in
the lemon juice?
57. What is the mass percent concentration of nicotine
in the body of a 70 kg person smokes a pack of
cigarettes (20 cigarettes) in one day? Assume that
there is 1.0 mg of nicotine per cigarette, and that all
the nicotine is absorbed into the person’s body.
58. The blood of an average adult contains about 2.0 L
of red blood cells. The hemoglobin present in these
cells contains approximately 0.33% iron by mass.
Make a reasonable guess about the density of red
blood cells, and use this value to estimate the mass
of iron present in the red blood cells of an average
adult.
59. Ozone is a highly irritating gas that reduces the
lung capability of healthy people in concentrations
as low as 0.12 ppm. Older photocopy machines
could generate ozone gas and they were often
placed in closed rooms with little air circulation.
Calculate the volume of ozone gas that would result
in a concentration of 0.12 ppm in a room with
dimensions of 5.0 m × 4.0 m × 3.0 m.
60. Human blood serum contains about 3.4 g/L of
sodium ions. What is the molar concentration of Na+
in blood serum?
Chapter 9
61. Write the net ionic equation for the reaction between
aqueous solutions of barium chloride and sodium
sulfate. Be sure to include the state of each reactant
and product.
62. Write the net ionic equation for the reaction between
aqueous sodium hydroxide and aqueous nitric acid.
Be sure to include the state of each reactant and
product.
63. What are the spectator ions when solutions of
Na2SO4 and Pb(NO3)2 are mixed?
64. Iron(II) sulfate reacts with potassium hydroxide in
aqueous solution to form a precipitate.
(a) What is the net ionic equation for this reaction?
(b) Which ions are spectator ions?
65. Write the balanced molecular and net-ionic equa-
tions for the following reactions:
(a) Na3PO4(aq) + Ca(OH)2(aq) → NaOH(aq) +
Ca3(PO4)2(s)
(b) Zn(s) + Fe2(SO4)3(aq) → ZnSO4(aq) + Fe(s)
Chapter 10
66. Name each of the following acids. Indicate whether
each one is a strong or weak acid.
(a) H2SO4(aq)
(c) HBr(aq)
(e) HF(aq)
(b) HNO3(aq)
(d) HCl(aq)
650 MHR • Appendix B
68. How many millilitres of sodium hydroxide solution
are required to neutralize 20 mL of 1.0 mol/L acetic
acid if 32 mL of the same sodium hydroxide solution
neutralized 20 mL of 1.0 mol/L hydrochloric acid?
69. What are the concentrations of hydrogen ions and
hydroxide ions in a solution that has a pH of 5?
70. What is the pH of a 1.0 × 10−5 mol/L Ca(OH)2
(calcium hydroxide) solution?
71. How many moles of calcium hydroxide will be neu-
tralized by one mole of hydrochloric acid, according
to the following equation?
Ca(OH)2(s) + 2HCl(aq) → CaCl2(aq) + 2H2O(l)
72. In an experiment, 50.0 mL of 0.0800 mol/L NaOH is
titrated by the addition of 0.0500 mol/L HNO3. What
is the hydroxide ion concentration after 30.0 mL of
HNO3 solution has been added?
73. A100 mL volume of 0.200 mol/L HCl was placed in
a ﬂask. What volume of 0.400 mol/L NaOH solution
must be added to bring the solution to a pH of 7.0?
74. What is the pH of a solution in which 2.0 × 10−4 mol
of HCl is dissolved in enough distilled water to
make 300 mL of solution?
75. What is the pH of a solution containing 2.5 g of
NaOH dissolved in 100 mL of water?
+
(aq)
(aq) +
(aq) + F−
(aq)
(aq) + CN−
76. For each of the following reactions, identify the acid,
the base, the conjugate base, and the conjugate acid:
(a) HF(aq) + NH3(aq) → NH4+
3+
(b) Fe(H2O)6
H3O+
+
(c) NH4
(d) (CH3)3N(aq) + H2O(l) → (CH3)3NH+
(aq) + H2O(l) → Fe(H2O)5(OH)2
(aq) → HCN(aq) + NH3(aq)
(aq)
77. A solution was prepared by mixing 70.0 mL of
4.00 mo/L HCl(aq) and 30.0 mL of 8.00 mol/L
HNO3(aq). Water was then added until the ﬁnal
volume was 500 mL. Calculate [H+] and ﬁnd the pH
of the solution.
(aq) + OH−
UNIT 4
Chapter 11
78. The gas in a large balloon occupies 30.0 L at a
pressure of 300 kPa. If the  temperature is kept
constant at 300 K, what volume will the balloon
be at a pressure of 1200 kPa?
79. A gas occupies a 2.0 L container at 25˚C and
300 kPa pressure. If the gas is transferred to a 3.0 L
container at the same temperature, what will be the
new pressure?
80. If the volume of a given amount of gas is tripled
while the temperature remains constant, what will
be the new pressure of the gas, relative to the initial
pressure?
81. To what temperature must an ideal gas at 27˚C be
cooled to reduce its volume by one third? In other
words, the new volume will be  2
volume.
3 the original
82. If 2.0 L of gas in a piston at 400 K is expanded to
3.0 L while keeping the pressure constant, what is
the ﬁnal temperature of the gas in kelvins?
83. If a certain mass of gas occupies 55 cm3 at 303 K
and 780 mm Hg, what is its volume in L at SATP?
84. If 1.00 L of helium gas at 20˚C and 100 kPa is forced
into a 250 mL container and subjected to a pressure
of 400.0 kPa, what will be the new temperature of
the gas?
85. A mixture of gases contains equal masses of H2, O2
and CH4. If the partial pressure of CH4 is 80 kPa,
what is the partial pressure of H2?
86. The volume of an automobile tire does not change
appreciably when the car is driven. Before starting
on a journey, a tire contains air at 220 kPa and 20˚C.
After being driven for an hour, the tire and the air
in it become warmer and the pressure increases to
240 kPa. What is the temperature of the air inside
the tire?
87. The gases inside a balloon exerted a total pressure
of 150.0 kPa on the walls of the balloon. Seventy-ﬁve
percent of the gas was nitrogen and twelve
percent was oxygen. There was also some water
vapour, which exerted a pressure of 2.4 kPa and
some carbon dioxide. Calculate the pressure exerted
by the CO2 gas.
Chapter 12
88. A container holds one mole of gaseous neon at
a certain temperature and pressure. A second,
identical container holds gaseous nitrogen at three
times the pressure and twice the temperature (in
kelvins). How many moles of neon are in the
second container?
89. If the mass of a gas is tripled and the pressure is
quadrupled while the temperature is constant, by
what factor will the volume of the gas change?
90. A cylinder with a volume of 25.0 L contains carbon
dioxide at a pressure of 120 kPa and a temperature
of 25˚C. How much carbon dioxide is in the
cylinder?
91. A closed vessel contains the following gases: 6.0 g
of hydrogen, 14 g of nitrogen, and 44 g of carbon
dioxide. If the total pressure in the vessel is 400 kPa,
what is the partial pressure (in kPa) exerted by the
nitrogen in the mixture?
92. One litre of a certain gas has a mass of 2.05 g at
SATP. What is the molar mass of this gas?
93. What amount of gas is contained in a 10.0 L ﬂask at
a pressure of 180 kPa and a temperature of 300 K?
94. When a spark ignites a mixture of hydrogen gas and
oxygen gas, water vapour is formed. What mass of
oxygen gas would be required to react completely
with 1.00 g of hydrogen?
95. Drinking a solution of baking soda (sodium
hydrogen carbonate, NaHCO3) can neutralize excess
hydrochloric acid in the stomach in water. A student
stirred 5.0 g of baking soda in water and drank the
solution, then calculated the size of “burp” expected
from the carbon dioxide generated in the following
reaction.
NaHCO3(aq) + HCl(aq) → NaCl(aq) + H2O(l) + CO2(g)
Assuming the gas will be at a pressure of 101 kPa,
and body temperature is 37˚C, what volume of
carbon dioxide will be generated?
96. Rutherford proved that alpha particles were helium
nuclei. In an experiment 1.82 × 1017 alpha particles
were counted by use of a Geiger counter. The result-
ing helium gas occupied a volume of 7.34 × 10−3 mL
at 19˚C and 99.3 kPa. Use this information to
calculate Avogadro’s number.
97. A compound was found to contain 54.5% carbon,
9.10% hydrogen, and 36.4% oxygen. The vapour
from 0.082 g of the compound occupied 21.8 mL
at 104 kPa and 20˚C.
(a) Calculate the empirical formula of the compound.
(b) Calculate the molecular mass of the compound.
(c) Calculate the molecular formula of the compound.
98. A student collected 375 mL of oxygen gas from the
decomposition of hydrogen peroxide. The gas was
collected over water at 19˚C and 100.2 kPa. What
mass of oxygen was collected? The vapour pressure
of water at 19˚C is 2.2 kPa.
99. Examine the reaction below and answer the
following questions.
C7H16(g) + 11O2(g) → 7CO2(g) + 8H2O(g)
(a) if 10.0 L of C7H16(g) are burned, what volume of
oxygen gas, measured at the same temperature
and pressure, is required?
(b) if 200 g of CO2 are formed, what mass of C7H16(g)
was burned?
(c) if 200 L of CO2 are formed, measured at STP,
what mass of oxygen was consumed?
UNIT 5
Chapter 13
100
. Name each of the following hydrocarbons.
(a)
CH3
CH
CH2
CH2
CH3
CH3
Appendix B • MHR 651
(b) 3-ethyl-5-methyl-hexane
(c) 2-methyl-4-ethyl-hexane
(d) 2,5-dimethylheptane
(e) 3,6-dimethylheptane
(f) 2,3,4-trimethylpentane
104
105
. Draw and name three structural isomers of C6H14.
. Name the following alkenes and alkynes.
(a)
CH2
CH CH
CH CH3
(b)
CH3
C
C
CH2
CH3
(c)
CH2
CH
CH
CH2
CH
CH2
CH3
(d)
CH3
CH
CH
CH2
CH2
C
C
CH3
(e)
CH2
CH
CH3
CH2
C
C
CH2
CH CH3
(f)
CH3
CH
CH2
C
CH
CH3
(g)
H2
C
CH
CH
CH2
CH2
−
CH
−
CH2
CH3
(h)
CH3
CH
CH
CH2
C
CH2
CH3
CH
CH3
CH3
106
. Examine the following compounds. Correct any
ﬂaws that you see in the structural diagrams.
(a) Is this compound 4-ethyl-2-methylpentane?
CH3
CH2
CH3
CH
CH2
CH CH2
CH3
CH3
(b)
CH3
CH3
CH
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH3
(c)
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH
CH3
(d)
CH3
CH3
CH2
CH3
CH2
CH2
C
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH
CH3
CH3
(e)
CH3
CH3
CH
CH2
CH2
CH3
(f)
CH3
CH3CH3
CH
CH2
CH
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
101
. Draw condensed structural diagrams for each of the
following compounds.
(a) 2-ethyl-1-pentene
(b) 2,6-octadien-4-yne
(c) 2,5-dimethyl-3-hexyne
(d) 2-methyl-3-butene
(e) 2-butyl-3-ethyl-1-cyclobutene
(f) 1,4-dimethylcycloheptane
102
. Write IUPAC names for each of the following
compounds.
(c) C5H10
(b) C5H8
(a) C3H6
(d) C5H12
(f) C6H12
(e) C6H14
. Draw condensed structural diagrams for the
103
following compounds:
(a) 2,5-dimethylhexane
652 MHR • Appendix B
(b) Is this compound 4,5-dimethylhexane?
CH2
CH
CH3
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH
CH3
(c) Is this compound 2-methyl-3-ethylpentane?
CH3
CH2
CH3
CH
CH CH2
CH3
CH2
CH3
(d) Is this compound 1-methyl-3-cyclobutene?
CH
CH
CH2
CH CH3
CH CH
Chapter 14
107
. 100 g of ethanol at 25˚C is heated until it reaches
75˚C. How much thermal energy did the ethanol
gain? Hint: Use the information in Table 14.2.
108
. An unknown material with a mass of 18 g was
heated from 22˚C until it reached 232˚C. During this
process, the material gained 751 J of energy. What is
the heat capacity of the unknown material per gram?
109
. A beaker containing 25 g of liquid at room
temperature is heated until it gains 5˚C. A second
beaker containing 50 g of the same liquid at room
temperature is heated until it also gains 5˚C. Which
beaker has gained the most thermal energy? Explain.
110
. An unknown solid was dissolved in the water of a
polystyrene calorimeter in order to ﬁnd its heat of
solution. The following data was recorded:
mass of solid (g) = 5.5
mass of calorimeter water (g) = 120.0
initial temperature of water (˚C) = 21.7
ﬁnal temperature of solution (˚C) = 32.6
(a) Calculate the heat change of the water.
(b) Calculate the heat change caused by the solid
dissolving.
(c) What is the heat of solution per gram of solid
dissolved.
111
. A 100 -g sample of food is placed in a bomb
calorimeter calibrated at 7.23 kJ/˚C. When the food
is burned, the calorimeter gains 512 kJ of heat. If
the initial temperature of the calorimeter was 19˚C,
what is the ﬁnal temperature of the calorimeter and
its contents?
Appendix B • MHR 653
Appendix C
MAIN-GROUP
ELEMENTS
Periodic Table of the Elements
1
(IA)
1
2.20
1312
13.81
20.28
1.01
1+
1-
H
hydrogen
2
(IIA)
3
0.98
520
453.7
1615
6.94
1+
Li
4
1.57
899
1560
2744
9.01
2+
Be
lithium
beryllium
11
0.93
496
371
1156
22.99
1+
Na
sodium
24.31
2+
12
1.31
738
923.2
1363
magnesium
Mg
Atomic number
Electronegativity
First  ionization energy (kJ/mol)
Melting point (K)
Boiling point (K)
6
2.5
1086
4765
4098
12.01
2+
4+
C
carbon
Average atomic mass*
Common ion charge
Other ion charges
Gases
Liquids
Synthetics
metals (main group)
metals (transition)
metals (inner transition)
metalloids
nonmetals
TRANSITION ELEMENTS
3
(IIIB)
4
(IVB)
5
(VB)
6
(VIB)
7
(VIIB)
8
19
0.82
419
336.7
1032
39.10
1+
K
20
1.00
590
1115
1757
40.08
2+
Ca
21
1.36
631
1814
3109
44.96
3+
Sc
22
1.54
658
1941
3560
47.87
4+
2+
3+
Ti
23
1.63
650
2183
3680
50.94
5+
2+
3+
4+
V
24
1.66
653
2180
2944
52.00
3+
2+
6+
Cr
potassium
calcium
scandium
titanium
vanadium
chromium
37
0.82
403
312.5
941.2
85.47
1+
Rb
38
0.95
549
1050
1655
87.62
2+
Sr
39
1.22
616
1795
3618
88.91
3+
Y
40
1.33
660
2128
4682
91.22
4+
Zr
41
1.6
664
2750
5017
92.91
5+
3+
Nb
rubidium
strontium
yttrium
zirconium
niobium
95.94
6+
42
2.16
685
2896
4912
molybdenum
Mo
54.94
25
1.55
4+
717
2+
1519
3+
2334
7+
manganese
Mn
43
2.10
702
2430
4538
(98)
7+
4+
6+
Tc
26
1.83
759
1811
3134
44
2.2
711
2607
4423
55.85
3+
2+
Fe
iron
101.07
3+
Ru
9
(VIIIB)
27
1.88
760
1768
3200
45
2.28
720
2237
3968
58.93
2+
3+
Co
cobalt
102.91
3+
Rh
technetium
ruthenium
rhodium
55
0.79
376
301.7
944
132.91
1+
Cs
56
0.89
503
1000
2170
137.33
2+
Ba
57
1.10
538
1191
3737
138.91
3+
La
72
1.3
642
2506
4876
178.49
4+
Hf
73
1.5
761
3290
5731
180.95
5+
Ta
74
1.7
770
3695
5828
183.84
6+
W
75
1.9
760
3459
5869
186.21
4+
6+
7+
Re
76
2.2
840
3306
5285
190.23
4+
3+
Os
77
2.2
880
2719
4701
192.22
4+
3+
Ir
cesium
barium
lanthanum
hafnium
tantalum
tungsten
rhenium
osmium
iridium
87
0.7
~375
300.2
–
(223)
1+
Fr
88
0.9
509
973.2
–
(226)
2+
Ra
89
1.1
499
1324
3471
(227)
3+
Ac
francium
radium
actinium
Lanthanoids
Actinoids
58
1.12
527
1071
3716
140.12
3+
4+
Ce
cerium
90
1.3
587
2023
5061
232.04
4+
Th
thorium
(262)
–
(261)
4+
104
–
–
–
–
rutherfordium
Rf
105
–
–
–
–
Db
(264)
–
(266)
–
106
–
–
–
–
Sg
107
–
–
–
–
Bh
(268)
–
(265)
–
108
–
–
–
–
Hs
109
–
–
–
–
Mt
dubnium
seaborgium
bohrium
hassium
meitnerium
140.91
3+
INNER TRANSITION ELEMENTS
59
1.13
523
1204
3793
praseodymium
60
1.14
530
1294
3347
neodymium promethium
150.36
3+
2+
62
1.17
543
1347
2067
63
–
547
1095
1802
61
–
536
1315
3273
144.24
3+
(145)
3+
Sm
Pm
Nd
Eu
samarium
Pr
europium
151.96
3+
2+
231.04
5+
4+
91
1.5
568
1845
–
protactinium
Pa
92
1.7
584
1408
4404
238.03
6+
3+
4+
5+
U
93
1.3
597
917
–
237.05
5+
3+
4+
6+
Np
94
1.3
585
913.2
3501
(244)
4+
3+
5+
6+
Pu
uranium
neptunium
plutonium
95
–
578
1449
2284
(243)
3+
4+
5+
6+
americium
Am
64
1.20
593
1586
3546
157.25
3+
Gd
gadolinium
96
–
581
1618
3373
(247)
3+
Cm
curium
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
6
7
654 MHR • Appendix C
*Average atomic mass data in brackets indicate atomic mass of most stable isotope of the element.
Data obtained from The CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics, 81st Edition
MAIN-GROUP
ELEMENTS
13
(IIIA)
14
(IVA)
15
(VA)
16
(VIA)
17
(VIIA)
18
(VIIIA)
2
–
2372
5.19
5.02
4.00
–
He
helium
10.81
–
B
6
2.55
1086
4765
4098
12.01
–
C
7
3.04
1402
63.15
77.36
14.01
3–
N
8
3.44
1314
54.36
90.2
16.00
2–
O
9
3.98
1681
53.48
84.88
19.00
1–
F
10
–
2080
24.56
27.07
Ne
20.18
–
boron
carbon
nitrogen
oxygen
fluorine
neon
26.98
3+
Al
14
1.90
786
1687
3538
28.09
–
Si
aluminum
silicon
30.97
–
15
2.19
1012
317.3
553.7
phosphorus
P
31
1.81
579
302.9
2477
69.72
3+
Ga
32
2.01
761
1211
3106
72.61
–
Ge
33
2.18
947
1090
876.2
74.92
–
As
16
2.58
999
392.8
717.8
34
2.55
941
493.7
958.2
32.07
2–
S
17
3.16
1256
171.7
239.1
35.45
1–
Cl
sulfur
chlorine
78.96
2–
Se
35
2.96
1143
266
332
79.90
1–
Br
18
–
1520
83.8
87.3
36
–
1351
115.8
119.9
39.95
–
Ar
argon
83.80
–
Kr
gallium
germanium
arsenic
selenium
bromine
krypton
5
2.04
800
2348
4273
13
1.61
577
933.5
2792
10
11
(IB)
12
(IIB)
58.69
2+
3+
Ni
29
1.90
745
1358
2835
63.55
2+
1+
Cu
nickel
copper
65.39
2+
Zn
zinc
28
1.91
737
1728
3186
46
2.20
805
1828
3236
106.42
2+
3+
Pd
palladium
78
2.2
870
2042
4098
195.08
4+
2+
Pt
47
1.93
731
1235
2435
79
2.4
890
1337
3129
111
–
–
–
–
30
1.65
906
692.7
1180
48
1.69
868
594.2
1040
112
–
–
–
–
107.87
1+
Ag
silver
112.41
2+
Cd
49
1.78
558
429.8
3345
114.82
3+
In
50
1.96
708
505
2875
118.71
4+
2+
Sn
51
2.05
834
903.8
1860
121.76
–
Sb
52
2.1
869
722.7
1261
127.60
–
Te
53
2.66
1009
386.9
457.4
126.90
1–
I
54
–
1170
161.4
165
131.29
–
Xe
cadmium
indium
tin
antimony
tellurium
iodine
xenon
196.97
3+
1+
Au
80
1.9
1107
234.3
629.9
200.59
2+
1+
Hg
81
1.8
589
577.2
1746
204.38
1+
3+
Tl
82
1.8
715
600.6
2022
207.20
2+
4+
Pb
83
1.9
703
544.6
1837
208.98
3+
5+
Bi
84
2.0
813
527.2
1235
(209)
4+
2+
Po
85
2.2
(926)
575
–
(210)
1–
At
86
–
1037
202.2
211.5
platinum
gold
mercury
thallium
lead
bismuth
polonium
astatine
110
–
–
–
–
(269)
–
(272)
–
(277)
–
Uun
Uuu
Uub
ununnilium
unununium
ununbium
(285)
–
114
–
–
–
–
ununquadium
Uuq
(289)
–
116
–
–
–
–
ununhexium
Uuh
65
–
565
1629
3503
158.93
3+
Tb
terbium
97
–
601
1323
–
(247)
3+
4+
Bk
berkelium
162.50
3+
66
1.22
572
1685
2840
dysprosium
Dy
67
1.23
581
1747
2973
164.93
3+
Ho
68
1.24
589
1802
3141
167.26
3+
Er
69
1.25
597
1818
2223
168.93
3+
Tm
70
–
603
1092
1469
173.04
3+
2+
Yb
71
1.0
524
1936
3675
174.97
3+
Lu
holmium
erbium
thulium
ytterbium
lutetium
(252)
3+
98
–
608
1173
–
(251)
3+
99
–
619
1133
–
californium einsteinium
Es
Cf
100
–
627
1800
–
(257)
3+
(259)
3+
2+
(258)
3+
2+
101
–
635
1100
–
mendelevium
102
–
642
1100
–
No
nobelium
(262)
3+
103
–
–
1900
–
lawrencium
Lr
Fm Md
fermium
(222)
–
Rn
radon
(293)
–
118
–
–
–
–
Uuo
ununoctium
Periodic Table • MHR 655
Appendix D
Expanding the
Model of the Atom
In science, theoretical models and experimental evi-
dence are always linked. For example, early scientists
believed that rotting meat generated maggots. This
seemed reasonable, since exposed meat becomes infest-
ed with maggots. Experiments proved, however, that if
the meat was protected from ﬂies, no maggots appeared.
Thus, rotting meat didn’t generate maggots; ﬂies did.
When a  model fails to explain experimental evidence,
scientists must discard or modify that model. The
model of the atom is no exception.
Emission Spectra
In Chapter 2, you used a diffraction grating to observe
the spectra of various elements. These elements were
sealed in gas discharge tubes. The spectra resulted from
electrons in atoms moving from higher energy levels to
lower energy levels and releasing energy as light.
Each wavelength of visible light is associated
with a colour. When white light is shone through a gas
discharge tube, it produces a line spectrum. A line
spectrum is a series of narrow lines having speciﬁc
colours (energy), separated by colourless spaces. Each
element produces a different and characteristic emission
spectrum. You can see several examples of these spectra
in Figure D.1. Scientists who were thinking about how
to describe the atom needed to take the emission spectra
into account.
400 nm
500 nm
600 nm
700 nm
H
Hg
Ne
400 nm
500 nm
600 nm
700 nm
The top spectrum is the continuous spectrum
Figure D.1
of white light. The others are emission spectra for hydrogen,
mercury, and neon. Each element has its own distinct
spectrum, which is like a “ﬁngerprint” for that element.
656 MHR • Appendix D
Bohr’s Model of the Atom
In 1913, the Danish physicist Niels Bohr developed a
model of the atom that explained the hydrogen emission
spectrum. In Bohr’s model, electrons orbit the nucleus
in the same way that Earth orbits the Sun, as shown in
Figure D.2. The following three points of Bohr’s theory
help to explain hydrogen’s emission spectrum.
1. In Bohr’s model, atoms have speciﬁc allowable
energy levels. He called these energy levels
stationary states. Each of these levels corresponds
to a ﬁxed, circular orbit around the nucleus.
2. An atom does not give off energy when its electrons
are in a stationary state.
3. An atom changes stationary states by giving off or
absorbing a quantity of light energy exactly equal to
the difference in energy between the two stationary
states.
e–
e–
e–
Figure D.2
the nucleus with ﬁxed, circular orbits.
In Bohr’s atomic model, electrons move around
Bohr’s model was revolutionary, because he proposed
that the energy absorbed or emitted by an atom needed
to have speciﬁc values. The energy change was
quantized, rather than continuous. When something
is quantized, it means that it is limited to discrete
amounts or multiples of discrete amounts. Two great
scientists paved the way for this surprising idea.
German physicist Max Planck had already suggested
that energy in general was quantized, meaning that it
exists in “packets.” Building on this idea, Einstein
proposed that light could behave as particles, which
he called photons.
The energy associated with the light in a line
spectrum corresponds with the change in energy of an
electron as it moves up or down an energy level. For
example, when electrons in hydrogen atoms that have
been excited to the third energy level subsequently drop
to the second energy level, they emit light that has a
speciﬁc energy. They emit photons of red light that have
a wavelength of 656.3 nm. These photons cause the red
line on the line spectrum for hydrogen, which you can
see in Figure D.1.
Why a New Model?
So what was the problem? Bohr’s model worked
beautifully, correctly predicting the line spectrum for
hydrogen. It also worked ﬁne for ions with one electron,
such as He+, Li2+, Be3+, etc. The model failed, however,
when it was applied to the emission spectra of atoms
that had more than one electron. Bohr’s model needed
to be modiﬁed, because it was too simple to explain the
experimental evidence.
Sublevels
The spectra of many-electron atoms suggested that a
more complex structure was needed. Notice in Figure
D.1 that spectra for these more complex atoms have
groups of lines close together. The groups are separated
by spaces. The large spaces represent the energy differ-
ences between energy levels, while the smaller spaces
represent energy differences within the levels.
If the electrons are changing energy within the
levels, this suggests that there are sublevels within each
level, each with its own slightly different energy. The
idea of energy levels 1, 2, 3, 4, etc. remains, but each
energy level is split up into sublevels called s, p, d,
and f. Examine Table D.1 to see how electrons are
arranged in sublevels for energy levels 1 to 4.
Table D.1 Distribution of
Electrons in Energy Levels and Sublevels
Energy
level
Number of electrons
in energy level
Sublevel
Number of electrons
in sublevel
1
2
3
4
2
8
18
32
1s
2s
2p
3s
3p
3d
4s
4p
4d
4f
2
2
6
2
6
10
2
6
10
14
Each sublevel has its own energy. Examine Figure D.3 to
see the relative energies of the levels and sublevels.
Energy
Level
3d
3p
2p
y
g
r
e
n
E
3s
2s
1s
Figure D.3
sublevels in energy levels 1, 2, and 3.
This ﬁgure shows the relative energies of
3
2
1
Visualizing the New Model
But where do you ﬁnd the electrons in this new model?
How are the sublevels oriented in space? Several
theories enabled scientists to describe what the newly
conceived atom “looked like.”
Particles with Wave-Like Properties
In 1924, Louis de Broglie, a young physics student,
suggested that all matter had wave-like properties. This
seemed to follow from Planck and Einstein’s idea that
electromagnetic radiation has matter-like properties.
De Broglie developed an equation that allowed him to
calculate the wavelength of the matter wave associated
with any object, from a bowling ball to an electron.
Objects that we can see and can interact with have
calculated wavelengths that are smaller than electrons.
Their wavelengths are so tiny compared to their size
that they do not have any measurable effect on the
motion of the objects.
For very tiny moving particles, however, such as
electrons, the wavelength becomes very signiﬁcant.
In fact, an electron moving at an average speed has a
wavelength even larger than the size of the entire
hydrogen atom!
De Broglie’s theory was proven by experiment
when streams of electrons produced diffraction patterns
similar to those produced by electromagnetic radiation,
which was already known to travel in waves.
Orbitals
In 1926, Erwin Schrödinger used de Broglie’s idea that
matter has wavelike properties. Schrödinger proposed
what is now known as the quantum mechanical model
of the atom. In this new model, he abandoned the
notion of the electron as a small particle orbiting the
nucleus. Instead, he took into account the particle’s
wavelike properties, and described the behaviour of
electrons in terms of wave functions.
The imprecise nature of Schrödinger’s model was
supported shortly afterwards by a principle proposed by
Werner Heisenberg, in 1927. Heisenberg demonstrated
that it is impossible to know both an electron’s path-
way and its exact location. Heisenberg’s uncertainty
principle is a mathematical relationship that shows that
you can never know both the position and the momen-
tum of an object beyond a certain measure of precision.
C H E M
FA C T
The momentum of an object is its mass multiplied by its
velocity. An object’s momentum is directly related to the
amount of energy it has.
Expanding the Model of the Atom • MHR 657
Heisenberg also showed that if you could know either
velocity or position precisely, then the other property
would be uncertain. Therefore, when talking about
where electrons are found in an atom, you cannot talk
in terms of certainties, but only in terms of probabilities.
Schrödinger used a mathematical wave equation
to deﬁne the probability of ﬁnding an electron within an
atom. There are multiple solutions to this wave
equation and Schrödinger called these solutions wave
functions, or orbitals. Each solution provides informa-
tion about the energy and location of an electron within
an atom. Each orbital has a speciﬁc energy associated
with it, and each contains information about where,
inside the atom, the electrons would spend most of
their time. The actual paths of the moving electrons
cannot be determined. However, the solutions can be
used to show where, for each orbital, there is a high
probability of ﬁnding an electron.
Imagine you were able to take many exact measure-
ments of the position of an electron in the 1s sublevel
at ﬁxed intervals. At each second, you would mark the
electron’s position on a graph. After a while, your graph
might look something like the ﬁrst diagram in Figure
D.4. If someone tried to use your graph to determine
where the electron was, they would not be able to state
its position exactly. They would, however, be able to
see that the probability of ﬁnding the electron would be
greater near the nucleus and would decrease farther
away from the nucleus.
The probability graph is “fuzzy,” because the proba-
bility of ﬁnding an electron anywhere in a 1s sublevel
is never zero. The probability becomes extremely small
when it is far away from the nucleus, but it never quite
reaches zero. Therefore, to obtain an exact shape for
an orbital, you need to choose a level of probability.
For example, drawing a contour that encompasses
95 percent of the probability graph results in a spherical
shape, like the third diagram in Figure D.4. In other
words, at any time, there is a 95 percent chance of
ﬁnding the electron within the spherical contour.
1
1
1
These three ﬁgures represent the probability
Figure D.4
of ﬁnding an electron at any point in a hydrogen atom.
The two-dimensional drawing on the left shows that the
electron spends most of its time fairly close to the nucleus.
The circle around the cloud in the centre encompasses
95 percent of the two-dimensional cloud. The diagram on
the right shows the 95 percent probability contour in three
dimensions.
658 MHR • Appendix D
Shapes of Orbitals
The shapes of the probability graphs from Schrödinger’s
wave functions are the shapes of the orbitals in which
electrons reside in atoms. You can visualize orbitals as
electron clouds. The shape of each cloud is based on
probability — it tells you where the electron spends
most of its time.
Examine Figure D.5. The s orbitals are spherical in
shape, as described above. Each of these spherical shells
contains two electrons. There are three p orbitals for
each sublevel, each with a capacity for two electrons.
Each orbital is shaped something like a dumbbell. For
each sublevel, the p orbitals are oriented along the x, y,
and z axes. Therefore, the three p orbitals in each sub-
level are sometimes designated with subscripts to show
this. For example, the 2p orbitals may be designated
2px, 2py, 2pz.
z
z
y
x
y
x
2s
z
y
x
y
x
2px
z
2py
2pz
Figure D.5
orbitals.
This ﬁgure shows the shapes of the 2s and 2p
The d and f orbitals are quite complex in shape. Each d
sublevel contains ﬁve d orbitals, while each f sublevel
contains seven f orbitals.
Filling the Orbitals
Why is it that each orbital can contain only two
electrons? A hypothesis suggests that electrons spin
around their own axes as they move around the nucle-
us, generating magnetic ﬁelds. They can spin either in
a positive direction or in a negative direction. In 1925,
Wolfgang Pauli proposed that only two electrons of
opposite spin could occupy an orbital. This idea became
known as the Pauli exclusion principle.
How do electrons ﬁll orbitals within atoms? They do
so in such a way as to minimize the potential energy of
the atom.
1. They will ﬁll orbitals with the lowest energy ﬁrst.
The 1s orbital will ﬁll before the 2s orbital, which
will ﬁll before the 2p orbitals.
2. When occupying two or more orbitals with the same
energy (for example, any of the three 2p orbitals),
electrons will half ﬁll each orbital until all are half
ﬁlled before adding a second electron to each one.
This is called Hund’s rule.
You can show how electrons ﬁll orbitals, using
superscripts. For example, a boron atom contains
ﬁve electrons. Here’s how you show the electron
conﬁguration:
1s2, 2s2, 2px
1
How would you show the electron conﬁguration of a
nitrogen atom? Remember Hund’s rule:
1, 2pz
1s2, 2s2, 2px
1, 2py
1
Using the Model
The quantum mechanical model of the atom is useful
for explaining phenomena in addition to emission
spectra. For example, in Chapter 2, you learned about
trends in ionization energy. You learned that, in general,
ionization energy increases across a period. Figure D.6
shows the ionization energy as a function of atomic
number for the ﬁrst 18 elements. In most cases, the
ionization energy follows the trend. There are some
exceptions, however, such as oxygen, boron, and sulfur.
You can use the quantum model of the atom to explain
these discrepancies.
First Ionization Energy versus Atomic Number
Practice Problems
1. Write the electron conﬁgurations for the following
atoms:
(a) carbon
(b) oxygen
(c) ﬂuorine
(d) sodium
(e) silicon
(f) hydrogen
2. Explain why the ionization energy of the following
elements is less than the element that precedes it,
even though its nucleus has a greater positive
charge.
(a) oxygen has a lower ionization energy than
nitrogen
(b) boron has a lower ionization energy than
beryllium
(c) sulfur has a lower ionization energy than
phosphorus
PROBLEM TIP
Keep in mind two things when answering question 2:
(a) A completely ﬁlled sublevel is favourable in terms
of energy.
(b) When removing electrons from the same sublevel,
it is easier to remove an electron from a ﬁlled orbital
than from a half-ﬁlled orbital. In spite of their
opposite spins, the negative charges of electrons
together in a ﬁlled orbital repel each other more
than those in half-ﬁlled orbitals.
3. Explain why Bohr’s model of the atom explained
emission spectra for one-electron atoms, but failed
to explain emission spectra for many-electron atoms.
3000
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
)
l
o
m
/
J
k
(
y
g
r
e
n
E
n
o
i
t
a
z
i
n
o
I
t
s
r
i
F
He
Ne
N F
H
Be
O
C
B
Li
Mg
Al
Na
0
2
4
8
12
6
Atomic number
10
Ar
P
Si
Cl
S
14
16
18
This graph shows the relationship between
Figure D.6
ﬁrst ionization energy and atomic number for the ﬁrst
18 elements.
Expanding the Model of the Atom • MHR 659
Appendix E
Math and Chemistry
In chemistry, quantities and values are often very, very
large or very, very small. One mole of H2O contains a
huge number (602 214 199 000 000 000 000 000) of
molecules. The mass of each molecule is minuscule
(0.000 000 000 000 000 000 000 029 9 g). To calculate
the mass of one mole of H2O using the above data, you
multiply the number of molecules in a mole by the mass
of an individual molecule. Imagine doing this by hand:
602 214 199 000 000 000 000 000
× 0.000 000 000 000 000 000 000 029 9 g
18.0062045501 g
There is another problem with writing all these zeros:
It implies that they are all signiﬁcant digits. Yet the non-
ﬁnal zeros to the right of the decimal point in the mass
of an H2O molecule are used as placeholders. They are
not signiﬁcant digits. There are only three
signiﬁcant digits in
0.000 000 000 000 000 000 000 029 9 g
Scientiﬁc Notation
To simplify reporting large numbers and doing calcula-
tions, you can use scientiﬁc notation. As you learned in
an earlier mathematics course, scientiﬁc notation works
by using powers of 10 as multipliers.
The number of particles in one mole of a substance
(the Avogadro constant ) is often rounded down to
602 000 000 000 000 000 000 000. When performing
calculations, however, this number is still too unwieldy.
To simplify it, you can express it as a number between
1 and 10, multiplied by factors of 10. To do this, move
the decimal point behind the left-most non-zero digit,
counting the number of places that the decimal point
moves. The number of places moved is the exponent for
the base 10.
6.02 000 000 000 000 000 000 000.
23 21
6.02 × 1023
Figure E.1
18
15
12
9
6
3
The decimal point moves to the left.
Numbers less than 1 are converted into scientiﬁc
notation by moving the decimal point to the right of the
left-most non-zero digit. The exponent is expressed as a
negative power of 10.
0.000 000 000 000 000 000 000 02.9 9 g
3
6
9
12
15
18
21
2.99 × 10−23
Figure E.2
The decimal point moves to the right.
660 MHR • Appendix E
Once you have numbers in scientiﬁc notation, calcula-
tions become much simpler. To ﬁnd the mass of one
mole of H2O, you can multiply (6.02 × 1023/mol) ×
(2.99 × 10−23 g). To do this without a calculator, you
ﬁrst multiply.
6.02 × 2.99 = 17.9998 → 18.0 (rounded up to three
signiﬁcant digits)
When multiplying, exponents are added to ﬁnd the new
exponent: −23 + 23 = 0 .
This gives 18.0 × 100 g/mol. In scientiﬁc notation,
however, there must be only one digit before the deci-
mal place. Here the decimal place must be moved one
place to the left: 1.80 × 101 g/mol.
Figure E.3 shows how to do this calculation with a
scientiﬁc calculator. When you enter an exponent on a
scientiﬁc calculator, you do not have to enter (× 10) at
any time.
Keystrokes
6.02¨23
≠2.99¨23—
=
Display
6.02  23
2.99  −23
17.998
Round to three signiﬁcant
digits and express in scientiﬁc
notation: 1.80 × 101 g/mol
On some scientiﬁc calculators, the ¨ key
Figure E.3
is labelled ´ . Key in negative exponents by entering the
exponent, then striking the — key.
Rules for Scientiﬁc Notation
• When multiplying, exponents are added algebraically.
(2.37 × 104 g) × (1.89 × 10
= (2.37 × 1.89) × 10(4 + (−1))
= 4.4793 × 103 g → 4.48 × 103 g
• When dividing, exponents are subtracted
−1 g)
algebraically.
(9.23 × 106 L) ÷ (4.11 × 104 L)
= (9.23 ÷ 4.11) × 10(6 − 4)
= 2.245742 × 102 L → 2.25 × 102 L
• When adding or subtracting numbers in scientiﬁc
notation, the numbers must be converted to the same
power of 10 as the measurement with the greatest
power of 10. Once the numbers are all expressed to
the same power of 10, the power of 10 is neither
added nor subtracted in the calculation.
(8.22 × 104 cm) + (5.66 × 103 cm)
= (8.22 × 104 cm) + (.566 × 104 cm)
= 8.786 × 104 cm → 8.79 × 104 cm
(9.73 × 101 dm3) − (8.11 × 10
= (9.73 × 101 dm3) − (.0811 × 101 dm3)
= 9.6489 × 101 dm3 → 9.65 × 101 dm3
−1 dm3)
Practice Problems
Scientiﬁc Notation
1. Convert each number into scientiﬁc notation.
(a) 0.000 945
(b) 39 230 000 000 000
(c) 0.000 000 000 000 003 497
(d) 879 × 105
(e) 0.00142 × 103
(f) 31271 × 10−6
2. Add, subtract, multiply, or divide. Round your
answer, and express it in scientiﬁc notation to the
correct number of signiﬁcant digits.
(a) (3.00 × 103) + (8.50 × 101)
(b) (6.99 × 103) + (8.13 × 102)
(c) (1.01 × 101) − (9.34 × 10−2)
(d) (12.01 × 106) × (8.32 × 107)
(e) (4.75 × 10−3) ÷ (3.21 × 10−2)
Logarithms
Calculators have made multiplication and division as
easy as adding and subtracting. Before calculators were
invented, however, what did people do? In 1614, John
Napier (1550–1617) invented logarithms to help people
multiply and divide large numbers.
Why do logarithms make multiplication and
division easier? Recall, from the power laws, how you
multiply and divide powers. To multiply powers with
the same base, you add the exponents. To divide powers
with the same base, you subtract the exponents.
Logarithms are exponents. Therefore, to multiply
large numbers using logarithms, you simply add the
logarithms. To divide large numbers using logarithms,
you subtract the logarithms.
Find the log (for “logarithm”) key on your calcula-
tor. Enter 1000 or 103 into your calculator, then press
the log key. The number 3 will be in the display. Now
enter 10 000 or any other power of 10. Press the log
key. What is displayed for the log of the number?
(The logarithm of any power of 10 is just the exponent.)
How do you multiply one million by one billion,
or 106 × 109, using logarithms? You add the exponents,
or logarithms, of these two numbers: 6 + 9 = 15. The
answer is 1015, a power of 10. This power is called the
antilogarithm of the logarithm 15.
Logarithms may not seem like a major discovery,
but John Napier also evaluated logarithms for numbers
such as 2, 3, 5, and 764. (Table E.1 has more examples
of logarithms.) Enter 2 into your calculator, and press
the log key. The display will show 0.3010, to four
signiﬁcant digits. This means that 100.3010 = 2. Repeat
to ﬁnd the log of 3. The display will show 0.4771. This
means that 100.4771 = 3.
You know that 2 × 3 = 6. If you add 0.3010 to
0.4771, you get 0.7781. What is 100.7781? Enter 0.7781
into your calculator. Find the 10x key. (Usually it is
above the log key, as a second function.) Press the 10x
key. If you round the answer in the display, you will
get 6.
Find the log of 8 and the log of 4. You know
that 8 ÷ 4 = 2. Subtract the log of 4 from the log of
8: 0.9031 − 0.6021 = 0.3010. This answer is the log
of 2: 100.9031 ÷ 100.6021 = 100.3010 = 2 . Evaluate 100.3010
on your calculator by typing in 0.3010 and using the
10x key.
Technology
LINK
Logarithms were used for 350 years to do many complex
calculations. Even today, calculators are programmed to
do mathematical manipulations with logarithms. So, indi-
rectly, we are still using John Napier’s invention.
Table E.1 Some Numbers and Their Logarithms
Number
1 000 000
7 895 900
1
0.000 001
0.004 276
Scientific notation
1 × 106
7.8590 × 105
1 × 100
1 × 10−6
4.276 × 10−3
As a power of 10
106
105.8954
100
10−6
10−2.3690
Logarithim
6
5.8954
0
−6
−2.3690
Notice that numbers above 1 correspond to logarithms
whose value is positive; numbers below 1 correspond
to logarithms whose value is negative. Over the years,
scientists have found logarithms convenient for more
than calculations. Logarithms can be used to express
values that span a range of powers of 10, such as pH.
In Chapter 10, section 10.2, concentrations of acids
are discussed. The pH of an acid solution is deﬁned
as –log[H3O+]. (The square brackets mean “concentra-
tion.”) For example, suppose that the hydronium
ion concentration in a solution is 0.0001 mol/L
(10−4 mol/L). The pH is –log(0.0001). To calculate this,
enter 0.0001 into your calculator. Then press the log
key. Since the logarithm is negative, press the — key.
The answer in the display is 4. Therefore the pH of
the solution is 4.
As stated above, there are logarithms for all
numbers, not just whole multiples of 10. What is the pH
of a solution if [H3O+] = 0.00476 mol/L? Enter 0.00476.
Press the log key and then the — key. The answer is
2.322. Remember that the concentration was expressed
to three signiﬁcant digits. The pH to three signiﬁcant
digits is 2.32.
What if you want to ﬁnd the [H3O+] from the pH?
You would need to ﬁnd 10−pH. For example, what is the
[H3O+] if the pH is 5.78? Enter 5.78, and press the —
key. Then use the 10x function. The answer is 10−5.78.
Therefore, the [H3O+] is 1.66 × 10−6 mol/L.
Remember that the pH scale is a negative log scale.
Thus, a decrease in pH from pH 7 to pH 4 is an increase
of 103 , or 1000, in the acidity of a solution. An increase
from pH 3 to pH 6 is a decrease of 103 , or 1000, in
acidity.
Math and Chemistry • MHR 661
C H E M
FA C T
You may be familiar with two other logarithmic scales:
the decibel scale for sound, and the Richter scale for
earthquake strength.
Practice Problems
Logarithms
1. Calculate the logarithm of each number. Note the
trend in your answers.
(a) 1
(b) 5
(c) 10
(d) 50
(e) 100
(f) 500
(g) 1000
(h) 5000
(i) 10 000
(j) 50 000
(k) 100 000
(l) 500 000
(m) 1 000 000
2. Calculate the antilogarithm for each number.
(g) −3
(c) −1
(d) 2
(e) −2
(f) 3
(a) 0
(b) 1
3. (a) How are your answers for question 2, parts (b)
and (c) related?
(b) How are your answers for question 2, parts (d)
and (e) related?
(c) How are your answers for question 2, parts (f) and
(g) related?
(d) Calculate the antilogarithm of 3.5.
(e) Calculate the antilogarithm of −3.5.
(f) Take the reciprocal of your answer for part (d).
(g) How are your answers for parts (e) and (f) related?
4. (a) Calculate log 76 and log 55.
(b) Add your answers for part (a).
(c) Find the antilogarithm of your answer for part (b).
(d) Multiply 76 and 55.
(e) How are your answers in parts (c) and (d) related?
Linear Graphs
Suppose that you conduct a Boyle’s law experiment.
(See Chapter 11, section 11.2.) You obtain data that are
similar to the data in Table E.2.
Table E.2 Boyle’s Law Data
1/Pressure (kPa−1)
1.00 × 10−2
8.93 × 10−3
7.87 × 10−3
7.04 × 10−3
6.13 × 10−3
Volume (mL)
50.0
44.6
39.4
35.2
30.7
Looking at the data does not tell you much about the
relationship between the two variables: the volume (V)
and the inverse pressure ( 1
data? Put  1
Put V (the dependent variable) on the y-axis. The scale
for  1
P should go from 0 to at least 0.01. The scale for V
should go from 0 to at least 50.0. To plot each point, go
P (the independent variable) on the x-axis.
P ). What if you graph the
662 MHR • Appendix E
along the x-axis until you reach the value of  1
P (such as
0.01). Then go up from this point to the corresponding
value of V (50.0). After you have plotted all the points,
draw the line of best ﬁt through the points. (See Figures
E.4A and E.4B).
Finding a Point on a Graph
y
)
L
m
V
(
50
40
30
20
10
0
0.001 0.002 0.003 0.004 0.005 0.006 0.007 0.008 0.009 0.01
(kPa−1)
1
P
x
Figure E.4A
Drawing a Line of Best Fit
y
)
L
m
V
(
50
40
30
20
10
0
0.001 0.002 0.003 0.004 0.005 0.006 0.007 0.008 0.009 0.01
(kPa−1)
1
P
x
Figure E.4B
Examine the graph in Figure E.4B. You can see that the
points form a straight line that goes through the origin,
(0,0). You can also see that there is a linear relationship
between the volume and the inverse pressure.
Mathematically, this means that the volume is
directly proportional to the inverse pressure, or V ∝  1
P .
To remove the proportionality sign and replace it with
an equal sign, V must be multiplied by a proportionality
constant, k.
1
P
)
∴ V = k(
V = k
P
PV = k
How can you determine the proportionality constant?
Recall, from mathematics courses, that the equation of
a straight line that goes through the origin is given by
y = mx, where m is the slope of the line. Also recall the
equation for the slope of a straight line.
Slope = Rise
Run
This equation is illustrated in Figure E.4C.
Finding the Rise and Run on a Graph
y
)
L
m
V
(
50
40
30
20
10
0
rise
run
0.001 0.002 0.003 0.004 0.005 0.006 0.007 0.008 0.009 0.01
(kPa−1)
1
P
x
Figure E.4C
m =
∆y
∆x
= (y2 − y1)
(x2 − x1)
For this graph, the change in the y values corresponds
to a change in V, from 30.0 mL to 10.0 mL. The change
in the x values corresponds to a change in  1
0.0060 kPa
P , from
−1 to 0.0020 kPa−1.
m = (y2 − y1)
(x2 − x1)
=
(30.0 − 10.0) mL
(0.006 − 0.002) kPa
−1
= 5000 (kPa mL)
The equation of the line is therefore V = 5.0 × 103
P
.
What happens if the data do not give a line that goes
through the origin? The data in Table E.3 came from
an experiment to determine the density of an unknown
liquid. The student forgot to measure the mass of the
container that was used to hold the various volumes
of the liquid.
Table E.3 Mass and Volume of a Liquid
Volume of liquid (mL)  Mass of liquid and container (g)
22
41
65
83
100
58.4
71.7
87.2
99.2
110.6
These data are plotted, as shown in Figure E.5, with
the volume on the x-axis and the mass on the y-axis.
The equation of this line is in the form y = mx + b ,
where m is the slope of the line and b is the y-intercept.
(The y-intercept is the value of y where the line crosses
the y-axis. This value occurs when x = 0.) Thus, the
relationship here is m = kV + b, where the k is the slope
of the line. As before,
k = (y2 − y1)
(x2 − x1)
= (97.2 − 63.8) g
(80 − 30) mL
= 0.668 g/mL
Therefore, the equation of the line is m = 0.668V + b.
If there is no liquid, both the mass and the volume of
the liquid are zero. Notice, however, that there is still a
value for mass on the graph. This is the value of b, the
y-intercept, which is 43.8 g. It represents the mass of
the container. Therefore, the ﬁnal equation is
m = 0.668V + 43.8.
Consider one more example. Two different sets of
data for Charles’ law experiments are given in Table E.4.
Table E.4 Charles’ Law Data
Set 1
Set 2
Temperature (˚C)  Volume (mL)
Temperature (˚C)  Volume (mL)
20
34
42
55
68
150
157
161
168
175
15
26
38
51
80
240
249
259
270
294
The linear graphs of both sets of data are given in
Figure E.6, on the same pair of axes. Since two different
samples of gas were used, there are two different lines
in the form y = mx + b . Notice that the lines intersect at
−273˚C, or 0 K, the theoretical lowest temperature possi-
ble. (The linear graphs for the temperature and volume
of all gases go through this point.) If the y-axis was
moved to this point and a new origin was established
here, then the equations for the lines would be in the
form y = mx. This is what happens when you convert
temperatures to the Kelvin scale.
Graph of Mass and Volume of a Liquid
Charles’ Law Graph
)
g
(
s
s
a
M
110
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
y
rise
y-intercept
run
V (mL)
250
200
150
100
50
10
20
30
40
50
V (mL)
60
70
80
90
T (˚C)
T (K)
−250
0
−200
+73
−150
−100
+173
−50
0
100
50
+273 +323 +373
x
−273
Figure E.5
Figure E.6
Math and Chemistry • MHR 663
Practice Problems
Linear Graphs
1. A spring, 20 cm long, has hooks on each end. One
end is attached to the ceiling. The other has small,
metal blocks, with hooks hanging from it. The
following data are generated.
Mass attached (g)
Spring length (cm)
50
200
300
500
600
20.1
20.4
20.7
21.0
21.3
(a) Which variable is the independent variable?
(b) Which variable is the dependent variable?
(c) Graph these data. Is the graph linear?
(d) Determine the slope and the y-intercept for your
graph. Do not forget to use appropriate units.
(e) Write an equation to represent your graph.
2. An object is dropped off the roof of a building that
is 100 m high. Its position at various times is given
below.
Time (s)
Distance fallen (m)
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
0
1.3
4.9
11
20
(a) Which variable is the independent variable?
(b) Which variable is the dependent variable?
(c) Graph these data. Is the graph linear?
(d) Try graphing distance versus some function of
√
time (such as 1
graph appears to be generated.
time or time2) until a linear
(e) Write an equation from your linear graph in part
(d).
(f) How long will it take for the object to reach the
ground?
The Unit Analysis
Method of Problem Solving
The unit analysis method of problem solving is
extremely versatile. You can use it to convert between
units or to solve simple formula problems. If you forget
a formula during a test, you may still be able to solve
the problem using unit analysis.
The unit analysis method involves analyzing the
units and setting up conversion factors. You match and
arrange the units so that they divide out to give the
desired unit in the answer. Then you multiply and
divide the numbers that correspond with the units.
664 MHR • Appendix E
Steps for Solving Problems
Using Unit Analysis
Step 1 Determine which data you have and which con-
version factors you need to use. (A conversion
factor is usually a ratio of two numbers with
units, such as 1000 g/1 kg. You multiply the given
data by the conversion factor to get the desired
units in the answer.) It is often convenient to
use the following three categories to set up your
solution: Have, Need, and Conversion Factors.
Step 2 Arrange the data and conversion factors so that
you can cross out the undesired units. Decide
whether you need any additional conversion fac-
tors to get the desired units in the answer.
Step 3 Multiply all the numbers on the top of the ratio.
Then multiply all the numbers on the bottom of
the ratio. Divide the top result by the bottom
result.
Step 4 Check that the units have cancelled correctly.
Also check that the answer seems reasonable,
and that the signiﬁcant digits are correct.
Sample Problem
Active ASA
Problem
In the past, pharmacists measured the active ingre-
dients in many medications in a unit called grains
(gr). A grain is equal to 64.8 mg. If one headache
tablet contains 5.0 gr of active acetylsalicylic acid
(ASA), how many grams of ASA are in two tablets?
What Is Required?
You need to ﬁnd the mass in grams of ASA in
two tablets.
What Is Given?
There are 5.0 gr of ASA in one tablet. A conver-
sion factor for grains to milligrams is given.
Plan Your Strategy
Multiply the given quantity by conversion factors
until all the unwanted units cancel out and only
the desired units remain.
Have
Need
Conversion factors
5.0 gr
? g
64.8 mg/1 gr and 1 g/1000 mg
Act on Your Strategy
× 64.8 mg
1 gr
5.0 gr
1 tablet
= 5.0 × 64.8 × 1 × 2 g
1000
×
= 0.648 g
= 0.65 g
1 g
1000 mg
× 2 tablets
Continued ...
Continued ...
Continued ...
There are 0.65 g of active ASA in two headache
tablets.
Check Your Solution
There are two signiﬁcant digits in the answer.
This is the least number of signiﬁcant digits in the
given data.
Notice how conversion factors are multiplied
until all the unwanted units are cancelled out,
leaving only the desired unit in the answer.
The next Sample Problem will show you how to solve a
simple stoichiometric problem.
Sample Problem
Stoichiometry and Unit Analysis
Problem
What mass of oxygen, O2, can be obtained by the
decomposition of 5.0 g of potassium chlorate,
KClO3? The balanced equation is given below.
2KClO3 → 2KCl + 3O2
What Is Required?
You need to calculate the amount of oxygen, in
grams, that is produced by the decomposition of
5.0 g of potassium chlorate.
What Is Given?
You know the mass of potassium chlorate that
decomposes.
Mass = 5.0 g
From the balanced equation, you can obtain the
molar ratio of the reactant and the product.
3 mol O2
2 mol KClO3
Plan Your Strategy
Calculate the molar masses of potassium chlorate
and oxygen. Use the molar mass of potassium
chlorate to ﬁnd the number of moles in the
sample.
Use the molar ratio to ﬁnd the number of moles of
oxygen produced. Use the molar mass of oxygen to
convert this value to grams.
Act on Your Strategy
The molar mass of potassium chlorate is
1 × MK = 39.10
1 × MCl = 35.45
3 × MO = 48.00
122.55 g/mol
The molar mass of oxygen is
2 × MO = 36.00 g/mol
Find the number of moles of potassium chlorate.
mol KClO3 = 5.0 g ×
(cid:2)
1 mol
122.55 g KClO3
(cid:3)
= 0.0408 mol
Find the number of moles of oxygen produced.
3 mol O2
2 mol KClO3
=
3 mol O2
2 mol KClO3
mol O2
0.0408 mol KClO3
mol O2 = 0.0408 mol KClO3 ×
= 0.0612 mol
Convert this value to grams.
mass O2 = 0.0612 mol × 32.00 g
1 mol O2
= 1.96 g
= 2.0 g
Therefore, 2.0 g of oxygen are produced by the
decomposition of 5.0 g of potassium chlorate.
As you become more familiar with this type of
question, you will be able to complete more than
one step at once. Below, you can see how the con-
version factors we used in each step above can be
combined. Set these conversion ratios so that the
units cancel out correctly.
(cid:2)
mass O2 = 5.0 g KClO3
(cid:2)
×
×
(cid:3)
(cid:3)
1 mol
122.6 g KClO3
(cid:3)
(cid:2) 32.0 g
×
1 mol O2
3 mol O2
2 mol KClO3
= 1.96 g
= 2.0 g
Check Your Solution
The oxygen makes up only part of the potassium
chlorate. Thus, we would expect less than 5.0 g
of oxygen, as was calculated.
The smallest number of signiﬁcant digits in
the question is two. Thus, the answer must also
have two signiﬁcant digits.
Practice Problems
Unit Analysis
Use the unit analysis method to solve each problem.
1. The molecular mass of nitric acid is 63.02 g/mol.
What is the mass, in g, of 7.00 mol of nitric acid?
2. To make a salt solution, 0.50 mol of NaCl are
dissolved in 750 mL of water. What is the
concentration, in g/L, of the salt solution?
3. The density of solid sulfur is 2.07 g/cm3. What is the
mass, in kg, of a 345 cm3 sample?
4. How many grams of dissolved potassium iodide are
in 550 mL of a 1.10 mol/L solution?
Math and Chemistry • MHR 665
Appendix F
Chemistry Data Tables
Table F.1 Ionic Charges of Representative Elements
Table F.4 Common Polyatomic Ions
IA
1
H+
Li+
Na+
K+
Rb+
Cs+
IIA
2
IIIA
13
IVA
14
Al3+
Be2+
Mg2+
Ca2+
Sr2+
Ba2+
VA
15
N3−
P3−
VIA
16
O2−
S2−
Se2−
VIIIA
18
noble
gases
do not
ionize
VIIA
17
H−
F−
Cl−
Br−
I−
Table F.2 Charges of Some Transition Metal Ions
1+
silver, Ag+
2+
cadmium, Cd2+
nickel, Ni2+
zinc, Zn2+
3+
scandium, Sc3+
Formula
3−
PO4
3−
2−
2−
PO3
SO4
SO3
2−
CO3
−
−
NO3
NO2
−
−
−
ClO4
ClO3
ClO2
ClO−
2−
CrO4
Cr2O7
2−
C2H3O2
−
Name
phosphate
phosphite
sulfate
sulfite
carbonate
nitrate
nitrite
perchlorate
chlorate
chlorite
hypochlorite
chromate
dichromate
acetate
or ethanoate
Formula
CN−
OH−
−
MnO4
2−
C2O4
2−
SiO3
+
NH4
Name
cyanide
hydroxide
permanganate
oxalate
silicate
ammonium
2−
HPO4
−
H2PO4
2−
HPO3
−
H2PO3
−
−
HSO4
HSO3
−
HCO3
hydrogen phosphate
or biphosphate
dihydrogen
phosphate
hydrogen phosphite
dihydrogen
phosphite
hydrogen sulfate
hydrogen sulfite
hydrogen carbonate
or bicarbonate
Table F.3 Common Metal Ions
with More Than One Ionic Charge
Formula
Cu+
Cu2+
Fe2+
Fe3+
Stock Name
copper(I) ion
copper(II) ion
iron(II) ion
iron(III) ion
Classical Name
cuprous ion
cupric ion
ferrous ion
ferric ion
2+(Hg+)
Hg2
Hg2+
Pb2+
Pb4+
Sn2+
Sn4+
Cr2+
Cr3+
Mn2+
Mn3+
Mn4+
Co2+
Co3+
mercury(I) ion
mercurous ion
mercury(II) ion
mercuric ion
lead(II) ion
lead(IV) ion
tin(II) ion
tin(IV) ion
plumbous ion
plumbic ion
stannous ion
stannic ion
chromium(II) ion
chromous ion
chromium(III) ion
chromic ion
manganese(II) ion
manganese(III) ion
manganese(IV) ion
cobalt(II) ion
cobalt(III) ion
cobaltous ion
cobaltic ion
666 MHR • Appendix F
Table F.5 Solubility of Compounds at SATP
m
u
n
i
m
u
l
a
m
u
i
n
o
m
m
a
m
u
i
r
a
b
m
u
i
c
l
a
c
)
I
I
(
r
e
p
p
o
c
)
I
I
(
n
o
r
i
)
I
I
I
(
n
o
r
i
acetate
bromide
carbonate
chlorate
chloride
chromate
hydroxide
iodide
nitrate
oxide
perchlorate
phosphate
sulfate
sulfide
S
S
–
S
S
I
I
S
S
I
S
I
S
d
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
–
S
S
S
S
S
S
I
S
S
I
S
S
S
S
S
I
S
S
S
S
S
S
ss
ss
S
I
I
d
S
I
ss
I
S
S
–
S
S
I
I
S
S
I
S
I
S
I
S
S
I
S
S
–
I
S
S
I
S
I
S
I
S
S
–
S
S
I
I
S
S
I
S
I
ss
d
Legend
m
u
i
s
e
n
g
a
m
m
u
i
s
s
a
t
o
p
S
S
I
S
S
S
I
S
S
I
S
I
S
d
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
m
u
i
h
t
i
l
S
S
ss
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
ss
S
S
m
u
i
d
o
s
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
r
e
v
l
i
s
ss
I
I
S
I
I
–
I
S
I
S
I
ss
I
m
u
i
t
n
o
r
t
s
S
S
I
S
S
ss
S
S
S
S
S
I
I
I
c
n
i
z
S
S
I
S
S
S
I
S
S
I
S
I
S
I
S = soluble
ss = slightly soluble
I = insoluble
− = no compound
d = decomposes in water
Table F.6 Chemicals in Everyday Life
Common
name
Chemical formula and name
(other names)
Physical
properties
Safety concerns
Comments
acetone
CH3COCH3
2-propanone
acetylene
C2H2
ethyne
clear; evaporates
quickly
flammable; toxic
by ingestion and
inhalation
solvent; contained in some nail polish
removers
smells sweet
highly explosive
burns very hot, with oxygen, in
oxyacetylene welding torches; used to
produce a wide range of synthetic
products
used in Aspirin and related medicines
for pain, fever, and inflammation
ASA
CH3COOC6H4COOH
o-acetoxy benzoic acid
(acetylsalicylic acid)
white crystals
with a slightly
bitter taste
excessive use may
cause hearing loss
or Reye’s
syndrome,
especially in
young people
baking
soda
battery
acid
bleach
NaHCO3
sodium hydrogen
carbonate
(sodium bicarbonate)
tiny white crystals    none
used for baking and cleaning, as an
antacid and mouthwash, and in fire
extinguishers
H2SO4
sulfuric acid
clear and
odourless
corrosive
used in lead-acid storage batteries
(automobile batteries)
NaOCl(aq)
sodium hypochlorite
solution
yellowish
solution with a
chlorine smell
toxic, strong
oxidizing agent
household chlorine bleach; used for
bleaching clothes and for cleaning
bluestone
CuSO4·5H2O
copper(II) sulfate
pentahydrate (cupric
sulfate pentahydrate)
blue crystals or
blue crystalline
granules
toxic by ingestion;
strong irritant
used in agriculture and industry, as a
germicide, and for wood preservation
borax
Na2B4O7·10H2O
sodium borate decahydrate
white crystals
none
main source is mining; used in the glass
and ceramics industries; used for making
Silly Putty and for washing clothes
carborundum SiC
hard, black solid
none
used as an abrasive
silicon carbide
citric acid
(HOOCCH2)2C(OH)(COOH)
2-hydroxy-1,2,3-propane
(tricarboxylic acid)
CFCs
CCl2F2, CCl3F, CClF3
chlorofluorocarbons
(freons, Freon-12)
translucent
crystals with a
strongly acidic
taste
colourless,
odourless gas
none
used in foods and soft drinks as an
acidifying agent and an antioxidant
CFCs are now
banned by the
Montréal Protocol
in the past, were used as refrigerants and
aerosols
charcoal/
graphite
C(s)
pure carbon, in a less
structured form than
diamond
none
soft grey or black
solid that rubs
easily onto other
substances
used as pencil “lead”and artists’ charcoal,
as a de-colourizing and filtering agent, in
gunpowder, and for barbeque briquettes
cream of
tartar
HOOC (CHOH)2  COOK
potassium hydrogen
tartrate
white, crystalline
solid
none
used as a leavening agent in baking
powder
Chemistry Data Tables • MHR 667
dry ice
CO2
solid carbon dioxide
cold white solid
that sublimates
Epsom
salts
MgSO4·7H2O
magnesium sulfate
heptahydrate
ethylene
C2H4
ethene
damaging to skin
and tissue after
prolonged
exposure
can cause
abdominal cramps
and diarrhea
used as a refrigerant in laboratories when
cold temperatures (as low as −79˚C) are
required
used as a bath salt and in cosmetics and
dietary supplements; has industrial uses
colourless crystals
colourless gas
with sweet odour
and taste
flammable
used to accelerate fruit ripening and to
synthesize  polymers such as polystyrene;
occurs naturally in plants
ethylene
glycol
CH2OHCH2OH
glycol
clear, colourless,
syrupy liquid
toxic by ingestion
and inhalation
used in antifreeze and cosmetics, and as a
de-icing fluid for airport runways
Glauber’s
salt
Na2SO4·10H2O
sodium sulfate
decahydrate
glucose
C6H12O6
dextrose, grape sugar,
corn sugar
none
large, transparent
crystals, needles,
or granular
powder
white crystals
with a sweet taste
none
a laxative; used for paper and glass
making, and in solar heat storage and air
conditioning; energy storage capacity
more than seven times that of water
source of energy for most organisms
grain
alcohol
C2H5OH
ethanol
(ethyl alcohol)
clear, volatile
liquid with
distinctive odour
flammable
beverage alcohol, antiseptic, laboratory/
industrial solvent; produced by the
fermentation of grains or fruits
gyp rock
CaSO4·2H2O
gypsum
hard, beige
mineral
none
used in plaster of Paris and as a core
for drywall
hydrogen
peroxide
H2O2
clear, colourless
liquid
damaging to skin
in high
concentrations
sold as 3% solution in drugstores;
non-chlorine bleach often 6% H2O2
ibuprofen
C13H18O2
p-isobutyl-hydratropic acid
white crystals
can conflict with
other medications
ingredient in over-the-counter pain
relievers
laughing
gas
N2O
nitrous oxide, dinitrogen
oxide
colourless, mainly
odourless, soluble
gas
lime
CaO
calcium oxide
(hydrated lime, hydraulic
lime, quicklime)
white powder
prolonged
exposure causes
brain damage and
infertility
reacts with water
to produce caustic
calcium
hydroxide,
Ca(OH)2, with
liberation of heat
used as a dental anesthetic, an aerosol
propellant, and to increase fuel
performance in racing cars
used to make cement and to clean and
nullify odours in stables
limestone
CaCO3
calcium carbonate
lye
NaOH
sodium hydroxide
(caustic soda)
soft white mineral    none
used for making lime and for building;
has industrial uses
white solid, found
mainly in form of
beads or pellets;
quickly absorbs
water and CO2
from the air
corrosive, strong
irritant
produced by the electrolysis of brine or
the reaction of calcium hydroxide and
sodium carbonate; has many laboratory
and industrial uses; used to manufacture
chemicals and make soap
malachite
CuCO3·Cu(OH)2
basic copper(II) carbonate
clear, hard, bright
green mineral
none
ornamental and gem stone; copper found
in the ore
668 MHR • Appendix F
milk of
magnesia
Mg(OH)2
magnesium hydroxide
(magnesia magma)
moth
balls
C10H8
naphthalene
white powder
harmless if used
in small amounts
antacid, laxative
white, volatile
solid with an
unpleasant odour
toxic by ingestion
and inhalation
used to repel insects in homes and
gardens, and to make synthetic resins;
obtained from crude oil
MSG
COOH(CH2)2CH(NH2)-
COONa monosodium
glutamate
white, crystalline
powder
may cause
headaches in
some people
flavour enhancer for foods in
concentrations of about 0.3%
muriatic
acid
HCl(aq)
hydrochloric acid
colourless or
slightly yellow
aqueous solution
toxic by ingestion
and inhalation;
strong irritant
has many industrial and laboratory uses;
used for processing food, cleaning, and
pickling
natural
gas
about 85% methane, CH4,
10% ethane, C2H6, and
some propane, C3H8,
butane, C4H10, and
pentane, C5H12
odourless,
colourless gas
oxalic
acid
HO2CCO2H
ethanedoic acid
strongly flavoured
acid; white
crystals
Pepto-
Bismol
bismuth subsalicylate
calcium carbonate
pink solid or
solution
flammable and
explosive; a
warning odour is
added to
household gas as
a safety
precaution
toxic by
inhalation and
ingestion; strong
irritant in high
concentrations
may cause
stomach upset if
taken in excess of
recommended dose
used for heating, energy, and cooking;
about 3% is used as a feedstock for the
chemical industry
occurs naturally in rhubarb, wood sorrel,
and spinach; used as wood and textile
bleach, rust remover, and deck cleaner;
has many industrial and laboratory uses
relieves digestive difficulties by coating
the digestive tract and reducing acidity
PCBs
polychlorinated
biphenyls: class of
compounds with two
benzene rings and two or
more substituted chlorine
atoms
potash
K2CO3
potassium carbonate
PVCs
(C2H3Cl)n
polyvinyl chloride,
polychloroethene
colourless liquids   highly toxic,
used as coolants in electrical transformers
unreactive, and
persistent; cause
ecological damage
white, granular,
translucent
powder
tough, white,
unreactive solid
solutions
irritating to tissue
laboratory and industrial uses; used in
special glasses, in soaps, and as a
dehydrating agent
none
used extensively as a building material
road salt
CaCl2
calcium chloride
white crystalline
compound
none
by-product of the Solvay process
rotten-egg
gas
H2S
hydrogen sulfide
colourless gas
with an offensive
odour
obtained from sour gas during natural gas
production
highly flammable,
therefore high fire
risk; explosive;
toxic by
inhalation; strong
irritant to eyes
and mucous
membranes
Chemistry Data Tables • MHR 669
rubbing
alcohol
(CH3)2CHOH
isopropanol
(isopropyl alcohol)
colourless liquid
with a pleasant
odour
salicylic
acid
HOC6H4COOH
2-hydroxybenzoic acid
white crystalline
solid
sand
SiO2
silica
large, glassy cubic
crystals
has industrial and medical uses
can be used in different amounts in foods
and dyes, and in wart treatment
occurs widely in nature as sand, quartz,
flint, and diatomite
flammable,
therefore high fire
risk; explosive;
toxic by
inhalation and
ingestion
damages skin in
high
concentrations
toxic by
inhalation;
chronic exposure
to dust may cause
silicosis
slaked
lime
Ca(OH)2
calcium hydroxide
white powder that
is insoluble in
water
none
used to neutralize acidity in soils and to
make whitewash, bleaching powder, and
glass
soda ash
Na2CO3
sodium carbonate
white powdery
crystals
none
used to manufacture glass, soaps, and
detergents
sugar
C12H22O11
sucrose
(cane or beet sugar)
table salt
NaCl
sodium chloride
(rock salt, halite)
cubic white
crystals
cubic white
crystals
none
none
used in foods as a sweetener; source of
metabolic energy
produced by the evaporation of natural
brines and by the solar evaporation of sea
water; also mined from underground
sources; used in foods and for de-icing
roads
Tylenol™ CH3CONHC6H4OH
N-acetyl-p-aminophenol
(acetaminophen, APAP)
TSP
Na3PO4
trisodium phosphate
(sodium phosphate,
sodium orthophosphate)
colourless,
slightly bitter
crystals
white crystals
vinegar
5% acetic acid,
CH3COOH, in water
clear solution
with a distinctive
smell
can be toxic if an
overdose is taken
pain reliever (analgesic)
toxic by ingestion;
irritant to tissue;
pH of 1% solution
is 11.8 to 12
used as a water softener and cleaner (for
example, to clean metals and to clean
walls before painting); has many
industrial uses
none
used for cooking and household cleaning
vitamin C
C6H8O6
ascorbic acid
white crystals or
powder with a
tart, acidic taste
none
required in diet to prevent scurvy; found
in citrus fruits, tomatoes, potatoes, and
green leafy vegetables
washing
soda
Na2CO3·H2O
sodium carbonate
monohydrate (soda ash)
white powdery
crystals
may be irritating
to skin
used for cleaning and photography, and as
a food additive; has many industrial and
laboratory uses
wood
alcohol
CH3OH
methanol
(methyl alcohol)
clear, colourless
liquid with faint
alcoholic odour
flammable; toxic
by ingestion, skin
absorption, and
inhalation; causes
blindness and
death
has many industrial and household uses;
used in gasoline antifreeze and as a
thinner for shellac and paint; can be
mixed with vegetable oil and lye to make
diesel
670 MHR • Appendix F
Appendix G
Alphabetical List of Elements
Element
Actinium
Aluminum
Americium
Antimony
Argon
Arsenic
Astatine
Barium
Berkelium
Beryllium
Bismuth
Bohrium
Boron
Bromine
Cadmium
Calcium
Californium
Carbon
Cerium
Cesium
Chlorine
Chromium
Cobalt
Copper
Curium
Dubnium
Dysprosium
Einsteinium
Erbium
Europium
Fermium
Fluorine
Francium
Gadolinium
Gallium
Germanium
Gold
Hafnium
Hassium
Helium
Holmium
Hydrogen
Indium
Iodine
Iridium
Iron
Krypton
Lanthanum
Lawrencium
Lead
Lithium
Lutetium
Magnesium
Manganese
Meitnerium
Mendelevium
Mercury
Molybdenum
Symbol
Ac
Al
Am
Sb
Ar
As
At
Ba
Bk
Be
Bi
Bh
B
Br
Cd
Ca
Cf
C
Ce
Cs
Cl
Cr
Co
Cu
Cm
Db
Dy
Es
Er
Eu
Fm
F
Fr
Gd
Ga
Ge
Au
Hf
Hs
He
Ho
H
In
I
Ir
Fe
Kr
La
Lr
Pb
Li
Lu
Mg
Mn
Mt
Md
Hg
Mo
Atomic Number
89
13
95
51
18
33
85
56
97
4
83
107
5
35
48
20
98
6
58
55
17
24
27
29
96
105
66
99
68
63
100
9
87
64
31
32
79
72
108
2
67
1
49
53
77
26
36
57
103
82
3
71
12
25
109
101
80
42
Element
Neodymium
Neon
Neptunium
Nickel
Niobium
Nitrogen
Nobelium
Osmium
Oxygen
Palladium
Phosphorus
Platinum
Plutonium
Polonium
Potassium
Praseodymium
Promethium
Protactinium
Radium
Radon
Rhenium
Rhodium
Rubidium
Ruthenium
Rutherfordium
Samarium
Scandium
Seaborgium
Selenium
Silicon
Silver
Sodium
Strontium
Sulfur
Tantalum
Technetium
Tellurium
Terbium
Thallium
Thorium
Thulium
Tin
Titanium
Tungsten
Ununbium
Ununhexium
Ununnilium
Ununoctium
Ununquadium
Unununium
Uranium
Vanadium
Xenon
Ytterbium
Yttrium
Zinc
Zirconium
Symbol
Nd
Ne
Np
Ni
Nb
N
No
Os
O
Pd
P
Pt
Pu
Po
K
Pr
Pm
Pa
Ra
Rn
Re
Rh
Rb
Ru
Rf
Sm
Sc
Sg
Se
Si
Ag
Na
Sr
S
Ta
Tc
Te
Tb
Tl
Th
Tm
Sn
Ti
W
Uub
Uuh
Uun
Uuo
Uuq
Uuu
U
V
Xe
Yb
Y
Zn
Zr
Atomic Number
60
10
93
28
41
7
102
76
8
46
15
78
94
84
19
59
61
91
88
86
75
45
37
44
104
62
21
106
34
14
47
11
38
16
73
43
52
65
81
90
69
50
22
74
112
116
110**
118
114
111
92
23
54
70
39
30
40
**The names and symbols for elements 110 through 118 have not yet been chosen
Appendix G • MHR 671
Glossary
Section numbers are provided in parentheses.
A
accuracy: the closeness of a measurement to an
accepted value  (1.2)
acid: a substance that produces hydrogen ions in
aqueous solutions  (10.1)
acid-base indicator: a substance, usually a weak
monoprotic acid, that changes colour in acidic and
basic solutions  (10.3)
activity series: a ranking of the relative reactivity of
metals or halogens in aqueous reactions  (4.3)
actual yield: the measured quantity of product obtained
in a chemical reaction  (7.3)
aliphatic hydrocarbons: hydrocarbons that consist of
chains or non-aromatic rings; the carbon atoms are
bonded to the maximum number of hydrogen or
carbon atoms  (13.3)
alkanes: hydrocarbons that contain only carbon-carbon
single bonds; general formula CnH2n+2 (13.3)
alkenes: hydrocarbons that contain one or more carbon-
carbon double bond; general formula CnH2n (13.3)
alkynes: hydrocarbons that contain one or more carbon-
carbon triple bond; general formula CnH2n−2 (13.3)
alloys: solid metallic solutions  (8.1)
alpha particle emission: a radioactive process that
involves the loss of one alpha (∝) particle (a helium
nucleus, 4
2He); also called alpha decay (4.4)
anhydrous: a term used to describe a compound that
does not have any water molecules bonded to it;
applies to compounds that can be hydrated  (6.4)
aqueous solution: a solution in which water is the
solvent  (8.1)
Arrhenius theory of acids and bases: the theory stating
that an acid is a substance that produces hydrogen
ions in water and a base is a substance that produces
hydroxide ions in water  (10.1)
atmosphere (atm): a unit of pressure; equal to 101.325
kPa  (11.2)
atom: the basic unit of an element, which still retains
the element’s properties  (2.1)
atomic mass unit (u): a unit of mass that is 1/12 of the
mass of a carbon-12 atom; equal to 1.66 × 10−24 g
(2.1)
atomic number (Z): the unique number of protons in
the nucleus of a particular element  (2.1)
atomic symbol: a one- or two-letter abbreviation of the
name of an element; also called element symbol (2.1)
672 MHR • Glossary
average atomic mass: the average of the masses of all
the isotopes of an element; given in atomic mass
units (u)  (5.1)
Avogadro constant (NA): the experimentally-determined
number of particles in 1 mol of a substance; the
currently accepted value is 6.022 141 99 × 1023 (5.2)
Avogadro’s hypothesis: equal volumes of gases, at the
same temperature and pressure, contain the same
number of particles  (12.1)
B
balanced chemical equation: a statement that uses
chemical formulas and coefﬁcients to show the
identity and quantity of the reactants and products
involved in a chemical reaction  (4.1)
base: a substance that produces hydroxide ions in
aqueous solutions  (10.1)
beneﬁt: a desirable result of an action  (14.4)
beta decay: a nuclear reaction that results in the
emission of a beta (β) particle (electron) from a
nucleus  (4.4)
binary acid: an acid that is composed of two elements:
hydrogen and a non-metal  (10.2)
binary compound: a compound that is composed of two
elements  (3.4)
bomb calorimeter: a device that combusts a substance
in pure oxygen in order to measure the heat of
combustion of that substance  (14.4)
bond energy: the amount of energy that is produced or
absorbed when a speciﬁc bond in a molecule is
broken or formed; measured in kJ/mol  (14.2)
Boyle’s law: the law stating that the volume of a given
amount of gas varies inversely with the applied
pressure, if the temperature is constant: V ∝ 1
P
(11.2)
branched-chain alkane: an alkane with one or more
side-chains that branch off the parent chain  (13.3)
Brønsted-Lowry theory of acids and bases: the theory
deﬁning an acid as a substance from which a
hydrogen ion can be removed and a base as a
substance that can remove a hydrogen ion from an
acid  (10.1)
C
calorie: the amount of energy that is needed to raise the
temperature of 1 g of liquid water by 1˚C; equal to
4.184 J  (14.4)
Calorie: a unit of energy equal to one thousand calories
(1 kcal = 1000 cal) or 4.184 kJ  (14.4)
calorimeter: a device that burns compounds containing
carbon, hydrogen, and other elements in a stream of
oxygen, O2, to determine their composition  (14.4)
calorimetry: the process of measuring changes in
thermal energy  (14.4)
volume of a given amount of gas are inversely
proportional, and directly proportional to the kelvin
temperature of the gas: V ∝ T
P (11.4)
combustion: the reaction of a substance with oxygen,
producing oxides, heat, and light; burning  (14)
carbon-hydrogen combustion analyzer: a device that
uses the combustion-enabling properties of O2 to
determine the composition of compounds containing
carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen  (6.4)
common name: a name for a compound that does not
necessarily suggest anything about the chemical
composition of the compound (e.g., water, baking
soda); also called the trivial name (3.4)
cation: a positively charged ion  (2.3)
competing reaction: a reaction that occurs at the same
Charles’ law: the law stating that the volume of a ﬁxed
mass of gas is directly proportional to its kelvin
temperature, if the pressure remains constant: V ∝ T
(11.3)
chemical bond: the force that holds atoms together in
compounds  (3.1)
chemical change: the type of change that occurs when
elements and/or compounds interact with each other
to form different substances with different properties;
involves the rearrangement of atoms  (1.3)
chemical equation: a statement of what occurs in a
chemical reaction; can be a word equation, a skeleton
equation, or a balanced chemical equation  (4.1)
chemical formula: a representation, in atomic symbols
and numerical subscripts, of the type and number of
atoms that are present in a compound  (3.4)
chemical nomenclature: the system that is used to name
chemical compounds  (3.4)
chemical property: a property of a substance that can
only be observed as the substance changes into
another substance  (1.2)
chemical reaction: a process in which a substance (or
substances) changes, forming one or more different
substances  (4.1)
chemistry: the study of matter, its composition, and its
interactions  (1.1)
chloroﬂuorocarbon (CFC): a compound containing
carbon, ﬂuorine, and chlorine atoms that is
chemically inert in the troposphere, but that is
broken down by solar radiation in the stratosphere
(12.4)
time as a principal reaction and consumes the
reactants and/or products of the principal reaction
(7.3)
complete combustion: combustion in which a
hydrocarbon fuel is completely reacted in the
presence of sufﬁcient oxygen, producing only carbon
dioxide gas and water vapour  (14.1)
complete combustion reaction: a synthesis reaction in
which a compound burns in the presence of oxygen
gas, forming the most common oxides of the
elements in the compound  (4.2)
complete structural diagram: a symbolic representation
of all the atoms in a molecule, showing how they are
bonded  (13.2)
compound: a pure substance that is composed of two or
more elements chemically combined in ﬁxed
proportions  (1.3)
concentration: the ratio of the amount of solute per
quantity of solvent  (8)
condensation: a physical change from the gaseous state
to the liquid state  (11.1)
condensed structural diagram: a symbolic
representation of a compound, showing most atoms
present, and the bonds between carbon atoms  (13.2)
conjugate acid: the particle that results when a base
receives a proton  (10.1)
conjugate acid-base pair: two molecules or ions that are
linked by the transfer of a proton  (10.1)
conjugate base: the particle that remains when a proton
is removed from an acid  (10.1)
covalent bond: a chemical bond in which two electrons
cis-trans isomers: compounds that have the same
are shared by two atoms  (3.1)
formula but different arrangements of atoms around a
ﬁxed carbon-carbon double bond; also called
geometric isomers (13.3)
closed system: a system in which the total amount of
matter remains constant; matter can neither enter nor
leave this system (11.2)
coefﬁcient: in a balanced chemical equation, a positive
number that is placed in front of a formula to show
how many units of the substance are involved  (4.1)
combined gas law: a combination of Boyle’s law and
Charles’ law, which states that the pressure and
cracking: the use of heat or catalysts, in the absence of
air, to break down or rearrange large hydrocarbon
molecules  (13.4)
cyclic hydrocarbon: a hydrocarbon that consists of one
or more rings; can be a cycloalkane, a cycloalkene, or
a cycloalkyne  (13.3)
D
Dalton’s law of partial pressures: the law stating that
the total pressure of a mixture of gases is the sum of
the pressures of each of the individual gases  (11.4)
Glossary • MHR 673
decomposition reaction: a chemical reaction in which a
compound breaks down into elements or simpler
compounds  (4.2)
stoichiometrically equal to the number of moles of
standard solution  (10.3)
exothermic process: a process that produces thermal
∆T: a symbol used to indicate change in temperature
energy  (14.2)
(14.3)
diatomic element: an atom of this element tends to
bond with another atom of the same element,
forming a molecule that contains two atoms  (3.2)
expanded molecular formula: a symbolic representation
that shows the arrangement of atoms in a molecule
(e.g., CH3CH2CH3 for propane, C3H8)  (13.2)
diffraction grating: a device that separates light into a
F
spectrum  (2.2)
dipole: dipole moment; a distribution of molecular
charge consisting of two opposite charges that are
separated by a short distance  (8.2)
dipole-dipole attraction: the intermolecular force
between oppositely charged ends of two polar
molecules (molecules with dipoles)  (8.2)
diprotic acid: an acid that contains two hydrogen ions
that can dissociate  (10.2)
double bond: a covalent bond in which two atoms share
two pairs of electrons  (3.2)
double displacement reaction: a chemical reaction in
which the cations of two ionic compounds exchange
places, resulting in the formation of two new
compounds  (4.3)
E
elastomer: a polymer that can be bent or twisted by an
outside force; it will return to its previous shape
once the force is removed  (13.3)
electrolyte: a solute that conducts a current in an
aqueous solution  (8.2)
electron: a negatively charged subatomic particle that
occupies the space around the nucleus of an atom
(2.1)
electron afﬁnity: the change in energy that accompanies
the addition of an electron to an atom in the gaseous
state  (2.3)
electronegativity: a relative measure of an atom’s ability
to attract shared electrons in a chemical bond  (3.1)
element: a pure substance that cannot be broken down
into smaller particles and retain the same properties
(1.3)
forensic scientist: a scientist who uses specialized
knowledge to analyze evidence in legal cases  (6.3)
fossil fuel: a fuel that is formed over geologic time by
the action of pressure and heat on organic materials
(e.g., petroleum, coal) (14)
fractional distillation: a process that uses the speciﬁc
boiling points of substances to reﬁne a mixture into
separate components  (13.4)
fraction: one component of a substance that has been
reﬁned by fractional distillation  (13.4)
fuel cell: a technology that produces energy by the
reaction of hydrogen and oxygen, leaving water as a
by-product  (11.5)
fusible plug: a safety device that melts at a high
temperature to relieve gas pressure inside a container
(11.3)
G
gamma radiation: a type of high-energy electromagnetic
radiation in which gamma (γ) photons are emitted
from a nucleus  (4.4)
Gay-Lussac’s law: the law stating that the pressure of a
ﬁxed amount of gas is directly proportional to its
Kelvin temperature, if the volume is constant: P ∝ T
(11.3)
general solubility guidelines: a set of guidelines that
characterize the solubility of substances in water
(9.1)
geometric isomers: compounds that have the same
formula but different arrangements of atoms around a
ﬁxed carbon-carbon double bond; also called cis-
trans isomers  (13.3)
global warming: a gradual increase in the average
empirical formula: shows the lowest whole number
temperature of Earth’s atmosphere  (14.5)
ratio of atoms of each element in a compound  (6.2)
endothermic process: a process that absorbs thermal
energy (14.2)
greenhouse gas: a gas that prevents some of the heat
produced by solar radiation from leaving the
atmosphere (e.g., carbon dioxide)  (14.5)
end-point: the point in a titration when the acid-base
indicator changes colour  (10.3)
H
energy level: ﬁxed, three-dimensional volume in which
electrons travel around the nucleus (2.2)
equivalence point: the point in a titration when the
number of moles of added solution is
hard water: water with a high concentration of
dissolved ions  (9.4)
heat: the transfer of thermal energy between objects
with different temperatures  (14.3)
674 MHR • Glossary
heat capacity: the amount of energy that is needed to
change the temperature of a particular substance or
system by 1˚C; measured in kJ/˚C (14.4)
heat of combustion: the heat that is released by a
combustion reaction; usually measured in kJ/mol
(14.4)
heat of solution: the change in the thermal energy when
a solute dissolves in a solvent  (14.4)
the mole; from the French Système international
d’unités (1.2)
intramolecular forces: the forces that bond atoms
together within a molecule (e.g., covalent bonds)
(3.2)
ion: a positively or negatively charged particle that
results from a neutral atom or group of atoms giving
up or gaining electrons  (2.2)
heterogeneous mixture: a mixture in which the different
ion-dipole attractions: the intermolecular forces
components can be distinctly seen  (1.3)
between ions and polar molecules  (8.2)
homogeneous mixture: a mixture in which the different
components are mixed so that they appear to be a
single substance; a solution  (1.3)
homologous series: a series of molecules in which each
member differs from the next by an additional
speciﬁc structural unit (e.g. −CH2−)  (13.3)
ion exchange: a process for softening water by
exchanging one type of ion with another  (9.4)
ionic bond: a bond between oppositely charged ions
that arises from electron transfer; usually involves a
metal atom and a non-metal atom  (3.1)
ionization energy: the energy that is needed to remove
hydrate: a compound that has a speciﬁc number of
an electron from a neutral atom  (2.3)
water molecules bonded to each formula unit  (6.4)
hydrated: a term used to describe ions in aqueous
solutions, surrounded by and attached to water
molecules  (8.2)
hydrocarbon: a molecular compound that contains only
hydrogen and carbon atoms  (13)
hydrogen bonding: the strong intermolecular attraction
between molecules containing a hydrogen atom
bonded to an atom of a highly electronegative
element, especially oxygen  (8.2)
hydronium ion: a proton that is bonded to a water
molecule; chemical formula H3O+ (10.1)
I
ideal gas: a hypothetical gas with particles that have
mass but no volume or attractive forces between
them  (11.1)
ideal gas law: the law stating that the pressure times the
volume of a gas equals the number of moles of the
gas times the universal gas constant and the
temperature of the gas; PV = nRT (12.1)
immiscible: a term used to describe substances that are
not able to combine with each other in a solution
(8.1)
incomplete combustion: combustion in which
insufﬁcient oxygen prevents a hydrocarbon fuel from
reacting completely, leaving products other than
carbon dioxide gas and water vapour (4.2, 14.1)
insoluble: a term used to describe a substance that has a
solubility of less than 0.1 g per 100 mL in a
particular solvent  (8.1)
intermolecular forces: the forces that exist between
molecules  (3.2)
International System of Units (SI): the international
system of measurement units, including units,
including units such as the metre, the kilogram, and
isolated system: a system in which the total amount of
matter and energy remains constant  (14.4)
isomers: compounds that have the same chemical
formula but different molecular arrangements and
properties  (13.2)
isotopes: atoms of an element that are chemically
similar but have different numbers of neutrons and
thus, different mass numbers  (2.1)
isotopic abundance: the relative amount of an isotope of
an element; expressed as a percent or a decimal
fraction  (5.1)
IUPAC: the acronym for International Union of Pure
and Applied Chemistry, an organization that speciﬁes
rules for chemical names and symbols  (3.4)
K
Kelvin scale: a temperature scale that begins at the
theoretical point of absolute zero kinetic energy
(0 K = −273.15˚C); each unit (a kelvin) is equal to
1˚C (11.3)
kilopascal: a unit of pressure equal to 1000 Pa  (11.2)
kinetic molecular theory: the theory explaining gas
behaviour in terms of the random motion of particles
with negligible volume and negligible intermolecular
forces  (11.1)
L
law of combining volumes: the law stating that when
gases react, the volumes of the gaseous reactants and
products, at constant temperatures and pressures, are
always in whole number ratios  (12.1)
law of conservation of mass: the law stating that matter
can be neither created nor destroyed; in any chemical
reaction, the mass of the products is always equal to
the mass of the reactants  (4.1)
Glossary • MHR 675
law of deﬁnite proportions: the law stating that the
elements in a chemical compound are always present
in the same proportions by mass  (6.1)
molar volume: the amount of space that is occupied by
1 mol of a substance; equal to 22.4 L for a gas at
standard temperature and pressure (STP)  (12.1)
law of multiple proportions: the law stating that the
molecular compound: a non-conducting compound
masses of two or more elements that combine to form
a compound can be expressed in small whole
number ratios  (12.1)
Lewis structure: a symbolic representation of the
arrangement of the valence electrons of an element
(2.2)
limiting reactant: the reactant that is completely
consumed during a chemical reaction, limiting the
amount of product produced  (7.2)
line structural diagram: a graphical representation of
the bonds between carbon atoms in a hydrocarbon
(13.2)
lone pairs: pairs of electrons in an atom’s outer valence
shell that are not involved in covalent bonding  (3.3)
M
mass/mass percent: the mass of a solute divided by the
mass of the solution, expressed as a percent (8.3)
mass number (A): the sum of the protons and neutrons
in the nucleus of one atom of a particular element
(2.1)
mass percent: the mass of an element in a compound,
expressed as a percent of the compound’s total mass
(6.1)
mass spectrometer: an instrument that uses magnetic
ﬁelds to separate the isotopes of an element and
measure the mass and abundance of each isotope
(5.1)
mass/volume percent: the mass of a solute divided by
the volume of the solution, expressed as a percent
(8.3)
matter: anything that has mass and occupies space  (1.2)
metathesis reaction: a double displacement reaction
(9.2)
millimetre of mercury (mm Hg): a unit of pressure that
is based on the height of a column of mercury in a
barometer or manometer; equal to 1 torr  (11.2)
miscible: a term used to describe substances that are
able to combine with each other in any proportion
(8.1)
mixture: a combination of two or more kinds of matter,
in which each component retains its own
characteristics  (1.3)
molar concentration (C): a unit of concentration
expressed as the number of moles of solute present
in one litre of solution; also called molarity (8.3)
molar mass (M): the mass of 1 mol of a substance,
numerically equal to the element’s average atomic
mass; expressed in g/mol (5.2)
676 MHR • Glossary
whose intramolecular bonds are not broken when the
compound changes state  (3.2)
molecular formula: a formula that gives the actual
number of atoms of each element in a molecule or
formula unit  (6.2)
mole (mol): the SI base unit for amount of substance;
contains the same number of atoms, molecules, or
formula units as exactly 12 g of carbon-12  (5.2)
mole ratio: a ratio that compares the number of moles of
different substances in a balanced chemical equation
(7.1)
monomer: a small, repeating molecular unit in a
polymer chain  (13.1)
monoprotic acid: an acid that contains only one
hydrogen ion that can dissociate  (10.2)
Montréal Protocol: an international agreement that
limits the global use of CFCs and other ozone-
destroying chemicals  (12.4)
N
net ionic equation: a representation of a chemical
reaction in a solution that shows only the ions
involved in the chemical change  (9.2)
neutralization reaction: a double displacement reaction
in which an acid and a base combine to form water
and a salt  (4.3, 10.3)
neutron: an uncharged subatomic particle in the
nucleus of an atom  (2.1)
non-electrolyte: a solute that does not conduct a current
in an aqueous solution  (8.2)
non-polar molecule: a covalently bonded molecule that
does not possess a dipole moment, because of the
arrangement of its molecules  (3.3)
nuclear equation: a symbolic representation of a nuclear
reaction, showing how a nucleus gains or loses
subatomic particles  (4.4)
nuclear ﬁssion: the process in which an unstable, heavy
isotope splits into smaller, lighter nuclei  (4.4)
nuclear fusion: the process by which a nucleus absorbs
lighter, accelerated nuclei  (4.4)
nuclear reaction: a reaction that involves changes in the
nuclei of atoms  (4.4)
nucleus: the central core of an atom, composed of
protons and neutrons  (2.1)
O
octet: an arrangement of eight electrons in the valence
shell of an atom  (2.2)
octet rule: the rule stating that atoms bond in such a
polymer: a very long molecule that is formed by the
way as to attain eight electrons in their valence shells
(3.2)
covalent bonding of many smaller, identical
molecular units (monomers)  (13.1)
organic compound: a molecular compound based on
potential energy: stored energy; the energy of an object
carbon, almost always containing carbon-carbon and
carbon-hydrogen bonds  (13.1)
due to its position  (14.4)
precipitate: an insoluble solid that is formed by a
oxoacid: an acid formed from a polyatomic ion that
contains oxygen, hydrogen, and one other acid  (10.2)
chemical reaction between two soluble  compounds
(4.3) (9.1)
P
parts per million/parts per billion: units of
concentration used to express very small quantities
of solute  (8.3)
pascal: the SI unit of pressure; equal to 1 N/m2 (11.2)
percentage composition: the relative mass of each
element in a compound  (6.1)
percentage purity: the percent of a sample that is
composed of a speciﬁc compound or element  (7.3)
percentage yield: the actual yield of a reaction,
expressed as a percent of the theoretical yield  (7.3)
periodic table: a system for organizing the elements by
atomic number into groups (columns) and periods
(rows), so that elements with similar properties are in
the same column  (2.2)
periodic trend: a pattern that is evident when elements
are organized by their atomic numbers  (2.2)
petrochemical: a product that is derived from petroleum
(13.4)
petroleum: a complex mixture of solid, liquid, and
gaseous hydrocarbons  (13.1)
pH: the negative logarithm of the concentration of
hydronium ions, −log [H3O+], measured in mol/L
(10.2)
precipitation reaction: a double displacement reaction
that forms a precipitate  (9.2)
precision: the closeness of a measurement to other
measurements of the same object or phenomena  (1.2)
pressure: the force that is exerted on an object, per unit
of surface area  (11.2)
pressure relief valve: a device that regulates the
pressure of a gas inside a container  (11.3)
product: a substance that is formed by a chemical
reaction  (4.1)
property: a characteristic that distinguishes different
types of matter; (e.g., colour, melting or boiling point,
conductivity, density)  (1.2)
proton: a positively charged subatomic particle in the
nucleus of an atom  (2.1)
pure covalent bond: a chemical bond between two
atoms with identical or nearly identical
electronegativities  (3.2)
pure substance: a material that is composed of only one
type of particle (e.g., iron, water, sodium chloride)
(1.3)
Q
qualitative analysis: the process of separating and
identifying ions in an aqueous solution  (9.2)
pH scale: a mathematical scale that is used to express
the concentration of hydronium ions in a solution as
a number from 0 to 14 (10.2)
qualitative property: a property of matter that can be
observed but cannot be precisely measured or
expressed numerically (e.g., colour, odour)  (1.2)
physical change: a change, such as change of state, that
does not alter the composition of matter  (1.3)
physical property: a property of a substance that can be
observed without the substance changing into or
interacting with another substance  (1.2)
polar covalent bond: a covalent bond between atoms
that have signiﬁcantly different electronegativities, in
which the electron pair is unevenly shared  (3.3)
polar molecule: a molecule that has an uneven
distribution of charge; one end has a partial positive
charge and one end has a partial negative charge (3.3)
polyatomic ion: an ion that is made up of two or more
atoms; it has a positive or negative charge  (3.4)
polymerization: a process, common in the plastics
industry, in which polymers are formed by reacting
monomers  (13.3)
quantitative property: a property of matter that can be
measured and expressed numerically (e.g., density,
boiling point)  (1.2)
R
radioactivity: the process in which unstable nuclei
spontaneously decay, releasing energy and subatomic
particles  (2.1)
radioisotope: an unstable isotope of an element, which
undergoes radioactive decay  (2.1)
rate of dissolving: the speed at which a solute dissolves
in a solvent  (8.2)
reactant: a substance that undergoes a chemical change
in a chemical reaction  (4.1)
Glossary • MHR 677
reforming: the use of heat, pressure, and catalysts to
convert a large hydrocarbon molecule into other
compounds  (13.4)
stable octet: an arrangement of eight electrons in the
valence shell of an atom  (2.2)
standard ambient temperature and pressure (SATP):
risk: a potential danger; a chance of an undesirable
25˚C and 100 kPa  (11.4)
consequence  (14.4)
risk-beneﬁt analysis: a thoughtful assessment of both
the positive and negative results that may be caused
by a particular course of action  (14.4)
standard atmospheric pressure: 101.325 kPa at sea level
and 0˚C; the pressure that supports a column of
mercury exactly 760 mm in height  (11.2)
standard solution: a solution of known concentration
rotational motion: the motion of particles around other
(8.4)
particles; characteristic of liquids  (11.1)
standard temperature: 0˚C, the freezing point of water
S
salt: any ionic compound that is formed in a
neutralization reaction from the anion of an acid and
the cation of a base  (10.3)
saturated hydrocarbon: a hydrocarbon that consists of
chains or non-aromatic rings, whose carbon atoms
are bonded to the maximum number of hydrogen or
carbon atoms  (13.3)
saturated solution: a solution in which no more of a
particular solute can be dissolved at a speciﬁc
temperature  (8.1)
SI: the international system of measurement units,
including units such as the metre, the kilogram, and
the mole; from the French Système international
d’unités)  (1.2)
signiﬁcant digits: the number of meaningful digits,
including a ﬁnal uncertain digit, that is obtained by
measurement or used in calculations  (1.2)
single displacement reaction: a chemical reaction in
which one element in a compound is replaced
(displaced) by another element  (4.3)
skeleton equation: an equation that identiﬁes the
reactants and products in a chemical reaction by
their chemical formulas but does not quantify them
(4.1)
soft water: water with a low concentration of dissolved
ions  (9.4)
solubility: the amount of solute that dissolves in a given
quantity of solvent at a speciﬁc temperature  (8.1)
soluble: a term used to describe a substance that has a
solubility greater than 1 g per 100 mL of a particular
solvent  (8.1)
solute: a substance that is dissolved in a solution  (8.1)
solution: a homogeneous mixture of a solvent and one
or more solutes  (8.1)
solvent: a substance that has other substances dissolved
in it  (8.1)
speciﬁc heat capacity (c): the amount of energy (in J)
required to change the temperature of 1 g of a
substance by 1˚C; measured in J/g•˚C (14.3)
spectator ions: ions that are present in a solution but are
not involved in the chemical reaction  (9.2)
678 MHR • Glossary
(11.4)
standard temperature and pressure (STP): 0˚C and
101.325 kPa  (11.4)
Stock system: the current system for naming
compounds that have elements that can have more
than one valence; the valence of the ﬁrst element
name (usually a metal) in roman numerals in
parentheses (e.g., copper(II))  (3.4)
stoichiometric amount: the exact molar amounts of a
reactant or a product, as predicted by a balanced
chemical equation  (7.2)
stoichiometric coefﬁcient: a number that is placed in
front of the formula of the formula of a product or a
reactant of a chemical equation to indicate how many
moles are involved in the reaction  (7.2)
stoichiometry: the study of the mass-mole-number
relationships in chemical reactions and formulas
(7.1)
straight-chain alkane: a hydrocarbon whose carbon
atoms form a continuous chain of single carbon-
carbon bonds  (13.3)
strong acid: an acid that completely dissociates into
ions in aqueous solutions  (10.2)
strong base: a base that completely dissociates into ions
in aqueous solutions  (10.2)
structural diagram: a two-dimensional representation of
the structure of a compound; can be a complete
diagram, a condensed diagram, or a line diagram
(13.2)
structural model: a three-dimensional representation of
the structure of a compound  (13.2)
STSE: an abbreviation for the interactions between
science, technology, society, and the environment
(1.1)
subatomic particle: one of the small particles (protons,
neutrons, and electrons) that make up an atom  (2.1)
sustainable development: the use of resources in a way
that meets our current needs, without jeopardizing
the ability of other people, or future generations, to
meet their needs  (14.5)
synthesis reaction: a chemical reaction in which two or
more reactants combine to produce a single, different
substance  (4.2)
systematic name: a name that is based on the IUPAC
V
rules for naming compounds  (13.3)
T
temperature: a measure of the average kinetic energy of
a substance or a system  (14.3)
theoretical yield: the amount of product that is
produced by a chemical reaction as predicted by the
stoichiometry of the chemical equation  (7.3)
thermal energy: the kinetic energy of particles; the
energy possessed by vibrating particles  (14.3)
thermal equilibrium: the state that is achieved when all
the substances in a system have the same ﬁnal
temperature  (14.4)
thermochemical equation: an equation that shows the
energy produced or absorbed in a reaction  (14.2)
titration: a laboratory process that is used to determine
the concentration of a acidic or basic solution by
reacting it with a solution of known concentration
(10.3)
torr: a unit of pressure; equal to 1 mm of mercury in the
column of a barometer or manometer  (11.2)
total ionic equation: a form of chemical equation that
shows dissociated ions of soluble ionic compounds
(9.2)
translational motion: the independent motion of
particles from one point in space to another;
characteristic of gases  (11.1)
triple bond: a covalent bond in which two atoms share
three pairs of electrons  (3.2)
trivial name: a name for a compound that does not
necessarily suggest anything about the chemical
composition of the compound (e.g., water, baking
soda); also called the common name (3.4)
valence: a number, positive or negative, that describes
the bonding capacity of an element or ion  (3.4)
valence electron: an electron that occupies the
outermost energy level of an atom  (2.2)
variable composition: a term used to describe a
solution; capable of having different ratios of solutes
to solvent  (8.1)
vibrational motion: the motion of particles that are ﬁxed
in position; a characteristic of solids  (11.1)
volumetric ﬂask: a ﬂat-bottomed, tapered glass vessel
that is used to prepare standard solutions; accurate to
± 0.1 mL (8.4)
volume/volume percent: the volume of a liquid solute
divided by the volume of the solution, expressed as a
percent  (8.3)
W
waste-water treatment: the cleaning of used water by
physical, chemical, and biological processes  (9.4)
water treatment: the process of removing chemical,
biological, and physical contaminants to make water
suitable for consumption  (9.4)
weak acid: an acid that only slightly dissociates into
ions in aqueous solutions  (10.2)
weak base: a base that only slightly dissociates into ions
in aqueous solutions  (10.2)
weighted average: an average that takes into account the
abundance or importance of each value  (5.3)
word equation: an equation that identiﬁes the reactants
and products of a chemical reaction by name, but
does not specify their amounts  (4.1)
troposphere: the layer of the atmosphere that is closest
Z
zero sum rule: the rule stating that for chemical
formulas of neutral compounds involving ions, the
sum of positive valences and negative valences must
equal zero  (3.4)
to the surface of Earth  (12.4)
U
universal gas constant (R): a proportionality constant
that relates pressure, temperature, volume, and
amount of gas; equal to 8.31 kPa·L/mol·K  (12.1)
unsaturated hydrocarbon: a hydrocarbon that contains
carbon-carbon double or triple bonds; the carbon
atoms can potentially bond to additional atoms
(13.3)
unsaturated solution: a solution in which more of a
particular solute can be dissolved at a speciﬁc
temperature  (8.1)
Glossary • MHR 679
Index
The page numbers in boldface type inidcate the pages where the terms are defined. Terms that occur
in Sample Problems (SP ), Investigations (inv), ExpressLabs (EL), and ThoughtLabs (TL) are also indicated.
2,2,4-trimethylpentane,  549
compound solubility,  330
incomplete combustion,  582–584SP
Alkaline earth metals,  41
2,2-dimethylbutane,  543
2,3-dimethylbutane,  543
2-ethyl-1-butene,  556–557
2-methylpentane,  547
3-ethyl-2,2-dimethylpentane,  549
3-ethyl-2,4-dimethylpentane,  549
3-methylpentane,  543
Abiogenic theory,  537
Absolute zero,  440
Academies,  471
Accuracy,  18
Acetic acid,  161, 370
concentration,  402– 403inv
empirical formula,  215
Acetylsalicylic acid,  533, 534
Acetylene, 207, 560, 580
combustion,  581–582SP,
585–586inv, 590–591SP
chemical formula,  207, 216
thermochemical equation,
590–591SP
Acid rain,  5, 358, 623
Acid-base indicator,  395
Acidity,  280
Acids,  369
Arrhenius theory,  373
Brønsted-Lowry theory,  375, 376
binary,  384
cleaners,  373EL
diluting,  324
diprotic,  383
monoprotic,  382
pH,  390– 391inv
properties of,  370
strength,  385
strong,  381
triprotic,  383
weak,  381
Activity series,  127
Activity series for halogens,  131
Actual yield,  260
percentage yield,  263– 264SP
Aerial fluids,  114
Agitation and rate of dissolving,  290
Air bags,  506
Air pollution and gases,  515–520
Aliphatic hydrocarbons,  544
alkanes,  547–550
properties,  564inv
structures,  564inv
Alkali,  370
Alkali metals,  41, 383
bases,  383
680 MHR • Index
bases,  383
Alkanes,  544
aliphatic compounds,  547–550
boiling points,  545–546
branched-chain,  547
drawing,  550–551, 565
naming,  546–549, 565
properties of,  545
reactivity,  554–555inv
rules for naming,  547–550
side-chain,  547
solubility,  552
straight chain,  546
structural diagrams,  550–551
Alkenes,  552
chemical reactivity,  553
drawing,  557–558, 565
naming,  556–557, 565
properties of,  553
reactivity,  554–555inv
solubility,  553
Alkynes,  560, 580
drawing,  560, 565
naming,  560, 565
Alloys,  83, 130, 286
composition,  306
Alpha particle emission,  142
Alumina,  102
Aluminum, specific heat capacity,  595
Aluminum oxide,  102
Amalgam,  286, 306
Ammonia,  235–236, 280, 370, 539
empirical formula,  207
molecular formula,  207
polar molecule,  91
specific heat capacity,  595
Ammonium chloride,  101, 104
solubility,  334
Ammonium cyanate,  534
Ammonium nitrate,  104
Analytical chemistry
applications of,  216
doping control laboratory,  216
Anhydrous,  223
Aniline,  207
Anion,  53, 54
Apollo 11,  233
Aqueous solutions,  286, 329, 344
colour of,  344
flame test,  344
identifying ions in,  344
ions in,  344
limiting reactant problems,
353–354
minimum volume to precipitate,
351–352
qualitative analysis,  345–346inv
reactions in,  337
solubility,  330
stoichiometry,  348–355
water quality,  357–364
Argon, average atomic mass,  180
Ariya, Dr. Parisa,  520
Aromatic compounds,  571
Arrhenius theory of acids and
bases,  374
limitations of,  374–375
Arrhenius, Svanté,  373, 374
Arson,  222
Aspirin™,  533, 534
Atmosphere,  485
formation of,  458
Atmospheres (atm),  428
Atmospheric reactions,  515–520
Atomic mass
average.  See Average atomic mass
isotopes,  37
Atomic mass unit (u),  35
Atomic number (Z),  36, 37
Atomic symbol,  36
Atomic theory of matter,  34, 35, 38
Atoms,  34, 35
bonding,  70
chemical equations,  112, 235
electron affinity,  57
electronegativity,  70
electrons,  38, 40–47
energy levels,  49–55
ionization energy,  53–55
moles,  176SP
nucleus of,  36
periodic trends,  49–55
radius,  49, 50–51inv, 52
valence electrons,  70
Average atomic mass,  162, 164,
167SP, 189–190SP
argon,  180
Avogadro constant,  171
hydrogen,  180
isotopes,  162, 163, 164, 165
oxygen,  180
periodic table,  165
sodium,  180
Avogadro constant,  36, 172, 173,
177, 178
average atomic mass,  171
conversion,  175
magnitude,  175
mole,  171
using,  174SP
Avogadro’s hypothesis,  473, 474
Avogadro’s law,  474, 478,
479–482SP, 484
Avogadro, Amadeo,  178, 472, 473
Ayotte, Dr. Christiane,  216
Baking soda,  102, 161, 370, 394, 534
Balanced chemical equation,  114
Ball-and-stick model,  87, 540
Barium chloride, solubility,  334
Barium hydroxide,  383
hydrate,  224–225
octahydrate,  223
solubility,  334
Barium oxide, solubility,  334
Barium sulfate,  175
Barometer,  426
Bartlett, Neil,  244
Bases,  369
alkali metals,  383
alkaline earth metals,  383
Arrhenius theory,  373
cleaners,  373EL
properties of,  370
strength,  385
Bayer, Frederick,  534
Beauchamp, Dr. Stephen,  246
Bends,  466
Benefit,  620
Benzene,  199, 207
empirical formula,  207
molecular formula,  216
Beryllium oxide,  181
Berzelius, Jons Jakob,  534
Beta particle,  143
Beta particle emission,  143
Beta radiation,  143
Big Bang theory,  458
Binary acid,  384
Binary compounds,  102, 105
Biogenic theory,  537
Black, Joseph,  603
Blanketing,  465
Bohr-Rutherford diagram,  44, 46
Boiling point,  12
Bomb calorimeter,  602, 610
Bond/Bonding,  70, 589
ionic and covalent, 70
Lewis structure,  96
octet rule,  96
stable octet,  96
valence,  96
Bond energy,  539, 589, 590–591SP
Bonding pairs,  88
Boron,  169
Boyle’s law,  432, 433– 435SP, 453, 489
Boyle, Robert,  429, 432, 452
Brass,  306
Brittleness,  12
Brønsted, Johannes,  375
Brønsted-Lowry theory of acids and
bases,  375, 376
Bronze,  83, 306
Brooks, Harriet,  145
Burette,  401
Burning.  See Combustion
Butane
heat combustion,  615
molecular formula,  546
Calcium carbonate,  102, 188, 360, 539
Calcium chlorate, solubility,  334
Calcium chloride,  307
dihydrate,  223
Calcium gluconate,  188
Calcium hydroxide,  383
Calcium oxide,  102
Calcium phosphate,  181
Calcium sulfate, dihydrate,  223
Calories,  603, 612
Calorimeter,  602, 603, 604–605SP
heat capacity,  610–611SP
Calorimetry,  601, 602
Candle wax,  615
Carbides,  534
Carbohydrates,  217, 534
energy,  613
Carbon
bonding,  539
bonding electrons,  538
geometrical structures of,  538
properties of,  538
radioactive isotope,  144
specific heat capacity,  595
structures,  539
Carbon dioxide,  6, 69, 184, 199, 200,
420, 491
conductivity,  69
melting point,  69
molecular shape,  88
non-polar molecule,  91
Carbon monoxide,  199, 200
Carbon tetrafluoride as non-polar
molecule,  91
Carbon-12,  167
Carbon-14,  164
Carbon-hydrogen combustion
analyzer,  219
calculations,  220–221SP
Carbonates,  534
Carbonic acid,  370
Cation,  53, 54
Cellulose,  536
Celsius,  14
Centimetres,  14
Charles’ law,  440, 441, 442–443SP,
444–446SP, 453
Charles, Jacques,  436, 440, 452
Chemical bonds,  70, 589
Chemical changes,  25
Chemical compounds
classifying,  66
common names,  101
naming,  101
trivial names,  101
Chemical engineer,  265
Chemical equations,  112, 235EL
atoms,  235
balanced,  114, 234, 235EL, 236–249
balancing,  116–118SP
coefficients,  115
mass,  241
molecules,  235
moles,  237–238
reactants,  239
yield,  260
Chemical formula,  95
calculating percentage
composition,  202
Lewis structure,  95
octet rule,  95
percentage composition,  203–204SP
representation,  96
valence,  98–100
Chemical nomenclature,  101
Chemical properties,  12
periodic table,  40
Chemical proportions in
compounds,  197
Chemical reactions,  112
classification of,  111, 119
law of conservation of mass,  113
Chemistry,  6
matter,  6–16
technology,  7, 8
Chlorine,  280
Chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs),  516,
517–519
Chlorophyll,  309
Cholesterol,  539, 561
Cinnabar,  203
Cinnamaldehyde,  203
Cis-trans isomer,  558
Citric acid,  370
Closed system,  424
Coal,  537
Cobalt(II) chloride,  189
Cochineal,  361
Codeine,  158, 218
Coefficients,  115
Combined gas law,  453, 453–454SP,
455–457SP, 484
Combustibility,  12
Combustion,  577
acetylene,  581–582SP, 585–586inv,
590–591SP
candles,  615
complete,  580
heat of,  606
incomplete,  580
oxygen,  464
propane,  580
Combustion equations,  580–581
Combustion reactions,  123, 578
Index • MHR 681
Competing reaction,  260
Complete combustion,  580
Complete structural diagram,  541
Composition of alloys,  306
Compounds,  26, 67EL
binary,  105
chemical proportions in,  197
covalent,  67, 294
empirical formula of,  208
hydrogen,  104
ideal gas law,  498–500SP
ionic,  67
molar mass,  181SP, 197,
198–205, 216
molecular formula of,  215–218
percentage composition of,  200
polyatomic ions,  104
solubility,  330, 331, 332–333inv
tertiary,  104
Compressed gases,  450
Concentration,  302
acetic acid,  402–403inv
finding,  396–397SP
mass volume,  304–305SP
mass/volume percent,  302
mass/mass percent,  306
parts per billion,  311
parts per million,  311
solution,  283, 302–318, 317inv,
322–323inv
vinegar,  402–403inv
volume/volume percent,  309
Condensation,  419
Condensed structural diagram,  541
Conductivity
carbon dioxide,  69
covalent bonds/compounds,  67, 82
ionic compound,  67, 78–79
sodium chloride,  69, 78–79
solubility,  70
Conjugate acid,  376
Conjugate acid-base pair,  376,
377–379SP
Conjugate base,  376
Copper
decomposition reaction,
138–139inv
double displacement reaction,
138–139inv
single displacement reaction,
138–139inv
specific heat capacity,  595
synthesis reaction,  138–139inv
Copper oxide,  211
Copper(II) carbonate,  198
Copper(II) chloride,  255inv
anhydrous,  223
dihydrate,  223
Copper(II) nitrate,  117
Copper(II) sulfate,  322–323inv
anhydrous,  226–227inv
682 MHR • Index
hydrate and hydrated,  226–227inv
Cortisol,  221
Covalent bonds,  70
conductivity,  82
double bond,  82
electronegativity,  81
Lewis structure,  81, 82
multiple,  82
octet rule,  75
polar,  86
pure,  81
triple bond,  82
Covalent compound,  67, 68, 69
conductivity,  67
melting point,  67
miscible,  294
solubility,  67, 294
Cracking,  570
Crosslinked,  559
Crude oil,  537
Cryogenics,  437
Cryosurgery,  465
Crystal lattice/shape,  12, 418
Cupronickel,  306
Curie, Marie,  143, 145
Cyanides,  534
Cyclic hydrocarbons,  561
drawing/naming,  562–563
Cycloalkanes, drawing/naming,  566
Cycloalkenes,  562
drawing/naming,  566
Cycloalkynes, drawing,  566
Cyclohexane,  219, 562
Czyzewska, Dr. Eva,  361
d-limonene,  313
Dalton’s law of partial pressures,  459,
460–461SP, 507
Dalton, John,  34, 38, 207, 459,
472, 473
Davy, Sir Humphrey,  121
Decaffeination,  300
Decane, molecular formula,  546
Decomposition,  12
Decomposition reaction,  119, 122
copper,  138–139inv
Degrees,  14
Density,  12, 14
gases,  490, 491, 492–493SP
ideal gas law,  489, 490
Diatomic elements,  81
Dickson, Alison,  77
Diffraction grating,  43EL
Dihydrogen monoxide.  See Water
Dinitrogen monoxide,  102
Dinitrogen tetroxide,  233
Diphosphorus pentoxide,  105
Dipole-dipole,  420
Dipole-dipole attraction,  292
Dipoles,  91, 292, 420
Diprotic acids,  383
Dispersing agent,  624
Distillation,  284
Double bond,  82
Double displacement reaction,
132–133, 337
copper,  138–139inv
gas producing,  340
gases,  134
neutralization reaction,  135
observing,  136–137inv
precipitate,  132–133
sulfur dioxide gas,  340
water producing,  341
Double replacement reaction.
See Double displacement reaction
Dry ice.  See Carbon dioxide
Ductility,  12
Duralumin,  306
Elastin,  559
Elastomer,  559
Electrical conductivity,  12
Electrolyte,  293
Electron affinity,  57
Electron energy levels,  71
Electronegativity,  70
atomic size,  71
bond type,  72
covalent bonds,  81
range of differences,  73
solubility,  293
table of,  71
trend for,  71
Electrons,  35, 43EL, 46
in atoms,  38, 40–47
energy levels,  43
periodic table,  42
spectra of,  43EL
transferring multiple,  76
valence,  45, 46
Electrostatic attraction,  419
Element symbol,  36
Elements,  26, 34
compounds,  199, 200
specific heat capacity,  595
synthesis reactions,  120
Empirical formula,  207
determining by experiment,  211
experiments,  219–228
finding by experiment,  219–228
magnesium oxide,  212–213inv
molar mass,  208, 216
percentage composition,  208,
210–211SP
solving problems using,  209–211
End-point,  399
Endothermic,  588, 603
Energy,  14, 577
carbohydrates,  613
fat,  613
fatty acids,  613
foods,  613
glucose,  613
measurement factors,  593
Energy levels,  43, 44–47
atoms,  49–55
electron arrangements,  45
electrons,  43
full,  47
ionization energy,  53, 54
Lewis structures,  46
patterns,  45
valence electrons,  45
Energy shells.  See Energy levels
Environmental problems with
fossil fuels,  625
Enzymes,  534
ripening,  552
Epsom salts,  223
Equivalence point,  399
Erlenmeyer flask,  401
Erlenmeyer, Richard E.A.C.,  123
Estrone,  561
Ethane, molecular formula,  546
Ethanoic acid,  544
Ethanol,  420, 535, 539
combustion,  123
solubility,  294
specific heat capacity,  595
Ethene,  553, 568
Ethyne,  207, 560, 580
empirical/molecular formula,  207
Ettinger, Robert C.W.,  437
Eutrophication,  8
Exact numbers and measurement,
15, 17
Excess reactant,  252, 255inv
Exothermic,  588, 603
reaction,  324
Expanded molecular formula,  539
Fahrenheit degrees,  26
Fats,  534
energy,  613
Fatty acids and energy,  613
Fermi problems,  175
Fermi, Enrico,  175
First ionization energy,  54
Fission.  See Nuclear fission
Fixed air,  121
Flammability.  See Combustibility
Flotation,  77
Food chemist,  114
Fool’s gold,  66
Forensic scientists,  215, 222
Formula, calculating percentage
composition,  202
Fossil fuels,  537, 577, 578–586
environmental problems,  625
Fractional distillation,  569
Freon,  517
Fructose, formula,  217
Fuel cell,  464
Fusible plugs,  451
Fusion.  See Nuclear fusion
Haber Process,  236
Halogens,  41
single displacement reaction,  131
Galactose, formula,  217
Galilei, Galileo,  426
Gamma radiation,  145
Gas chromatography,  222
Gases
air pollution,  515–520
behaviour of,  417
boiling point,  461
combined laws,  452–453
compressed,  450, 451
density,  490, 491, 492–493SP
produced in double displacement
reactions,  134
hydrogen, production of,
512–513inv
inert,  244
kinetic molecular theory,  418
mass,  422EL
molar mass,  490, 494–495SP,
496–497inv
molar volume,  474–477SP, 478,
479–482SP, 480–482SP, 490
molecular mass,  490
moles,  482SP
noble,  244
particle theory,  419
pressure,  424, 430–431inv, 432–435
pressure, volume, and temperature,
447–450
solubility,  298
temperature,  298, 436, 438–439inv,
440–441, 444–446
using,  462
volume,  422EL, 424, 430– 431inv,
432–435, 436, 438–439inv, 440–441
Gasoline,  579
Gay-Lussac’s law,  447, 448–449SP, 453
Gay-Lussac, Joseph Louis,  440, 447,
452, 472, 473, 501
Gelling agent,  624
General solubility guidelines,  334
Geometric isomer,  558
Gesner, Abraham,  579
Global warming,  623
Glucose,  207, 536
empirical formula,  207, 217
energy,  613
molecular formula,  217
Gold,  65
specific heat capacity,  595
Grams,  14
Greenhouse effect,  5, 458, 517, 623
Greenhouse gases,  623
Ground water,  360
Gypsum,  223
Hard water,  360
testing,  363
Hardness,  12
Heat,  593
transfer, factors in,  594
Heat capacity,  609, 610
calorimeter,  610–611SP
Heat combustion
butane,  615
propane,  615
Heat measurement, technology of,  601
Heat of combustion,  606
candle,  616–617inv
Heat of formation,  589
Heat of solution,  608
measuring,  608EL
Heat transfer,  594
mass,  595
water,  596–597SP
Heptane
combustion,  124
molecular formula,  546
Heroin,  158
Heterogenous mixture,  26
Hexane,  543
chemical formula,  539
molecular formula,  539, 546
High pressure injectors,  427
High-performance liquid
chromatography (HPLC),  188
Higson, Dr. Robert,  427
Homogeneous mixtures,  26, 283, 284
Homologous series,  544
Humidity,  459
Hydrate,  223
barium hydroxide,  224–225
determining the formula of,
224–225
molecular formula,  225,
226–227inv
naming,  103
Hydrated,  293
Hydrazine,  233
Hydrides,  340
Hydrobromic acid,  381, 382
Hydrocarbons,  533, 577, 578–586
classifying,  544–566
compounds, representation of,
538–543
cyclic,  561
modelling,  542inv
origins of,  536
refining,  568
risk,  622–623
sources of,  537
structural diagrams/model,
540, 541
unsaturated,  553
Index • MHR 683
using,  568
Hydrochloric acid,  102, 235EL, 381,
382, 384
boiling point,  70
electronegativity, difference of
bond  73
melting point,  70
polar molecule, 91
Hydrodynamics,  428
Hydrofluoric acid,  382, 384
Hydrogen
average atomic mass,  180
compounds,  104
double displacement reaction,  340
molar mass,  180
specific heat capacity,  595
Hydrogen bonding,  292
Hydrogen chloride. See Hydrochloric
acid
Hydrogen gas, production of,
512–513inv
Hydroiodic acid,  381, 382
Hydronium ion,  374
Hydrophobic,  77
Hydrosulfuric acid,  384
Hyperbaric oxygen chamber,  462
Hypo,  102
Hypospray,  427
Ideal gas,  421
Ideal gas law,  472, 484
application of,  489–500
density,  489, 490
kelvins,  484
kilopascals,  484
molar mass,  489, 490
molar volume,  485–486SP, 490
molecular mass,  490
moles,  484
product,  509
production of hydrogen gas,
512–513inv
reactant,  509
stoichiometry,  501–507
Immiscible,  286
Incomplete combustion,  124, 580
2,2,4-trimethylpentane,  582–584SP
Inert gases,  244, 465
Inner transition elements,  41
Intermolecular forces,  83, 420
solubility,  292
Ion size, solubility,  331
Ion-dipole attraction,  293
Ionic bonding,  419
Ionic bonds,  70
more than two ions,  77
octet rule,  75
gases,  418
states of matter,  418
Kirumira, Dr. Abdullah,  463
Kwolek, Stephanie,  572
Ionic compound,  67, 68, 69
conductivity,  67, 78–79
double displacement reactions,
132–133
insoluble,  293
magnetism,  67
melting point,  67
neutralization reaction,  394–396
polar solvent,  293
solubility,  67, 293, 330, 332–333inv
Lactic acid,  370
empirical formula,  215
Lamp oil,  579
Landfill leachates,  358
Laplace, Pierre,  603
Laughing gas,  102, 486–488
Lavoisier, Antoine,  472, 484, 603
Law of combining volumes,  472
Law of conservation of energy,  602
Law of conservation of mass,  35, 113,
Ionic crystal, preparing,  80inv
Ionic equation,  337
Ionization energy,  54
atoms,  53–55
energy levels,  53, 54
trends,  55
Ions,  53
concentration of, calculation of,
348–349
flame test,  344
mass percent of,  350–351
polyatomic,  97
Iron, specific heat capacity,  595
Iron oxide,  67, 201
Isoelectric,  75
Isolated system,  602
Isomers,  539, 540, 543, 558
cis-trans,  558
geometric,  558
modelling,  542inv
Isopropanol,  124, 309
Isotopes,  37, 38, 168EL
abundance,  163, 165, 169SP, 170
atomic mass/number,  37
average atomic mass,  162, 163,
164, 165
Isotopic abundance,  163
Jet injectors,  427
Joules,  14, 603
specific heat capacity,  595
Kelvin scale,  440, 441TL
Kelvin, Lord,  440
Kelvins,  14, 484
115, 241
Law of definite composition,  35
Law of definite proportions,  198
Law of multiple proportions,  473
Lead(II) nitrate,  337
solubility,  338
Lemieux, Dr. Raymond,  536
Lewis structure,  46, 76, 87, 88–89, 449
bond,  96
chemical formula,  95
covalent bonds,  81, 82
Lime,  102
Limestone,  102, 360
Limiting reactant,  252
identifying,  253–254SP
stoichiometry,  256–257SP
Line structural diagram,  541
Liquids,  418
Lithium,  165
Lithium chloride tetrahydrate,  223
Lithium hydride,  340
Lithium hydroxide,  242, 243–244SP
Litre,  14
Lone pairs,  88
Lowry, Thomas,  375
Lunar module,  233
Lye,  102
Magma,  458, 491
Magnesium hydroxide,  102, 383
Magnesium oxide,  383
empirical formula,  212–213inv
Magnesium sulfate
heptahydrate,  223
hydrate,  223
Magnetism of ionic compound,  67
Main-group elements,  41
electron affinity,  57
Malleability,  12
Mannose, formula,  217
Marble,  102
Mariotte, Edmé,  433
Mass
chemical equations,  241
International System of Units (SI),  14,
ideal gas law,  484
178
International Union of Pure and
Applied Chemistry (IUPAC),
102, 544
Intramolecular forces,  83
Ion charge, solubility,  330
Ion exchange,  361
684 MHR • Index
Kerosene,  568, 579
Kevlar,  572
Kilojoule (kJ),  54
Kilopascal (kPa),  424, 484
ideal gas law,  484
Kinetic energy,  421
Kinetic molecular theory,  421, 483
gases,  422EL
heat transfer,  595
law of conservation of,  113
matter,  14
molar concentration,  315–316SP
mole,  180
molecules,  190–191SP
moles,  185, 186, 187SP, 189
percentage composition,
200–201SP
precipitate,  353–354SP
products,  245–246SP
reactants,  243–244SP, 245–246SP
significant digits,  21–22SP
stoichiometry,  241, 247–248SP
subatomic particles,  35
Mass number,  36, 37
Mass percent,  199
Mass spectrometer,  164, 166, 216, 344
Mass/mass percent,  306
concentration,  306
solving for,  307–308SP
Mass/volume percent,  302
solving for,  303–304SP
Material Safety Data Sheets,  451
Matter,  5, 11
atomic theory of,  34, 35
chemical changes,  25
chemistry,  6–16
classification of,  25, 26
describing,  11
mass,  14
measurement,  14
measuring,  11
physical changes,  25
properties,  11
states of,  418
temperature,  14
volume,  14
Measurement,  13inv, 14
exact numbers,  15, 17
matter,  14
significant digits,  17
uncertainty,  15, 17
Melting point,  12
covalent and ionic compounds,  67
Mendeleev, Dmitri,  40, 42
Mercury(II) sulfide,  202, 203, 353–354
Metal,  41, 65, 67EL, 286
alloys,  286
bond,  83
electron affinity,  57
precious,  66
Metal activity series
creating,  128–129inv
single displacement reaction,
126–127, 130–131
Metal ions, flame test,  344
Metallic bond,  83
Metalloids,  41
Metathesis reactions,  337
Methane,  420, 535, 539, 544
combustion,  123
identification of,  498–500SP
molecular formula,  546
Methanol, solubility,  294
Midgley, Thomas,  517
Milk of magnesia,  102
Millilitre,  14
Minerals,  188
Miscible,  286
covalent compound,  294
Mixture,  26, 27
analyzing,  274–275inv
mm Hg,  428
Molar concentration,  313
calculating,  314SP
mass,  315–316SP
Molar mass,  180
compound,  181SP, 197,
198–205, 216
empirical formula,  208, 216
finding,  53, 181
gases,  490, 494–495SP, 496–497inv
ideal gas law,  489, 490
mole,  182–183inv, 185
percentage composition,  202
periodic table,  184
Molar volume
calculating,  485–486SP
gases,  474–477SP, 478,
479–482SP, 490
ideal gas law,  485–486SP, 490
Mole ratios,  237
reactants,  239–240SP
Molecular compounds,  82
Molecular formula,  201, 203
compounds,  215–218
decane,  546
determining,  215, 217–218SP
expanded,  539
experiments,  219–228
finding by experiment,  219–228
Molecular mass
gases,  490
ideal gas law,  490
Molecular models, comparing,  87
Molecule size, solubility,  295
Molecules
chemical equations,  235
mass,  190–191SP
modelling,  85, 92inv
moles,  178SP
Moles,  14, 54, 161, 172, 173, 484
atoms,  176SP
Avogadro constant,  171
chemical equations,  237–238
conversion,  177
gases,  482SP
ideal gas law,  484
mass,  180, 185, 186, 187SP, 189
molar mass,  182–183inv, 185
molecules,  178SP
periodic table,  184
Molina, Mario,  518
Monoprotic acids,  382
Montréal Protocol,  519
Morphine,  158
Mount St. Helens,  458
Muriatic acid,  102
Naphtha,  571
Natural gas,  537
Net ionic equation,  341, 342
writing,  342–343SP
Neutralization reaction,  135, 341, 394
calculations,  396
ionic compound,  394–396
Neutrons,  35
Nickel sulfate,  104
Nitric acid,  381
Nitrogen, uses for,  465
Nitrogen narcosis,  465
Nitroglycerine,  123
Noble gases,  41, 47, 244
Non-electrolyte,  294
Non-metals,  41
Non-polar molecules/compounds,  91,
291, 553
alkanes,  545
properties of,  93
Nonane, molecular formula,  546
Nuclear equation,  142, 143–147
Nuclear fission,  145, 146
Nuclear fusion,  145, 146
Nuclear reactions,  111, 142
Octane,  199, 614
molecular formula,  546
Octet,  47
Octet rule,  75
bonding,  96
chemical formula,  95
covalent bonds,  75
ionic bonds,  75
Odour,  12
Oehlschlager, Dr. Cam,  361
Oil spill,  623
advisor,  624
Old Faithful,  458
Oleic acid,  614
Opium,  158
Order of magnitude,  176
Organic compound,  533, 534
modelling,  542inv
natural,  534
origins of,  536
synthetic,  534
Oxoacid,  384
Oxyacetylene,  580
Oxyacids,  384
Index • MHR 685
Oxygen
average atomic mass,  180
combustion,  464
electronegativity,  73
molar mass,  180
uses of,  462–464
Ozin, Dr. Geoffrey,  89
Ozone cycle,  516
Ozone depletion,  515–520
Physical changes,  25
Physical property,  12
periodic table,  40
Pipette,  399–401
Plasma,  418
Plastics,  535
Polar bonds,  90
Polar covalent bonds,  86
Polar molecules,  91, 420, 421
properties of,  93
water,  90
Paraffin,  568, 615
Particle, stoichiometry,  247–248SP
Parts per billion (ppb),  311,
Polar solvent,  293
Polar substance,  291
Pollution,  5, 515–520, 623, 624
311–312SP
Parts per million (ppm),  311
Pascal (Pa),  424
Pascal, Blaise,  428
Pentane,  420
combustion,  124
molecular formula,  546
Percentage composition,  200
calculating from chemical formula,
202, 203–204SP
empirical formula,  208, 210–211SP
mass,  200–201SP
molar mass,  202
using,  205
Percentage purity,  268
finding,  268–269SP
Percentage yield,  260, 261
actual yield,  263–264SP
application of,  264
calculating,  261–262SP
determining,  266–267inv
purity,  265
Perchloric acid,  381
Periodic law,  44
Periodic table,  38, 40
annotated,  59
average atomic mass,  165
chemical properties,  40
electrons,  42
molar mass,  184
mole,  184
physical properties,  40
Periodic trends,  44, 49–55
Pesticides and pollution,  408–409inv
Petrochemicals,  568
Petroleum,  537, 568
Petroleum age,  579
Petroleum products,  619–626
Pewter,  306
pH,  385, 386, 387–388
acid,  390–391inv
calculating,  389SP
Phenolphthalein,  395
Phosgene,  492
Phosphates,  8
Phosphoric acid,  383
Phosphorus tribromide,  105
686 MHR • Index
pesticides,  408–409inv
phosphate,  8
water quality,  358
Polonium,  143
Polanyi, Dr. John Charles,  9
Polyatomic ions,  97
compounds,  104
Polyisobutylene,  559
Polymer,  559
Polymer chemist,  572
Polymerization,  553
Polymers,  535
Polystyrene,  535
Polywater,  329
Potassium aluminum sulfate
dodecahydrate,  223
Potassium fluoride,
electronegativity,  72
Potassium hydroxide,  117, 383, 392
Potassium iodide,  337
solubility,  338
Potassium nitrate,  204
products of decomposition,  204
Potential energy,  615
Precious metal,  66
Precipitates,  132, 332
double displacement reactions,
132–133
mass,  353–354SP, 354–355
predicting formation of,  338–339
silver chromate,  354–355
solubility,  332–333inv
Precipitation reaction,  338
solubility,  338
Precision,  18
Pressure,  424
atmosphere,  427EL, 428
atmospheric,  425
gases,  424, 430–431inv, 432–435
solubility,  299
standard atmospheric,  428
torr,  428
units of,  428
volume,  428, 430–431inv
Pressure relief valve,  450
Priestly, Joseph,  472
Product,  112
ideal gas law,  509
mass,  245–246SP
Product development chemist,  313
Propane
chemical formula,  539
combustion,  580
heat of combustion,  615
molecular formula,  539, 546
Propene,  553, 568
Property,  11
aliphatic compounds,  564inv
chemical,  12
physical,  12
qualitative,  12
quantitative,  12
Propyne,  560
Proteins,  534
Proton acceptors,  376
Proton donors,  376
Protons,  35
Proust, Joseph Louis,  198
Pure covalent bonds,  81
Pure substance,  26, 27
Purity,  268
percentage yield,  265
Puskas, Dr. Judit,  559
Pyrite,  66
Qualitative analysis,  274–275inv, 344
aqueous solutions,  345–346inv
Quality control (QC),  188
Quantitative analysis,  274–275inv
Quartz,  102
Radioactive isotope of carbon,  144
Radioactivity,  38, 142–147
Radioisotopes,  38
Radium,  143
Radon,  143
Rare metals,  56
Rate of dissolving,  290
Reactants,  112
chemical equations,  239
excess,  252, 255inv
ideal gas law,  509
limiting,  251–253, 253–254SP,
255inv
mass,  243–244SSP, 245–246SP
mole ratios,  239–240SP
Reactivity,  12
Recommended Nutrient Intake,  188
Reforming,  571
Respiration,  111
Richter, Jeremias Benjamin,  242
Ripening and enzymes,  552
Risk,  620
hydrocarbons,  622–623
Risk-benefit analysis,  620
smoking,  620–622SP
Rotational motion,  418
Rowland, F. Sherwood,  518
Rutherford, Ernest,  145
Sal ammoniac,  101
Salt,  394
Saturated fat,  614
Saturated hydrocarbons,  544
Saturated solution,  286
Saturation of solution,  286
Science societies,  471
Science, technology, society and
the environment (STSE),  8
Second ionization energy,  54
Sewage,  362
Shells.  See Energy levels
SI units,  428
See also International System of
Units
Significant digits,  17, 19EL
calculating with,  20
mass,  21–22SP
measurement,  17
rounding,  20
rules for,  17
volume,  20–21SP
Silicic acid,  329
Silicon dioxide,  102
Silver chloride,  341
Silver chromate
precipitates,  354–355
solubility,  354–355
Single displacement reaction,  126
copper,  138–139inv
halogens,  131
metal activity series,  126–127,
130–131
Skeleton equation,  113
Slag,  77
Smog,  516
Smoking, risk-benefit analysis,
620–622SP
Sniffers,  222
Soap,  360, 369
Sodium bicarbonate,  136, 394
Sodium carbonate,  102, 370
decahydrate,  223, 361
Sodium chloride,  66, 69, 101, 102
bonding,  75
conductivity,  69, 78–79
electronegativity,  75
melting point,  69
solubility,  69, 334
Sodium tripolyphosphate,  8
Soft water,  360
testing,  363
Soil erosion,  5
Solids,  418
Solubility,  12, 286
alkanes,  552
alkenes,  553
aqueous solutions,  330
compounds,  330, 331, 332–333inv
covalent compound,  67, 294
curves, plotting,  296–297inv
electronegativity,  293
factors affecting,  290–301
gases,  298
general guidelines,  334
insoluble,  287
intermolecular forces,  292
ion charge,  330
ion size,  331
ionic compound,  67, 293, 330,
332–333inv
making predictions,  331
molecule size,  295
particle attraction,  291
precipitates,  332–333inv
precipitation reaction,  338
predicting,  293
pressure,  299
slightly soluble,  287
solution,  286
sparingly soluble,  287
temperature,  290, 295, 298EL
Solute,  284, 288
Solution,  284
concentration,  283, 302–318,
317inv, 322–323inv
diluting,  320
gases,  298EL
heat of,  608
measuring heat of,  608EL
preparing,  319–324
saturation,  286
solubility,  286
standard,  319
type of,  284–286
Solvent,  284
coffee,  300
identifying,  287
solute,  288
Sørensen, Søren,  386
Sour gas,  580
Space-filling model,  87, 540
Specific heat capacity,  595, 610
Sodium hydrogen carbonate,  102,
235EL, 370, 394, 534
Sodium hydroxide,  102, 369, 370, 383
Sodium stearate,  360
Sodium sulfate,  104
Sodium sulfite,  340
Sodium thiosulfate,  102
calculating,  598–599SP
compounds,  595
determining,  604–605SP
elements,  595
joules,  595
water,  595
Spectator ions,  341
Stable octet,  47
bond,  96
Standard ambient temperature and
pressure (SATP),  452, 485
Standard atmospheric pressure,  428
Standard solution,  319, 399
diluting,  320–321SP
Standard temperature,  452
Standard temperature and pressure
(STP),  452
Starches,  534
Steroid,  561
Stock system,  102, 103
Stock, Alfred,  102
Stoichiometric amounts,  251
Stoichiometric coefficients,  251
Stoichiometry,  234, 242, 501–514
aqueous solutions,  348–355
ideal gas law,  511–507
limiting reactant,  256–257SP
mass,  241, 247–248SP
mass to volume,  504–507
particle,  247–248SP
process for solving problems,  247
using,  274–275inv
volume to volume,  501–503
water vapour pressure,  507–509
Strong acid,  381
Strong base,  383
Strontium hydroxide,  383
Structural diagrams,  87, 541
alkanes,  550–551
Structural model,  540
Structures of aliphatic compounds,
564inv
Subatomic particles,  35
Sucrose,  536
solubility,  294
Sugars,  534
Sulfur dioxide,  420
double displacement reaction,  340
Sulfuric acid,  381
Superconductors,  437
Superfluid,  442
Surface water,  360
Sustainable development,  625
Swiss Water Process,  300
Symposium,  473
Synthesis reactions,  119, 120
compounds,  120, 121
copper,  138–139inv
elements,  120
Synthesized,  533
Systematic names,  544
Table salt,  69, 101, 102
Technology and chemistry,  7, 8
Temperature,  593
change in,  594–595
Index • MHR 687
pressure,  428, 430–431inv
significant digits,  20–21SP
temperature,  438–439inv
Volume/volume percent,  309
concentration,  309
solving for,  309–310SP
Volumetric flask,  319
Washing soda,  102, 361, 370
Waste water,  362
Water,  199, 207
double displacement reactions,  341
chemical formula,  207
heat transfer,  596–597SP
molecular shape,  88
polar bonds,  90
polar molecule,  90
solubility,  330
solutions,  329
specific heat capacity,  595
Water cycle,  357
Water quality
aqueous solutions,  357–364
health concerns,  358, 364
pollution,  358
Water softener,  361
Water treatment,  359
Weak acid,  381
Weak base,  383
Weak dispersion forces,  420
Weighted average,  165
Wet chemical techniques,  344
WHMIS,  451
Wohler, Friedrich,  534
Word equation,  112
Wu, Dr. Jiangning,  363
X-ray fluorescence,  58
Zero sum rule,  98
gases,  298, 436, 438–439inv,
440–441, 444–446
matter,  14
rate of dissolving,  290
solubility,  290, 295, 298EL
volume,  438–439inv
Tertiary compounds,  104
Testosterone,  561
Theoretical yield,  260
Thermal conductivity,  12
Thermal energy,  593
calculating,  606–607SP
Thermal equilibrium,  605
Thermochemical equation,  588
acetylene,  590–591SP
Third ionization energy,  54
Titration,  399
step-by-step,  399–401
Torr,  428
conversion,  485
Torricelli, Evangelista,  426, 428
Total ionic equation,  341
Toxicity,  12
Transition elements,  41
Translational motion,  419
Triple bond,  82
Triprotic acids,  383
Troposphere,  516
Typhoid,  364
Ultraviolet radiation,  516, 519
Uncertainty in measurement,  15, 17
Universal gas constant,  484, 485
Unsaturated fat,  614
Unsaturated hydrocarbons,  553
Unsaturated solution,  286
Urea,  534
Valence,  96
bond,  96
chemical formula,  98–100
polyatomic,  97, 98
Valence electrons,  45
atoms,  70
Van der Waals equation,  483
van Helmont, Jan Baptista,  114
Vanillin,  200
Variable composition,  284
Vibrational motion,  418
Vinegar,  369, 544
concentration,  402–403inv
Vital force,  534
Vitamins,  188
Volcanoes,  458
Volume
finding,  397–398SP
gases,  422EL, 424, 430–431inv,
432–435, 436, 438–439inv, 440–441
matter,  14
688 MHR • Index
Photo Credits
2-3 (background), © R. Kord/Firstlight.ca; 2-3 (background), Artbase Inc.; 2-3 (background), Ludek Pesek/Science Photo
Library/Photo Researchers Inc; 4 (background), NASA/NSSCD; 4 (bottom right), Artbase Inc.; 5 (bottom left), Artbase Inc.; 6
(bottom right), © Ron Sherman/Stone; 6 (centre right), © Ron Fehling/Masterfile; 7 (centre left), Artbase Inc.; 7 (centre right),
© Tom Stewart/The Stock Market/Firstlight.ca; 9 (centre left), © Sun Media Corporation; 16 (bottom centre), from Chemistry:
The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, Second Edition, by Martin S. Silberberg © 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies
Inc.; 23 (top left), Artbase Inc.; 32 (background), Darius Kochli/Firstlight.ca; 32 (bottom left), Armstong Roberts/Comstock; 32
(background), Artbase Inc.; 40 (bottom), © Stephen Frish Photography; 42 (top), from Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of
Matter and Change, Second Edition, by Martin S. Silberberg © 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies Inc.; 56 (top left), ©
Patrick Bennett/Corbis/Magma; 58 (top left), © Magma Photo News; 64 (background), © Underwood &
Underwood/Corbis/Magma; 64 (top right), Anthony Howard/Masterfile; 65 (bottom left), © Catherine Ursillo/Photo
Researchers Inc.; 66 (centre left), © George Bernard/Science Photo Library/Photo Researchers, Inc.; 66 (centre right), © Geoff
Tompkinson/Science Photo Library/Photo Researchers, Inc.; 69 (top right), © Larry Stepanowicz/Visuals Unlimited, Inc.; 69
(centre left), © Gary Griffen/Animals Animals/Earth Scenes; 69 (bottom right), Artbase Inc.; 70 (top left), © Dick Hemingway;
72 (top right), from Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, Second Edition, by Martin S. Silberberg © 2000,
The McGraw-Hill Companies Inc.; 83 (bottom right), from Chemistry: Concepts and Applications © 2000, The McGraw-Hill
Companies Inc.; 85 (centre left), © Jean Marc Barey/Agence Vandystadt/Photo Researchers, Inc.; 85 (centre left), Artbase Inc.;
90 (centre right), © Stephen Dalton/Photo Researchers, Inc.; 93 (background), Artbase Inc.; 110 (background), © Mike
Timo/STONE; 110 (bottom left), © Mike & Carol Werner/Stock, Boston Inc./PictureQuest; 111 (bottom left), Trevor
Bonderud/Firstlight.ca; 114 (top left), Artbase Inc.; 119 (bottom left), Artbase Inc.; 119 (bottom right), © Dale Sarver/Animals
Animals; 120 (centre right), Bill Ivy/Ivy Images; 121 (centre left), © Bruce Forster/STONE; 123 (top right), © Charles D.
Winters/Photo Researchers; 127 (top right), from Sciencepower 10 © 2000, McGraw-Hill Ryerson Limited; 127 (centre left),
from Chemistry: Concepts and Applications © 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies Inc.; 141 (centre right), © Dave G.
Houser/Corbis/Magma; 142 (centre left), © David Joel/STONE; 143 (centre left), VU/National Archives/Visuals Unlimited; 145
(top left), Notman Photographic Archives, McCord Museum of Canadian History, Montreal; 147 (top right), © AFP/COR-
BIS/MAGMA; 148-149 (background), © Notts/Firstlight.ca; 152 (centre left), COMSTOCK IMAGES/B. Pizaro; 152 (bottom left), ©
Russell D. Curtis/Photo Researchers, Inc.; 172 (centre right), from Chemistry: Concepts and Applications © 2000, The
McGraw-Hill Companies Inc.; 173 (bottom left), from Chemistry: Concepts and Applications © 2000, The McGraw-Hill
Companies Inc.; 174 (centre left), © Walter Schmid/Stone Images; 177 (bottom right), Artbase Inc; 192 (top left), © Nino
Mascardi/Image Bank; 196 (background), Inga Spence/Index Stock Imagery; 196 (bottom right), Jackson Vereen/Food Pix; 198
(bottom right), Index Stock Imagery; 198 (bottom left), © Larry Williams/Masterfile; 198 (bottom right), Didier Givois/Allsport
USA; 205 (centre), from Sciencepower 8 © 2000, McGraw-Hill Ryerson Limited; 211 (centre right), © Will & Deni
McIntyre/Photo Researchers, Inc.; 216 (top left), Chris Mikula/The Ottawa Citizen; 222 (centre left), © Mark
Stephenson/Firstlight.ca; 223 (centre right), Angle Wynn/Native Stock; 232 (bottom left), NASA/Science Photo Library/Photo
Researchers; 233 (bottom left), NASA; 236 (top right), © Thomas Dressler/First Light Associated Photographers; 242 (centre
right), NASA; 244 (centre left), Neil Bartlett/B. C. Jennings Photographer; 248 (centre left), © Crown/Health & Safety
Laboratory/Science Photo Library/Photo Researchers, Inc.; 252 (top left), © Nancy Richmond/Ivy Images; 260 (centre right),
Artbase Inc; 265 (top left), V.C.L/Spencer Rowell/FPG International; 268 (top left), © Ed Gifford/Masterfile; 274 (centre left), ©
1991, Richard T. Nowitz/Photo Researchers, Inc.; 280-281 (background), © Carolyn A. McKeone/Photo Researchers, Inc.; 282
(background), © C. Dass/Firstlight.ca; 282 (bottom centre), © Chris Vincent/Firstlight.ca; 283 (bottom left), © Christian
Michaels/FPG International; 285 (top left), © Larry Stepanowicz/Visuals Unlimited, Inc.; 285 (top left), © Larry
Stepanowicz/Visuals Unlimited, Inc.; 285 (top centre), © Chris Vincent/Firstlight.ca; 285 (top centre), © David Burch/Index
Stock; 285 (top right), Dick Hemingway Photographs; 285 (background), © NMR/Firstlight.ca; 285 (top right), © IPS/Index
Stock; 286 (bottom left), © Sovfoto/Eastfoto/PictureQuest; 290 (bottom left), © Lawrence Migdale/Science Source/Photo
Researchers, Inc.; 298 (top left), © Terry C. Hazen/Visuals Unlimited, Inc.; 299 (top right), Dick Hemingway Photographs; 300
(bottom left), © Minden/Firstlight.ca; 307 (top left), Artbase Inc; 307 (top right), Artbase Inc; 309 (top right), © Charles D.
Winters/Photo Researchers, Inc.; 310 (centre left), Dick Hemingway Photographs; 313 (centre right), © Matthias
Kulka/Firstlight.ca; 319 (centre right), © Larry Stepanowicz/VISUALS UNLIMITED, INC.; 324 (top left), Artbase Inc.; 328 (back-
ground), Artbase Inc.; 328 (bottom left), Artbase Inc.; 350 (centre right), © Hans Reinhard/Okapia/Photo Researchers, Inc.; 358
(bottom right), © Geoff Tompkinson/Science Photo Library/Photo Researchers, Inc.; 360 (bottom right), © Andrew
Syred/Science Photo Library/Photo Researchers, Inc.; 368 (bottom right), © McGraw Hill Higher Education/Stephen Frisch,
Photographer; 368 (bottom right), © McGraw Hill Higher Education/Stephen Frisch, Photographer; 369 (bottom left), Kathleen
Campbell/Stone; 373 (bottom right), © E.F. Smith Collection University of Pennsylania Library; 375 (bottom left), © Science
Photo Library/Photo Researchers, Inc.; 375 (bottom centre), © E.F. Smith Collection University of Pennsylania Library; 385
(top left), © VU/Jeff Greenberg/MR/Visuals Unlimited; 408 (centre left), © Garry Black/Masterfile; 408 (top right), © Brian
Sytnyk/Masterfile; 408 (centre right), © Gilbert&Brant/Photo Researchers, Inc.; 408 (top right), Artbase Inc.; 416 (background),
© Pat Morrow/Firstlight.ca; 416 (bottom right), Comstock Photofile Limited; 417 (bottom left), © Firstlight.ca; 425 (centre left),
© John Lemker/Earth Scenes; 427 (bottom left), © Damien Lovegrove/Science Photo Library/Photo Researchers, Inc.; 428 (cen-
tre right), Westerkov/Earth Scenes; 436 (bottom centre), © Bruce Davidson/Earth Scenes; 436 (bottom left), © Bruce
Davidson/Earth Scenes; 436 (bottom right), © Bruce Davidson/Earth Scenes; 437 (top right), © Roy Ooms/Masterfile; 450 (bot-
tom left), Artbase Inc.; 451 (top right), Michelle Del Guercio/Photo Researchers Inc.; 452 (centre left), Paul Rocheleau/Index
Stock; 458 (centre left), Science Photo Library/Photo Researchers; 458 (bottom left), D&J Heaton/Stock Boston; 462 (bottom
Credits • MHR 689
left), © James King-Holmes/Science Photo Library/Photo Researchers, Inc.; 462 (bottom right), Artbase Inc.; 463 (centre left), ©
Michael Creagen Photography; 464 (bottom left), © Bob Peterson/FPG International; 464 (bottom right), Artbase Inc.; 465 (bot-
tom right), © Kevin Aitken/Firstlight; 468 (background), © Benelux Press/Masterfile; 468 (bottom left), North Wind Picture
Archives; 469 (bottom left), COMSTOCK IMAGES; 470 (centre left), © Science Photo Library/Photo Researchers, Inc.; 470 (cen-
tre), © Science Photo Library/Photo Researchers, Inc.; 470 (centre right), © Science Photo Library/Photo Researchers, Inc.; 487
(centre left), © Bart Vallecoccia/Masterfile; 488 (bottom left), © Jeff Perkell/Masterfile; 489 (centre left), © David & Peter
Turnley/CORBIS/MAGMA; 490 (top right), © Ralph Reinhold/Earth Scenes; 492 (top right), © E.R. Degginger/Earth Scenes; 496
(top left), © Charles D. Winters/Science Photo Library/Photo Researchers, Inc.; 504 (top left), Samuel Ashfield/FPG
International; 505 (top right), © Charles D. Winters/Science Photo Library/Photo Researchers, Inc.; 507 (bottom right), Visuals
Unlimited, Inc.; 513 (centre left), © Ned Therrien/Visuals Unlimited, Inc.; 514 (bottom left), © Peter Christopher/Masterfile; 515
(centre right), Artbase Inc.; 516 (top left), © Charles D. Winters/Science Photo Library/Photo Researchers, Inc.; 517 (top right),
© NOAA/Science Photo Library/Photo Researchers, Inc.; 518 (top left), P.A. Ariya; 526 (bottom left), Comstock Images; 526 (top
right), VU/© Bernd Wittich/Visuals Unlimited, Inc.; 532 Richard Dunoff/First Light Associates; 532 (background), © Richard
Dunoff/Firstlight.ca; 533 (bottom left), Artbase Inc.; 536 (bottom left), © University of Alberta Imaging Centre 1999; 538 (top
right), © 2000, Rosemary Weller/Stone; 561 (centre left), © David Hall/Masterfile; 568 (centre right), © Mike Dobel, MCMX-
CI/Masterfile; 572 (top left), © Michael Branscom Photography; 572 (centre right), © K9 Storm Inc.; 576 (background), Artbase
Inc.; 576 (bottom right), Artbase Inc.; 578 (bottom right), © Peter Christopher/Masterfile; 578 (centre right), © Firstlight.ca; 578
(centre left), © Marilyn "Angel" Wynn/Native Stock; 580 (top left), © Lowell Georgia/Photo Researchers, Inc.; 580 (bottom
right), © Phil Degginger/Color-Pic, Inc.; 580 (bottom left), © Alan Marsh/First Light; 588 (bottom left), © Charles D.
Winters/Photo Researchers, Inc.; 595 (top right), Artbase Inc.; 601 (top left), Artbase Inc.; 603 (centre right), Holton
Getty/Designed by Laplace and Lavoisier; 606 (top left), Comstock Photofile Limited; 609 (centre left), © Stephen Frish/Stock,
Boston/PictureQuest; 612 (centre), from Chemistry: Concepts and Applications © 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies Inc.; 613
(top left), © Eastcott/Momatiuk/Animals Animals; 613 (bottom left), © Stephen Frish/Stock, Boston/PictureQuest; 615 (bottom
right), Artbase Inc.; 619 (centre right), Image Courtesy GORE-TEX; 619 (centre left), © 1988, Michael Ventura/Bruce Coleman,
Inc.; 619 (bottom left), Artbase Inc.; 619 (bottom right), Artbase Inc.; 620 (top left), Artbase Inc.; 622 (bottom left), © Richard
Berenholtz/Firstlight.ca; 622 (centre left), © S.L.I.D.E./Phototake; 622 (centre right), © Tim Davis/Photo Researchers, Inc.; 624
(top left), © Vanessa Vick/Photo Researchers, Inc.; 629 (top right), © George Hunter/Comstock; 630 (centre left), © SIU/Visuals
Unlimited; 639 (centre right), COMSTOCK IMAGES/Grant Heilman Photography; 640 (centre left), © Ken Lax/Photo
Researchers, Inc.; 641 (centre right), Holt Studios International (Nigel Cattlin)/Photo Researchers Inc.; 641 (centre right), Bernd
Wittich/Visuals Unlimited; 642 (centre left), © Jonathan Blair/CORBIS/MAGMA; 643 (bottom right), COMSTOCK IMAGES
Illustration Credits
16 (centre), from Chemistry: Concepts and Applications © 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies Inc.; 29 (centre right), from
Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, Second Edition, by Martin S. Silberberg © 2000, The McGraw-Hill
Companies Inc.; 35 (bottom right), from Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, Second Edition, by Martin
S. Silberberg © 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies Inc.; 54 (top left), 42 (top), from Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of
Matter and Change, Second Edition, by Martin S. Silberberg © 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies Inc.; 54 (centre right), 42
(top), from Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, Second Edition, by Martin S. Silberberg © 2000, The
McGraw-Hill Companies Inc.; 57 (bottom left), from Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, Second
Edition, by Martin S. Silberberg © 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies Inc.; 141 (bottom), from Chemistry: The Molecular
Nature of Matter and Change, Second Edition, by Martin S. Silberberg © 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies Inc.; 166 (bot-
tom), from Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, Second Edition, by Martin S. Silberberg © 2000, The
McGraw-Hill Companies Inc.; 215 (centre), from Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, Second Edition, by
Martin S. Silberberg © 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies Inc.; 219 (bottom), from Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of
Matter and Change, Second Edition, by Martin S. Silberberg © 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies Inc.; 294 (centre right),
from Chemistry: Concepts and Applications © 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies Inc.; 301 (centre right), from Chemistry:
Concepts and Applications © 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies Inc.; 344 (bottom centre), from Chemistry: The Molecular
Nature of Matter and Change, Second Edition, by Martin S. Silberberg © 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies Inc.; 359 (cen-
tre), from Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, Second Edition, by Martin S. Silberberg © 2000, The
McGraw-Hill Companies Inc.; 418 (centre left), from Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, Second
Edition, by Martin S. Silberberg © 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies Inc.; 419 (top right), from Chemistry: The Molecular
Nature of Matter and Change, Second Edition, by Martin S. Silberberg © 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies Inc.; 419 (centre
right), from Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, Second Edition, by Martin S. Silberberg © 2000, The
McGraw-Hill Companies Inc.; 432 (centre right), from Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, Second
Edition, by Martin S. Silberberg © 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies Inc.; 442 (top), from Chemistry: The Molecular Nature
of Matter and Change, Second Edition, by Martin S. Silberberg © 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies Inc.; 476 (bottom cen-
tre), from Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, Second Edition, by Martin S. Silberberg © 2000, The
McGraw-Hill Companies Inc.; 480 (bottom left), from Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, Second
Edition, by Martin S. Silberberg © 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies Inc.
Text Credits
634–635 A portion of this material adapted from Essential Chemistry by Raymond Chang © 1996, McGraw-Hill
690 MHR • Credits
