Take Good Care of
This Textbook
This textbook is the property of your school.
Take good care not to damage or lose it.
Here are 10 ideas to help take care of the book:
1. Cover the book with protective material, such as plastic, old
newspapers or magazines.
2. Always keep the book in a clean dry place.
3. Be sure your hands are clean when you use the book.
4. Do not write on the cover or inside pages.
5. Use a piece of paper or cardboard as a bookmark.
6. Never tear or cut out any pictures or pages.
7. Repair any torn pages with paste or tape.
8. Pack the book carefully when you place it in your school bag.
9. Handle the book with care when passing it to another person.
10. When using a new book for the first time, lay it on its back. Open
only a few pages at a time. Press lightly along the bound edge as
you turn the pages. This will keep the cover in good condition.
CHEMISTRY
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
GRADE 9
Authors, Editors and Reviewers:
J.L. Sharma (Ph.D.)
Nell Angelo (M.A.)
Stella Johnson (B.Sc.)
Solomon Tekleyohannes (B.Sc.)
Taye Hirpassa (B.Sc., M.A.)
Merid Tessema (Ph.D.)
Evaluators:
Nega Gichile
Mahtot Abera
Solomon Haileyesus
FEDERAL DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF ETHIOPIA
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION
1
Page
Unit
Structure of the Atom ............ 1
1.1 Atomic Theory ........................................... 3
1.2 Discoveries of the Fundamental Subatomic
Particles and the Atomic Nucleus ............... 6
1.3 Composition of an Atom and the Isotopes 12
1.4 The Atomic Models ................................... 21
Check List ......................................... 31
Unit Summary .................................. 31
Review Exercise ............................... 33
2
Periodic Classification
Unit
of the Elements ............ 35
2.1 Introduction ............................................... 36
2.2 The Modern Periodic Table ...................... 38
2.3 Periodic Properties in the Periodic Table .. 47
2.4 Advantages of Periodic Classification ...... 59
Check List ......................................... 61
Unit Summary .................................. 62
Review Exercise ............................... 62
3
Chemical Bonding and
Unit
Intermolecular Forces ... 65
3.1 Chemical Bonding ..................................... 67
3.2 Ionic Bonding ............................................ 69
3.3 Covalent Bonding ..................................... 77
3.4 Metallic Bonding ....................................... 87
3.5 Intermolecular Forces ................................ 89
Check List ......................................... 92
Unit Summary .................................. 92
Review Exercise ............................... 93
II I
IIVV Content
4
Chemical Reaction and
Unit
Stoichiometery ............ 95
4.1 Introduction ............................................... 96
4.2 Fundamental Laws of Chemical
Reactions ................................................... 97
4.3 Chemical Equations ................................. 102
4.4 Energy Changes in Chemical Reactions .. 108
4.5 Types of Chemical Reactions .................. 113
4.6 Stoichiometery ......................................... 123
4.7 Oxidation and Reduction Reactions ......... 136
4.8 Rate of Chemical Reaction and Chemical
Equilibrium .............................................. 144
Check List ........................................ 160
Unit Summary ................................. 160
Review Exercise .............................. 161
5
Physical States of
Unit
Matter ........................ 163
5.1 Introduction .............................................. 165
5.2 Kinetic Theory and Properties of Matter . 166
5.3 The Gaseous State .................................... 169
5.4 The Liquid State ....................................... 189
5.5 The Solid State .......................................... 195
Check List ........................................ 198
Unit Summary ................................. 199
Review Exercise .............................. 200
1
TINU
Bohr’s Model
Structure of the Atom
Unit Outcomes
After completing this unit, you will be able to:
E comprehend Dalton’s atomic theory and modern atomic theory;
E understand the discovery of the electron and the nucleus;
E know the terms like atomic number, mass number, atomic mass, isotope, energy
level, valence electrons, and electron configuration;
E understand the Dalton, Thomson, Rutherford, Bohr and the quantum mechanical
atomic models;
E develop skills in:
– determining the number of protons, electrons, and neutrons of atoms from
atomic numbers and mass numbers,
– calculating the atomic masses of elements that have isotopes,
– writing the ground-state electron configurations of atoms using sub-energy
levels and drawing diagrammatic representations of atoms; and
E demonstrate scientific inquiry skills: observing, comparing and contrasting,
communicating, asking questions, and applying concepts.
MAIN CONTENTS
1.1 Atomic theory
1.2 Discoveries of the fundamental subatomic particles and the atomic nucleus
1.3 Composition of an atom and the isotopes
1.4 The atomic models
–Unit Summary
–Review Exercise
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Start-up Activity
Scientists have been able to gather information about atoms without actually seeing
them. Perform the following activity to get an idea about the structure of the atom.
Take an onion. It looks solid. Peel off a layer, and you will find another layer
underneath. Layer after layer surfaces as the onion is peeled off. Keep on peeling
to its core.
Analysis
1. How do you compare this with the atomic model?
2. What do the layers represent in the atomic model?
3. What does the core represent in the atom?
Two thousand years ago, ancient Greek philosophers developed a theory of matter
that was not based on the experimental evidences. A notable Greek philosopher,
namely, Democritus, believed that all matter was composed of very tiny, indivisible
particles. He called them atomos. Hence, the word ‘atom’ came from the Greek word
atomos, which means uncuttable or indivisible.
Aristotle was part of the generation that succeeded Democritus. He did not believe in
atomos. Aristotle thought that all matter was continuous. That is, if one proceeded on
breaking down a substance, it would be impossible to reach to the last indivisible
particle. In other words, it would continue to divide infinitely. His opinion was
accepted for nearly 200 years.
The early concept of atoms was simply a result of thinking and reasoning on the part
of the philosophers, instead of experimental observations. In 1803, however, John
Dalton proposed a completely different theory of matter. His theory was based on
scientific experimental observations and logical laws. These scientific assumptions were
Figure 1.1 Dalton’s atomic symbols.
2
STRUCTURE OF THE ATOM
very closely related to what is presently known about the atom. Due to this, John
Dalton is often referred to as the father of modern atomic theory.
Dalton also worked on the relative masses of atoms and gave symbols to some
elements as illustrated in Figure 1.1.
1.1 Atomic Theory
Competencies
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• describe Dalton’s atomic theory;
• describe modern atomic theory; and
• compare and contrast Dalton’s atomic theory with modern atomic theory.
Activity 1.1
Form a group and discuss the following idea: Dalton’s contribution was different from that
of the ancient Greeks who postulated the existence of atoms. Point out the differences
between the two ideas. Present your discussion to the class.
Even though the idea of the existence of atoms and atomic theory dates back to
classical times, as discussed earlier, only Dalton's atomic theory ideas were the basis
for the new era of science.
1.1.1 Dalton’s Atomic Theory
Historical Note
British physicist and chemist John Dalton is best known for
developing the atomic theory of elements and molecules, the
foundation of modern physical science. While pondering the
nature of the atmosphere during a meteorological study in the
early 1800s, Dalton deduced the structure of carbon dioxide and
proposed that an exact number of atoms constitute each
molecule. He held that all atoms of a given element are identical
and different from the atoms of every other element. The first to
John Dalton
classify elements according to their atomic weights, Dalton set
the stage for a revolution in scientific thought.
3
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
In 1804, John Dalton developed the first modern theory of atoms and proposed their
existence. Dalton's atomic theory was based directly on the ideas of elements and
compounds, and on the three laws of chemical combination. The three laws are:
i) The law of conservation of mass states that matter is neither created nor
destroyed. This law is also called the law of indestructibility of matter. It means
that the mass of the reactants is exactly equal to the mass of the products in
any chemical reaction. A chemical reaction involves only the separation and union
of atoms.
ii) The law of definite proportions states that a pure compound is always
composed of the same elements combined in a definite ratio by mass. For
example, water (H O) is composed of hydrogen and oxygen only. These elements
2
are always in the proportion of 11.19% hydrogen to 88.81% oxygen by mass
and in the proportion 2 : 1 by volume.
iii) The law of multiple proportions states that when two different compounds are
formed from the same elements, the masses of one of the elements in the two
compounds, compared to a given mass of the other element, is in a small whole-
number ratio. For example, carbon and oxygen form two compounds: carbon
monoxide and carbon dioxide. Carbon monoxide contains 1.3321 g of oxygen
for each 1 g of carbon, whereas carbon dioxide contains 2.6642 g of oxygen
for each 1g of carbon. Hence, carbon dioxide contains twice the mass of oxygen
as does carbon monoxide.
AAccttiivviittyy 11..22
Form a group and perform the following task. Present your findings to the class.
Using two chemical compounds as an example, describe the difference between the law
of definite proportions and the law of multiple proportions.
Dalton proved that these laws are entirely reasonable if the elements are composed of
tiny particles, which he called atoms. An atom is the smallest fundamental particle of
an element.
The basic postulates of Dalton’s Atomic Theory are summarized as follows:
1. All elements are made up of small particles called atoms.
2. Atoms are indivisible and indestructible.
3. All atoms of a given element are identical in mass and in all other properties.
4. Atoms are neither created nor destroyed in chemical reactions.
5. Compounds are formed when atoms of more than one element combine.
6. In a given compound, the relative numbers and types of atoms are constant.
4
STRUCTURE OF THE ATOM
Although some of these postulates, like postulate number 2 and number 3, have been
shown to be incorrect by later work, Dalton's theory was a brilliant and logical
explanation of many experimental discoveries and laws that were known at that time.
AAccttiivviittyy 11..32
Form a group. Discuss the following laws and present to the class.
Use Dalton’s atomic theory to explain:
a The law of conservation of mass
b The law of definite proportions
c The law of multiple proportions.
1.1.2 Modern Atomic Theory
Towards the end of the 19th century, various experimental discoveries revealed the
existence of subatomic particles, isotopes, and so on. In light of these findings,
Dalton's Atomic Theory was modified.
The Modern Atomic Theory can be summarized as follows:
1. Atoms are the smallest particles of all elements that can take part in a chemical
reaction.
2. An atom is divisible. It can be subdivided into electrons, protons, and neutrons.
An atom is also indestructible i.e., atoms can neither be created nor destroyed
during ordinary chemical reactions.
3. Atoms of the same element may not be identical in mass because of the existence
of isotopes.
4. Atoms of the same elements have identical chemical properties.
5. Atoms of different elements have different chemical properties.
Atoms of two or more elements combine in simple whole-number ratios to form
6.
compounds.
Exercise 1.1
1. Name the postulates of Dalton’s atomic theory.
2. Compare and contrast Dalton’s atomic theory with modern atomic theory.
5
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
1.2 DISCOVERIES OF THE FUNDAMENTAL SUBATOMIC
PARTICLES AND THE ATOMIC NUCLEUS
Competencies
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• explain the discovery of the electron;
• explain the discovery of the nucleus;
• explain the discovery of the neutron.
AAccttiivviittyy 1 1..43
Form a group and discuss the following ideas. Present your discussion to the rest of the
class.
1. In your grade 7 chemistry lesson, you have learned that atoms consist of three
fundamental subatomic particles. What are these? Where is their location in the atoms?
What are their charges?
2. What were the consequences of the discoveries of subatomic particles on Dalton’s
atomic theory?
In the late 1880’s, John Dalton thought atoms were indivisible. However, a series of
investigations and astounding discoveries clearly demonstrated that atoms are made up
of smaller particles, called subatomic particles. The three fundamental subatomic
particles of an atom are electrons, protons, and neutrons.
1.2.1 Discovery of the Electron
Do you think that there is a similarity between cathode rays and electrons?
The electron was the first subatomic particle to be identified. In 1879, William
Crooke studied electrical discharges in partially evacuated tubes called
discharge tubes.
Two electrodes from a high-voltage source are sealed into a glass tube from which air
has been evacuated. The negative electrode is the cathode and the positive one is the
anode. When the high-voltage current is turned on, the glass tube emits a greenish
light and a beam of light is seen at the anode. These rays flow from the cathode
towards the anode in a straight line. They are called cathode rays. Later on, in 1897,
J.J. Thomson found that the beam was deflected by both electrical and magnetic
6
STRUCTURE OF THE ATOM
fields. In an electric field, they bend toward the positive plate. From this he concluded
that the cathode rays are made up of very small negatively charged particles, which he
named electrons. He concluded that electrons are constituents of all matter, because
he obtained the same results when he changed the gas and the electrode in the tube.
Figure 1.2 A simple cathode-ray tube.
Properties of Cathode Rays
Cathode rays possess the following properties:
1. An object placed between the cathode and the opposite end of the tube,
casts a shadow on the glass. This shows that the cathode rays travel in a
straight line.
2. A paddle wheel placed in the path of cathode rays rotates. This indicates that
cathode rays are of particle nature-the particles strike the paddle and therefore
move the wheel.
Cathode Gas at low pressure
Paddle wheel
Anode
Rail to support
paddle wheel
Figure 1.3 A paddle wheel placed in the path of cathode ray.
3. When an electric or magnetic field is applied in the path of cathode rays, they
are deflected towards the positive plate. This shows that cathode rays are
negatively charged.
7
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
4. The properties of cathode rays (like charge to mass ratio, e–/m ratio) do not
depend on the nature of the gas in the discharge tube or on the material of the
cathode. This shows that electrons are present in the atoms of all elements.
Thus, cathode-ray experiments provided evidence that atoms are divisible into small
particles, and that one of the atom’s basic constituents is the negatively charged
particle called electron.
PROJECT WORK
Produce a model of cathode ray tube from simple and locally available materials
such as glass tube, copper wire and rubber stoppers. Using your model show how
cathode rays are generated and explain their properties.
Charge and Mass of an Electron
J.J. Thomson studied the deflection of cathode rays under the simultaneous application
of electric and magnetic fields, that are applied perpendicular to each other. His
experiment led to the precise determination of the charge-to-mass ratio (e–/m) of an
electron, and this ‘e–/m’ value was found to be 1.76 × 108 coulomb/g. Coulomb is a
unit of electric charge.
Activity 1.5
Form a group and discuss how J.J Thomson's determination of the charge-to-mass ratio of
the electron led to the conclusion that atoms were composed of sub atomic particles.
Present your findings to the class.
In 1909, Robert Millikan determined the charge of an electron (e–), using the oil drop
experiment. He found the charge of an electron to be 1.60 × 10–19 coulombs.
Combination of e–/m and e– values are used to determine the mass of an electron,
which is found to be 9.11 × 10–31 kg.
From Thomson’s experiment, e–/m = 1.76 × 108 C/g
From Millikan’s experiment, e– = 1.60 × 10–19 C
e− 1.60 × 10-19 C
\ Mass of the electron = m = =
e−/m 1.76 × 108 C/g
= 9.11 × 10–28 g = 9.11 × 10–31 kg
From the above discussion, it follows that:
An electron is a fundamental particle of an atom carrying a negative charge and having
1
a very small mass. The mass of an electron is approximately times the mass
1837
of a hydrogen atom.
8
STRUCTURE OF THE ATOM
Exercise 1.2
1. Explain how the electron was discovered.
2. Give explanation on the works of J.J. Thomson and R. Millikan.
1.2.2 Discovery of the Atomic Nucleus
Radioactivity
In 1895, the German physicist, Wilhelm Röntgen noticed that cathode rays caused
glass and metals to emit very unusual rays. This highly energetic radiation penetrated
matter, darkened covered photographic plates, and caused a variety of substances to
fluoresce. Since these rays could not be deflected by a magnet, they could not contain
charged particles as cathode rays do. Röntgen called them X-rays.
Not long after Röntgen’s discovery, Antoine Becquerel, a professor of physics in
Paris, began to study fluorescent properties of substances. He found that exposing
thickly wrapped photographic plates to a certain uranium compound caused them to
darken, even without the stimulation of cathode rays. Like X-rays, the rays from the
uranium compound were highly energetic and could not be deflected by a magnet.
Also, these rays were generated spontaneously. One of Becquerel's students, Marie
Curie, suggested the name radioactivity to describe this spontaneous emission of
particles and/or radiation. Consequently, any element that spontaneously emits
radiation is said to be radioactive.
Further investigation revealed that three types of rays are produced by the “decay”, or
breakdown of radioactive substances such as uranium, polonium, and radium. These
are alpha, beta, and gamma rays.
Alpha (α) rays consist of positively charged particles called α-particles. They are
deflected by positively charged plates. Beta (β) rays or β-particles are electrons of
nuclear origin that are deflected by negatively charged plates. The third type of
radioactive radiation consists of high-energy rays called gamma (γ) rays. Like X-rays,
γ-rays have no charge and are not affected by an external electric or magnetic field.
Activity 1.6
Form a group and discuss the following ideas. Present your discussion to the class.
Scientists discovered the three subatomic particles (electrons, protons and neutrons).
Compare and contrast these fundamental sub atomic particles with alpha particles, beta
particles and gamma rays in terms of the nature of the particles.
More details about the structure of an atom were provided in 1911 by Ernest
Rutherford and his associates, Hans Geiger and Ernest Marsden. The scientists
9
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
bombarded a thin gold foil with fast moving alpha particles. Alpha particles are positively
charged particles with about four times the mass of a hydrogen atom. Geiger and
Marsden assumed that mass and charge were uniformly distributed throughout the atoms
of the gold foil. Therefore, they expected the alpha particles to pass through the gold foil
with only a slight deflection. However, when the scientists checked for the possibility of
wide-angle deflections, they were shocked to find that roughly 1 in 8000 of the alpha
particles had actually been redirected back toward the source.
After thinking about the observations for two years, Rutherford finally came up with
an explanation. He reasoned that the rebounded alpha particles must have
experienced some powerful force within the atom. He concluded that the source of
this force must occupy a very small amount of space because very few of the total
number of alpha particles had been affected by it. He also concluded that the force
must be caused by a very densely packed bundle of matter with a positive electric
charge. Rutherford called this small, dense, positive bundle of matter the nucleus.
Figure 1.4 Rutherford’s a – particles experiment.
Rutherford’s Conclusion
1. Since most of the α-particles passed through the gold foil undeflected, most of
the space in an atom is empty.
2. Some of the α-particles were deflected by small angles. This indicated the presence
of a heavy positive centre in the atom, which Rutherford named the nucleus.
3. Only a few particles (1 in about a million) were either deflected by a very large
angle or deflected back. This confirmed that the space occupied by the heavy
positive centre must be very small.
10
STRUCTURE OF THE ATOM
Activity 1.7
Form a group and perform the following task. Present your findings to the class.
Predict what Rutherford might have observed if he had bombarded copper metal instead
of gold metal with alpha particles.
From the angles through which alpha particles are deflected, Rutherford calculated
that the nucleus of an atom has a radius of about 10–15 m. The radius of the whole
atom is about 10–10 m. Therefore, the nucleus is about 1/10,000 (one ten-thousandth)
of the size of the atom as a whole. Thus, if we magnified an atom to the size of a
football stadium (about 100 m across), the nucleus would be represented by a pea
placed at the centre of the pitch.
Rutherford suggested that the negatively charged electrons surrounding the positively
charged nucleus are like planets around the sun revolving. He could not explain,
however, what kept the electrons in motion around the nucleus.
1.2.3 Discovery of Neutrons
In 1932, an English scientist, James Chadwick, identified the existence of neutrons.
He bombarded a thin foil of beryllium with α-particles of a radioactive substance. He
then observed that highly penetrating rays, consisting of electrically neutral particles of
a mass approximately equal to that of the proton, were produced. These neutral
particles are called neutrons.
A neutron is a subatomic particle carrying no charge and having a mass of 1.675 ×
10–24 g. This mass is almost equal to that of a proton or of a hydrogen atom.
Exercise 1.3
1. Which experimental evidence indicates that:
i) electrons are negatively charged particles?
ii) electrons are the constituents of all atoms?
2. In Rutherford’s experiment, most of the alpha particles passed through the
gold foil undeflected. What does this indicate?
3. In Rutherford’s experiment, some of the α-particles were deflected by small
angles. What does this indicate?
4. What was determined from Millikan’s oil drop experiment?
5. Three particles are fired into a box that is positively charged on one side and
negatively charged on the other side. The result is shown in Figure 1.5.
11
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Figure 1.5 particles fired into a box.
a Which particle is a proton?
b Which particle is an electron?
c Which particle is a neutron?
Activity 1.8
Hydrogen is the most abundant element in the universe. It is the fuel for the sun and
other stars. It is currently believed that there are roughly 2,000 times more hydrogen
atoms than oxygen atoms. There are also 10,000 times more hydrogen atoms than carbon
atoms.
Make a model of a hydrogen atom, using materials of your choice, to represent a
hydrogen atom, including the proton and electron. Present the model to the class, and
explain in what ways your model resembles a hydrogen atom.
1.3 COMPOSITION OF AN ATOM AND ISOTOPES
Competencies
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• write the relative charges of an electron, a proton, and a neutron;
• tell the absolute and relative masses of an electron, a proton, and a neutron;
• tell the number of protons and electrons in an atom from the atomic number of
the element;
• determine the number of neutrons from given values of atomic number and mass
number;
12
STRUCTURE OF THE ATOM
• explain the terms atomic mass and isotope, and
• calculate the atomic masses of elements that have isotopes.
AAccttiivviittyy 11..96
Based on your previous knowledge discuss the following concepts in groups, and share
your ideas with the rest of the class.
1. Would you think that it is possible for someone to discover a new element that would
fit between magnesium (atomic number 12) and aluminum (atomic number 13)?
2. You are given the following three findings:
a An atom of calcium has a mass of 40 a.m.u. Another atom of calcium has 44 a.m.u.
b An atom of calcium has a mass of 40 a.m.u. An atom of potassium has a mass
of 40 a.m.u.
c An atom of calcium has a mass of 40 a.m.u. An atom of cobalt has a mass of
59 a.m.u.
Are these findings in agreement with Dalton’s atomic theory? Discuss your conclusions in
your group.
All atoms have two regions. The nucleus is a very small region located at the center of
an atom. Except for the nucleus of the simplest type of hydrogen atom, all atomic
nuclei are made of two kinds of particles, protons and neutrons. Surrounding the
nucleus, there is a region occupied by negatively charged particles called electrons.
This region is very large compared with the size of the nucleus. A proton has a
positive charge, which is equal in magnitude to the negative charge of an electron.
Atoms are electrically neutral because they contain equal numbers of protons and
electrons.
Figure 1.6 A simple representation of an atom.
A proton has a mass of 1.673 × 10–27 kg, and a neutron has a mass of 1.675 × 10–27
kg. Hence, protons and neutrons have approximately the same mass. Most of the
mass of the atom is concentrated in the nucleus, assuming the mass of an electron to
be negligible or almost zero.
13
STRUCTURE OF THE ATOM
1.3.1 Atomic Number and Mass Number
Activity 1.12
Form a group and perform the following task. Present your findings to the class.
The table below gives the number of electrons, protons and neutrons in atoms or ions for
a number of elements.
Atom or ion of elements A B C D E F G
Number of electrons 5 7 9 12 7 6 9
Number of protons 5 7 10 10 7 5 9
Number of neutrons 5 7 10 10 8 6 10
Based on the table, answer the following questions:
i) Which of the species are neutral?
ii) Which of them are negatively charged?
iii) Give the symbolic representations for 'B' , 'D' and 'F'
All atoms are composed of the same basic particles. Yet all atoms are not the same.
Atoms of different elements have different number of protons. Atoms of the same
element have the same number of protons.
The Atomic Number (Z) of an element is equal to the number of protons in the
nucleus of an atom. It is also equal to the number of electrons in the neutral atom.
Z = p+ or Z = e– (in a natural atom)
For different elements, the nuclei of their atoms differ in the number of protons they
contain. Therefore, they differ in the amount of positive charge that their atoms
possess. Thus, the number of protons in the nucleus of an atom determines the identity
of an atom.
Each atom of an element is identified by its atomic number. In the periodic table, the
atomic number of an element is indicated below its symbol. Notice that the elements
are placed in order of increasing atomic number. Hydrogen, H, has atomic number 1,
hence, atoms of the element hydrogen have one proton in the nucleus. Next is helium,
He, which has two protons in its nucleus. Lithium, Li, has three protons. Beryllium,
Be, has four protons, and so on.
Mass Number (A) is the sum of the number of protons and neutrons in the nucleus of
an atom. Collectively, the protons and neutrons of an atom are called its nucleons.
Mass Number (A) = Number of protons + Number of neutrons
A = p+ + n°
15
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
The name of an element, its atomic number and mass number can be represented by
a shorthand symbol. For example, to represent neutral atoms of magnesium with 12
protons and 12 neutrons, the symbol is 24 Mg. The atomic number is written as a
12
subscript to the left of the symbol of magnesium. The mass number is written as a
superscript to the left of the symbol. This method can be represented in general by
the following illustration, in which X stands for any chemical symbol.
MassNumberX or AX
AtomicNumber Z
24 25
Mg can be read as “Magnesium-24”, and “Magnesium-25” represents Mg. In a
12 12
23
similar manner, Na can be read as “Sodium-23”.
11
The number of neutrons in an atom is found by subtracting the atomic number from
the mass number. For example, the number of neutrons for a silver atom (108Ag) is:
47
Mass number – Atomic number = Number of neutrons
108 – 47 = 61
∴ The number of neutrons is 61.
Example 1
How many protons, electrons, and neutrons are found in an atom of bromine-80
if its atomic number is 35?
Solution:
Atomic number of bromine is 35.
Mass number of bromine is already given as 80. Now we can write bromine,
Br in the form of:
AX as ABr = 80Br
Z Z 35
Mass number – Atomic number = Number of neutrons
80 – 35 = 45 neutrons
For a neutral atom: number of protons = number of electrons = atomic number.
\ Number of protons = Number of electrons = 35
Activity 1.13
Discuss the following idea in groups and present your discussion to the class.
Why do all atoms of a chemical element have the same atomic number although they
may have different mass numbers?
16
STRUCTURE OF THE ATOM
Exercise 1.4
Determine the atomic number, mass number, and number of neutrons in
a P b 39K c 56Fe
19 26
1.3.2 Isotopes and Atomic Mass
The simplest atoms are those of hydrogen. Each hydrogen atom contains one proton
only. However, hydrogen atoms contain different numbers of neutrons.
Three types of hydrogen atoms are known. The most common type of hydrogen is
called protium. It accounts for 99.985% of the hydrogen atoms found on Earth. The
nucleus of a protium atom consists of one proton only, and it has one electron moving
around it. The second form of hydrogen atom is called deuterium, which accounts for
0.015% of the Earth's hydrogen atoms. Each deuterium atom has a nucleus containing
Activity 1.14
31
15
Form a group and discuss the following idea and present your discussion to the class.
Nitrogen has two naturally occurring isotopes, N-14 and N-15. The atomic mass of
nitrogen is 14.007. Which isotope is more abundant in nature? Explain.
one proton and one neutron. The third form of hydrogen atom is known as tritium,
and it is radioactive. It exists in very small amounts in nature, but it can be prepared
artificially. Each tritium atom contains one proton and two neutrons. Protium,
deuterium and tritium are the three isotopes of hydrogen.
Isotopes are the atoms of the same element that have the same atomic number but different
masses number. The isotopes of a particular element have the same number of protons and
electrons but different number of neutrons. Isotopes of an element may occur naturally, or
they may be made in the laboratory (artificial isotopes). Since isotopes have the same
number of protons and electrons, they have the same chemical properties.
Designating Isotopes
Isotopes are usually identified by specifying their mass number. There are two
methods for specifying isotopes. In the first method, the mass number is written
with a hyphen after the name of the element. Tritium, for example, is written as
Hydrogen-3. We will refer to this method as hyphen notation. The second method for
17
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
designating an isotope is by indicating its isotopic nuclear composition. For example,
Hydrogen-3 is written as 3H. The following table illustrates this designation of
1
isotopes for hydrogen and helium.
Table 1.2 Isotopes of Hydrogen and Helium.
Isotope Nuclear No. of No. of No. of Z A
symbol protons electrons neutrons
Hydrogen-1 (protium) 1H 1 1 0 1 1
1
Hydrogen-2 (deuterium) 2H 1 1 1 1 2
1
Hydrogen-3 (tritium) 3H 1 1 2 1 3
1
Helium-3 3He 2 2 1 2 3
2
Helium-4 4He 2 2 2 2 4
2
Exercise 1.5
1. Write the nuclear symbol for carbon-13 and carbon-12.
2. The three atoms of elements X, Y and Z are represented as:
23X, 27Y and 31Z. Determine the number of protons, electrons, and neutrons in
11 13 15
the neutral atoms indicated.
Relative Atomic Masses
Actual masses of atoms, measured in grams, are very small. An atom of oxygen-16,
for example, has a mass of 2.657 × 10–23g. For most chemical calculations, it is more
convenient to use relative atomic masses. In order to set up a relative scale of atomic
mass, one atom has been arbitrarily chosen as the standard and assigned a relative mass
value. The masses of all other atoms are expressed in terms of this defined standard.
The standard used by scientists to determine units of atomic mass is the carbon-12
atom. It has been arbitrarily assigned a mass of exactly 12 atomic mass units, or 12
a.m.u. One atomic mass unit, or 1 a.m.u, is exactly 1/12 the mass of a carbon-12
atom, or 1.660 × 10–24 g. The atomic mass of any atom is determined by
comparing it with the mass of the carbon-12 atom. The hydrogen-1 atom has an
atomic mass of about 1/12 of that of the carbon-12 atom, or about 1 a.m.u. The
precise value of the atomic mass of a hydrogen-1 atom is 1.007 a.m.u. An oxygen-
16 atom has about 16/12 (or 4/3 the mass of a carbon-12 atom). Careful
measurements show the atomic mass of oxygen-16 to be 15.994 a.m.u. The mass
of a magnesium-24 atom is found to be slightly less than twice that of a carbon-12
atom. Its atomic mass is 23.985 a.m.u.
18
STRUCTURE OF THE ATOM
The masses of subatomic particles can also be expressed on the atomic-mass scale.
The mass of an electron is 0.0005486 a.m.u, that of the proton is 1.007276 a.m.u,
and that of the neutron is 1.008665 a.m.u. Note that the proton and neutron masses
are close to 1 a.m.u but not equal to 1 a.m.u. You have learned that the mass number
is the total number of protons and neutrons in the nucleus of an atom. You can now
see that the mass number and relative atomic mass of a given nucleus are quite close
to each other. They are not identical because the proton and neutron masses deviate
slightly from 1 a.m.u.
Activity 1.15
Form a group and perform the following task, based on the given information:
Magnesium has three naturally occurring isotopes, namely Mg-12, Mg-13, and Mg-14.
Make models of three isotopes of magnesium using locally available materials such as clay,
colours and sticks, and depict the nucleus, the positions of protons, electrons and neutrons.
Present your model to the class.
Average Atomic Masses of Elements
Most elements occur naturally as mixtures of isotopes, as shown in the examples in
Table 1.3. The percentage of each isotope in the naturally occurring elements is nearly
always the same, no matter where the element is found. The percentage at which each
isotope of an element occurs in nature is taken into account when calculating the
average atomic mass of the element. Average atomic mass is the weighted average of
the atomic masses of the naturally occurring isotopes of an element.
Table 1.3 Atomic masses and abundances of some natural occurring isotopes.
Isotopes Mass % natural Atomic mass Average atomic mass
number abundance (a.m.u) of element (a.m.u)
Hydrogen-1 1 99.985 1.6078
1.00794
Hydrogen-2 2 0.015 2.0141
Oxygen-16 16 99.762 15.994
Oxygen-17 17 0.038 16.999 15.9994
Oxygen-18 18 0.200 17.999
* Since tritium is radioactive and exists in a very small amount in nature, it is not
included in the calculation of atomic mass of hydrogen.
19
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
The average atomic mass of an element is calculated by summing up the products of
relative atomic mass and percentage abundance of each isotope and dividing by 100.
Example 2
Chlorine has two isotopic compositions: 75.77 % of 35Cl and 24.23 % of
17
37Cl. Determine the average atomic mass of chlorine.
17
Solution:
75.77 % of natural chlorine exists as chlorine 35, and the rest 24.23 % as
chlorine 37.
The average atomic mass of chlorine is calculated as follows:
(75.77 × 35) + (24.23 × 37)
= = 35.45
100
Thus, the average atomic mass of chlorine is 35.45 a.m.u
Example 3
Calculate the average atomic mass of boron, using the following data:
Isotope Relative Percent
masses abundance
10B 10.0134 19.70
5
11B 11.0094 80.30
5
Solution:
The average atomic mass of boron is obtained by taking the sum of the products
of the relative atomic mass and the percentage abundance of the first and the
second isotopes of boron and dividing by 100.
(10.0134 × 19.70) + (11.0094 × 80.30)
Average atomic mass of B =
100
= 10.813 a.m.u
Exercise 1.6
Give appropriate answers for the following questions.
1. What are isotopes? Explain their symbolic designation using the isotopes of
hydrogen.
20
STRUCTURE OF THE ATOM
2. The three isotopes of uranium are: 234U, 235U and 238U. How many protons,
92 92 92
neutrons and electrons are present in each isotope?
3. Indicate the number of fundamental particles present in an atom of 206Pb.
82
4. The metal thallium occurs naturally as 30% thallium-203 and 70%
thallium-205. Calculate the atomic mass of thallium.
Critical Thinking
5. Why is the gravitational force in the nucleus so small?
6. Could a nucleus of more than one proton but no neutron exist? Explain.
1.4 ATOMIC MODELS
Competencies
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• name the five atomic models,
• describe Dalton’s, Thomson’s and Rutherford’s atomic models,
• state Bohr’s postulates,
• describe Bohr’s model,
• describe the quantum mechanical model,
• describe main-energy level and sub-energy level,
• define the term electronic configuration,
• write the ground state-electronic configuration of the elements,
• draw diagrams to show the electronic configuration of the first 18 elements,
• write the electronic configuration of the elements using sub–energy levels,
• write electronic configuration of elements using noble gas as a core and
• describe valence electrons.
Activity 1.16
Discuss the following concept in groups and present your conclusion to the class. Have
you heard the word “model” in your everyday life? Car makers produce different models as
time passes. What is your understanding about the atomic model?
Atoms are too small to be observed directly. Hence, it is better to develop a tentative
mental picture (model) of the atomic concept. The ideas about atoms have changed
21
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
many times. But, at present we can reduce these ideas into five models: Dalton’s
Model, Thomson’s Model, Rutherford’s Model, Bohr’s Model, and the Quantum
Mechanical Model.
i) Dalton’s Atomic Model
This model of atoms was accepted for 100 years without serious challenge. He
thought of atoms as solid indestructible spheres. He called it the billiard ball model.
Figure 1.7 Dalton’s model of an atom.
ii) Thomson Model
After learning that atoms contain electrons, Thomson proposed a new model of the
atom, which is shown in Figure 1.8. It is sometimes called the plum-pudding model. In
his model of an atom, Thomson proposed thought that electrons were embedded
inside a positively charged sphere, just like plums in a pudding. Today we might call
Thomson’s model the chocolate chip ice-cream model.
Figure 1.8 Thomson’s model of an atom.
Activity 1.17
Perform the following tasks in groups and present your findings to the class.
1. Draw a sketch diagram of a carbon atom using Thomson's atomic model.
2. What was incorrect about Thomson's model of the atom?
iii) Rutherford Model
Why was Thomson’s model of atom discarded and replaced by
Rutherford’s model?
22
STRUCTURE OF THE ATOM
By 1911, evidence was collected that allowed scientists to modify Thomson’s model
of an atom. Ernest Rutherford (1871–1937), a former student of Thomson, performed
one of the classic experiments of scientific history. As indicated earlier in this unit, he
bombarded different types of matter with high-energy, positively charged alpha
particles. Based on the Thomson’s model of an atom, Rutherford hypothesized that
the alpha particles should go through very thin metal foils undeflected. However, after
performing an experiment on gold leaf, he found that a small but significant number of
the alpha particles were deflected through large angles by the gold atoms. These
results showed Rutherford that the Thomson model of the atom was not valid. A
uniform positive charge with embedded negatively charged electrons would not
interact with the alpha particles in such a manner.
The Rutherford model of the atom has a small, dense, positively charged nucleus
around which electrons whirl at high speeds and at relatively long distances from it.
He compared the structure of an atom with the solar system, saying that the nucleus
corresponds to the sun, while the electrons correspond to the planets. This picture of
the atom is also called the planetary atom. In other words, Rutherford gave us the
nuclear model of the atom.
Even though Rutherford showed that the atom has a nucleus, he did not know how
the electrons were arranged outside the nucleus. This was the major drawback of
Rutherford’s model of an atom.
Figure 1.9 Rutherford model.
Historical Note
A Nobel Prize winner, Niels Bohr, was known not only for his
own theoretical work, but also as a mentor to younger physicists
who themselves made important contributions to physical
theory. As the director of the Institute for Theoretical Physics at
the University of Copenhagen, Bohr gathered together some of
the finest minds in the physics community, including Werner
Heisenberg and George Gawow. During the 1920’s, the Institute
was the source of many important works in quantum mechanics
and in theoretical physics in general.
Niels Bohr
23
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
iv) Bohr Model
In 1913, the Danish physicist Niels Bohr (1885–1962) proposed an atomic model in
which the electrons moved around the nucleus in circular paths called orbits. He
assumed the electrons to be moving around the nucleus in a circular orbit as the
planets move around the sun. Based on the Rutherford's atomic model, Bohr made
the following modifications.
• The electrons in an atom can exist only in a restricted number of stable orbits
with energy levels in which they neither absorb nor emit energy. These orbits
designated by a number called the principal quantum number, n. The principal
quantum number has the values of 1, 2, 3, . . . The energy levels are also called
shells. They are represented by K, L, M, . . . etc. The K-shell is the first shell,
the L-shell is the second shell, the M-shell is the third shell, etc.
• When an electron moves between orbits it absorbs or emits energy. When an
electron jumps from lower to higher states it absorbs a fixed amount of energy.
When an electron falls from a higher (excited) state to a lower (ground) state it
emits a fixed amount of energy.
• The electrons move around the nucleus in energy levels.
Figure 1.10 The first six energy levels in the Bohr model of an atom.
• According to Bohr, for each element, the number of energy levels or shells is
fixed. Also, each different energy level or shell of an atom can only accommodate
a certain number of electrons. The maximum number of electrons that the main
energy level can have is given by the general formula 2n2, where n is equal to
the main energy level.
Therefore, the maximum number of electrons in each shell in the Bohr model is:
first energy level (n = 1) is 2(1)2 = 2 electrons
second energy level (n = 2) is 2(2)2 = 8 electrons
third energy level (n = 3) is 2(3)2 = 18 electrons
fourth energy level (n = 4) is 2(4)2 = 32 electrons
24
STRUCTURE OF THE ATOM
It can also be summarized in the form of Table 1.4.
Table 1.4 Energy levels and electrons for the first four main energy levels.
Principal quantum number (n) 1 2 3 4
Shell K L M N
Maximum possible number of electrons 2 8 18 32
• When electrons fill the various energy levels in an atom, they first occupy the
shell with the lowest energy level. When the lowest energy level is filled, according
to the 2n2 rule, then the electrons enter the next higher energy level.
The outermost shell of an atom cannot accommodate more than eight electrons, even
if it has the capacity to hold more electrons. This is because having more than eight
electrons in the outermost shell makes the atom unstable.
For example, let us write the electron configuration of magnesium that has 12
electrons. The first 2 electrons occupy the K-shell (the first energy level). The L-shell
(the second energy level) is occupied with 8 electrons. The remaining 2 electrons
enter the M-shell (the third energy level). Hence, the electron configuration of
magnesium atom becomes K L M.
2 8 2
Bohr’s diagrammatic representation, using shells, in some atoms are given below.
Note that p = proton, n = neutron, and = electron.
Figure 1.11 Diagrammatic representation of Bohr’s model.
25
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Activity 1.18
Form a group and try to compare Rutherford’s atomic model with Bohr’s atomic model?
Present your discussion to the class.
Exercise 1.7
Draw Bohr’s diagrammatic representations for the following atoms:
a Nitrogen (atomic number = 7)
b Sulphur (atomic number = 16)
c Potassium (atomic number = 19)
d Calcium (atomic number = 20)
v) The Quantum Mechanical Model
During the 1920’s, the discovery of the wave-like properties of electrons led to the
wave-mechanical model or quantum-mechanical model of atoms. In this model, the
electrons are associated with definite energy levels, but their locations cannot be
pinpointed. Instead, they are described in terms of the probability of being found in
certain regions of space about the nucleus. These regions of space are called orbitals.
An orbital is a particularly shaped volume of space where the probability of finding an
electron is at a maximum.
According to this model, the electrons in an atom are in a series of energy levels or
shells. Each energy level or shell is described by a number called the principal
quantum number, n, which is related to the size of the energy level. The larger the
energy value of n, the farther the electrons are found from the nucleus.
The quantum mechanical model introduces the concept of sublevel for each main
energy level. For atoms of the known elements, there are four types of sublevels
designated by the letters s, p, d, and f. The number of sublevels within each energy
level or shell is equal to the numerical value of n.
26
STRUCTURE OF THE ATOM
Table 1.5 The principal quantum number specified with shell, sublevels and
maximum number of electrons.
Principal quantum Shell Number and type of Maximum number
number (n) sublevels of electrons in
each shell (2n2)
1 K 1 (s) 2
2 L 2 (s, p) 8
3 M 3 (s, p, d) 18
4 N 4 (s, p, d, f) 32
5 O 5 (s, p, d, f, g) 50
6 P 6 (s, p, d, f, g, h) 72
Any orbital can accommodate a maximum of two electrons. Accordingly,
s-sublevel has only 1 orbital and can hold a maximum of 2 electrons,
p-sublevel has 3 orbitals and can hold a maximum of 6 electrons,
d-sublevel has 5 orbitals and can hold a maximum of 10 electrons, and
f-sublevel has 7 orbitals and can hold a maximum of 14 electrons.
Electron Configurations
The arrangement of electrons in an atom is known as the electron configuration of the
atom. Because atoms of different elements have different numbers of electrons, a
distinct electronic configuration exists for the atoms of each element. Like all systems
in nature, electrons in atoms tend to assume arrangements that have the lowest
possible energies. The lowest energy arrangement of the electrons in an atom is called
the ground state electron configuration. A few simple rules, combined with the
quantum number relationships discussed below, allow us to determine these ground-
state electron configurations.
The quantum mechanical model is designated by the following notation: a coefficient
which shows the main energy level, a letter that denotes the sublevel that an electron
occupies, and a superscript that shows the number of electrons in that particular
sublevel.
The designation is explained as follows
s 2
1 Numberofelectrons
Sublevel
Mainenergylevel
27
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
For example, the electron configuration of lithium (5Li) is: 1s22s1.
3
This indicates that there are 2 electrons in the first s-sublevel and 1 electron in the 2nd
s-sublevel.
The configuration for sodium (23Na) atom is: 1s22s22p63s1. This indicate that there
11
are 2 electrons in the first s-sublevel, 2 electrons in the second s-sublevel, 6 electrons
in the second p-sublevel, and 1 electron in the third s-sublevel.
Activity 1.19
Form a group and perform the following task in groups and present your findings to the
class.
The following ground state electron configurations are incorrect. Identify in each case the
mistakes that have been made and write the correct electron configurations.
i) 1s2 2s2 2p4 3s2
ii) 1s2 2s1 2p6
iii) 1s2 2s2 2p6 3p3 3s2
iv) 1s2 2s2 2p 6 3s2 3p3 4s2 3d4
The following table lists the first 14 elements in the periodic table and shows the
electron configuration of each.
Table 1.6 The ground state electron configuration of the first 14 elements.
Element Electron Configuration
Hydrogen 1s1
Helium 1s2
Lithium 1s2 2s1
Beryllium 1s2 2s2
Boron 1s2 2s2 2p1
Carbon 1s2 2s2 2p2
Nitrogen 1s2 2s2 2p3
Oxygen 1s2 2s2 2p4
Fluorine 1s2 2s2 2p5
Neon 1s2 2s2 2p6
Sodium 1s2 2s2 2p6 3s1
Magnesium 1s2 2s2 2p6 3s2
Aluminium 1s2 2s2 2p6 3s2 3p1
Silicon 1s2 2s2 2p6 3s2 3p2
28
STRUCTURE OF THE ATOM
Exercise 1.8
Write the ground state electron configuration for the following elements.
a Phosphorus (atomic number = 15)
b Sulphur (atomic number = 16)
c Chlorine (atomic number = 17)
d Argon (atomic number = 18)
Rules Governing Electron Configuration
Most of the electronic configuration of an atom can be explained in terms of the building-up
principle, or also known as the Aufbau principle. According to the Aufbau principle, an
electron occupies the lowest energy orbital available before entering a higher energy orbital.
The atomic orbitals are filled in order of increasing energy. The orbital with the lowest energy
is the 1s orbital. The 2s orbital is the next higher in energy, then the 2p orbitals, and so on.
Beginning with the third main energy level, n = 3, the energies of the sublevels in the different
main energy levels begin to overlap.
In Figure 1.12, for example, the 4s sublevel is lower in energy than the 3d sublevel.
Therefore, the 4s orbital is filled before any electrons enter the 3d orbitals. Less energy is
required for two electrons to pair up in the 4s orbital than for a single electron to occupy a 3d
orbital. Which sublevel will be occupied after the 3d sublevel is fully occupied?
The electrons are arranged in sublevels according to Aufbau principle which is also known as
the diagonal rule. The diagonal rule is a guide to the order of filling energy sublevels. It is
particularly helpful for atoms with atomic numbers higher than 18. This is because for atoms
with higher atomic numbers their sublevels are not regularly filled.
Figure 1.12 Diagonal rule for writing electron configuration.
29
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
If you list the orbitals following the direction of arrows, you can obtain the electron
configuration of most atoms. Therefore, the order of filling the sublevels is given as:
1s2 2s2 2p6 3s2 3p6 4s2 3d10 4p6 5s2 4d10 5p6 6s2 4f14 5d10 6p6...
The outermost occupied energy level of an atom is called the valence shell and the
electrons that enter into these energy levels are referred to as valence electrons.
Example 1
What is the electron configuration of magnesium, 24Mg?
12
Solution:
24Mg = 1s2 2s22p6 3s2 fi in sublevel
12 (cid:78) (cid:8)(cid:9)(cid:10) (cid:78)
2 8 2 fi in main energy level
From this, we can write the configuration of elements by using a noble gas as
a core and the electrons outside the core. Note that noble gases have complete
outer electron shells, with 2 or 8 electrons. Therefore, the above electron
configuration can be written as follows:
1s22s22p6 3s2
24Mg =
12
[Ne]
= [Ne] 3s2
Example 2
Write the electron configuration of copper (Z = 29).
Solution:
Following the diagonal rule, we can fill the sublevels, in order of increasing
energy, until all its electrons are filled. Therefore, the configuration will be:
Cu = 1s22s22p63s23p6 4s13d10
[Ar]
= [Ar] 4s13d10
Exercise 1.9
1. Write the electron configuration of the following elements using noble gases as
a core.
a O b Al c Cl d Ca
30
STRUCTURE OF THE ATOM
2. Write the electron configuration of the following elements.
a 84Kr b 56Fe c 65Zn
36 26 30
Check list
Key terms of the unit
• Modern atomic theory
• Atom
• Neutron
• Atomic Model
• Nucleus
• Aufbau principle
• Proton
• Average atomic mass
• Quantum Mechanical Model
• Bohr's Model
• Radioactivity
• Cathode ray
α - particles
• Dalton's atomic theory
β - particles
• Dalton's Model
γ - particles
• Electron
• Rutherford's Model
• Electron configuration
• Sub-energy level
• Electron configuration
• Thomson's Model
• Isotopes
• Main energy level
Unit Summary
The Greek philosopher Democritus proposed what we consider as the first atomic
theory. He believed that all matter consists of very small, indivisible particles. He
named the particles atoms (meaning uncuttable or indivisible).
John Dalton’s work in atomic theory marked the start of modern chemistry. His
concept of an atom was far more detailed and specific than Democritus'.
Dalton did not try to describe the structure or composition of atoms – he did not
know what an atom really looked like. But he did realize that the different properties
shown by elements such as hydrogen and oxygen can be explained by assuming that
hydrogen atoms are not the same as oxygen atoms.
In our current view of atomic theory, atoms consist of smaller particles – electrons,
protons, and neutrons. The structure of an atom is basically a cloud of electrons
31
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
surrounding a small, dense region, called the nucleus. An electron is a negatively
charged particle with negligible mass.
The nucleus was discovered by Ernest Rutherford. Rutherford suggested that the
charge and mass of an atom are concentrated in its nucleus, and that the nucleus has
positive charge.
In current views, the nucleus of an atom contains protons and neutrons. Protons have
positive charge, and neutrons have no charge. Each element has a unique number of
protons in its atoms. This number is the atomic number of the element, and is
designated by Z. The total number of protons and neutrons in the nucleus of an atom
is the mass number of the element. Mass number is designated by A. Atomic number
and mass number for an atom of an element, X, is designated by:
A X
Z
For a neutral atom,
• the number of protons = the number of electrons = atomic number.
• the number of protons + the number of neutrons = mass number.
Over centuries, scientists have developed these main atomic models:
• Dalton’s Model: an atom is a solid, indestructible sphere.
• Thomson’s Model: an atom is a sphere with a uniform positive charge. Negatively
charged electrons are embedded in the positive charge.
• Rutherford’s Model: Rutherford discovered that atoms are mostly empty space
with a dense, positive nucleus.
• Bohr’s Model: in an atom, electrons follow circular orbits around the nucleus.
The Bohr Model was the first quantum mechanical model of the atom.
• The Quantum Mechanical Model: in an atom, the orbits of electrons around
the nucleus are elliptical. This theory is a modification of the Bohr model.
The quantum mechanical description of an atom is the electron configuration of the
atom – the arrangement of electrons in the atom. The maximum number of electrons in
a main energy level is 2n2, where n is the principal quantum number.
The quantum mechanical model is governed by this principle:
The Aufbau principle is a guide to the order of filling energy levels and sublevels.
According to this principle lower energy sub levels are completely filled before
electrons enter higher energy sublevels.
32
STRUCTURE OF THE ATOM
REVIEW EXERCISE ON UNIT 1
Part I: True/False type questions
1. Identify whether each of the following statement is correct or incorrect. Give
your reasons for considering a statement to be false.
a Atoms of the same element have the same number of protons.
b Atoms of different elements can have the same number of protons.
c Atoms of the same element have the same number of electrons.
d Atoms of the same element have the same number of neutrons.
e The s- sublevel contains 2 electrons.
f The d-sublevel contains 5 orbitals.
g The 4s-sublevel comes before the 3d sublevel.
h The fundamental particle not present in a hydrogen atom is the proton.
i Isotopic elements contain the same number of neutrons.
j An alpha particle is composed of He2+ ions.
k The mass of an electron is almost equal to the mass of a proton.
Part II: Write the missing words in your exercise book
2. The mass of an atom is mainly concentrated in ______________.
3. The diameter of an atom is ___________ times that of the nucleus.
4. The energy level in the third principal quantum number can accommodate
_______electrons.
Part III: Give the appropriate answers for the following questions
5. Draw diagrammatic representation of the following atoms by using shell or energy
level.
a 9Be b 19F c 28Si d 39K
4 9 14 19
6. Write the electron configuration of the elements: (use quantum mechanical model)
a 32S b 52Cr c 56Fe d 64Cu
16 24 26 29
7. For the elements in question number 6,
a give the valence electrons for each.
b give the number of neutrons for each.
33
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
8. In a certain atom, the last electron has a 3d2 electron configuration. On the
basis of this:
a write the electron configuration of the element using a noble gas as a core.
b write the electron configuration using the main energy levels.
c what is the atomic number of the atom?
d what are the valence shell electrons of the atom?
e how many protons does the atom have?
9. What is the relative atomic mass of an element whose isotopic composition is
90% of 20X and 10% of 22X?
Part IV: Short answer type questions
10. Comment on Dalton’s atomic theory and the areas in which modifications were
made.
11. John Dalton made a number of statements about atoms that are now known to
be incorrect. Why do you think his atomic theory is still found in science text
books?
12. If scientists had tried to repeat Thomson's experiment and found that they could
not, would Thomson's conclusion still have been valid? Explain your answer.
34
2
TINU
Periodic Classification of the
Elements
Unit Outcomes
After completing this unit, you will be able to:
(cid:40) understand the periodic classification of the elements;
(cid:40) develop skills in correlating the electron configuration of elements with the
periodicity of the elements, and in predicting the trends of periodic properties
of elements in the periodic table;
(cid:40) appreciate the importance of classification in chemistry; and
(cid:40) demonstrate scientific inquiry skills: observing, inferring, predicting, classifying,
comparing and contrasting, making models, communicating, measuring, asking
questions, interpreting illustrations, drawing conclusions, applying concepts,
and problem solving.
MAIN CONTENTS
2.1 Introduction
2.2 The Modern Periodic Table
2.3 Periodic properties in the Periodic Table
2.4 Advantages of periodic classification
– Unit Summary
– Review Exercises
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Start-up Activity
How can you use a table of repeating events to predict the next events?
Table 2.1 shows a familiar table of repeating properties. What is it?
Of course, it is a calendar, but it is a calendar with a difference – it is missing
some information. You can determine what is missing and fill in the blanks.
1. Look at the calendar again. The calendar has columns of days, Sunday through
Saturday. The calendar also has horizontal rows. They are its weeks.
2. Examine the information surrounding each empty spot. Can you tell what
information is needed in each empty spot?
3. Fill in the missing information. For example:
Conclude and Apply
1. One day in column 3 is marked X, and a day in column 4 is marked Y. What
dates belong to these positions? Discuss your answers in your group.
2. Column 5 does not have a name. What is the correct name of this column?
3. What dates are included in the third row of the table?
4. Assuming that the previous month had 30 days, what day would the 28th of
that month have been? What row of this table would it appear in?
5. How do you relate this periodicity with the periodic classification of elements?
Table 2.1 Periodicity in time.
Sun Mon Tues Wed Fri Sat
1 2 3
4 5 6 7 8 9 10
11 12 X Y 15 16 17
18 19 20 21 22 23 24
25 26 27 28 29 30 31
2.1 INTRODUCTION
Competencies
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe periodicity.
36
PERIODIC CLASSIFICATION OF THE ELEMENTS
Activity 2.1
Form a group and discuss the following concepts. Present your discussion to the rest of
the class.
What was the basis for the early attempts in classifying the elements? Outline the
contributions of some scientists you have read about in classfying the elements.
Before the beginning of the 18th century, it was easy to study and remember the
properties of the elements because very few were known. However, in the middle of
the 19th century, many more elements were discovered. Scientists then began to
investigate possibilities for classifying the known elements in a simple and useful
manner. After numerous attempts, the scientists were ultimately successful. They
grouped elements with similar properties together. This arrangement is known as the
classification of elements.
Early Attempts in classifying the elements
What is meant by the term periodicity? Can you give some periodic events in
nature?
Early attempts to classify elements were based merely on atomic mass. Then scientists
began to seek relationships between atomic mass and other properties of the
elements.
i) Dobereiner's Triads: One of the first attempts to group similar elements was
made in 1817 by the German chemist J. Dobereiner. He put together similar
elements in group of three or triads. According to Dobereiner, when elements in
a triad are arranged in the order of increasing atomic masses, the middle element
had the average atomic mass of the other two elements. For example, because
the atomic mass of bromine is nearly equal to the average atomic mass of
chlorine and iodine, he considered these three elements to constitute a triad when
arranged in this order: chlorine, bromine, iodine see Table 2.2.
Table 2.2 Dobereiner's Triads.
Triads Atomic Masses
Chlorine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35.5
Bromine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 80
Iodine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 127
35.5+127
Average atomic masses of chlorine and iodine = = 81.25
2
Reading Check
Do you think that this classification works for all elements?
37
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
ii) Newlands's Law of Octaves: In 1864, John Newlands, an English chemist,
reported the law of octave, which is also known as the law of eight. He stated
that when elements are arranged in increasing order of their atomic masses,
every eighth element had similar properties to the first element.
Newlands first two octaves of eight elements are shown below:
Li Be B C N O F
Na Mg Al Si P S Cl
K Ca
However, the law of octaves could not be applied beyond calcium.
Reading Check
With the aid of an encyclopedia, reference books or other resources, write a report
on:
a J. Dobereiner and
b J. Newlands works in organizing the elements.
In your report include the merits and demerits of their works.
Exercise 2.1
1. Decide whether the principle of Dobereiner’s triad can be applied in the following
groups of three elements.
a Be, Ca, Sr b Li, Na, K
2. Newlands stated that there was a periodic similarity in properties of every
eighth element in his system. However, today we see that for periods 2 and 3,
the similarity occurs in every ninth element. What is the reason? Explain.
2.2 The Modern Periodic Table
Competencies
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• state Mendeleev’s and modern periodic law;
• describe period and group;
• explain the relationship between the electronic configuration and the structure of
the modern periodic table;
• describe the three classes of the elements in the modern periodic table;
• explain the four blocks of the elements as related to their electronic
configuration in the modern periodic table;
38
PERIODIC CLASSIFICATION OF THE ELEMENTS
• tell the block of an element from its electronic configuration;
• give group names for the main group elements;
• classify the periods into short, long, and incomplete periods;
• tell the number of groups and periods in the modern periodic table;
• tell the number of elements in each period;
• predict the period and group of an element from its atomic number; and
• tell the block and group of an element from its electronic configuration.
Activity 2.2
Form a group and perform the following tasks. Share your findings with the rest of the
class.
1. Make a list of the symbols for the first eighteen elements. Beside each symbol, write
its electronic configuration.
2. Draw sets of vertical boxes. In order of increasing atomic number, fill into each set the
symbol of all elements having the same outer electron configurations. How many sets
are there? Record your answer.
3. Draw sets of horizontal boxes. In order of increasing atomic number, fill into each set
the symbols of all elements having the same number of shells. How many sets are
there? How many elements are there in each set? Record your answers.
4. Do you see any regular patterns that you created in Steps 2 and 3?
5. Draw one complete table which shows all elements;
a with the same number of outermost electrons in a vertical column
b filling the same outer electron shell in a horizontal row.
Historical Note
While attempting to group the elements according to their
chemical properties and atomic weights, Dimitri Mendeleev
developed the periodic table and formulated the periodic law.
Because his classification revealed recurring patterns (periods) in
the elements, Mendeleev was able to leave spaces in his table for
elements that he correctly predicted would be discovered.
Dimitri Mendeleev
39
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
2.2.1 The Periodic Law
A. Mendeleev’s Periodic Law
In 1869, the Russian chemist Dimitri Mendeleev and the German scientist Luthar
Meyer independently published periodic arrangements of the elements based on
increasing atomic mass.
Mendeleev observed that, when elements are arranged according to increasing atomic
mass, the chemical and physical properties of the elements recur at regular intervals.
This periodic variation and the recurrence of the properties of the elements led to the
formulation of the Periodic Law.
Mendeleev's periodic law states that the properties of the elements are periodic
functions of their atomic masses. Only 63 elements were known when Mendeleev
constructed his table in 1871. Mendeleev organized his table in columns, with each
column containing elements that have similar chemical properties. Accordingly,
elements in the same column gave family or groups of elements.
How did Mendeleev know where to leave gaps for undiscovered elements in his
periodic table?
Mendeleev left blank spaces for the undiscovered elements and also predicted masses
and other properties of these unknown elements almost correctly. For example,
neither gallium nor germanium were discovered when Mendeleev constructed his
periodic table. But he predicted the existence and properties of these unknown
elements.
Mendeleev left two blank spaces for these two elements in the table, just under
aluminium and silicon. He called these unknown elements 'eka-aluminium' and 'eka-
silicon.' ('eka' means 'first'). What he meant by 'eka-aluminium' is "a currently known
element (galium) following aluminium".
Later on, in 1874, the element Gallium (eka-aluminium in Mendeleev's system) was
discovered. In 1886, the element Germanium (eka-silicon) was discovered. The
observed properties of these elements were remarkably very close to those in
Mendeleev’s predictions. Table 2.3 shows the properties of eka-silicon predicted by
Mendeleev and compares them to the observed properties of Germanium.
40
PERIODIC CLASSIFICATION OF THE ELEMENTS
Table 2.3 Comparison of Mendeleev's predictions for the properties of Eka-silicon with
Germanium.
Property Mendeleev's Observed Properties for
Predictions for Germanium (Ge) in 1886
eka-silicon (Es) in 1871
Atomic mass . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72 72.6
Density (g/cm3) . . . . . . . . . . . 5.5 5.47
Colour . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Dark Gray Light Gray
Oxide formula . . . . . . . . . . . . . EsO GeO
2 2
Density of oxide (g/cm3) . . . . . 4.7 4.7
Chloride formula . . . . . . . . . . . EsCl GeCl
4 4
Density of chloride (g/cm3) . . . 1.9 1.887
Boiling point of chloride . . . . . < 100°C 86°C
Defects in Mendeleev's periodic table
1. Position of isotopes: The isotopes were not given separate places in Mendeleev's
periodic table. Since elements are arranged in order of increasing atomic masses,
the isotopes belong to different groups (because isotopes have different masses).
2. Wrong order of atomic masses of some elements: When certain elements are
grouped on the basis of their chemical properties, some elements with higher
atomic masses precede those with lower atomic masses. For example, argon,
with atomic mass of 39.95, precedes potassium with atomic mass of 39.1.
B The Modern Periodic Law
What was Mosley's contribution to the modern form of the Periodic Table?
In 1913, the English physicist Henry Mosley determined the atomic number of each of
the elements by analyzing their X-ray spectra. He observed that when each element
was used as a target in an X-ray tube, it gave out X-rays with a characteristic
wavelength. The wavelength depends on the number of protons in the nucleus of the
atom and was constant for a given element. By arranging the elements in order of
decreasing wavelength, Mosley was able to assign atomic number to each element.
The atomic number of every element is fixed, and it clearly distinguishes one element
from another. 'No two elements can have the same atomic number.' For example,
atomic number 8 identifies the element oxygen. No other element can have atomic
number 8.
41
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Therefore, the atomic number of an element is the fundamental property that
determines the chemical behavior of the element. The discovery of atomic number led
to the development of the modern periodic law. The modern periodic law states that:
‘‘the properties of the elements are periodic function of their atomic numbers.’’ This
means that when elements are arranged according to increasing atomic number,
elements with similar physical and chemical properties fall in the same group.
2.2.2 Characteristics of Groups and Periods
Many different forms of the periodic table have been published since Mendeleev's
time. Today, the long form of the periodic table, which is called the modern periodic
table, is commonly in use. It is based on the modern periodic law. In the modern
periodic table, elements are arranged in periods and groups.
What are the basis for classifying the elements into groups and periods?
What are the similarities and differences in the electron configuration of S
and Cl?
Periods: The horizontal rows of elements in the periodic table are called periods or
series.
Elements in a period are arranged in increasing order of their atomic numbers from left
to right.
There are 7 periods in the modern periodic table, and each period is represented by
an Arabic numeral: 1, 2 . . . and 7.
• Elements in the same period have the same number of shells.
• Periods 1, 2, and 3 are called short periods while periods 4, 5, and 6 are
known as long periods.
• Period 1 contains only 2 elements, hydrogen and helium. Period 2 and period 3
contain 8 elements each.
• Period 4 and period 5 contain 18 elements each. Period 6, the longest period,
has 32 elements. Period 7, which is an incomplete period, contains more than
24 elements.Period 7 element is radioactive and/or an artificial element.
• Except for the first period, all periods start with an alkali metal and ends with a
noble gas.
42
PERIODIC CLASSIFICATION OF THE ELEMENTS
Table 2.4 The number of elements in a given period and the orbitals being filled.
Period number Orbitals occupied Number of elements
1 1s 2
2 2s, 2p 8
3 3s, 3p 8
4 4s, 3d, 4p 18
and so on
The position of an element in a given period can be determined by the number of
shells occupied with its electrons. Accordingly, the number of shell is equal to the
number of period to which the element belongs.
Example
Electronic configuration of 23Na = 1s22s22p63s1 (2, 8, 1). Sodium has 3 main
11
shells. Hence, sodium is found in period 3.
What are the similarities and differences in the electron configuration of F
and Cl?
Groups or families: are the vertical columns of elements in the periodic table. There
are 18 columns or groups in the modern periodic table.
• Group numbers are usually designated with the Roman numerals I to VIII each
followed by the letter A or B.
These are: IA . . . . . . . . . VIII A Main groups (A groups)
IB . . . . . . . . . VIIIB Sub groups (B groups)
• Elements in a given group have the same number of outermost shell electrons.
• Elements in the same group have similar chemical properties.
• For the main group elements the group number equals the number of valence
electrons.
Example
Electronic configuration of 35Cl = 1s22s22p63s23p5 (2, 8, 7). The number of
17
valence electrons of chlorine is 7. Hence chlorine is found in Group VIIA.
43
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
44
ELBAT
CIDOIREP
PERIODIC CLASSIFICATION OF THE ELEMENTS
Exercise 2.2
Give appropriate answers for the following questions.
1. Which group of elements was missing from Mendeleev's periodic table as
compared to the modern periodic table?
2. Why does the first period contain only two elements?
3. To which group and period do the following elements belong?
a carbon d potassium
b neon e calcium
c aluminium f sulphur
2.2.3 CLASSIFICATION OF THE ELEMENTS
Activity 2.3
Perform the following tasks in groups and present your conclusion to the class.
For the following elements, determine the valence electrons, and identify the sub–shell
(s, p, d or f) in which the last electron of each element enters.
a Nitrogen (atomic number = 7)
b Sodium (atomic number = 11)
c Silicon (atomic number = 14)
d Iron (atomic number = 26)
e Zinc (atomic number = 30)
f Krypton (atomic number = 36)
g Cerium (atomic number = 58)
Elements in a periodic table can be classified into three distinct categories based on
their electron configuration and the type of sub-level being filled. These are the
representative elements, the transition elements, and the rare-earth elements.
1. Representative Elements: s-and p-block elements
These are elements in which valence electrons are filling the s- or p-orbitals.
Representative elements are also known as Main Group Elements. They include
elements in groups IA through VIIIA.
s-block elements are elements in which the last electron enters the s-orbital of the
outermost shell. Their general valence shell configuration is ns1 and ns2, where n
represents the outermost shell. They are found on the left side of the periodic table
45
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
and contain the first two groups: Group IA and Group IIA. These two groups
contain very reactive metals.
p-block Elements are elements in which the last electron enters the p-orbital of the
outermost shell. They have the general valence shell electron configuration of ns2np1–
ns2np6. p-block elements are located at the right hand side of the periodic table and
they include six groups-Group IIIA to VIIIA. Most of these elements are non-metals.
Table 2.5 Valence electron configuration, blocks and common names for the
representative elements.
Group Common name General valence Number of
Number shell electron valence
configuration electrons
IA Alkali metals ns1 1
s-block
IIA Alkaline earth metals ns2 2
IIIA Boron family ns2np1 3
IVA Carbon family ns2np2 4
VA Nitrogen family ns2np3 5
p-block
VIA Oxygen family (Chalcogen) ns2np4 6
VIIA Halogens ns2np5 7
VIIIA Noble gases (Inert gases) ns2np6 except He 8
Why is helium classified as a noble gas?
2. Transition Elements: d-block elements
These elements are found in the periodic table between the s-block and p-block
elements. In these elements, the valence electrons are being added to the d-orbital of
the outermost shell. They are also known as d-block elements. They are designated
as 'B' group, and they consist of groups IB – VIIIB. The transition elements are found
in periods 4, 5, 6, and 7. They include common elements such as iron, gold, and
copper. d-block elements are also called transition metals.
3. Rare-Earth Elements: f-block elements
These elements are also known as inner-transition elements. They are elements in
which the last electrons are being added to the f-orbital of the outermost shell. The
inner transition elements are in periods 6 and 7. The period 6 inner transition series
fills the 4f-orbitals. It is known as the Lanthanide series because it occurs after the
element lanthanum and its elements are similar to it. The period 7 inner transition
series fills the 5f-orbitals and appears after the element actinium. Its elements are
similar to actinium, thus it is known as the Actinide series.
46
PERIODIC CLASSIFICATION OF THE ELEMENTS
Figure 2.1 presents a scheme to show the basic structure of the periodic table. On the
basis of the electron configuration of the elements the table is divided into s, p, d and
f-blocks.
Figure 2.1 Division of the modern periodic table.
Reading Check
In the periodic table, you have seen a section called rare earth elements. Find this
term in an encyclopedia, in reference books, or in other resource material. Read
and analyze the information you find. Write a report on these elements.
Exercise 2.3
Give appropriate answers for the following questions:
1. For the following elements, write their electron configurations and determine
the group and period number of each element.
a Na, Ca, Al b Cl, S, Ar
2. Bromine is a Group VIIA and period-4 element. What is the valence shell
configuration of bromine?
3. Deduce the group, period, and block of the elements with atomic numbers:
a 37 b 24 c 32
Critical Thinking
4. Why is hydrogen, a non-metal, usually placed with Group I elements in the
periodic table, even though it does not show a metallic property like the alkali
metals?
2.3 PERIODIC PROPERTIES IN THE PERIODIC TABLE
Competencies
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• explain the general trends in properties of the elements as they move down a
group of the periodic table;
47
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
• explain the general trends in properties of elements across a period;
• deduce the properties of an element from its position in the periodic table; and
• make a chart to show the trends in properties of elements in the periodic table.
Activity 2.4
Refer any chemistry book and look up values for atomic size, ionization energy,
electronegativity and other properties of elements. Enter the values in the periodic table,
and see if there any obvious trends in the properties as you go across a period or down a
column of the table. Report your findings to the class.
In the periodic table the properties of the elements such as atomic size, ionization
energy, electron affinity, and electronegativity show a regular variation with in a group
or across a period.
2.3.1 Periodic Properties within a Group
Elements in the same group have the same number of valence electrons and also
exhibit similar chemical properties. For example, group IA elements have 1 valence
electron; those in Group IIA have 2 valence electrons, and so on. Generally, it is
possible to conclude that the number of valence electrons determines the group
number of an element.
Table 2.6 Electron configuration and number of valence electrons of Group IA elements.
Element Electron Number of Group Number
Configuration Valence electron
Li 2, 1 1
Na 2, 8, 1 1
K 2, 8, 8, 1 1 IA
Rb 2, 8, 18, 8, 1 1
Cs 2, 8, 18, 18, 8, 1 1
The periodic properties of the elements can be explained on the basis of nuclear
charge and effective nuclear charge.
Nuclear charge (Z): is the total positive charge in the nucleus of an atom.
Effective Nuclear charge (Z ): In an atom, the outermost shell electrons (or
eff
valence electrons) are attracted to the nucleus and simultaneously repelled by the inner
shell electrons. The attraction of the nucleus for the valence electrons is also reduced
because inner electrons shield (or screen) the valence electrons. As a result, these
48
PERIODIC CLASSIFICATION OF THE ELEMENTS
inner electrons reduce the attraction of the nuclear charge. The resulting net-positive
nuclear charge attracting the valence electrons is called effective nuclear charge, Z .
eff
Effective nuclear charge relates the nuclear charge to the number of shells (size) of the
atom.
The effective nuclear charge is the difference between the nuclear charge (Z) and the
inner electrons (S) that shield the valence electrons. The effective nuclear charge is
always less than the actual nuclear charge.
Z = Z – S
eff
Let us consider the sodium atom with its 11 electrons: 1s22s22p63s1 (2, 8, 1). The 10
inner electrons of sodium completely cancel the 10 units of nuclear charge on the
nucleus. In this way, the inner electrons shield the valence electrons from the full
attractive force of the nucleus and leave an effective nuclear charge of + 1 (Z =+1).
eff
The fact that the inner electrons shield or screen the outer electrons from the full
charge of the nucleus is known as shielding or screening effect.
Activity 2.5
Form a group and perform the following task:
Draw Bohr's model for the following elements and indicate the shielding shells, shielding
electrons and effective nuclear charge:
a beryllium, magnesium and calcium;
b lithium, carbon and fluorine.
Present your findings to the class.
The following properties of elements vary in a regular periodic manner.
1. Nuclear Charge
On moving down a given group of the periodic table, nuclear charge progressively
increases, but effective nuclear charge remains nearly constant.
2. Atomic Size/Atomic Radius
Where in a group do you find atoms with the largest atomic radius? Why?
It is difficult to measure the size of an atom directly. The electron cloud enveloping the
nucleus does not have a clear boundary because its electrons do not have fixed
distances from the nucleus. Therefore, atoms do not have definite outer boundaries.
The size of an atom is defined in terms of its atomic radius. For metals, atomic radius
is defined as one-half the distance between the nuclei of the two adjacent atoms. For
49
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
elements that exist as diatomic molecules (such as chlorine), atomic radius is equal to
one-half of the distance between the nuclei of the atoms in the molecule. Figure 2.2
illustrates the atomic radius of chlorine in a chlorine molecule.
Chlorine
nucleus
AAttoommiicc
rraaddiiuuss
9999ppmm
119988ppmm
Chlorine
Distancebetween nucleus
nuclei
Figure 2.2 The representation of atomic radius in a chlorine molecule.
In moving down a group, atomic radius of the elements mainly depends on the
number of shells.
Activity 2.6
Form a group and perform the following task; present your findings to the class.
The following values are given for atomic radii (in Å) of group IA elements:
1.54, 1.34, 2.35, 2.16 and 1.96
Based on the given information;
1. fill the following table with the number of shells and the appropriate values for atomic
radii corresponding to the symbols of the elements.
2. explain the reason for the observed trend.
Elements Number of Shells Atomic Radius (Å)
Li
Na
K
Rb
Cs
3. Ionization Energy
In which region of the periodic table do you find elements with the:
a lowest tendency to lose electrons, and
b highest tendency to lose electrons?
Ionization energy is the minimum energy required to remove the outermost shell
electron from an isolated gaseous atom or ion.
50
PERIODIC CLASSIFICATION OF THE ELEMENTS
Ionization energy is represented by the following equation (where M denotes any
metal).
M (g) + energy ––––→ M+ (g) + e–
The electrons in an atom can be successively removed, one after another. Thus, the
first ionization energy is the energy needed to remove the first valence electron, the
second ionization energy is the energy needed to remove the second valence electron,
and so on.
M (g) + energy ––––→ M+ (g) + e– ⇒ First ionization energy
M+ (g) + energy ––––→ M2+ (g) + e– ⇒ Second ionization energy
For a given element, the second ionization energy is higher than the first one.
Ionization energy is always a positive value (and therefore is an endothermic process)
because energy is required to remove an electron from an atom. Ionization energy is
measured in electron volts (eV) or kiloJoules per mole (kJ/mol).
Ionization energy is a measure of the tendency of an atom to lose an electron. Metals
easily lose electrons and thus have low ionization energy. Non-metals have high
ionization energy because they do not easily lose electrons.
Activity 2.7
Form a group and perform the following task. Present your findings to the class.
Rank each set of the following elements in order of decreasing ionization energy and
explain the trend in ionization energy of the elements down a group.
i) Ca, Sr, Mg, Be
ii) K, Li, Rb, Na
iii) Cl, F, I, Br
Generally, ionization energy is affected by the following factors:
i) Atomic size: As atomic size increases, the valence electrons are less tightly
held by the nucleus. Thus, less energy is required to remove these electrons.
For example, the energy needed to remove an electron from a cesium atom is
lower than from a lithium atom.
ii) Effective nuclear charge: The smaller the effective nuclear charge of an atom,
the lower is the energy needed to remove an electron from the atom.
iii) Types of electrons: The closer an electron is to the nucleus, the more difficult
it is to remove the electron. In a given energy level, s-electrons are closer to
51
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
the nucleus than p-electrons. Similarly, p-electrons are closer than d-electrons,
and d-electrons are closer than f-electrons. Hence, ionization energy
decreases in the order of: s > p > d > f.
iv) Screening effect by the inner electrons: As described earlier, inner shell
electrons shield the valence electrons from the nuclear charge. The more inner
electrons there are, the higher the screening effect, and therefore the easier it
is to remove the valence electrons. Screening decreases ionization energy.
v) Electron configuration (stability): It is easier to remove electrons from unstable
sublevels than from stable ones. Half-filled (p3, d5, f7) and completely-filled
(d10, p6, f 14) sublevels are more stable. For example, more energy is
required to remove a p3 electron than a p4 electron. As a result of it, the first
ionization energy of nitrogen is higher than that of oxygen.
Generally, with the increasing atomic number, the first ionization energy decreases
down the same group.
Activity 2.8
After studying the given information, identify the elements represented by X, M, and Y;
discuss the findings in your group, and then share your conclusion with the other groups.
Element X
(cid:127) has a relatively high ionization energy.
(cid:127) generally forms an ion with a – 2 charge.
(cid:127) has an outermost electron configuration of 3s23p4.
Element M
(cid:127) reacts with oxygen to form M O.
2
(cid:127) has a very low ionization energy.
(cid:127) is in the fourth period of the periodic table.
Element Y
(cid:127) is a transition element.
(cid:127) is used in Ethiopian coinage.
(cid:127) has 10 electrons in the 3d orbital
4. Electron Affinity (E )
A
To which group it is easier to add electrons; alkali metals or halogens?
Non-metals gain electrons and therefore form negative ions. The tendency of an atom
to form a negative ion is expressed in terms of electron affinity (E ).
A
52
PERIODIC CLASSIFICATION OF THE ELEMENTS
Electron affinity is defined as the energy released in kilojoules/mole, when an electron
is added to an isolated gaseous atom to form a gaseous ion. It is a measure of the
attraction or ‘affinity’ of the atom for the extra added electron.
X(g) + e– ––––→ X– (g) + energy
Since energy is liberated during the process, electron affinity is expressed as a
negative value. For example, when an electron is added to a fluorine (F) atom, 328
kJ/mol of energy is released to produce a fluoride ion (F–), and E is – 328 kJ/mol.
A
F(g) + e– ––––→ F– (g) + E = – 328 kJ/mol
A
Electron affinity is a measure of the strength of an atom to attract an additional
electron. The smaller is the atomic size of an element, the stronger is the tendency to
form negative ions, and consequently the higher the electron affinity. Generally,
electron affinity depends on atomic size and effective nuclear charge of the elements.
Activity 2.9
Form a group and discuss the following concepts.
1. Why does the electron affinity of Cl is higher than that of F?
2. Explain why noble gases have extremely low (almost zero) electron affinities?
3. Explain why halogens have the highest electron affinities?
Present your findings to the class.
5. Electronegativity
Where do you find the most electronegative element in the periodic table?
Electronegativity is the ability of an atom in a molecule to attract the shared electrons
in the chemical bond. The American chemist Linus Pauling (1901-1994) developed
the most widely used scale of electronegativity values based on bond strength. The
Pauling scale ranges from 0.7 to 4.0. Fluorine, the most electronegative element, is
assigned a value of 4.0, and the least electronegative element, cesium, has an
electronegativity value of 0.7. The electronegativity values for all the rest elements lie
between these extremes.
The electronegativity of an atom is related to its ionization energy and electron affinity.
53
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
An atom with high ionization energy and high electron affinity also tends to have a high
electronegativity value because of its strong attraction for electrons in a chemical
bond.
Activity 2.10
Form a group and perform the following task:
Arrange each set of the given elements in order of decreasing electronegativity and
explain the observed trend.
a Ba, Mg, Be, Ca
b C, Pb, Ge, Si
c Cl, F, I , Br
Present your findings to the class.
6. Metallic Character
In which region of the periodic table do you find metals and non-metals?
Metals have the tendency to lose electrons and form positive ions. As a result, metals
are called electropositive elements.
In moving down a group, atomic size increases progressively, and it becomes easier
for elements to lose their valence electrons and form positive ions. Therefore, metallic
character increases down a group.
In the periodic table, metals and non-metals are separated by a stair step diagonal
line, and elements near this border line are called metalloids. Metals are found on the
left side of the line and nonmetals on its right side.
Activity 2.11
Form a group, perform the following task and present your findings to the class:
1. The members of group IVA of the periodic table are: Ge, Sn, C, Pb and Si.
Classify these elements into metals, non-metals and metalloids.
2. Explain the differences between silicon and lead in terms of:
a Atomic size
b Ionization energy
c Electron affinity
d Electronegativity
54
PERIODIC CLASSIFICATION OF THE ELEMENTS
Exercise 2.4
Part I: Choose the correct answer from the given choices
1. Which of the following properties of the elements remain unchanged down a
group?
a Ionization energy c Electron affinity
b Nuclear charge d Valence electrons
2. Which of the following elements has the largest atomic size?
a Be c Ca
b Ba d Mg
3. Which of the following elements has the lowest electronegativty?
a F b Br c I d Cl
Part II: Give short answers for the following
4. What is screening effect? How does it relate to effective nuclear charge?
5. What is the relationship between first ionization energy and the metallic
properties of elements?
2.3.2 Periodic Properties within a Period
Activity 2.12
Form a group and draw a rough sketch of the periodic table (no details are required). Based
on this, perform the following activities and present your findings to the class.
1. Indicate the regions where metals, non-metals, and metalloids are located in the
periodic table. (Use different colours).
2. Where do you find the most active metal and the most active non-metal? .
As we move from left to right across a period, the number of valence electrons of the
elements increases. But the number of energy levels or main shells remains the same
in a given period and electrons are filling the same energy level until stable noble gas
configuration is achieved. The additional electrons from Li (2, 1) to Ne (2, 8) are
added to the second shell. In fact, the period number equals the number of energy
level being filled.
55
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Table 2.7 Electron configuration and number of shells for period-2 elements.
Elements Li Be B C N O F Ne
Atomic number 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Electron configuration 2, 1 2, 2 2, 3 2, 4 2, 5 2, 6 2, 7 2, 8
Number of shells
(period number) 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2
Let us now consider periodic properties of elements across a period.
1. Atomic Size: From left to right in a given period, nuclear charge or atomic
number progressively increases by one for every succeeding element. However,
increasing number of valence electrons is being added to the same shell. This
results in an increase in effective nuclear charge.
Activity 2.13
Form a group and perform the following task. Present your findings to the class.
The following values are given for atomic radii (in Å) of period 2 elements:
0.77, 1.34, 0.69, 0.75, 0.73, 0.82, 0.90, and 0.71.
Based on the information given;
1. fill the table given below with the appropriate values for atomic radii of the
elements.
2. explain the reason for the observed trend.
Element Li Be B C N O F Ne
Atomic radii (Å)
2. Ionization Energy: Two factors account for the general trend in ionization
energy across a given period. These are nuclear charge and atomic size.
Activity 2.14
Form a group and perform the following task, and present your findings to the class.
The following table lists ionization energy values of period 3 elements
Elements Na Mg Al Si P S Cl Ar
Ionization energy (kJ/mol) 496 738 578 787 1012 1000 1251 1521
56
PERIODIC CLASSIFICATION OF THE ELEMENTS
1. Explain why there is a general increase in the first ionization energy across
the period from Na to Ar.
2. Explain why the first ionization energy of:
i) aluminium is lower than that of magnesium.
ii) sulphur is lower than that of phosphorus.
(Hint: Use sublevel configurations for the elements).
3. Electron Affinity: The variation in electron affinity of elements in the same
period is due to changes in nuclear charge and atomic size of the elements.
A cross a period from left to right, electron affinity increases due to an increase
in effective nuclear charge. The elements show a greater attraction for an extra
added electron.
4. Electronegativity: Across a period, a gradual change in nuclear charge and
atomic size determine the trends in the electronegativity of the elements.
Activity 2.15
Form a group and perform the following task. Present your findings to the class.
The following values are given for electronegativity of period 3 elements:
2.1, 0.9, 1.5, 3.0, 1.8, 2.5 and 1.2
Based on the information given;
1. Draw a table of period 3 elements and fill with the appropriate electronegativity
values corresponding to the symbols of the elements.
2. Explain the reason for the observed trend.
5. Metallic character: From left to right in a period, metallic character of the
elements decreases. Elements on the left end of a period have a higher tendency
to form positive ions. Those at the right end have a greater tendency to form
negative ions. In any period, elements on the left side are metals and those on
the right side are nonmetals.
Consider the following period-3 elements and observe how the elements become
more non-metallic on moving from left to right in the periodic table:
Elements Na Mg Al Si P S Cl Ar
Character Metals Metalloid Non-metals
Metallic character decreases
57
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Project work
Model of a periodic table
The following table shows a section of a periodic table. It is incomplete. According to the
data given in table 2.8,
a Construct a model of this section of the periodic table using locally available
materials to show the trends in atomic radii of the elements.
b Complete the section of the periodic table with the elements in the appropriate
position.
Table 2.8 Atomic number and atomic radii of some selected elements.
Element Atomic Atomic Element Atomic Atomic
number radii (nm) number radii (nm)
Li 3 0.123 Al 13 0.125
Be 4 0.089 Si 14 0.117
B 5 0.080 P 15 0.110
C 6 0.077 S 16 0.104
N 7 0.074 Cl 17 0.099
O 8 0.074 Ar 18 0.099
F 9 0.072 K 19 0.203
Ne 10 - Rb 37 0.216
Na 11 0.157 Cs 55 0.235
Mg 12 0.136
(Hint: Be innovative. Use cheap local material available to you. Your teacher will help you
whenever necessary.)
Questions:
Give reasons for the increase or decrease in atomic radii that you observe in your model:
i from lithium to fluorine and sodium to chlorine
ii from lithium to cesium
Present your findings to your class teacher.
58
PERIODIC CLASSIFICATION OF THE ELEMENTS
Exercise 2.5
Give appropriate answers for the following questions.
1. The element with the electron configuration of 1s2 2s22p6 3s23p6 is a:
a metal b non-metal c metalloid d noble gas
2. Which of the main groups in the periodic table has the elements with the
most negative value of electron affinity?
a halogens b noble gases c Alkali metals d none
3. Which of the following is the correct increasing order of atomic size for the
elements: Al, Ar, Na, Si?
a Si, Na, Al, Ar c Ar, Si, Al, Na
b Na, Al, Si, Ar d Al, Si, Ar, Na
Critical Thinking
4. Explain why the first ionization energy of nitrogen is the highest as
compared to that of carbon and oxygen.
5. Compare the elements fluorine and chlorine with respect to their
electronegativity and electron affinity values.
2.4 ADVANTAGES OF PERIODIC CLASSIFICATION
Competencies
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• describe the advantages of periodic classification in studying chemistry.
Activity 2.16
Form a group and discuss the importance of the periodic table for predicting the atomic
size and ionization energy of the elements. Share your idea with the class.
Why do we need the classification of elements?
The main advantages of using the periodic table are:
1. The periodic table is useful for predicting the formulas of compounds. The
elements in a given group form compounds with the same atomic ratio
59
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
because of their similar electron configuration. For example, if the chemical
formula of sodium oxide is Na O, then we can predict the formulas of the
2
other oxides of alkali metals. These are Li O, K O, Rb O, and Cs O.
2 2 2 2
2. The periodic table is useful for predicting the physical and chemical properties
of elements. For example, radium is a rare and radioactive element and
therefore difficult to handle in many experiments. Since its properties can be
predicted from the general trends of group IIA elements, sometimes we do
not need to analyze it directly.
3. The periodic table is also useful for predicting the behaviour of many
compounds. For example, oxides of the elements become more acidic across
a period and more basic in character down a group. The trends in the oxides
of period-3 elements vary from strongly basic oxides to amphoteric and then
acidic oxides as we move across a period.
Table 2.9 Oxides of period 3 elements.
NaO MgO AlO SiO PO SO ClO
2 2 3 2 4 10 3 2 7
Basic oxide Amphoteric Acidic oxide
oxide
For a given element, the important information indicated below, in i, ii and iii can be
read, deduced or stated from the periodic table.
Name
Symbol
(i) Read the
Atomic number
Atomic mass
Number of protonsand electrons
Electron configuration (number of shells and of
valence electrons)
(ii) Deduce the
Character (behavior) asmetal, non metal, or metalloid
Nature (property) of the oxides to formacids, bases...
Based on the information in i and ii, we can:
Period number
(iii) State the Group number and
Block type (s , p , dor f )
60
PERIODIC CLASSIFICATION OF THE ELEMENTS
Diagonal Relationship
How do you account for the unexpected resemblance of the properties of
the following sets of elements: Li and Mg, Be and Al, and B and Si?
In addition to the group and period relationships, the elements of s and p block
also exhibit diagonal relationship. On moving diagonally across the periodic table, the
elements show certain similarities. Though clear upon examination, these diagonal
relationships are far less pronounced than the similarities within a group.
Diagonal relationship is particularly noticeable in the elements of second and third
periods of the periodic table. The following illustrations show the diagonal relationship
between Li and Mg, Be and Al, and B and Si.
Li Be B
Mg Al Si
Check List
Key terms of the unit
• Actinide series • Law of octave
• Atomic size • Mendeleev's law
• Block of elements • Metalloids
• Dobereiner's traids • Metals
• Effective nuclear charge • Non-metals
• Electron affinity • Nuclear charge
• Electron configuration • Periodic law
• Electronegativity • Periodic table
• Groups • Periods
• Inner transition elements • Representative elements
• Ionization energy • Shielding ( screening) effect
• Lanthanide series • Transition elements
61
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Unit Summary
• Early attempts of classification of the elements were made by Dobereiner and
Newlands.
• Mendeleev’s law states that properties of the elements are periodic functions of
their atomic masses.
• Mendeleev arranged the elements based on increasing atomic mass.
• Modern periodic law states that the properties of the elements are periodic
function of their atomic numbers.
• Periods are horizontal rows, and groups are vertical columns of the elements in
the periodic table.
• Elements in the same group show similar chemical properties.
• Elements are classified as representative, transition, and rare-earth elements.
This classification is based on the type of sub-level (s, p, d, or f) being filled.
• Ionization energy is the energy required to remove the outermost shell electron
from an isolated gaseous atom.
• Electron affinity of an element is the energy released when an electron is added
to an isolated gaseous atom to form a gaseous ion.
• Metallic character is the tendency to lose electrons and form positively charged
ions.
• Electronegativity of an element is its ability to attract electrons.
• Trends in atomic size determine the trends in ionization energy, electron affinity,
electronegativity, and metallic character of the elements in the periodic table.
• Atomic size itself is determined by the number of energy levels, nuclear charge,
and effective nuclear charge.
• Periodic properties of elements, such as ionization energy, electron affinity,
electronegativity, etc. show regular variation within a group or period.
REVIEW EXERCISE ON UNIT 2
Part I: Identify whether each of the following statements
is true or false. Give your reasons when you
consider a statement to be false.
1. Metallic properties of the elements increase from left to right within a period.
2. Elements in a group have consecutive atomic numbers.
3. All elements with high ionization energy also have high electron affinity.
62
PERIODIC CLASSIFICATION OF THE ELEMENTS
4. All the elements that belong to s and p-blocks are metals.
5. The modern periodic law was proposed by Mosley.
6. As the atomic number of elements increases in the periodic table, their atomic
radius also increases.
7. Transition metals are found in four periods. Each corresponds to the filling of
valence electrons in the 3d, 4d, 5d, and 6d orbitals.
Part II: Multiple Choices Type Questions
8. The element with atomic number 35 belongs to:
a s-block c d-block
b p-block d f-block
9. An element with the valence electron configuration 3s23p2 belongs to group:
a IIIA c VIA
b IVA d VIIA
10. An element with the valence electron configuration 3s23p6 belongs to period:
a 2 c 8
b 6 d 3
11. An element with the valence electron configuration 2s22p4 belongs to:
a alkali metals c halogens
b oxygen group d noble gases
12. The property of the element with atomic number 18 resembles that of the element
with atomic number:
a 8 b 36 c 19 d 40
13. An element with high ionization energy and high electron affinity also tends to
have a high value of:
a electronegativity c atomic size
b electropositivity d metallic character
Part III: To which group, period, and sublevel block do the
following elements belong?
Group Period Block
14. Calcium _____ ______ _______
15. Sulphur _____ ______ _______
16. Iron ______ ______ _______
17. Zinc _____ ______ _______
18. Xenon ______ ______ _______
63
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Part IV: Give short answers
19. Explain, with examples, the meaning of diagonal relationship.
20. From the given elements : Na, P, Ca, and Br; which one has the:
a highest first ionization energy?
b smallest atomic size?
c most metallic character?
21. On the basis of electron configuration, explain why nitrogen is less electronegative
than oxygen?
22. On the basis of electron configuration, explain why atomic size of sodium is
larger than that of chlorine?
64
3
TINU
Chemical Bonding and
Intermolecular Forces
Unit Outcomes
After completing this unit, you will be able to:
(cid:40) discuss the formation of ionic, covalent, and metallic bonds;
(cid:40) know the general properties of substances containing ionic, covalent, and
metallic bonds;
(cid:40) develop the skills of drawing the electron-dot (Lewis structures) for simple
ionic and covalent compounds;
(cid:40) understand the origin of polarity within molecules;
(cid:40) appreciate the importance of intermolecular forces in plant and animal life;
(cid:40) understand the formation and nature of intermolecular forces; and
(cid:40) demonstrate scientific inquiry skills: observing, predicting, making model,
communicating, asking questions, measuring, applying concepts, comparing
and contrasting, relating cause and effects.
MAIN CONTENTS
3.1 Chemical bonding
3.2 Ionic bonding
3.3 Covalent bonding
3.4 Metallic bonding
3.5 Inter-molecular forces
– Unit Summary
– Review Exercises
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Start-up Activity
Objective of the Activity
Scientists have identified different types of attractive forces between atoms in forming
bonds. The strength of the forces relies on the types of bonds. For instance, in
covalent bonds, the strength of the bonds depends on whether the bonds are
single, double or triple bonds.
In this activity, you will use bundles of sticks to develop your ideas about strength
of bonds.
1. Collect the following materials and bring to school:
– Six sticks of wood of the same length and of the same thickness.
2. Place your sticks on the table in the classroom,
Your teacher will place your sticks in three groups.
– A single stick
– Pairs of sticks
– Sets of three sticks
Your teacher will assign three students and will give for each student a single
stick, a pair of sticks, and a set of three sticks.
Figure 3.1 A bundle of sticks.
Figure 3.2 Students trying to break the sticks.
66
CHEMICAL BONDING AND INTERMOLECULAR FORCES
Analysis
1. Which of your bundles of sticks was the strongest? What is the reason for the
different strengths of the bundle of sticks?
2. Draw your conclusions and present to the rest of the class.
3.1 CHEMICAL BONDING
Competencies
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• define chemical bonding;
• explain why atoms form chemical bonds.
Activity 3.1
Most of the elements are not found free in nature. Why do the elements exists in
combined form ? Discuss in group and present your findings to the class.
A chemical bond is the attractive force that binds atoms together in a molecule, or a
crystal lattice.
After the periodic table and the concept of electron configuration were developed,
scientists began to develop ideas about molecules and compounds. In 1916,
G.N Lewis concluded that atoms combine in order to achieve a more stable electron
configuration resulting in molecules or compounds.
Historical Note
Gilbert Newton Lewis (1875 - 1946), introduced the theory of the
shared-electron-pair chemical-bond formation in a paper
published in the journal of the American chemical society. In
honor of this contribution, we sometimes refer to “electron-dot”
structures as “Lewis structures”.
G.N. Lewis
67
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
As independent particles, atoms are at relatively high potential energy. Nature, favors
arrangements in which potential energy is minimized. Most individual atoms exist in a
less stable state than in their combined form.
When atoms form bonds with each other, they attain lower potential energy states.
This decrease in atomic energy generally results in a more stable arrangement of matter.
When atoms interact to form a chemical bond, only their outer regions are in contact.
In the process of the interaction, atoms achieve stable outermost shell configuration.
For this reason, when we study chemical bonding, we are concerned primarily with
the valence electrons. As described in Unit 2, valence electrons are electrons that exist
in the outermost shell of an atom.
Activity 3.2
Form a group and discuss the following:
The following table shows elements of group VIIIA and their atomic numbers. In the space
provided fill the valence shell electron configuration and number of valence electrons for
the elements. In your discussion include why helium is placed in group VIIIA even though
it has only 2 valence electrons.
Elements Atomic Valence-Shell Number of Valence
Number Electron Electrons
Configuration
Helium, He 2
Neon, Ne 10
Argon, Ar 18
Krypton,Kr 36
Xenon, Xe 54
Radon, Rn 86
Share your discussion with the rest of the class.
Noble gas atoms with eight electrons (except for, He) in the outermost shell are stable.
Thus, the ns2np6 electronic valence structure has maximum stability. Atoms containing
less than eight electrons in their outermost shell are unstable. To attain stability, these
atoms tend to have eight electrons in their valence shells. This leads to the explanation
of the octet rule. The rule states that atoms tend to gain, lose or share electrons until
there are eight electrons in their valence shell.
The type or characteristic of the resulting arrangement depends largely on the type of
chemical bonding that exists between the atoms. These are ionic, covalent, and metallic
bonds.
68
CHEMICAL BONDING AND INTERMOLECULAR FORCES
Exercise 3.1
1 Why do atoms combine to form compounds?
2 How is a chemical bond formed to make a compound or molecule?
3 Which electron (s) of an atom take (s) part in bond formation?
4 How does the chemical reactivity of halogens compare with that of the noble-gas
family?
3.2 IONIC BONDING
Competencies
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• explain the term ion;
• illustrate the formation of ions by giving examples;
• define ionic bonding;
• describe the formation of an ionic bond;
• give examples of simple ionic compounds;
• draw Lewis structures or electron-dot formulas of simple ionic compounds;
• explain the general properties of ionic compounds; and
• investigate the properties of given samples of ionic compounds.
Activity 3.3
Form a group and discuss each of the following concepts. Share your ideas with the class.
1. Why do some atoms easily lose electrons and others do not?
2. Sodium chloride, NaCl is a good conductor in the form of liquid state, but a non
conductor in the form of solid state.
When an atom either loses or gains electrons, it becomes an ion. An ion is an electrically
charged particles. Two different types of ions exist. These are the positive ions called
cations and the negative ions called anions.
The chemical properties of metals differ from those of non-metals. A metal has 1, 2,
or 3 electrons in its outermost shell. Metals tend to lose these electrons and become
positively charged ions. For example, if a metal (M) loses one electron, it becomes an
ion with a charge of +1.
69
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
However, if it loses two electrons it becomes an ion with a charge of +2:
A non-metal may have 4, 5, 6, or 7 electrons in its outermost shell. Non-metals tend
to gain electrons to form negatively charged ions. For example, if a non-metal (X)
gains one electron, it becomes an ion with a charge of –1.
Note that hydrogen can form both a cation, H+ (hydrogen ion) as in HCl, or an anion
H– (hydride ion) as in NaH.
Metals in Group IA, the alkali metals, tend to lose one electron when they combine
with other elements, producing cations of +1 charge. For example, Na and K each
lose one electron to form ions of +1 charge.
Na → Na+ + e–
sodium atom sodium ion
K → K+ + e–
potassium atom potassium ion
On the other hand, Group VIIA elements, the halogens, usually gain one electron and
produce an ion with –1 charge. For example, each Cl and Br atom accepts one
electron to produce an ion with –1 charge.
Cl + e– → Cl–
chlorine atom chloride ion
Br + e– → Br–
bromine atom bromide ion
70
CHEMICAL BONDING AND INTERMOLECULAR FORCES
Activity 3.4
Form a group and perform the following tasks:
Consider the elements:
1. Calcium (atomic number = 20)
2. Barium (atomic number = 56)
3. Oxygen (atomic number = 8)
4. Sulphur (atomic number = 16)
a determine whether each of the elements gain or lose electrons in chemical bond
formation.
b write the type of ions they form; and
c indicate the charges on the ions formed.
Present your findings to the class.
The following table relates the position of some elements in the periodic table to the ions
they normally produce.Note that the charge is the same for each ion in a given group or
column.
Table 3.1 Selected ions in the periodic table.
Ionic Bond formation
When two atoms combine, one of the atoms gains electrons and becomes an anion
and the other loses electrons to form a cation. When a cation and an anion are brought
close to one another, an electrostatic force of attraction is set up between them. This
force of attraction between oppositely charged ions is called an ionic bond. It is also
called an electrovalent bond. The bond is produced when electrons are transferred
from the outermost shell of a metal atom to the outermost shell of a nonmetal atom.
To illustrate ionic bonding, let us consider the formation of the bond between sodium
and chlorine. A sodium atom has 1 valence electron. In order to attain the electron
configuration of the nearest noble gas (Ne), it has to lose its valence electron and
form a sodium ion (Na+). Chlorine has 7 valence electrons. By gaining 1 electron,
chlorine attains the electron configuration of argon (Ar) and form a chloride ion (Cl–).
71
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
In general, an ionic bond is formed by the transfer of electron from a metal to a
nonmetal- for example, sodium and chlorine. Atoms that are bound together by an
ionic bond form ionic compounds. For example, Na+ and Cl– ions form sodium
chloride, NaCl. The transfer of an electron from sodium to chlorine and the formation
of the ionic bond in sodium chloride is shown with the following shell diagrams.
Figure 3.3 Formation of sodium chloride.
Electron-dot notation is often used to represent the outermost shell electron
configurations of the elements. These formulas, also called Lewis formulas, consist of
the symbol of the element plus dots equal to the number of valence electrons in the
atom or ion. Since valence shells contain a maximum of eight electrons, electron-dot
symbols contain a maximum of eight dots. Electron-dot formulas of sodium and chlorine
72
CHEMICAL BONDING AND INTERMOLECULAR FORCES
are shown below. Sodium is an alkali metal with one valence electron:
Na: 1s22s22p63s1
The Lewis symbol for sodium is Na•.
Chlorine is a halogen with seven valence electrons:
Cl: 1s22s22p63s23p5
The Lewis symbol for chlorine is Cl .
The formation of ionic bond can also be represented by using electron-dot formulas.
Therefore, the Lewis structure for the ionic compound sodium chloride will be
–
+
Na + Cl Na Cl
Activity 3.5
Form a group and perform each of the following task:
Draw Bohr's diagrammatic representation and write the Lewis formula for the following
ionic compounds:
a Potassium chloride b Magnesium oxide c Calcium chloride
d Potassium sulphide e Aluminium oxide
Share your ideas with rest of the class.
The following table illustrates the formation of ionic bonds between representative metals
and non-metals. Careful observation indicates that, in each case, both the metal and
the nonmetal acquire a noble-gas configuration. The compounds formed in each case
are electrically neutral as the sum of positive charges equals the sum of negative charges.
Table 3.2 Summary of formula of ionic-compounds.
Metal group Non-metal group Formula of Ionic Examples
Compound
IA VIIA MX (M+X–) NaCl, KBr
IA VIA M X (2M+X2–) Li O, K O
2 2 2
IA VA M X (3M+X3–), Na N, K P
3 3 3
IIA VIIA MX (M2+2X–), MgCl , CaI
2 2 2
IIA VIA MX (M2+ X2–), BaS, MgO, MgS
IIA VA M X (3M2+ 2X3–) Ca N , Mg P
3 2 3 2 3 2
IIIA VIIA MX (M3+ 3X–), AlF
3 3
IIIA VIA M X (2M3+3X2–) Al O
2 3 2 3
IIIA VA MX (M3+ X3–) AlN
Note: M = metal; X = non-metal.
73
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Exercise 3.2
1. Draw the Lewis structure for the nitrogen atom, nitrogen molecule and ammonia.
2. Show that the following species have the same number of electrons.
Na+, Mg2+, O2–, and Ne
How do you name ionic compounds, for example NaCl?
To name an ionic compound that is formed from a metal and a non-metal, follow the
given procedure, by considering the example of NaCl:
1. Write the name of the metal (sodium).
2. Modify the last characters of the name of the non-metal (chlorine) to end it with
ide. (Chloride).
Therefore, the name of NaCl is sodium chloride. Similarly, MgO is named as magnesium
oxide, Na N is named as sodium nitride.
3
General Properties of Ionic Compounds
Activity 3.6
Form a group and perform the following task: Collect samples of ionic compounds from
your school laboratory and investigate whether the samples are:
a hard or soft b brittle or strong c liquids or solids
What is your generalization about the physical properties of ionic compounds? Share your
ideas with the rest of the class.
Experiment 3.1
Investigating the Physical Properties of Ionic Compounds
I Melting Point and Solubility
Objective: To investigate the melting point and solubility of some ionic compounds.
Apparatus: Test -tube, Bunsen burner.
Chemicals: NaCl, CuCl , ethanol, hexane and benzene.
2
Procedure:
Perform the following three experiments:
1. Put a few crystals of dry sodium chloride (NaCl) and copper (II) chloride
(CuCl ) into separate glass test tubes. Heat strongly on a Bunsen burner. What
2
do you observe?
74
CHEMICAL BONDING AND INTERMOLECULAR FORCES
2. Place about 1 g each of sodium chloride (NaCl) and copper (II) chloride
(CuCl ) in separate test tubes. Add about 5 mL of water (polar solvent) and
2
shake well.
3. Repeat experiment 2 using the following solvents instead of water. Ethanol
(polar solvent), hexane and benzene (non-polar solvents). These solvents are
highly flammable and should be kept away from flames.
Observations and analysis
a In experiment 1, do the crystals melt? Do they have high or low melting
points?
b In experiment 2 and 3, does each of the solids dissolve in the given solvents?
Why? Do they have low or high solubility in the given solvents?
Prepare a table as shown below and fill in the results of the solubility tests.
Substances Water Ethanol Hexane Benzene
NaCl (s)
CuCl (s)
2
II Conductivity
Objective: To investigate the conductivity of some ionic compounds.
Apparatus: Beaker, conductivity cell, graphite or iron rods, bulb, wire, battery.
Chemicals: Sodium chloride, copper (II) chloride, benzene and charcoal.
Procedure:
1. Put some amount of sodium chloride crystals in a beaker.
2. Place two electrodes that are made of iron or graphite in the beaker.
3. Connect the two electrodes to a bulb and a 6-volt battery as shown in
Figure3.5.
Record your observation.
4. Now add distilled water to the beaker and stir dissolve the salt. Observe the
changes.
5. Repeat the experiment using aqueous copper (II) chloride, benzene and
charcoal.
75
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Graphite
electrodes
Bulb
Dry cells
NaClsolution
Figure 3.5 Conductivity of sodium chloride solution.
Observations and analysis
a Does sodium chloride conduct electricity in its solid state?
b What do you observe in the bulb when the sodium chloride is dissolved?
What does this indicate?
c What can you conclude from this experiment?
d What are your observations for aqueous copper (II) chloride, benzene and
charcoal?
Conclusion:
What are your conclusions about:
a melting point,
b solubility in polar and non-polar solvents, and
c electrical conductivity of ionic compounds?
A summary of the general properties of ionic compounds:
1. Ionic compounds do not contain molecules. They are aggregates of positive ions
and negative ions. In the solid state, each ion is surrounded by ions of the opposite
charge, producing an orderly array of ions called crystal.
76
CHEMICAL BONDING AND INTERMOLECULAR FORCES
Figure 3.4 Arrangement of ions.
2. At room temperature ionic compounds are hard and rigid crystalline solids. This is due
to the existence of strong electrostatic forces of attraction between the ions.
3. Ionic compounds have relatively high melting and boiling points. This is due to
the presence of strong electrostatic forces between the ions. These forces can
be overcome only by applying very large amounts of energy.
4. Ionic compounds can conduct electric currents when molten or in aqueous
solution. This is due to the presence of mobile ions in molten state or in solution.
However, ionic compounds do not conduct electricity in the solid state.
5. Ionic compounds are soluble in polar solvents such as water. They are insoluble
in non-polar solvents such as benzene.
Exercise 3.3
1. KCl is soluble in water but insoluble in benzene. Explain.
2. Which of the following substances conduct electricity? Give reasons for your
answer in each case:
a NaCl (aq) b NaCl (l) c NaCl (s)
3. Name the ionic compounds formed from the following pairs of elements:
a calcium and sulphur b sodium and iodine c silver and bromine
4. List the properties of ionic compounds.
3.3 COVALENT BONDING
Competencies
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• define covalent bonding,
• describe formation of a covalent bond,
77
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
• draw Lewis structures or electron-dot formulas of simple covalent molecules,
• give examples of different types of covalent molecules,
• make models of covalent molecules to show single, double and triple bonds
using sticks and balls or locally available materials,
• explain polarity in covalent molecules,
• distinguish between polar and non-polar covalent molecules,
• define coordinate (dative) covalent bond,
• illustrate the formation of coordinate covalent bond using appropriate examples,
• explain the general properties of covalent compounds, and
• investigate the properties of given samples of covalent compounds.
Activity 3.7
Form a group and discuss each of the following concepts.
1. What is the difference between the bond when two chlorine atoms combine to form a
chlorine molecule (Cl ) and that formed when sodium combines with chlorine to form
2
sodium chloride (NaCl)?
2. Carbon tetrachloride (CCl ) is a covalent compound. Would you expect it to be :
4
i) a conductor of electricity
ii) soluble in water.
Share your ideas with the class.
Many molecules are formed when outermost shell or valence electrons are shared
between two atoms. This sharing of electrons creates a covalent bond.
Covalent bond formation can be illustrated by the sharing of electrons between two
hydrogen atoms to form a molecule of hydrogen.
Figure 3.6 Sharing of electrons between hydrogen atoms in H molecule.
2
In the hydrogen molecule, each hydrogen atom attains the stable electron configuration
of helium.
In a covalent bond, each electron in a shared pair is attracted to the nuclei of both
atoms as shown in Figure 3.6. The shared electrons spend most of their time between
the two nuclei. The electrostatic attraction between the two positively charged nuclei
and the two negatively charged electrons hold the atoms in the molecule together. This
78
CHEMICAL BONDING AND INTERMOLECULAR FORCES
attractive force between positively charged nuclei of atoms and the shared electrons in
a molecule is known as covalent bond.
A molecule of hydrogen chloride is also formed by a pair of electrons shared between
the two atoms. Each atom in the molecule attains a stable electron configuration.
Figure 3.7 Hydrogen and chlorine share a pair of electrons in HCl.
The concept of Lewis formula representation can also be extended to covalent bonds.
The Lewis structure for a covalent compound shows the arrangement of atoms in a
molecule and all the valence electrons for the atoms involved in the compound. It is
conventional to represent the non-bonding (lone pair) electrons by dots and the pair
of electrons that are shared between atoms by a dash. For example, consider the
hydrogen molecule:
The electron-dot formula of the hydrogen molecule is:
H• + •H → H H
The covalent bond in hydrogen molecule is also written as H – H.
The formation of the covalent bond in hydrogen chloride is shown by the following
electron-dot formula. This formula must satisfy the octet rule (for chlorine) and the
doublet rule (for hydrogen). As shown in the illustration, these requirements are satisfied.
The shared pair belongs to both of the atoms (hydrogen and chlorine) in the hydrogen
chloride molecule. The resulting valence electron configuration provides two valence
electrons to hydrogen and eight to chlorine.
The chlorine atom in the molecule has three pairs of electrons, which are not used for
bonding. Pairs of electrons that is not used for bonding are called lone-pair electrons.
Pairs that are used for bonding are called bonding-pair electrons.
79
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Consider the fluorine molecule, F . The electron configuration of fluorine is 2, 7. Thus
2
each fluorine atom has seven valence electrons. Accordingly, there is only one unpaired
electron on fluorine. Therefore, the formation of the fluorine molecule is represented as
Note that only two valence electrons participate in the formation of fluorine molecule.
The others are non-bonding electron (lone pairs). Thus each fluorine atom in fluorine
molecule has three lone-pairs of electrons. The resulting molecule is a diatomic molecule.
A diatomic molecule consists of two atoms. All the other members of the halogen
family form diatomic molecules in the same way as fluorine does.
The maximum number of covalent bonds that an atom can form can be predicted
from the number of electrons needed to fill its valence shell. For example, each member
of Group IVA elements has four electrons in its valence shell, and it needs four more
electrons to achieve stable noble-gas electron configuration. Thus, it forms four covalent
bonds for carbon in methane, CH as shown below:
4
H
H
H C H or C
H H H
H
Elements of Group VA need three additional electrons to achieve noble gas configuration
and they form three covalent bonds as shown below for nitrogen in ammonia NH .
3
H N H or N
H H
H H
Similarly, elements of group VIA form two covalent bonds and Group VIIA elements
form single covalent bonds.
Types of Covalent Bonds
How do you compare the nature and strength of the bonds in H , O and N ?
2 2 2
Atoms can form different types of covalent bonds. These are single bonds, double
bonds and triple bonds.
In a single bond two atoms are held together by one electron pair.
80
CHEMICAL BONDING AND INTERMOLECULAR FORCES
How are the covalent bonds in H , Cl and HCl formed?
2 2
Many covalent compounds are held together by multiple bonds. Multiple bonds are
formed when two or three electron pairs are shared by two atoms. If two atoms
share two pairs of electrons, the covalent bond is called a double bond. For example,
double bonds are found in molecules of carbon dioxide (CO ) and ethene (C H ).
2 2 4
C or C
Carbondioxide
H H H H
C C or C C
H H H H
Ethene
A triple bond is formed when two atoms share three pairs of electrons, as in the
nitrogen molecule (N ).
2
The ethyne (acetylene) molecule (C H ) also contains a triple bond. In this case the
2 2
bond is between two carbon atoms.
H C C H or H C C H
Ethyne
Activity 3.8
Form a group and perform the following tasks:
1. Construct a molecular model for each of the following species using locally available
materials such as toothpicks to represent bonds, and styrofoam spheres to represent
atoms.
a N b H c O d CH
2 2 2 2 4
2. Based on your models, identify which species contain:
i) only single bonds
ii) double bonds
iii) triple bonds
Present your models and findings to the rest of the class.
81
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Exercise 3.4
1. How many bonding pair and lone pair electrons are found in each of the
following molecules?
a CO b C H c N d C H
2 2 4 2 2 2
2. Consider molecules of carbon disulfide, CS , and hydrogen cyanide, HCN.
2
a What types of bonds do they contain?
b Draw their electron-dot formulas.
c Are there any lone-pair electrons in these molecules?
3. Why is the melting point of ionic compounds higher than that of covalent
compounds?
Reading Check
Does the hydrogen atom form covalent as well as ionic bonds? How?
3.3.1 Polarity in Covalent Molecules
Activity 3.9
Form a group and discuss the following idea:
The covalent bonds are formed by sharing of electrons. Compare covalent bonds formed
between atoms of the same elements and those formed between atoms of different
elements. (Example: H and HCl).
2
Present your conclusion to the class.
A covalent bond is formed when electron pairs are shared between two atoms. In
molecules like H , in which the atoms are identical, the electrons are shared equally
2
between the atoms. A covalent bond in which the electrons are shared equally between
the two atoms is called a non-polar covalent bond.
H – H
In other words, a non-polar bond is a covalent bond in which bonding electrons are
shared equally between identical atoms, resulting in a balanced distribution of electrical
charge.
In contrast, in the covalently bonded HCl molecule, the H and Cl atoms are of different
elements; therefore, they do not share the bonding electrons equally.
82
CHEMICAL BONDING AND INTERMOLECULAR FORCES
A chemical bond in which shared electrons spend more time in the vicinity of one
atom than the other is called a polar covalent bond, or simply a polar bond.
Polarity of bonds is caused by differences in the electronegativity of the two atoms
forming the bonds. Electronegativity is the ability of an atom to attract the shared
electrons in a chemical bond toward itself.
Elements with high electronegativity have a higher tendency to attract electrons than
elements with low electronegativity. For example, in the case of HCl, the electronegativity
of the chlorine atom is higher than that of the hydrogen atom. The shared pair of
electrons is more strongly attracted to the nucleus of the chlorine atom. As a result,
the chlorine atom acquires a partial negative charge (δ–) whereas the hydrogen atom
acquires a partial positive charge (δ+). The delta is read as "partial" or "slightly."
If a molecule has a positive end and a negative end, it is said to be polar and posses
a dipole. Dipole means 'two poles'.
Experimental evidence indicates that, in the HCl molecule, the electrons spend more
time near the chlorine atom. We can think of this unequal sharing of electrons as a
partial electron transfer or a shift in electron density as shown below:
This unequal sharing of the bonding electron pair results in a relatively higher electron
density near the chlorine atom and a correspondingly lower electron density near
hydrogen.
Exercise 3.5
1. How many electrons are shared in a:
a single bond, b double bond, and c triple covalent bond?
2. Draw Lewis structures for:
a H b Cl c C H
2 2 3 6
3. Draw Lewis structures for each of the following molecules:
a HBr b CO c H O
2 2
Also indicate the partial charges using δ+ and δ–.
3.3.2 COORDINATE COVALENT BOND
A covalent bond in which one atom donates both electrons of the bond is called a
coordinate covalent bond. It is also called a dative bond. Such a bond is hypothetically
represented as:
83
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Once formed, a coordinate covalent bond has the same properties as any other covalent
bond. The atom that contributes both electrons for the bond is the donor atom, and
the atom that shares the electron pair is the acceptor atom.
For an atom to act as a donor, it must contain lone pair of electrons in its valence
shell and the acceptor atom must have at least one vacant orbital.
For example, the ammonium ion, NH+, is formed by a coordinate covalent bond in
4
which the two non-bonding electrons on NH bond with a hydrogen ion, H+, which
3
has no electrons to contribute.
In the resulting ion, NH+, the four N – H bonds are identical.
4
Similarly, a coordinate covalent bond can be formed between a hydrogen ion and a
molecule of water, which has two lone pairs of electrons.
Carbon monoxide, CO, also has a coordinate covalent bond. In order for both carbon
and oxygen atoms to attain noble-gas electron arrangements, oxygen donates a pair of
electrons to the carbon atom. In the process a coordinate covalent bond is formed
between the two atoms.
General properties of covalent compounds
1. Covalent compounds are generally liquids or gases at ordinary temperature. For
example : water and ethyl alcohol are liquids. Hydrogen chloride, methane and
cabon dioxide are gases. Same covalent compounds are solids (e.g. sugar)
2. As compared to ionic compounds, covalent compounds have relatively lower
melting points and boiling points.
3. They do not conduct electric current when molten or in aqueous solution, because
they consist of molecules rather than of ions.
4. Covalent compounds are insoluble in polar solvents such as water. They are
soluble in non-polar solvents such as benzene and carbon tetrachloride.
84
CHEMICAL BONDING AND INTERMOLECULAR FORCES
Experiment 3.2
Investigating the Physical Properties of Covalent Compounds
I. Melting point
Objective: To investigate the effect of heat on covalent compounds.
Apparatus: Test tube, Bunsen burner.
Chemicals: Naphthalene, graphite, iodine.
1. Put a small amount of naphthalene into a dry test tube. Heat it strongly.
Naphthalene is toxic. Do not inhale it or get it on your skin.
a What do you observe? Does the solid melt or vaporize?
b Is the melting point high or low?
2. Repeat the procedure with graphite, and iodine separately. Iodine vapor is
toxic. Do not inhale it.
Observe and record your observation in a tabular form as shown below.
Substance Melted, vaporized or High or low
nothing happened melting point
Naphthalene
Graphite
Iodine
II. Solubility
Objective: To investigate the solubility of covalent compounds.
Apparatus: Test-tubes, test tube rack.
Chemicals: Naphthalene, graphite, iodine, ethanol, hexane and benzene.
3. Arrange 12 test tubes in three sets (A, B, C) of 4 test tube each. To each
test tube of set A, add 1 g of naphthalene. To each test tube of set B add 1
g of graphite and to each test tube of set C add 1 g of iodine.
4. Add about 10 mL of each the following solvents to the four test tubes of each
set separately and shake well.
• Water
• Ethanol
• Hexane
• Benzene
Caution: Ethanol, hexane and benzene are all highly flammable.
Observe and record whether the solids are very soluble, slightly soluble or insoluble.
85
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Solubility
Substance
Water Ethanol Hexane Benzene
Naphthalene
Graphite
Iodine
Observations and analysis
Draw general conclusions on the
a melting points,
b solubility in polar and non-polar solvents of the covalent compounds given.
Exercise 3.6
1. Which of the following molecules contain a covalent bond?
a CaO d SO g MgO
2
b HCl e Na O h NaH
2
c CO f PCl i CH
2 3 4
2. Which of the following contain a dative bond?
a H O+ b NH c NH – d CaO
3 3 2
3. Which of the following molecules are polar ?
a SO c H O e BCl g CH Cl
2 2 3 3
b CO d CS f CH
2 2 4
4. Which of the following are non-polar covalent compounds?
a O c CH e H O g Br
2 4 2 2
b HCl d O f Cl
3 2
Activity 3.10
Form a group and perform the following task:
Collect samples of covalent compounds from your school laboratory and investigate
whether the samples are:
a liquids or solids b hard or soft c brittle or strong
What is your generalization about the physical properties of covalent compounds? Share
your ideas with the class.
Reading Check
What is the difference between a coordinate covalent bond and covalent bond?
86
CHEMICAL BONDING AND INTERMOLECULAR FORCES
3.4 METALLIC BONDING
Competencies
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• explain the formation of metallic bond;
• explain the electrical and thermal conductivity of metals in relation to metallic
bonding; and
Activity 3.11
Form a group and discuss the following concepts and present your discussion to the class.
a Metals are solids. They contain large number of atoms in their crystals. What kind of
force do you think holds these metal atoms together?
b How do you account for the properties of metals, such as conductivity, malleability, and
ductility in terms of the bonds in metals?
The highest energy orbitals of most metals are occupied by very few electrons. In
s-block metals, for example, one or two valence electrons occupy s orbitals in the
outermost levels (for example Na and Mg). Furthermore, the p orbitals of the outer
most level are also occupied partially in p-block metals (example Tl, Pb and Bi).
The d-block metals contain partially filled (n–1)d levels in their atomic states or principal
oxidation states. The bonding in metals is different from that in other types of crystals.
The valence electrons of metals are not held by individual atoms. Rather, they are
delocalized and mobile (free to move throughout the structure).
The valence electrons form a sea of electrons around the metal ions and these metal
ions are organized as a crystal. Metallic bonding results from the attraction between
the metal ions and the surrounding sea of electrons.
For example, as illustrated in Figure 3.8, a sodium metal crystal is a lattice-like array
of Na+ ions surrounded by a sea of mobile bonding valence electrons.
Figure 3.8 Metallic bonding in sodium metal.
87
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
The bonding valence electrons move freely throughout the entire crystal. This freedom
of movement is responsible for the electrical conductivity of metals.
Properties of Metallic Bonding
Have you ever visited a goldsmith workshop? Why are metals easily shaped into
thin sheets and drawn into wires?
The freedom of movement of bonding valence electrons is responsible for the high
electrical and thermal conductivity that characterizes the metals. Other properties of
metallic bonding contribute to unique properties of metals. For example, most metals
are easy to shape due to their malleability and ductility.
Malleability allows a substance such as a metal to be reshaped. By hammering and
bending some metals, you can create thin sheets. Ductility allows a substance to be
drawn or pulled out into long thin pieces, such as wires.
Metals are malleable and ductile because metallic bonding is the same in all directions
throughout the solid.
When we apply a force to metal, its cations swim freely within the sea of electrons
without breaking the crystal structure. For example, when you hammer, bend, or pull
on a metal to reshape it, you shift its cations around. The force you apply moves the
atoms around, for example, around corners in the lattice. This is the basis for malleability
and ductility of metals, which allows you to change its shape.
Project work
Model of a Metallic Crystal
Put about one hundred balls (for example, marble balls or balls made from other locally
available materials) into a rectangular glass trough. Shake the trough. Allow the balls to
settle.
a Draw a two-dimensional diagram to show how the marble balls are now arranged in
the trough.
b If the balls represent atoms in a metallic lattice, which species are occupying the
‘empty’ space between and around them?
Present your model and findings to the class.
Exercise 3.7
1. Describe how a metallic bond is different from those of an ionic bond and a
covalent bond.
2. Explain thermal and electrical conductivity in metals.
3. Is metallic bonding responsible to form compounds?
88
CHEMICAL BONDING AND INTERMOLECULAR FORCES
3.5 INTERMOLECULAR FORCES
Competencies
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• define inter-molecular forces;
• explain hydrogen bonding;
• explain the effects of hydrogen bonding on the properties of substances;
• describe Van der Waal's forces;
• explain dipole-dipole forces;
• give examples of molecules with dipole-dipole forces;
• explain dispersion forces;
• give examples of molecules in which dispersion force is important; and
• compare and contrast the three types of intermolecular forces.
Activity 3.12
Form a group and discuss the following phenomenon: Why do covalent compounds
usually exist as gases and liquids?
Share your views with the rest of the class.
Inter-molecular forces are relatively weak forces of attraction that occur between
molecules. Inter-molecular forces vary in strength but are generally weaker than the
bonds that join atoms in molecules, ions in ionic compounds, and metal atoms in solid
metals. Inter-molecular forces acting between molecules include: dipole-dipole forces,
London dispersion forces and hydrogen bonding. Dipole-dipole attractions and
London forces are collectively called Van der Waal's forces.
A Dipole-Dipole Forces
Dipole-dipole forces are strong inter-molecular forces between polar molecules. A dipole
is created by equal but opposite charges separated by a short distance. A polar molecule
acts as a tiny dipole because of its uneven charge distribution.
A dipole is represented by an arrow with a head pointing toward the negative pole
and crossed tail situated at the positive pole. The dipole created by a hydrogen chloride
molecule, which has its negative end at the more electronegative chlorine atom, is as
shown below:
Figure 3.9 Dipole-dipole interactions in HCl molecules.
89
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
The negative end in one polar molecule attracts the positive end in an adjacent molecule
in a liquid or solid. Dipole-dipole forces occur in molecules such as ethyl alcohol and
water.
B London Dispersion Forces
All molecules, including those without dipole moments, exert forces on each other. We
know this because all substances, even the noble gases, change from liquid to solid
state under different conditions.
Figure 3.10 Induced dipole-induced dipole forces between non-polar molecules.
London dispersion forces act between all atoms and molecules. They are the only
forces that exist between noble gas atoms and non-polar molecules. This fact is reflected
in the low boiling points of noble gases and non-polar molecules. Because dispersion
forces result from temporary redistribution of the electrons causing induced dipole-
dipole interactions, their strength increases with the number of electrons in the interacting
atoms or molecules. Hence, dispersion forces increase with atomic number or molar
mass. This trend can be seen by comparing the boiling points of gases (helium, He,
and argon, Ar), (hydrogen, H , and oxygen, O ), and (chlorine, Cl , and bromine,
2 2 2
Br ).
2
As an illustration, the boiling points of the noble gases are presented in Table 3.4.
Table 3.3 Boiling points of noble gases.
Noble gas Boiling Point (oC) Number of electrons
He -269 2
Ne -246 10
Ar -186 18
Kr -152 36
Xe -107 54
Rn -62 86
90
CHEMICAL BONDING AND INTERMOLECULAR FORCES
As you look down the column of noble gases, you note that boiling point increases.
This is because the induced dipole-dipole interaction increases.
C Hydrogen Bonding
Hydrogen bonding is a particular type of intermolecular force arising when a hydrogen
atom is bonded to highly electronegative elements, fluorine, oxygen and nitrogen.
Hydrogen bonding is a particular type of dipole-dipole interactions between polar
compounds. In such compounds, large electronegativity differences between the hydrogen
and the fluorine, oxygen, or nitrogen atoms make the bonds connecting them highly
polar. This polarity gives the hydrogen atom a positive charge. Moreover, the small
size of the hydrogen atom allows the atom to come very close to an unshared pair of
electrons on an adjacent molecule. Hydrogen bonding is responsible for the unusual
high boiling points of some compounds such as hydrogen fluoride (HF), water (H O)
2
and ammonia (NH ).
3
Hydrogen bonds are usually represented by dotted lines connecting the hydrogen atom
to the unshared electron pair of the electronegative atom to which it is attracted. For
example, the hydrogen bond in hydrogen fluoride, HF, results when the highly
electronegative F atom attracts the H atoms of an adjacent molecule.
Do you think that the intermolecular forces between molecules containing C-H,
N-H, and O-H bonds are as strong as the intermolecular forces containing F-H
bonds?
Exercise 3.8
1. Which of the following exists predominately in the water (H O) molecule?
2
a Van der Waal's force c coordinate covalent bond
b hydrogen bond d none of these
2. Which of the following has the highest induced dipole interactions in its molecule?
a He c Ne
b Ar d Kr
Critical Thinking
Oxygen (16O) and Sulphur (32S) are in the same group in the periodic table.
8 16
They form compounds with hydrogen, H O and H S. However, H O is a liquid,
2 2 2
whereas H S is a gas at room temperature. Give explanation?
2
91
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Check List
Key terms of the unit
• Anions • Ionization energy
• Bonding-pair electrons • London forces
• Cations • Lone-pair electrons
• Chemical bond • Malleability
• Conductivity • Metallic bond
• Coordinate/dative bond • Mobile electrons
• Covalent bond • Noble gases
• Delocalized electrons • Non-bonding electrons
• Dipole • Octet rule
• Dipole-dipole interaction • Polar bond
• Double-bond • Polar covalent bond
• Ductility • Polarity
• Electronegativity • Sea of electrons
• Electrovalent bond • Single-bond
• Hydrogen bonding • Triple-bond
• Inter-molecular forces • Valence electrons
• Ionic bonding • Van der Waal's forces
Unit Summary
• A chemical bond is the attractive force that binds atoms together to form a
molecule (or a crystal lattice), an ionic or metallic crystal lattice.
• An ionic bond is the electrostatic attraction between oppositely charged ions
(cations and anions).
• A covalent bond is formed by a shared pair of electrons.
• A covalent bond in which one pair of electrons is shared is known as a single
bond; for example, H written as H – H.
2
• Atoms can also share more than one pair of electrons to form a multiple bond.
• The sharing of three pairs of electrons forms a triple bond - for example, N ,
2
written as N≡N.
• A dative or coordinate covalent bond is a bond in which one of the atoms
supplies both of the shared electrons to the covalent bond.
• A metallic bond is the electrostatic attraction between positive metal ions and
delocalized electrons.
92
CHEMICAL BONDING AND INTERMOLECULAR FORCES
• Inter-molecular forces are forces of attraction between covalently bonded
molecules. These include: London forces, dipole-dipole forces, and hydrogen
bonding.
• London forces are forces of attractions between nonpolar molecules.
• Dipole-dipole forces are the attractions between dipoles of polar molecules.
• Hydrogen bonding is the attraction of covalently bonded hydrogen to lone pairs
on N, O, or F atoms in other molecules or in the same molecule (if the molecule
is large enough).
REVIEW EXERCISE ON UNIT 3
Part I: Multiple Choice Type Questions
1. Which of the following contain localized valence electrons?
a Cu c C H
6 6
b C H d none
2 6
2. Which of the following is a compound?
a Cl c Na
2
b HCl d liquid oxygen
3. In the formation of ionic bonding, valence electrons are:
a shared c transferred
b delocalized d not affected
4. What force is responsible for the formation of ice during the freezing of water?
a ionic c dipole-dipole interaction
b covalent d dative bond
5. Which of the following has the highest electrical conductivity in the solid state?
a water c sodium
b common salt d rubber
Part II: Write the missing words in your exercise book
6. Ionic bonding is formed between the atoms of _____ and _____.
7. Covalent bonding is formed between the atoms of _____.
8. Metallic bonding is formed between the atoms of _____.
9. The forces that hold atoms together in molecules of compounds are called _____.
93
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Part III: Short Answer Type Questions
10. Give a simple explanation of the following, using an example:
a a covalent bond d hydrogen bonding
b an ionic bond e metallic bond
c a dative bond
11. Classify the bonds that can be formed between the following pairs of atoms as
principally ionic or covalent:
a calcium and chlorine e sodium and hydrogen
b boron and carbon f aluminium and oxygen
c sodium and bromine g chlorine and oxygen
d magnesium and nitrogen h iodine and chlorine
12. Give the Lewis structures for the following:
a H S g NH
2 3
b CaS h CH
4
c Al O i CF
2 3 4
d HF j NO
e N k CaCl
2 2
f C H
2 4
13. Which of the following molecules can form hydrogen bonding?
a H S e NH
2 3
b CO f HF
2
c SO g CH OH
2 3
d CH
4
14. Which of the following substances contain hydrogen bonding?
a hydrogen chloride c ammonia
b water d methane
15. Classify the following molecules as polar or non-polar:
a CH e H O
4 2 2
b CH Cl f BCl
3 3
c C H g H S
2 2 2
d CO h HBr
2
16. What is meant by a polar molecule?
17. Explain the fact that HCl is polar, whereas Cl is a non-polar molecule.
2
18. What is the difference between intermolecular and intra-molecular attractive
forces?
94
4
TINU
Chemical Reactions and
Stoichiometry
Unit Outcomes
After completing this unit, you will be able to:
(cid:40) understand the fundamental laws of chemical reactions and how they are
applied;
(cid:40) develop skills in writing and balancing chemical equations;
(cid:40) understand energy changes in chemical reactions;
(cid:40) know types of chemical reactions;
(cid:40) develop skills in solving problems based on chemical equations (mass-mass,
volume-volume and mass-volume problems);
(cid:40) develop skills in determining limiting reactant, theoretical yield, actual yield,
and percentage yield;
(cid:40) understand oxidation-reduction reactions and analyze redox reactions by specifying
the oxidizing agents and reducing agents, the substance reduced or oxidized;
(cid:40) understand the rate of chemical reaction, the state of a chemical equilibrium
and factors affecting them; and
(cid:40) demonstrate scientific enquiry skills: observing, inferring, predicting, classifying,
comparing and contrasting, communicating, measuring, asking questions,
designing experiments, interpreting data, drawing conclusions, applying concepts,
relating cause and effect, and problem-solving.
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
MAIN CONTENTS
4.1 Introduction
4.2 Fundamental Laws of Chemical Reactions
4.3 Chemical Equations
4.4 Energy Changes in Chemical Reactions
4.5 Types of Chemical Reactions
4.6 Stoichiometry
4.7 Oxidation-Reduction Reactions
4.8 Rate of Chemical Reaction and Chemical Equilibrium
– Unit Summary
– Review Exercises
Start-up Activity
A chemical reaction enables a space shuttle to be launched, which is powered by a
chemical reaction between pure liquid hydrogen (serving as a fuel) and oxygen.
Assume that the fuel tank contains 32,000 litres of H and the oxidizer tank contains
2
40,000 litres of O ;
2
Analysis
1. What type of reaction takes place?
2. Write the balanced chemical equation for the reaction.
3. What volume of product is formed in the reaction?
4. What mass of product is formed in the reaction?
(Assume that the pressure remains constant in this process).
Submit your findings to the teacher.
4.1 INTRODUCTION
Competencies
By the end of this unit, you will be able to:
• define chemical reaction; and
• give some examples of chemical reactions.
Activity 4.1
Form a group and discuss the following phenomenon:
1. When a space shuttle leaves the ground on its way into orbit, what does the brightness
and warmth of the flame indicate?
2. What are the notations that indicate a chemical change might be taking place?
Present your conclusion to the class.
96
CHEMICAL REACTIONS AND STOICHIOMETRY
Chemical reactions are the basis of chemistry. Chemical reactions occur around us all
the time. For example, the burning of fuel, the souring of milk, metabolic processes of
our body and the decay of plants are some familiar chemical reactions in daily life.
A chemical reaction is the process in which reacting substances, called reactants, are
converted to new substances, called products. The characteristics of the products are
completely different from those of the reactants. The conversion process is a chemical
change.
Reactants Æ Products
For example, if you burn magnesium with oxygen, the magnesium and oxygen are
completely converted to magnesium oxide. Magnesium oxide is a soft, white,
crumbling powder. These characteristics of magnesium oxide are completely different
from the characteristics of the original substances, magnesium and oxygen. Magnesium
and oxygen are no longer present in the elemental form.
In summary, a chemical reaction has occurred in which the reactants, magnesium and
oxygen, underwent a complete chemical change, giving the product magnesium oxide.
All chemical reactions include three types of changes in the original substances. These
are changes in composition, properties and energy.
Activity 4.2
Form a group and perform the following task.
List some chemical processes that occur in your daily life. Identify the reactants and
products in each of these chemical processes.
Present your findings to the class.
Note that, in daily life, we use different terms for the same process of chemical
change. For example “the souring of milk” occurs due to the process of fermentation.
In scientific discussion we generally have a single term for each process.
4.2 FUNDAMENTAL LAWS OF CHEMICAL REACTIONS
Competencies
By the end of this unit, you will be able to:
• state the law of conservation of mass and illustrate the law, using examples;
• demonstrate the law of conservation of mass, using simple experiments;
• state the law of definite proportion and illustrate it, using examples;
• demonstrate the law of definite proportion, using a simple experiment; and
• State the law of multiple proportion and illustrate it, using examples.
97
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Activity 4.3
Form a group and discuss the following phenomenon. When wood burns, the ash weighs
much less than the original wood. Where did the “lost mass” go? How can you estimate
the mass of the wood that is no longer present?
Present your conclusion to the class.
While investigating the quantitative relations between substances in chemical reactions,
scientists formulated the three basic laws of chemical combination. These are:
i) The law of conservation of mass
ii) The law of definite proportions
iii) The law of multiple proportions
i) The Law of Conservation of Mass
In 1774, the French chemist Antoine Lavoisier performed an experiment in which he
heated a sealed glass container that held a sample of tin in air. He measured the mass of
the substances before and after heating and found them to be the same. This and other
similar experimental observations became the basis of the law of conservation of mass.
Historical Note
French chemist Antoine Lavoisier is considered the founder of
modern chemistry. He found that the amount of matter before a
chemical reaction is equal to the amount of matter afterwards, even
though the matter may change in its form. Lavoisier also
experimented with the role of oxygen in combustion and
respiration in both plants and animals.
Antoine Lavoisier
The law of conservation of mass states that matter is neither created nor destroyed in a
chemical reaction. In other words, the mass of the reactants is exactly equal to the
mass of the products, within the limits of experimental error. This law is also known as
the law of indestructibility of matter.
Mass of reactants = Mass of products
There is no loss or gain of substances during a chemical reaction, and mass is
conserved.
For example, consider the decomposition of mercury (II) oxide. When 100 g of
mercury (II) oxide decomposes by heat, 92.6 g of mercury and 7.4 g of oxygen are
formed. Note that the total mass of mercury and oxygen after decomposition is 100 g:
98
CHEMICAL REACTIONS AND STOICHIOMETRY
2HgO Æ 2Hg + O
2
100g 92.6g 7.4g
(cid:78) (cid:8)(cid:11)(cid:11)(cid:9)(cid:11)(cid:11)(cid:10)
100g 100g
Reactant Products
Experiment 4.1
Investigation of the Law of Conservation of Mass
Objective: To determine the mass of substances before and after a reaction.
Apparatus: Flask, test tube, thread, rubber stopper, balance.
Chemicals: Sodium chloride, silver nitrate.
Procedure:
1. Take 50 mL of silver nitrate solution in a conical flask.
2. Tie a thread around the top of a test tube. Fill the test tube with a saturated
solution of sodium chloride. Suspend the test tube in the flask by means of a
thread held by a rubber stopper, as shown in Figure 4.1.
3. Weigh the flask (and its contents). Record the result as m .
1
4. Mix the liquids by tilting the conical flask so that the sodium chloride pours
into the silver nitrate solution.
5. Reweigh the conical flask and contents and record as m . Compare m and m .
2 1 2
Observations and analysis
1. What was the colour of the solution after the reaction?
2. Is there any difference in mass between m and m ?
1 2
3. What is your conclusion from this experiment?
4. Write the balanced chemical equation for the reaction.
Figure 4.1 Conservation of mass.
99
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
ii) The Law of Definite Proportions
The law of definite proportions states that a compound always contains the same
elements in the same proportion by mass. This means that all pure samples of a
compound have the same composition regardless of the source of sample. This law is
also known as the law of constant composition. For example, sample of water could
be obtained from different sources, such as from a river, the ground, or the ocean.
But whatever the original source, all forms of pure water contains 11.2% hydrogen
and 88.8% oxygen by mass. These percentages represent a ratio of 1.0 to 8.0 (1:8),
by mass, of hydrogen to oxygen.
This ratio is constant (fixed) for water. In other words, a compound with a different
ratio of hydrogen and oxygen is not water.
Similarly, in forming the compound ZnO, 65.0 g of zinc combines with 16.0 g of
oxygen. This is 80.2% zinc and 19.8% oxygen, by mass. As is the case for water,
the composition of ZnO is constant. In forming ZnO, zinc combines with oxygen in a
definite proportion.
Experiment 4.2
Investigation of the Law of definite proportions
Objective: To determine the mass of copper from copper (II) oxide.
Apparatus: Burner, stand, combustion tube, two glass test tubes, two watch glasses.
Chemicals: Copper powder, copper (II) carbonate, hydrogen gas
Procedure:
1. Prepare samples of copper (II) oxide using the following two methods:
i) Make copper (II) oxide by heating copper powder in one of the test tubes.
ii) Make copper (II) oxide by heating copper (II) carbonate in the second
test tube.
(In this case, the heating process produces a chemical change through thermal
decomposition)
2. Take 1 g from each of the samples of copper (II) oxide (from i and ii). Place
each of these samples in a watch glass.
3. Reduce each of these samples: use the combustion tube to heat the samples in
a stream of hydrogen as shown in Figure 4.2.
4. Weigh the copper metal that remains in each case. Compare the measurements.
100
CHEMICAL REACTIONS AND STOICHIOMETRY
Observations and analysis
1. What is the mass of copper produced in each case?
2. Why is copper metal produced in each case?
3. What can you conclude from the experiment? Write a short report on your
observations.
Burninghydrogen
Samplesof
copper(II)oxide
Hydrogengas
Heat
Heat
Clamp
Figure 4.2 Reduction of copper (II) oxide by hydrogen.
iii) The Law of Multiple Proportions
The law of multiple proportions states that when two elements combine to form more
than one compound, the masses of one element combined with a fixed mass of the
second element are in the ratio of small whole numbers. This law can be illustrated by
the two oxides of carbon. The two oxides of carbon are carbon monoxide (CO) and
carbon dioxide (CO ). In CO , 1.0 g of carbon is combined with 2.67 g of oxygen;
2 2
whereas in CO, 1.0 g of carbon is combined with 1.33 g of oxygen. By comparing
2.67 g of oxygen with 1.33 g of oxygen, it is found that the masses of oxygen in the
two compounds that combine with the same mass of carbon are in the simple whole
number ratio, 2:1.
2.67 g of oxygen in CO 2
2 = = 2:1
1.33 g of oxygen in CO 1
Activity 4.4
Form a group and perform the following task:
The following table illustrates the law of multiple proportions using five oxides of nitrogen.
In the table, fill the mass ratio of nitrogen to oxygen and determine the mass of oxygen
in each compound that combine with a fixed mass (1g) of nitrogen.
Present your conclusion to the class.
101
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Compound Molecular Mass ratio of Ratio of Oxygen
formula N to O (N:O) in the oxides
Dinitrogen monoxide N O
2
Nitrogen monoxide NO
Dinitrogen trioxide N O
2 3
Nitrogen dioxide NO
2
Dinitrogen pentoxide N O
2 5
Exercise 4.1
Give appropriate answers for the following questions.
1. Classify the following as chemical or physical changes:
a the souring of tella b freezing ice cream
c plant growth d boiling of an egg
e heating sugar f fermentation
g the magnetization of iron h the fading of dye in cloth
2. Iron and chlorine form two compounds, A and B. Compound A contains 1.27
g of chlorine for each 1 g of iron whereas compound B contains 1.9 g of
chlorine for each 1 g of iron. Show that the masses of chlorine are in the ratio
2:3. Do they obey the law of multiple proportions? Explain.
3. Consider the following two chemical changes:
i) When a material made of iron rusts, its mass increases.
ii)When a match stick burns, its mass decreases.
Do you think that these two observations violate the law of conservation of
mass? Explain.
Critical Thinking
4. Discuss how the law of conservation of matter is explained by Dalton’s atomic
theory.
4.3 CHEMICAL EQUATIONS
Competencies
By the end of this unit, you will be able to:
• describe the conventions used to write chemical equations;
• balance chemical equations, using the inspection method;
102
CHEMICAL REACTIONS AND STOICHIOMETRY
• balance chemical equations, using the Least-Common-Multiple (LCM) method.
Activity 4.5
Form a group and discuss each of the following:
1. What is the difference between a chemical equation and a chemical reaction?
2. Which law is satisfied when a chemical equation is balanced? Take a simple chemical
reaction to illustrate this law.
Present your conclusion to the class.
A chemical equation is a shorthand representation of a chemical reaction in terms of
chemical symbols and formulas. In a chemical equation the starting substances are
called reactants; and the new substances produced are known as products.
Reactants are written on the left side and products on the right side of the equation.
An arrow (→) is placed between the two sides to indicate transformation of reactants
into products.
Reactants Æ products
4.3.1 Writing Chemical Equation
In writing chemical equation, instead of using words, chemical symbols and formulas
are used to represent the reaction.
Steps to Write a Chemical Equation
1. Write a word equation: A word equation is stated in words. For example, the
word equation for the reaction between sodium and chlorine to produce sodium
chloride is written as:
Sodium + Chlorine Æ Sodium chloride (word equation)
Note that we read the ' + ' sign as 'reacts with' and the arrow can be read as
'to produce', 'to form', 'to give' or 'to yield'.
2. Write the symbols and formulas for the reactants and products in the word
equation.
Na + Cl Æ NaCl (Chemical equation)
2
3. Balance the equation.
2Na + Cl Æ 2NaCl
2
103
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Generally, any chemical equation must fulfil the following conditions:
i) The equation must represent a true and possible chemical reaction.
ii) The symbols and formulas must be written correctly. The elements– hydrogen,
nitrogen, oxygen, fluorine, chlorine, bromine and iodine exist as diatomic
molecules. These elements should be written as molecules in the equation.
iii) The equation must be balanced.
A chemical equation has both qualitative and quantitative meanings.
Qualitatively, a chemical equation indicates the types of the reactants and products
in the reaction.
Quantitatively, a chemical equation expresses the relative number (amount)
of moles, molecules or masses of the reactants and products.
4.3.2 Balancing Chemical Equation
Which should be adjusted in balancing a chemical equation, the subscripts or
the coefficients?
According to the law of conservation of mass, atoms are neither created nor
destroyed during a chemical reaction. As a result, the number of atoms of each
element should remain the same before and after the reaction. Therefore, the main
reason why all chemical equations must be balanced is just to obey the law of
conservation of mass.
To balance a chemical equation means to equalize the number of atoms on both sides
of the equation by putting appropriate coefficients in front of the formulas.
Only two methods of balancing chemical equations will be discussed under this topic.
These are the inspection and the Least Common Multiple (LCM) method.
1. The Inspection Method
Most simple chemical equations can be balanced using this method. Balancing an
equation by inspection means to adjust coefficients by trial and error until the equation
is balanced. Follow the following four steps to balance the chemical equation.
Step 1: Write the word equation.
Step 2: Write the correct symbols or formulas for the reactants and products.
Step 3: Place the smallest whole number coefficients in front of the symbols or
formulas until the number of atoms of each element is the same on both sides
of the equation.
104
CHEMICAL REACTIONS AND STOICHIOMETRY
Step 4: Checking: By counting the number of atoms on both sides of the equation,
make sure that the atoms of all elements are balanced and also the
coefficients are expressed as the smallest whole number ratio.
Note:
When you balance an equation, do not change any symbol or formula of any compound.
If you change a symbol or formula, it no longer represents the element or compound
required by the equation.
Example 1
Balance the equation for the reaction between magnesium and oxygen to
produces magnesium oxide.
Solution:
Step 1: Magnesium + Oxygen Æ Magnesium oxide
Step 2: Mg + O Æ MgO (unbalanced)
2
Step 3: Put coefficients to balance the equation
•Oxygen is not balanced. There are two oxygen atoms on the left side and
one on the right side. Hence, place the coefficient 2 in front of MgO.
Mg + O Æ 2MgO (unbalanced)
2
•Now Mg is not balanced. There is one Mg on the left side and two on the
right side. Thus, place the coefficient 2 in front of Mg.
2Mg + O Æ 2MgO (balanced)
2
Step 4: Checking: There are two Mg and two O atoms on each side of the
equation. Therefore, the equation is correctly balanced.
2Mg + O Æ 2MgO
2
Exercise 4.2
Balance the following chemical equation, using the inspection method:
1. Na + H O Æ NaOH + H
2 2
2. CaCO Æ CaO + CO
3 2
3. H O Æ H O + O
2 2 2 2
4. Al + H PO Æ AlPO + H
3 4 4 2
5. HNO + H S Æ NO + S + H O
3 2 2
105
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
2. The LCM Method
In the LCM method, the coefficients for the balanced chemical equation are obtained
by taking the LCM of the total valency of reactants and products and then dividing it
by total valency of reactants and products. All the necessary steps to balance a
chemical equation by the LCM method, are shown by the following examples.
Example 2
When aluminium reacts with oxygen, aluminium oxide is formed. Write
the balanced chemical equation for the reaction.
Solution:
Step 1: Represent the reaction by a word equation.
Aluminium + Oxygen Æ Aluminium oxide
Step 2: Change the words to symbols and formulas for the reactants and
products.
Al + O Æ Al O
2 2 3
Step 3: Place the total valency of each atom above it.
3 4 6 6
Al + O Æ Al O
2 2 3
Now the equation shows
• The valency of aluminium as 3.
• The total valency of oxygen is 2 × 2 = 4.
• The total valency of aluminium in Al O is 3 × 2 = 6.
2 3
• The total valency of oxygen in Al O is 2 × 3 = 6.
2 3
Step 4: Find the LCM of each total valency and place it above the arrow.
3 4 6 6
Al + O  12 → Al O
2 L.C.M 2 3
Step 5: Divide the LCM by each total valency number to obtain the coefficients
for each of the reactants and products. Place the obtained coefficients
in front of the respective formulas.
4Al + 3O Æ 2Al O (balanced)
2 2 3
Checking: There are 4 aluminium and 6 oxygen atoms on both sides of the
equation. Hence, the chemical equation is correctly balanced.
106
CHEMICAL REACTIONS AND STOICHIOMETRY
Example 3
When iron reacts with water, iron (III) oxide and hydrogen are produced.
Write the balanced equation.
Solution:
Step 1: Iron + water Æ Iron (III) oxide + hydrogen.
Step 2: Fe + H O Æ Fe O + H
2 2 3 2
Step 3: 3 2 2 6 6 2
Fe + H O Æ Fe O + H
2 2 3 2
Step 4: F 3 e + H 2 O 2 6→ Fe 6 O 6 + H 2
2 L.C.M 2 3 2
Step 5: 2Fe + 3H O Æ Fe O + 3H (balanced)
2 2 3 2
Checking: There are 2 iron, 6 hydrogen, and 3 oxygen atoms on each side
of the equation. Thus, the equation is balanced.
Example 4
The reaction of ammonium sulphate with aluminium nitrate would form aluminium
sulphate and ammonium nitrate.
Solution:
Step 1: Ammonium sulphate + Aluminium nitrate → Aluminium sulphate +
Ammonium nitrate
Step 2: (NH ) SO + Al(NO ) —→ Al (SO ) + NH NO
4 2 4 3 3 2 4 3 4 3
2 2 3 3 6 6 1 1
Step 3: (NH ) SO + Al(NO ) —→ Al (SO ) + NH NO
4 2 4 3 3 2 4 3 4 3
2 2 3 3 6 6 1 1
Step 4: (NH ) SO + Al(NO ) 6 → Al (SO ) + NH NO
4 2 4 3 3 L.C.M 2 4 3 4 3
Step 5: 3(NH ) SO + 2Al(NO ) —→ Al (SO ) + 6NH NO (balanced)
4 2 4 3 3 2 4 3 4 3
Checking: There are 12 nitrogen, 24 hydrogen, 3 sulphur, 30 oxygen and 2 aluminium
atoms on both sides of the equation. Thus, the equation is correctly balanced.
Exercise 4.3
1. Write the balanced chemical equation to represent the following reactions.
a Sulphur dioxide reacts with oxygen to produce sulphur trioxide.
b Potassium chlorate when heated produces potassium chloride and oxygen.
107
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
c Sodium carbonate reacts with hydrochloric acid to form water, carbon
dioxide and sodium chloride.
d Silver oxide decomposes to silver and oxygen gas.
2. Balance the following equations by the LCM method.
a PCl + H O —→ H PO + HCl
5 2 3 4
b Mg + H O —→ Mg(OH) + H
2 2 2
c Zn(NO ) —→ ZnO + NO + O
3 2 2 2
d H SO + NaOH —→ Na SO + H O
2 4 2 4 2
e NH + O —→ NO + H O
3 2 2
4.4 ENERGY CHANGES IN CHEMICAL REACTIONS
Competencies
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• explain energy changes in chemical reactions;
• define endothermic and exothermic reactions;
• describe endothermic and exothermic reactions;
• illustrate endothermic and exothermic reactions using diagrams;
• conduct simple experiment to demonstrate exothermic and endothermic reactions;
• describe the importance of chemical changes in production of new substances
and energy.
Activity 4.6
Form a group and discuss each of the following phenomena:
When the bread baked, does the bread absorb or release heat energy? Justify your answer.
Present your conclusion to the class.
Almost all chemical reactions are accompanied by energy changes. These energy
changes could be in the form of heat energy, light energy, electrical energy, and so on.
108
CHEMICAL REACTIONS AND STOICHIOMETRY
On the basis of energy changes, chemical reactions can be divided into exothermic
and endothermic reactions.
4.4.1 Exothermic and Endothermic Reactions
Can heat energy be considered as a reactant or product?
Exothermic Reaction
A chemical reaction that releases heat energy to the surroundings is known as an
exothermic reaction. During an exothermic process, heat is given out from the system
to its surroundings and this heat energy is written on the right side of the equation as
shown below.
Reactants Æ Products + Heat
For example, the burning of carbon with oxygen produces carbon dioxide and heat is
released during the reaction. Thus, the reaction is exothermic and written as:
C + O Æ CO + Heat
2 2
Endothermic Reaction
A chemical reaction which absorbs heat energy from the surroundings is known as an
endothermic reaction. During an endothermic process, heat flows into the system from
its surroundings and the heat is written on the left side of the equation.
Reactants + Heat → products
For example, the reaction between carbon and sulphur to form carbon disulphide is
an endothermic reaction because heat is absorbed in the reaction.
C + 2S + Heat Æ CS
2
The amount of heat energy liberated or absorbed by a chemical reaction is called heat
of reaction or change in enthalpy for the reaction. It is symbolized as ∆H. Its unit is
expressed in kilojoules per mol(kJ ). The change in enthalpy (∆H) is the difference
mol
between the energy of the products and the energy of the reactants.
∆H = H – H ; where H is the heat content (energy) of the product, H is the
p r p r
heat content (energy) of the reactant.
4.4.2 Energy Diagrams
For endothermic reactions, DH is positive because the energy of the product is higher
than the energy of the reactant. As a result, the enthalpy of the system increases as
shown in Figure 4.3.
109
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
since, H > H , DH = positive (DH > 0)
p r
For example, when nitrogen reacts with oxygen to form nitrogen dioxide, 66.4 kJ of
heat energy is absorbed (i.e., DH = + 66.4 kJ/mol) and thus the reaction is
endothermic.
N (g) + 2O (g) Æ 2NO (g); DH = + 66.4 kJ/mol
2 2 2
Figure 4.3 Energy diagram for an endothermic reaction.
For exothermic reactions, DH is negative because the energy of the reactants is
greater than the energy of the products. Thus, the enthalpy of the system decreases,
as shown in Figure 4.4.
H < H fi ∆H = negative (DH < 0)
p r
For example, when carbon burns in oxygen to produce carbon dioxide, 393.5 kJ of
heat energy is liberated and hence the reaction is exothermic (∆H = –393.5 kJ/mol).
C(s) + O (g) Æ CO (g): DH = –393.5 kJ/mol
2 2
Figure 4.4 Energy diagram for an exothermic reaction.
110
CHEMICAL REACTIONS AND STOICHIOMETRY
Experiment 4.3
Investigating the Heat Involved in a Chemical Reaction
Objective: To determine the exothermic/endothermic nature of the reaction between
sulphuric acid and sugar.
Apparatus: beaker and reagent bottle.
Chemicals: Concentrated H SO and sugar.
2 4
Procedure:
1. Take small amount of sugar in a beaker.
2. Add a little concentrated sulphuric acid to the sugar.
3. Touch the outer surface of the beaker and record your observation.
Figure 4.5 Reaction between sulphuric acid and sugar.
Observations and analysis
1. Does the beaker feel hot or cold when you touch it?
2. Did you see any steam in the beaker?
3. What is the colour of the product formed?
4. Write a balanced chemical equation.
5. What can you conclude from the experiment?
[Caution-When mixing concentrated acid and water, always add the acid to
the water; never add water to concentrated acid.]
111
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Experiment 4.4
Investigating the Heat Involved in a Reaction
Objective: To investigate the exothermic/endothermic nature of the process when
ammonium nitrate is dissolved in water.
Apparatus: Beaker, thermometer, stirrer.
Chemicals: Ammonium nitrate and water.
Procedure:
1. Take 100 mL of water in a beaker and record its temperature.
2. Dissolve 15 g of solid ammonium nitrate (NH NO ) in the 100 mL of water.
4 3
3. Touch the outer surface of the beaker and record the temperature of the solution
with the help of a thermometer.
Observations and analysis:
1. Does the beaker feel hot or cold when you touch it?
2. Is the temperature increased or decreased after the addition of NH NO ?
4 3
3. What do you conclude from this experiment?
Figure 4.6 Dissolution of ammonium nitrate in water.
112
CHEMICAL REACTIONS AND STOICHIOMETRY
Activity 4.7
Form a group and perform the following task. In your daily life you encounter with many
chemical changes involving energy. List some of such changes and discuss their
importance.
Share your findings with the rest of the class.
Chemical reactions bring about chemical changes. All chemical changes are
accompanied by energy changes. This energy is usually in the form of heat, light, or
electricity.
Energy changes produced by chemical reactions have many practical applications
(uses). For example, energy lifts rockets, runs cars, and extracts metal from
compounds.
Many applications involve the energy produced by fuel combustion, which liberates
large amounts of heat. The energy can be converted from one form to another. For
example, the energy that fuel combustion produces can convert water to steam.
The steam can run a turbine that creates electricity.
Respiration (breathing) creates energy for our bodies. Breathing releases the energy
our living cells produce by oxidizing glucose. This energy helps to maintain our
body temperature and body exercises.
C H O + 6O Æ 6CO + 6H O + Energy
6 12 6 2 2 2
Exercise 4.4
In each of the following cases, determine the sign of ∆H. State whether the
reaction is exothermic or endothermic, and draw an enthalpy diagram.
a H (g) + ½O (g) → H O(l) + 285.8 kJ
2 2 2
b H O(I) + 40.7 kJ → H O(g)
2 2
4.5 TYPES OF CHEMICAL REACTIONS
Competencies
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• list the four types of chemical reactions;
• define combination reaction and give examples;
• conduct some experiments on combination reactions in groups;
113
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
• define decomposition reaction and give examples;
• conduct some experiments on decomposition reactions in group;
• define single displacement reactions and give examples;
• conduct some experiments on simple displacement reactions in groups;
• define double displacement reaction and give examples; and
• conduct some experiments on double displacement reactions in groups.
Activity 4.8
Form a group and discuss the following chemical reactions that occur during the:
a digestion of food in our body.
b fermentation of ‘tej’.
c burning of kerosene in a stove.
Share your discussion with the rest of the class.
Chemical reactions are classified into four categories. These are combination,
decomposition, single displacement and double displacement reactions.
i) Combination Reactions
Experiment 4.5
Investigation of Combination Reaction
Objective: To investigate the reaction between sulphur and iron.
Apparatus: Test tube, stand, burner, watch glass
Chemicals: Sulphur powder, iron filings
Procedure:
1. Mix about 3 g of iron filings and 2 g of powdered sulphur in a watch glass.
2. Transfer the mixture in a glass test tube.
3. Mount the test tube in a sloping position on a stand as shown in Figure 4.7.
4. Heat the test tube until the mixture in the glass glows red hot.
5. Remove the test tube from the flame and observe the result.
114
CHEMICAL REACTIONS AND STOICHIOMETRY
Observations and analysis:
1. What were the colours of iron filings and sulphur before the reaction?
2. What was the colour of the resulting compound after the reaction?
3. Write a balanced chemical equation for the reaction.
4. Identify the type of reaction.
Figure 4.7 The reaction between iron and sulphur.
A reaction in which two or more substances combine to form a single substance is
called a combination reaction. In a combination reaction, two elements, two compounds,
or an element and a compound react to form a single compound. Combination
reactions can be represented by the following general form of equation.
A + B Æ AB;
where the reactants A and B are elements or compounds, the product AB is a compound.
Such type of reaction is also known as synthesis or composition reaction.
Examples
• Magnesium burns in oxygen to form magnesium oxide.
2Mg + O Æ 2MgO
2
element element
• Water and carbon dioxide combine to form carbonic acid.
H O + CO Æ H CO
2 2 2 3
115
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Exercise 4.5
Complete and balance the following combination reactions.
1. CO + O →
2
2. H O + SO →
2 2
3. Na O + H O →
2 2
4. CaO + CO →
2
ii) Decomposition Reactions
Experiment 4.6
Investigation of Decomposition Reaction
Objective: To investigate the decomposition of copper (II) carbonate.
Apparatus: Test tube, stand, burner, cork, delivery tube.
Chemicals: Copper (II) carbonate and lime water.
Procedure:
Put copper (II) carbonate powder in a glass test-tube. Mount the test tube in
a sloping position on a stand as shown in Figure 4.8. Fit a cork and a delivery
tube to the test tube. Put another test tube containing lime water at the end of
the delivery tube. Heat the copper (II) carbonate with a burner.
Observations and analysis:
1. What was the colour of copper (II) carbonate before heating?
2. What was the colour during heating and after cooling?
3. What change did you observe in the lime water?
4. Write a balanced chemical equation for the reaction.
116
CHEMICAL REACTIONS AND STOICHIOMETRY
Deliverytube
Rubberstopper Standandclamp
Limewater
Copper(II)
carbonate
Bunsen
burner
Figure 4.8 Decomposition of copper (II) carbonate.
A decomposition reaction is a reaction that involves the breaking down of a single
compound into two or more elements or simpler compounds. A decomposition
reaction can be carried out using heat, light, electricity or a catalyst. But most
decomposition reactions are carried out when heat is supplied and this heat energy is
indicated by a ‘delta’ (∆) symbol above the arrow. The general form of equation for
a decomposition reaction is:
AB Æ A + B
where the reactant AB must be a compound and the products A and B could be
elements or compounds.
Examples
• Water is decomposed to hydrogen and oxygen gases when electricity is passed
through it.
2H O electric→ 2H + O
2 current 2 2
• When sodium bicarbonate is heated, it decomposes to give sodium carbonate,
carbon dioxide, and water.
2NaHCO ∆→ Na CO + CO + H O
3 2 3 2 2
117
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Let us consider the decompositions of nitrates and carbonates:
1. Decomposition of Metallic Nitrates
a) Decomposition of group IA nitrates produces nitrites and oxygen.
Examples
2NaNO D→ 2NaNO + O
3 2 2
2KNO D→ 2KNO + O
3 2 2
b) Decomposition of all metal nitrates, except group IA metals, gives nitrogen dioxide,
metal oxide and oxygen gas.
Examples
2Ca(NO ) D→ 2CaO + 4NO + O
3 2 2 2
2Zn(NO ) D→ 2ZnO + 4NO + O
3 2 2 2
2Pb(NO ) D→ 2PbO + 4NO + O
3 2 2 2
2. Decomposition of Metallic Carbonates
All metal carbonates, except sodium and potassium, decompose when heated to form
the metal oxide and carbon dioxide.
Examples
ZnCO D→ ZnO + CO
3 2
CuCO D→ CuO + CO
3 2
iii) Single Displacement Reactions
Experiment 4.7
Investigation of Single Displacement Reaction
Objective: To investigate the displacement reaction between iron and copper (II)
sulphate.
Apparatus: Iron rod and beaker.
118
CHEMICAL REACTIONS AND STOICHIOMETRY
Chemicals: Copper (II) sulphate.
Procedure:
1. Clean a piece of iron rod or iron knife with emery paper to remove any rust.
2. Take copper sulphate solution in a beaker.
3. Dip the iron rod into the copper (II) sulphate solution as shown in Figure 4.9
and wait for a few minutes. What did you observe on the iron rod?
4. Allow the reactants to stand for one day and observe any change on the iron
rod.
Observations and analysis:
1. What did you observe on the iron rod after one day?
2. Write a balanced chemical equation for the reaction.
3. Write the conclusion for the experiment.
Figure 4.9 Reaction between iron and copper (II) sulphate.
A reaction in which one element displaces another element from its compound is
known as single displacement or replacement reaction. Such a reaction is represented
by the following two general forms.
A + BC Æ B + AC
If A is a metal, it will displace B to form AC, provided A is a more active metal
than B.
A + BC Æ BA + C
If A is a non-metal, it will displace C to form BA, provided A is a more active
non-metal than C.
119
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
In general, a more reactive element displaces a less reactive element from a
compound.
Examples of single-displacement reactions
a Active metals displace hydrogen from acids.
Reactive metals such as potassium, calcium, sodium, and zinc displace hydrogen
gas from dilute acids.
For example, zinc is an active metal, and it displaces hydrogen from hydrochloric
acid; but copper metal cannot do so.
Zn + 2HCl Æ ZnCl + H
2 2
Au + HCl Æ No reaction
b Reactive metals, such as potassium, calcium, and sodium react vigorously with
water to displace hydrogen:
2Na + 2H O Æ 2NaOH + H
2 2
Ca + 2H O Æ Ca(OH) + H
2 2 2
Exercise 4.6
Complete and balance the following single displacement reactions:
1. Zn + CuSO —→
4
2. Cu + Zn(NO ) —→
3 2
3. F + CaCl —→
2 2
4. Br + NaCl —→
2
iv) Double Displacement Reactions
Experiment 4.8
Investigation of Double Displacement Reaction
Objective: To observe the displacement reaction between Na SO and Ba(NO ) .
2 4 3 2
Apparatus: Beaker, stirrer, filter paper, filter funnel.
Chemicals: Na SO and Ba(NO ) .
2 4 3 2
120
CHEMICAL REACTIONS AND STOICHIOMETRY
Procedure:
1. Take solution of Ba(NO ) into a beaker and add dropwise Na SO solution.
3 2 2 4
Then stir it continuously.
2. Filter the precipitate using a filter paper and funnel. Collect the filtrate or the
solution in a clean beaker.
Observations and analysis:
1. Write the names of the compounds that are formed as a precipitate and as
solution at the end of the reaction.
2. What was the colour of the precipitate.
3. Write the balanced chemical equation for the reaction.
NaSO
2 4
solution
Stirrer
Ba(NO)
32
solution
Figure 4.10 The double displacement reaction between Na SO and Ba(NO ) .
2 4 3 2
121
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Double displacement reaction is a reaction in which two compounds react together to
form two new compounds by exchange of the positive and negative ions of each
reactant. Such a reaction is also known as double replacement reaction or metathesis.
This type of reaction can be written in the following general form of equation.
AB + CD Æ AD + CB
Examples
• The two soluble compounds AgNO and NaCl react to produce an insoluble
3
precipitate of AgCl and a soluble NaNO solution.
3
AgNO + NaCl Æ AgCl ↓ + NaNO
3 3
Insoluble Soluble
• When aqueous solutions of BaCl and Na SO react, a precipitate of BaSO
2 2 4 4
is formed.
BaCl + Na SO Æ BaSO ↓ + 2NaCl
2 2 4 4
Insoluble Soluble
Exercise 4.7
Give appropriate answers for the following questions.
1. What type of reaction does usually take place in each of the following reactions?
a a metal reacting with water.
b a metal reacting with a non-metal.
c an acid reacting with a metal hydroxide.
d heating of a metal hydrogen carbonate.
2. Classify the following reactions as combination, decomposition, single or double
displacement reactions.
a FeO + C Æ Fe + CO
b 2NH + H SO Æ (NH ) SO
3 2 4 4 2 4
c CaCO + 2HCl Æ CaCl + CO + H O
3 2 2 2
d 2Cu(NO ) Æ 2CuO + 4NO + O
3 2 2 2
e 2Na PO + 3Ca(OH) Æ Ca (PO ) + 6NaOH
3 4 2 3 4 2
f CuSO .5H O Æ CuSO + 5H O
4 2 4 2
122
CHEMICAL REACTIONS AND STOICHIOMETRY
3. Complete and balance the following equations. If the reaction does not take
place, write “No Reaction”
a Mg + N D→
2
b Na CO D→
2 3
c BaCO + HNO Æ
3 3
d Zn + H SO Æ
2 4
e FeCO D→
3
f H CO + NaOH Æ
2 3
4.6 STOICHIOMETRY
Competencies
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• deduce mole ratios from balanced chemical equations;
• solve mass-mass problems based on the given chemical equation;
• define molar volume;
• state Avogadro’s principle;
• solve volume-volume problems based on the given chemical equation;
• solve mass-volume problems based on the given chemical equation;
• define limiting and excess reactants;
• determine limiting and excess reactants of a given chemical reaction;
• show that the amount of product formed in a chemical reaction is based on the
limiting reactant;
• define the term theoretical yield, actual yield and percentage yield; and
• calculate the percentage yield of a chemical reaction from given information.
Activity 4.9
Form a group and discuss the following concepts:
a A bicycle mechanic has 10 frames (body parts) and 16 wheels in the shop. How many
complete bicycles can he assemble using these parts? Which parts of the bicycle are
left over?
b Based on your conculsion in (a), do you think that the masses of reactants are always
completely converted to products in a chemical reaction?
Present your conclusion to the class.
123
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
The quantitative relationship between reactants and products in a balanced chemical
equation is known as stoichiometry. In other words, stoichiometry is the study of the
amount or ratio of moles, mass, energy and volumes (for gases) of reactants and
products. Stoichiometric calculations are based on the following two major principles.
i) The composition of any substance in the chemical equation should be expressed
by a definite formula.
ii) The law of conservation of mass must be obeyed (the mass of reactants equals
the mass of products).
4.6.1 Molar Ratios in Balanced Chemical Equation
From a balanced chemical equation, it is possible to determine the:
• number of moles of each reactant and product; and
• relative mass of each of the reactants and products
For example, in the reaction of hydrogen with oxygen to produce water, 2 moles of
H combines with 1 mole of O to yield 2 moles of H O. The equation also tells us
2 2 2
4 g of hydrogen reacts with 32 g of oxygen to produce 36 g of water. This can be
further interpreted as follows:
2H (g) + O (g) Æ 2H O(l)
2 2 2
Mole Æ 2 mole 1 mole 2 mole
Molecule Æ 2 molecule 1 molecule 2 molecule
Mass Æ 4 g 32 g 2 × 18 g
(cid:8)(cid:11)(cid:11)(cid:11)(cid:9)(cid:11)(cid:11)(cid:11)(cid:10) (cid:8)(cid:11)(cid:9)(cid:11)(cid:10)
36 g reactant 36 g product
Calculations based on chemical equations (stoichiometric problems) are classified
into mass-mass problem, volume-volume problems and mass-volume problems.
4.6.2 Mass–Mass Relationships
In mass-mass problems, the mass of one substance is given, and the mass of the
second substance is determined from the same reaction. There are two methods for
solving such types of problems:
i) Mass-ratio method
ii) Mole-ratio method
Let us see each method by using the necessary steps.
124
CHEMICAL REACTIONS AND STOICHIOMETRY
i) The mass-ratio method
In this type of stoichiometric calculation, the mass of one substance is determined
from the given mass of the other substance using the following steps.
Step 1: Write the balanced chemical equation.
Step 2: Place the given mass above the corresponding formula, and x above the
formula of the substance whose mass is to be determined.
Step 3: Write the total molar mass of the substances below the formula of each
substance. (Total molar mass is the molar mass of the substance
multiplied by its coefficient).
Step 4: Set up the proportion.
Step 5: Solve for the unknown mass, x.
Example 1
How many grams of calcium chloride are formed when 15 g of calcium metal
reacts with hydrochloric acid?
Solution:
Step 1: Ca + 2HCl Æ CaCl + H
2 2
Step 2: 15 g x
Ca + 2HCl Æ CaCl + H
2 2
15g x
Step 3: Ca + 2HCl Æ CaCl + H
2 2
40 g 111g
15g x
Step 4: =
40g 111g
Step 5: x = 41.63 g
Therefore, 41.63 g of CaCl is produced.
2
Example 2
How many grams of oxygen are produced by the decomposition of 145 grams
of potassium chlorate?
125
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Solution:
Step 1: 2KClO Æ 2KCl + 3O
3 2
145 g x
Step 2: 2KClO Æ 2KCl + 3O
3 2
145 g x
Step 3: 2KClO Æ 2KCl + 3O
3 2
(2 × 122.5) g (3 × 32) g
145 g x
Step 4: =
245 g 96 g
Step 5: x = 56.8 g
ii) The mole-ratio method
The mole ratio is the ratio between the numbers of moles of any two substances in a
given reaction. In this method, the given mass is converted into moles, and the number
of moles for the required substance is calculated. If needed, convert the obtained
moles back to mass.
Follow the steps given below to solve problems of mass-mass relationships by the
mole ratio method:
Step 1: Write the balanced chemical equation.
Step 2: Convert the given mass to moles and write the obtained moles and the
required quantity, x, above the formulas of the respective substances.
Step 3: Place the coefficients as the number of moles under the formula of each
substance involved.
Step 4: Set up the proportion.
Step 5: Solve for the unknown value, x; and convert the moles obtained into mass.
Example 3
How many grams of sodium metal are needed to react with 10.0 g of water?
Solution:
Step 1: 2Na + 2H O Æ 2NaOH + H
2 2
given mass 10.0 g
Step 2: moles of H O = = = 0.56 mol
2
molar mass 18 g/mol
x 0.56 mol
Æ 2NaOH + H
2Na + 2H O 2
2
126
CHEMICAL REACTIONS AND STOICHIOMETRY
x 0.56 mol
Step 3: 2Na + 2H O Æ 2NaOH + H
2 mol 2 m 2 ol 2
x 0.56 mol
Step 4: =
2 mol 2 mol
Step 5: x = 0.56 mol of Na
Now, convert 0.56 mole of Na to grams
mass of Na = mole × molar mass
= 0.56 mol × 23 g/mol
=12.88 g
Therefore, 12.88 g of sodium metal is needed to react with 10 g of water.
Example 4
What mass of nitrogen dioxide is produced by the decomposition of 182 g of
magnesium nitrate?
Solution:
Step 1: 2Mg (NO ) Æ 2MgO + 4NO + O
3 2 2 2
182 g
Step 2: moles of Mg (NO ) = = 1.23 mol
3 2 148 g/mol
1.23 mol x
2Mg(NO ) Æ 2MgO + 4NO + O
3 2 2 2
1.23 mol x
Step 3: 2Mg(NO ) Æ 2MgO + 4NO + O
3 2 2 2
2 mol 4 mol
1.23 mol x
Step 4: =
2 mol 4 mol
Step 5: x = 2.46 moles of NO
2
Mass of NO = 2.46 mol × 46 g/mol = 113.2 g
2
Therefore, 113.2 g of NO is produced.
2
127
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Exercise 4.8
1. How many grams of CaCO are needed to react with 15.2 g of HCl in
3
according to the following equation?
CaCO + 2HCl Æ CaCl + CO + H O
3 2 2 2
2. How many grams of NaOH are needed to neutralize 50 grams of H SO ?
2 4
3. Calculate the mass of CaCl formed when 5 moles of chlorine reacts with
2
calcium metal.
4. How many moles of H O are required to produce 4.5 moles of HNO
2 3
according to the following reaction:
3NO + H O Æ 2HNO + NO
2 2 3
5. In the decomposition of KClO , how many moles of KCl are formed in the
3
reaction that produces 0.05 moles of O ?
2
6. How many moles of CaO are needed to react with excess water to produce
370 g of calcium hydroxide?
4.6.3 Volume-Volume Relationships
In reactions involving gases, the volume of gases can be determined on the principle
that 1 mole of any gas occupies a volume of 22.4 litres at STP (standard
temperature and pressure, STP, the temperature is 0°C and the pressure is 1 atm).
It is also known that 22.4 L of any gas weighs exactly its molecular mass at STP. This
volume, 22.4 litres, of a gas is known as the molar volume.
At STP, 1 mole of any gas = 22.4 L = gram volume mass of the gas
The relationship between the volume of a gas and its number of molecules was
explained by Avogadro. Avogadro's law states that equal volumes of different gases,
under the same conditions of temperature and pressure, contain equal number of
molecules. This law can also be stated as the volume of a gas is proportional to the
number of molecules (moles) of the gas at STP.
128
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Exercise 4.9
1. What volume of nitrogen reacts with 33.6 litres of oxygen to produce nitrogen
dioxide?
2. How many litres of sulphur trioxide are formed when 4800 cm3 of sulphur
dioxide is burned in air?
3. How many litres of ammonia are required to react with 145 litres of oxygen
according to the following reaction?
4NH + 5O Æ 4NO + 6H O
3 2 2
4. Calculate the volume of oxygen produced in the decomposition of 5 moles of
KClO at STP?
3
5. How many moles of water vapour are formed when 10 litres of butane gas,
C H is burned in oxygen at STP?
4 10
4.6.4 Mass–Volume Relationships
In mass-volume problems, either the mass of one substance is given and the volume
of the other is required or the volume of one substance is given and the mass of the
other one is required. The steps to solve such type of problems are the same as the
previous steps except putting the masses on one side and the volumes on the other
side of the equality sign.
Example 6
How many grams of calcium carbonate are decomposed to produce 11.2 L of
carbon dioxide at STP?
Solution:
Step 1: CaCO Æ CaO + CO
3 2
x 11.2 L
Step 2:
CaCO Æ CaO + CO
3 2
x 11.2 L
Step 3: CaCO Æ CaO + CO
3 2
100 g 22.4 L
x 11.2 L
Step 4: =
100 g 22.4 L
Step 5: x = 50 g of CaCO is decomposed.
3
130
CHEMICAL REACTIONS AND STOICHIOMETRY
Example 7
How many litres of oxygen at STP react with 72 g of aluminum to produce
aluminum oxide?
Solution:
Step 1: 4Al + 3O Æ 2Al O
2 2 3
72 g x
Step 2:
4Al + 3O Æ 2Al O
2 2 3
72 g x
Step 3: 4Al + 3O Æ 2Al O
(4×27) g (3×22.4 2 ) L 2 3
72 g x
=
Step 4:
108 g 67.2 L
Step 5: x = 44.8 L of O
2
Hence, 44.8 litres of oxygen is required at STP to react with 72 g of aluminium.
Exercise 4.10
1. How many litres of oxygen are required to react with 23 g of methane according
to the following equation?
CH + 2O Æ CO + 2H O
4 2 2 2
2. What mass of aluminium would be completely oxidized by 44.8 L of oxygen to
produce Al O at STP?
2 3
3. Calculate the mass of calcium carbide that is needed to produce 100 cm3 of
acetylene according to the following equation.
CaC + 2H O Æ C H + Ca(OH)
2 2 2 2 2
4. How many millilitres of sulphur dioxide are formed when 12.5 g of iron sulphide
ore (pyrite) reacts with oxygen according to the equation at STP?
4FeS + 11O Æ 2Fe O + 8SO
2 2 2 3 2
4.6.5 Limiting and Excess Reactants
When all the reactants are completely consumed in a chemical reaction, then such
reactants are said to be in stoichiometric proportions. But, practically these types of
chemical reactions do not always occur. In many cases, an excess of one or more
131
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
reactants is encountered in the reaction and the other reactant is completely converted
into products. Thus, the reactant that is completely consumed in the reaction is known
as the limiting reactant, because it limits or determines the amount of products that can
be formed.
For example, consider the following reaction:
H + Cl Æ 2HCl
2 2
1 mole 1 mole 2 moles
According to the equation, 1 mole of H reacts with 1 mole of chlorine to produce 2
2
mole of HCl. Thus, all the reactants are completely consumed and only products
appear. However if 1 mole of H reacts with 1.5 mole of Cl , there is insufficient H
2 2 2
to react with all of the Cl . Therefore, Cl will be in excess and H will be the limiting
2 2 2
reactant. Only 2 moles of HCl are formed and at the end of the reaction 0.5 mole of
Cl remains unreacted.
2
Example 8
How much ammonia is produced if 10 g of hydrogen reacts with 18 g of
nitrogen?
Solution:
3H (g) + N (g)Æ 2NH (g)
2 2 3
First determine the number of moles;
10 g
Moles of H = = 5 mol
2 2 g/mol
18 g
Moles of N = = 0.64 mol
2 28 g/mol
Now, calculate the number of moles or masses of the product that would be
formed by each reactant.
The reactant that gives the smallest amount of product is the limiting reactant.
i. Using the quantity of H ii. Using the quantity of N
2 2
5 mol x 0.64 mol x
3H + N Æ2NH 3H + N Æ2NH
2 2 3 2 2 3
3 mol 2 mol 1 mol 2 mol
5mol x 0.64mol x
= =
3mol 2mol 1mol 2mol
x = 3.33 mol NH x = 1.28 mol NH
3 3
Mass of NH = 3.33 mol × 17 g /mol Mass of NH = 1.28 mol × 17 g /mol
3 3
= 56.6 g = 21.8 g
132
CHEMICAL REACTIONS AND STOICHIOMETRY
Therefore, the limiting reactant is nitrogen, because it gives less amount of
NH , i.e., 21.8 g NH . In the reaction, 0.64 mole (18 g) of N is consumed.
3 3 2
Hydrogen is in excess. The amount of hydrogen consumed will be:
x 18g x 0.64 mol
3H +N Æ 2NH or 3H + N Æ 2NH
2 2 3 2 2 3
6g 28 g 3 moles 1 mole
x 18 x 0.64mol
= =
6 28 3mol 1mol
x = 3.86 g of H x = 1.92 mol of H
2 2
Therefore, 3.86 g or 1.92 moles of H is used in the reaction, and 6.14 g or
2
3.08 moles of H is left unreacted.
2
Example 9
In the chemistry laboratory, a student performed a displacement reaction by
adding 9.5 g of zinc into 9.5 g of HCl in a beaker. What weight of ZnCl will
2
be produced?
Solution:
Zn + 2HCl Æ ZnCl + H
2 2
9.5 g
Moles of Zn = = 0.15 mol
65 g/mol
9.5 g
Moles of HCl = = 0.26 mol
36.5 g/mol
Even though the given masses of the two reactants are the same, they are not
mixed in equimolar ratio as shown above. Thus, the limiting reactant must be
determined first.
i. Using the quantity of Zn ii. Using the quantity of HCl
0.15 mol x 0.26 mol x
Zn + 2HCl Æ ZnCl +H Zn + 2HCl Æ ZnCl +H
1 mol 1 mol 2 2 2 mol 1 mol 2 2
0.15 mol x 0.26 mol x
= =
1 mol 1 mol 2 mol 1 mol
x = 0.15 mol ZnCl x = 0.13 mol ZnCl
2 2
Hence, the limiting reactant is HCl.
Mass of ZnCl = 0.13 mol × 136 g/mol = 17.68 g ZnCl
2 2
133
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Exercise 4.11
1. If 6.5 g of zinc reacts with 5.0 g of HCl, according to the following reaction.
Zn + 2HCl Æ ZnCl + H
2 2
a Which substance is the limiting reactant?
b How many grams of the reactant remains unreacted?
c How many grams of hydrogen would be produced?
2. What mass of Na SO is produced if 49 g of H SO reacts with 80 g of
2 4 2 4
NaOH?
3. If 20 g of CaCO and 25 g of HCl are mixed, what mass of CO is
3 2
produced?
CaCO + 2HCl Æ CaCl + CO + H O
3 2 2 2
4. If 3 moles of calcium reacts with 3 moles of oxygen, then
a Which substance is the limiting reactant?
b How many moles of calcium oxide are formed?
5. For the reaction:
2Al + 3H SO Æ Al (SO ) + 3H
2 4 2 4 3 2
How many grams of hydrogen are produced if 0.8 mole of aluminium reacts
with 1.0 mole of sulphuric acid?
4.6.6 Theoretical, Actual and Percentage Yields
The measured amount of product obtained in any chemical reaction is known as the
actual yield. The theoretical yield is the calculated amount of product that would be
obtained if the reaction proceeds completely. The actual yield (experimentally
determined yield) of a product is usually less than the theoretical yield (calculated
yield).
The percentage yield is the ratio of the actual yield to the theoretical yield multiplied by
100.
Acutal yield
Percentage yield = × 100
Theoretical yield
134
CHEMICAL REACTIONS AND STOICHIOMETRY
Example 10
25 grams of methane gas (CH ) burns in oxygen according to the following
4
reaction:
CH + 2O Æ CO + 2H O
4 2 2 2
What is the percentage yield if 60.3 grams of carbon dioxide is produced?
Solution:
The actual yield is 60.3 g of CO .
2
Determine the theoretical yield using mass-mass relationship
25 g x
CH +2O → CO +2H O
4 2 2 2
16 g 44 g
25 g x
=
16 g 44
x = 68.75 g of CO (theoretical yield)
2
Actual yield
Percentage yield = × 100%
Theoretical yield
60.3 g
= × 100% = 87.7 %
68.75 g
Exercise 4.12
1. When 20 g of sulphur dioxide reacts with oxygen, 23 g of sulphur trioxide is
formed. What is the percentage yield?
2. When 14.5 g of SO reacts with 21 g of O , what will be the theoretical
2 2
yield and percentage yield of the reaction if the actual yield is 12 g?
3. In the reaction:
2C H + 25O Æ 16CO + 18H O
8 18 2 2 2
When 52.7 g of octane (C H ) burns in oxygen, the percentage yield of
8 18
carbon dioxide is 82.5%. What is the actual yield in grams?
135
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
4.7 OXIDATION AND REDUCTION REACTIONS
Competencies
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• define redox reactions;
• define the terms oxidation and reduction in terms of electron transfer;
• define oxidation number (oxidation state),
• state oxidation number rules,
• determine the oxidation number of an element in a given formula;
• describe the oxidizing and reducing agents;
• analyze a given redox reaction by specifying the substance reduced and the
substance oxidized, and also the oxidizing and reducing agents; and
• Distinguish between redox and non-redox reactions.
Activity 4.10
Form a group and discuss the following phenomenon:
When you dry your meal dishes with a towel, the towel can be termed as a drying agent
and the dish as wetting agent. What happens to the towel and the dish, in terms of
getting wet and dry, after cleaning? Relate this idea with oxidizing agent and reducing
agent, oxidation and reduction of substances. Present your conclusion to the class.
In our day to day activity, we are familiar with the chemical processes like rusting of
iron, burning of substances, breathing of air, digestion of food and so on. All such
types of processes or reactions are known as oxidation and reduction or redox
reactions.
4.7.1 Oxidation-Reduction
Can oxidation take place without reduction?
Oxidation: is the process in which a substance loses electrons in a chemical reaction.
For example, in the reaction
2Na + Cl Æ 2NaCl
2
136
CHEMICAL REACTIONS AND STOICHIOMETRY
Each sodium atom has lost one electron and has turned to a sodium ion.
Hence, sodium is oxidized.
Na + 1e– Æ Na+
Reduction: is the process in which a substance gains electrons in a chemical
reaction.
For example, in the above reaction each chlorine atom has gained an
electron and has changed to chloride ion. Thus, chlorine is reduced;
Cl + 2e– Æ Cl–
2
The processes of oxidation and reduction always occur simultaneously because if one
substance loses electrons, the other substance must gain these electrons. Since the
process of oxidation and reduction involves the transfer of electrons, it also results in
the changes of oxidation number. Thus, oxidation and reduction can also be defined in
terms of oxidation number. Oxidation is an increase in the oxidation number of an
element and reduction is a decrease in the oxidation number. For example, in the
reaction,
The oxidation number of sodium is increased from 0 to +1 and thus sodium is
oxidized. The oxidation number of chlorine is decreased from 0 to –1, and therefore
chlorine is reduced.
4.7.2 Oxidation Number or Oxidation State
Oxidation number or oxidation state is the number of electrons that an atom appears
to have gained or lost when it is combined with other atoms.
Rules for Assigning Oxidation Numbers
Rule 1: The oxidation number of all elements in free state is zero. This rule is also
applied for diatomic or polyatomic elements.
Example: The oxidation number of Na = 0, Cu = 0, Cl in Cl = 0, O in
2
O = 0, S in S = 0.
3 8
Rule 2: The oxidation number of a monatomic ion is equal to the charge on the ion.
Example: Na+ = +1, Mg2+ = +2, S2–= –2.
Rule 3: The oxidation number of oxygen in a compound is usually – 2 except in the
following cases:
137
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Exceptions
The oxidation number of oxygen in:
i) peroxides is –1. Example: Na O
2 2
ii) superoxides is –1/2. Example: KO
2
iii) oxygen diflouride is +2. Example: OF
2
Rule 4: The oxidation number of hydrogen in its entire compounds is +1 except
in metal hydrides, (like NaH, CaH and AlH ), where its oxidation
2 3
number is –1.
Rule 5: The sum of the oxidation number of all the atoms in a neutral compound is
zero.
+1 +6 -2
Example: H SO ((+2) + (+6) + (–8) = 0)
2 4
Rule 6: In a polyatomic ion, the sum of the oxidation numbers of the constituent
atoms equals the charge on the ion.
+6–2
Example: (SO )–2 ((+6) + (–8) = –2)
4
Rule 7: Elements of group IA have +1 and group IIA have +2 oxidation states in all
of their compounds.
Rule 8: In a compound, the more electronegative element is assigned a negative
oxidation number, and the less electronegative element is assigned a positive
oxidation number.
+3 –1
Example: NCl (chlorine is more electronegative than nitrogen)
3
Example 1
What is the oxidation number of chromium in Na Cr O ?
2 2 7
Solution:
The oxidation number of O is –2 (Rule 3)
The oxidation number of Na is +1 (Rule 7)
Let the oxidation number of Cr be x.
+1 x –2
Na Cr O
2 2 7
Since the sum of the oxidation numbers of Na, Cr, and O in Na Cr O is 0
2 2 7
(Rule 5)
138
CHEMICAL REACTIONS AND STOICHIOMETRY
+1 x –2
Then, Na Cr O
2 2 7
(1 × 2) + (x × 2) + (–2 × 7) = 0
2 + 2x – 14 = 0
x = + 6
Therefore, the oxidation number of Cr in Na Cr O is +6.
2 2 7
Example 2
What is the oxidation number of manganese in MnO–?
4
Solution:
Let the oxidation number of Mn be x.
 x –2  –
MnO 4
 
The sum of the oxidation numbers of Mn and O in MnO– is –1 (Rule 6)
4
x + (–2 × 4) = –1
x – 8 = –1
x = +7
Therefore, the oxidation number of Mn in MnO– is +7.
4
Example 3
Determine the oxidation number of phosphorus in Ca(H PO ) .
2 4 2
Solution:
The oxidation number of Ca is +2 (Rule 7).
Let, the oxidation number of P be x.
+2  +1 x – 2 
CaH PO 
2 4
 
2
+2 + (4 × (+1)) + (2 × x) + (8 × (–2)) = 0
2 + 4 + 2x – 16 = 0
2x –10 = 0 or x = +5
Hence, the oxidation number of P in Ca(H PO ) is +5.
2 4 2
139
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Exercise 4.13
1. Determine the oxidation number of the specified element in each of the following:
a C in H C O b N in NH F
2 2 4 4
c S in Na S O d P in Ca (PO )
2 4 6 3 4 2
e H in AlH f N in NH HCO
3 4 3
g Fe in K [Fe(CN) ]
4 6
2. Determine the oxidation number of the specified element in each of the following.
a S in S–2 b Cl in ClO–
3
c N in NH+ d P in PO–3
4 4
e Cr in CrO−2 f S in S O–2
2 7 2 8
3. Determine whether the following processes are oxidation or reduction reactions:
a Cu2 + 2e– Æ Cu b K Æ K+ + e–
c O + 2e– Æ O2– d S2– Æ S + 2e–
e Fe2+ Æ Fe3+ + e– f N + 3e– Æ N3–
4.7.3 Oxidizing and Reducing Agents
In a redox reaction, the substance that causes another substance to get oxidized, but
itself gets reduced, is known as an oxidizing agent, or oxidant. In the same manner,
the substance that causes another substance to get reduced, but itself oxidized, is
referred to as a reducing agent or reductant.
• Oxidizing agents are substances that:
– are reduced (gain electrons)
– contain elements whose oxidation number decreases
• Reducing agents are substances that:
– are oxidized (lose electrons)
– contain elements whose oxidation number increases
Tests for an oxidizing agent are accomplished by mixing it with a substance which is
easily oxidized to give a visible colour change when the reaction takes place.
140
CHEMICAL REACTIONS AND STOICHIOMETRY
For example,
i) Permanganate ion (MnO–) in acidic solution changes colour from purple to
4
colourless.
MnO– → Mn2+
4
ii) Dichromate in acidic solution changes colour from orange to green.
Cr O 2– → Cr3+
2 7
Other common oxidizing agents are chlorine, potassium chromate, sodium chlorate
and manganese (IV) oxide.
Similarly, certain reducing agents undergo a visible colour change with a substance
which is easily reduced.
For example,
i) A moist starch solution changes potassium iodide paper to blue-black to show
that iodine is formed, 2I– → I . That is potassium iodide is a reducing agent.
2
ii) Hydrogen sulphide bubbled through a solution of an oxidizing agent forms a
yellow precipitate, S2– → S. That is H S is a reducing agent.
2
Other common reducing agents are carbon, carbon monoxide, sodium
thiosulphate, sodium sulphite and iron (II) salts.
The oxidizing or reducing ability of substances depend on many factors. Some
of these are:
• Electronegativity: Elements with high electronegativity such as F , O , N and
2 2 2
Cl are good oxidizing agents. Elements with low electronegativity for example,
2
metallic elements like Na, K, Mg and Al are good reducing agents.
• Oxidation states: In a compound or ion, if one of its elements is in a higher
oxidation state, then it is an oxidizing agent. Similarly, if an element of a compound
or ion is in a lower oxidation state, then it is a reducing agent..
Examples
+7 +7 + 6
KMnO , NaClO ,K Cr O ... are oxidizing agents
4 4 2 2 7
+2 +2 +4
FeS,CO,Na SO ... are reducing agents
2 3
141
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
4.7.4 Analysing Redox Reactions
Oxidation and reduction reactions are called Redox reactions. Oxidation and
reduction reaction take place simultaneously in a given reaction.
Activity 4.11
Form a group and discuss the following:
1. Why a reducing agent undergoes oxidation?
2. Why must every redox reaction involve both an oxidizing agent and a reducing agent?
Present your discussion to the class.
Example 4
Identify the oxidizing agent, reducing agent, the substance oxidized and reduced
in the following reaction.
H S + Br Æ 2HBr + S
2 2
Solution:
Let us assign oxidation number to all the elements of the reactants and products.
In the reaction, the S atom in H S increases its oxidation number from –2 to
2
0. Hence, S is oxidized and H S is a reducing agent. The oxidation number of
2
Br is decreased from 0 to –1. Thus, Br is reduced and is an oxidizing agent.
2
Example 5
Write the oxidizing and reducing agents for the reaction given below:
Cu + HNO Æ Cu(NO ) + NO + H O
3 3 2 2
Solution:
Write the oxidation numbers of each element and identify the substances which
undergo a change in oxidization number.
Therefore, copper is a reducing agent, and HNO is an oxidizing agent.
3
142
CHEMICAL REACTIONS AND STOICHIOMETRY
Non-redox Reactions
So far we have discussed oxidation and reduction reaction or redox reactions.
However, there are also reactions in which oxidation and reduction do not occur and
such types of reactions are known as non-redox reactions.
In non-redox reactions, no electrons are exchanged between the reacting substances.
Therefore, the oxidation numbers of the atoms do not change in the reaction. Usually such
types of reactions involve the exchange of positive and negative ions. Most of the double
displacement reactions and acid-base reactions are not oxidation-reduction reactions.
Examples
+2 –1 +1 +6 –2 +2+6-2 +1 –1
BaCl + Na SO Æ BaSO Ø + 2NaCl
2 2 4 4
+1 –1 +1 −2 +1 +1 –1 +1 –2
HCl + NaOH Æ NaCl + H O
2
Exercise 4.14
1. In each of the following equations, identify the substance oxidized, the substance
reduced, the oxidizing agent and reducing agent.
a Fe O + 3CO Æ 2Fe + 3CO
2 3 2
b CuO + H Æ Cu + H O
2 2
c 3NO + H O Æ 2HNO + NO
2 2 3
d AgNO + NaCl Æ AgCl + NaNO
3 3
e Fe2+ Æ Fe3+ + e–
f 3Cu + 8HNO Æ 3Cu(NO ) + 2NO + 4H O
3 3 2 2
g SO2– + I– + H+ Æ H S + I + H O
4 2 2 2
h MnO– + H+ Æ Mn2+ + H O
4 2
2. In each of the following, is the change indicated oxidation, reduction or no
change at all?
a Cl Æ Cl– b MnO– Æ MnO
2 4 2
c CrO Æ CrO2– d SO2– Æ SO2–
2 4 4 3
e Cr O2 – Æ CrO2–
2 7 4
143
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
4.8 RATES OF CHEMICAL REACTIONS AND CHEMICAL
EQUILIBRIUM
Competencies
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• define rate of reaction;
• describe rate of reaction using a graph;
• carry out an experiment to illustrate the relative rate of reactions;
• list the pre-conditions for a chemical reaction to occur;
• explain how collision, activation energy and proper orientation of reactants cause
a chemical reaction to occur;
• list factors that affect rate of chemical reaction;
• explain the effects of changes in temperature, concentration or pressure and
surface area on the rates of a chemical reaction;
• explain the effect of catalysts on the rates of chemical reaction;
• carry out an activity on how the factors affect the rate of chemical reaction;
• define the terms reversible reaction and irreversible reaction;
• define chemical equilibrium;
• describe the characteristics of chemical equilibrium;
• write the expression for equilibrium constant of a reversible reaction;
• state Le Châtelier’s principle; and
• use Le Châtelier’s principle to explain the effect of changes in temperature,
pressure and concentration of reactants at equilibrium.
Activity 4.12
Discuss each of the following phenomena in groups and present your findings to the class:
1. Why do some reactions take place rapidly and others slowly? Give examples of fast
and slow reactions.
2. Does sugar dissolve faster in hot or in cold tea? Why?
144
CHEMICAL REACTIONS AND STOICHIOMETRY
4.8.1 Reaction Rate
Experiment 4.9
Measuring Rate of a Reaction
Objective: To measure the rate of the reaction between HCl and CaCO .
3
Apparatus: Balance, conical flask, cotton wool, stop watch.
Chemicals: HCl, CaCO
3
Procedure:
1. Take 50 mL of dilute hydrochloric acid into a conical flask.
2. Place the conical flask on a laboratory balance.
3. Add 25 g of calcium carbonate (marble chips) into the flask. Plug the cotton
wool immediately as shown in Figure 4.11. This will help to prevent escape of
the acid spray.
4. Read and record the mass of the flask and its content at one minute intervals
until the reaction is over. (Use a stop watch).
Looseplugof
cottonwool
DiluteHCl
Marblechips
Balance
Figure 4.11 Measuring the rate of the reaction between HCl and CaCO .
3
Observations and analysis:
1. What happens to the mass during the reaction?
2. Write the balanced chemical equation.
145
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Use the following table to record your results.
Time (min) 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
Mass (g)
Loss in mass (g)
3. Plot a graph between time (x-axis) and loss in mass (y-axis), and draw a
smooth curve through maximum points.
4. Why the graph is steep in the beginning but horizontal at the end of the reaction?
5. At what time does the reaction stop?
Every chemical reaction proceeds at different rates or speed. Some reactions proceed
very slowly and may take a number of days to complete; while others are very rapid,
requiring only a few seconds.
The rate of a chemical reaction measures the decrease in concentration of a reactant
or the increase in concentration of a product per unit time. This means that the rate of
a reaction determines how fast the concentration of a reactant or product changes
with time. The rate of a reaction is obtained by determining the concentration of
reactants or products during the reaction. Methods for determining the concentration
of reactants or products depend on the type of reactions. Some of the methods are:
a Colour (changes in colour)
b Pressure (increase or decrease in pressure, particularly in gases)
c Volume (increase or decrease in size, particularly in gases)
d Mass (gain or loss in weight)
e Amount of precipitate formed
Generally, the rate of a reaction can be obtained by measuring either one of the above
changes in properties of substances and consequently relating to changes in their
concentrations during the course of the reaction.
Change inconcentrationofsubstance ∆C
Rateof reaction= =
Change in time ∆t
From this expression, it follows that the rate of a reaction is inversely proportional to
the time taken by the reaction.
1
Rate α
Time
Figure 4.12 illustrates the changes of the rate of a chemical reaction with time. A
reaction becomes slower as reactants are consumed. The reaction rate curve becomes
less steep until it becomes a horizontal straight line. No more reactant is used up at
this point.
146
CHEMICAL REACTIONS AND STOICHIOMETRY
Note that the rate of a reaction is the slope of the tangent to the curve at any
particular time.
Figure 4.12 The change in concentration of product with time.
Reading Check
When a clean piece of magnesium ribbon is added to excess dilute hydrochloric
acid, hydrogen gas is evolved. When a graph of volume versus time is drawn, show
that the total volume of the gas evolved can be measured at fixed intervals.
Pre-conditions for a Chemical Reaction
Chemical reactions are usually explained by the collision theory. The assumption of the
collision theory is that chemical reactions take place due to the collision between
molecules.
1. Collisions between reactants
The first precondition for a reaction to occur is the direct contact of the reacting
substance with each other. However, all collisions between molecules are not
necessarily effective in bringing a reaction.
2. Activation energy
If the collisions between the reactant molecules do not have sufficient energy, then no
reaction will occur. Therefore, for the reaction to take place collision must always
occur with sufficient energy to break the bonds in the reactants and form new bonds
in the product. Thus, minimum amount of energy needed for the reaction is known as
activation energy.
3. Proper Orientation
Collision of molecules with sufficient activation energy will not bring a reaction if the
reacting molecules are poorly oriented. Thus, the collision between molecules should
have the proper orientation.
147
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Consider the reaction between H and Cl molecules:
2 2
H + Cl Æ 2HCl
2 2
For the reaction to occur, first H and Cl molecules must collide with each other. For
2 2
the collision to be effective, these colliding molecules (H and Cl ) must have sufficient
2 2
energy to break the H – H and Cl – Cl bonds and consequently to form new H – Cl
bonds.
Unless, the H and Cl molecules are oriented in proper positions, there is no product
2 2
formed. Therefore, as shown in Figure 4.13(c) the H and Cl molecules rearrange
2 2
themselves so as to form a new H – Cl molecule.
a No reaction
b No reaction
c reaction
Figure 4.13 Molecular collisions and chemical reactions.
Factors Affecting the Rates of Chemical Reaction
Activity 4.13
Form a group and discuss each of the following:
1. How is the burning of charcoal affected by:
a increasing the amount of air used
b adding more charcoal.
2. How can you increase the rate of combustion of a given block of wood ?
Present your findings to the class.
148
CHEMICAL REACTIONS AND STOICHIOMETRY
Activity 4.14
Form a group and compare the rate of combustion of the following substances:
a paper c wood charcoal
b kerosene d copper
Present your findings to the class.
The rate of a chemical reaction depends on nature of reactants, temperature, and
concentration of reactants, surface area and catalysts.
The collision theory assumes that the rate of a reaction depends on the number
(frequency) of collisions of particles and those factors which affect the frequency of
collisions will also affect the rate of a reaction. Now let us discuss each factor.
1. Nature of the reactants
The rate of a reaction is influenced by the type and nature of the reacting substances.
For example, the following reactions have different rates due to the nature of the
reactants, Mg, Fe and Cu.
Mg + 2HCl Æ MgCl + H ... (very fast reaction)
2 2
Fe + 2HCl Æ FeCl + H ... (slow reaction)
2 2
Cu + HCl Æ No reaction
2. Temperature
An increase in temperature increases the rate of a reaction. This is because as the
temperature increases, the average kinetic energy of the particles increases which in
turn increases the number of effective collisions.
In general, for many chemical reactions, the rate of a reaction doubles for every 10°C
rise in temperature.
3. Concentration of reactants
The number of collisions is proportional to the concentration of reactants. The higher
the concentration of the reactants, the more collisions between the reacting particles
and thus the higher the rate of the reaction.
For example, if you heat a piece of steel wool in air (21% oxygen by volume) it burns
slowly. But in pure oxygen (100% oxygen by volume) it bursts in to a dazzling white
flame. This indicates that the rate of burning increases as the concentration of oxygen
is higher.
149
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Activity 4.15
Form a group and discuss the following idea. Present your discussion to the class.
If a certain reaction is carried out with water as a solvent, what will be the rate of the
reaction if more water is added to the reaction vessel? Explain.
Experiment 4.10
Investigating the effect of concentration on reaction rate
Objective: To determine the rate of reaction of magnesium with 0.1M and 5M of
sulphuric acid.
Apparatus: Beakers.
Chemicals: H SO .
2 4
Procedure:
a 1. Take 20 mL of 0.1M H SO into the first beaker.
2 4
2. Add 1 cm long magnesium ribbon into the beaker.
3. Note how fast the reaction occurs.
b 1. Take 20 mL of 5M H SO into the second beaker.
2 4
2. Add 1cm long magnesium ribbon into the beaker as shown in Figure 4.14.
3. Observe how fast the reaction occurs.
Observations and Analysis:
1. In which of the reactions does the evolution of gas bubble faster? (a) or (b).
2. Write the balanced chemical equation.
3. What do you conclude from the experiment?
Figure 4.14 The effect of concentration on the rate of a reaction.
150
CHEMICAL REACTIONS AND STOICHIOMETRY
4. Surface area
When the reactants are in different phases, be it solid, liquid or gas, then the surface
area of the substances affect the rate of the reaction. The higher the surface area of
reactants, the faster is the rate of the reaction. This is because more contact results in
more collisions between each small particle of reactants.
Experiment 4.11
Investigating the effect of surface area on reaction rate
Objective: To determine the rate of reaction of a lump and powdered calcium
carbonate with hydrochloric acid.
Apparatus: Beaker, dish, and grinder.
Chemicals: Calcium carbonate and dilute hydrochloric acid.
Procedure:
a 1. Take a 5 g of calcium carbonate and put it in a beaker.
2. Add 100 mL dilute hydrochloric acid into the beaker carefully.
3. Observe how fast the reaction occurs.
b 1. Add 5 g of calcium carbonate into a dish and grind until it becomes powder.
2. Put this powdered calcium carbonate into the beaker as shown in Fig. 4.15.
3. Add 100 mL dilute hydrochloric acid carefully.
4. Observe how fast the reaction occurs.
Observations and Analysis:
1. Which of the reaction is faster? (a) or (b).
2. What do you conclude from the experiment?
LumpofCaCO PowderedCaCO
3 3
(a) DiluteHCl (b)
Figure 4.15 Effect of surface area on the rate of a reaction.
151
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
5. Catalysts
A catalyst is a substance that changes the rate of a chemical reaction without itself
being consumed in the reaction. For example, the decomposition of potassium
chlorate, KClO into KCl and O is made faster in the presence of MnO catalyst.
3 2 2
2KClO MnO2→2KCl+3O
3 Heat 2
A catalyst speeds up the rate of a reaction by providing an alternative reaction path
with lower activation energy. Lower activation energy for a reaction corresponds to
the higher reaction rate. Figure 4.16 illustrates how the presence of catalysts speeds
up a reaction.
Figure 4.16 Activation energy and catalysts.
Activity 4.16
Form a group and discuss the following concept. Present your discussion to the class.
Do the factors that affect the rate of a chemical reaction influence a physical change in
the same manner? Explain, by giving appropriate example.
Experiment 4.12
Investigating the effect of a catalyst on the Rate of a Chemical Reaction
Objective: To determine the effect of MnO catalyst on the rate of decomposition
2
of H O .
2 2
152
CHEMICAL REACTIONS AND STOICHIOMETRY
Apparatus: Test tube, test-tube rack.
Chemicals: MnO , H O .
2 2 2
Procedure:
1. Take 5 mL of hydrogen peroxide in each of the two test tubes.
2. Add a small amount of coarse manganese (IV) oxide to the first test tube
(a). What do you observe?
3. Leave the second test tube (b) without adding any chemical.
4. What change do you observe in each test tube?
5. Introduce a glowing splint in the test tube and test for the evolution of a gas.
Observations and Analysis:
1. In which of the test tubes does the reaction occur at a fast rate? Why?
2. Which gas is evolved in the test tube?
3. What do you conclude from the experiment?
MnO
2
(a)
(b)
HO
2 2
Figure 4.17 Effect of a catalyst on the decomposition of H O .
2 2
Reading Check
What is the difference between positive and negative catalysts? Explain the
importance of negative catalysts by giving examples.
153
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
4.8.2 Chemical Equilibrium
In the previous chapters, we came across chemical reactions in which all the reactants
are completely converted to products. Such types of reactions are known as
irreversible reactions. Irreversible reactions proceed only in one direction (forward
direction) and expressed by a single arrow (→).
Examples
2Na + Cl Æ 2NaCl
2
2KClO Æ 2KCl + 3O
3 2
However, there are many chemical reactions that do not proceed to completion. The
products at the same time react to give (produce) the reactants. These are called
reversible reactions.
Reversible reactions take place in both the forward and backward directions under
the same conditions. A double arrow (
←




→) or ( (cid:89)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:88)(cid:90) ) pointing in opposite
directions is used in such reaction equations.
Example
N + 3H (cid:89)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:88)(cid:90) 2NH
2 2 3
The forward reaction proceeds from left to right and the reaction that goes from right
to left is the reverse reaction.
Does a reaction stop if it attains equilibrium?
Chemical equilibrium is the state of a chemical system in which the rates of the
forward and reverse reactions are equal. At the state of chemical equilibrium, there is
no net change in the concentrations of reactants and products because the system is in
dynamic equilibrium. Dynamic equilibrium means the reaction does not stop and both
the forward and the backward reactions continue at equal rates.
At equilibrium, Rate of forward reaction = Rate of reverse reaction
The law of chemical equilibrium can be expressed mathematically using the molar
concentrations of reactants and products at equilibrium. The concentration of species
is denoted by enclosing the formula in square bracket [ ].
Thus, for the reversible reaction:
aA+bB (cid:89)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:88)(cid:90) cC + dD
Rate of forward reaction = K [A]a [B]b where K and K are rate constants for the
f f r
Rate of reverse reaction = K [C]c [D]d forward and reverse reactions respectively.
r
154
CHEMICAL REACTIONS AND STOICHIOMETRY
Since at equilibrium the rate of the forward reaction equals the rate of the reverse
reaction, it follows:
K [A]a [B]b = K [C]c [D]d
f r
K [C]c[D]d
f =
K [A]a[B]b
r
Solving for the constants, K /K , gives a new constant, termed as the equilibrium
f r
constant, K .
eq
K [C]c[D]d
Therefore, K = f =
eq K [A]a[B]b
r
Example
For the reaction,
N + 3H (cid:89)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:88)(cid:90) 2NH
2 2 3
Rate of forward reaction = K [N ][H ]3
f 2 2
Rate of reverse reaction = K [NH ]2.
r 3
K [NH ]2
K = f = 3
eq K [N ][H ]3
r 2 2
The rates of the forward and reverse reactions are also illustrated by the following graph.
Rateofforwardreaction
e
at
r
n
o
e a
cti
K = K f= [C]c[D]d
R eq K [A]a[B]b
r
Rateofreversereaction
Time
Figure 4.18 Change of the rate of the forward and reverse reactions with time.
As it is noted in the figure the rate of the forward reaction decreases with time as the
concentrations of the reactants, A and B decrease with time. The reverse reaction rate
starts at zero and increases as more of the products, C and D are produced.
However, at equilibrium the forward and the reverse reaction rates are equal.
155
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Example
The following equilibrium has been studied at 230°C.
2NO(g) + O (g) (cid:89)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:88)(cid:90) 2NO (g)
2 2
In one experiment, the concentrations of the reacting species at equilibrium are
found to be [NO] = 0.0542 M, [O ] = 0.127 M and [NO ] = 15.5 M.
2 2
Calculate the equilibrium constant of the reaction at this temperature.
Solution:
The equilibrium constant is given by
[NO ]2
K = 2
[NO]2[O ]
2
Substituting the concentration, we find that
(15.5)2
K = =6.44×105 M−1
(0.0542)2(0.127)
Exercise 4.15
Give appropriate answers to the following questions.
1. What is the reason for all collisions between reactant molecules not to lead to
products? Explain on the basis of the collision theory.
2. Explain why the rates of a reaction change with time.
3. Write the equilibrium constant expression for each of the following reactions.
a CO(g) + H
2
O(g) (cid:89)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:88)(cid:90) CO
2
(g) + H
2
(g)
b CH
4
(g) + Cl
2
(g) (cid:89)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:88)(cid:90) CH
3
Cl(g) + HCl(g)
c 2SO
2
(g) + O
2
(g) (cid:89)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:88)(cid:90) 2SO
3
(g)
d FeO(s) + CO(g) (cid:89)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:88)(cid:90) Fe(s) + CO
2
(g)
4. At the start of a reaction there are 0.0249 mol of N , 3.21 × 10–2 mol H
2 2
and 6.42 × 10–4 mol of NH in a 3.50 L reaction vessel at 375°C.
3
If the equilibrium constant, K, for the reaction:
N
2
(g) + 3H
2
(g) (cid:89)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:88)(cid:90) 2NH
3
(g)
is 1.2 at this temperature, decide whether the system is at equilibrium or not. If
it is not, predict in which direction, the net reaction will proceed.
156
CHEMICAL REACTIONS AND STOICHIOMETRY
Activity 4.17
Form a group and discuss the importance of equilibrium in the study of chemical reactions.
Present your discussion to the class.
Factors that Affect Chemical Equilibrium
Activity 4.18
Form a group and try to explore at least two properties that can be utilize to determine
the state of chemical equilibrium in system.
Present your findings to the class.
A system remains at a state of chemical equilibrium if there is no change in the
external conditions that disturb the equilibrium. But the point of equilibrium could be
affected due to any external factors like temperature, pressure, concentration and so
on. How a system at equilibrium adjusts itself to any of these changes is stated by the
French chemist Henri Le Chatelier in 1888.
Le Chatelier states that if a stress is applied to a system in equilibrium, the system
will respond in such a way to counteract the stress. The stress could be change in
temperature, concentration or pressure.
The factors affecting chemical equilibrium and their effects:
1. Effect of temperature
The effect of temperature changes on equilibrium depends on whether the reaction is
exothermic or endothermic. An increase in the temperature of a system will favour an
endothermic reaction and a decrease in temperature favors an exothermic reaction.
For example, consider the following reaction:
H
2
O(g) + CO(g) (cid:89)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:88)(cid:90) H
2
(g) + CO
2
(g); ∆H = – 41 kJ
Since the reaction is exothermic,
i) if temperature is increased, the system will shift to the left.
ii) if temperature is decreased, the system will shift to the right and a high yield of
products (H and CO ) is obtained.
2 2
157
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
2. Effect of Pressure or Volume
Pressure changes only affect equilibrium reaction involving gaseous reactants and
products. The effect of pressure on liquids and solids is negligible. An increase in
pressure (or decrease in volume) on a gaseous system shifts the equilibrium in the
direction of forming smaller number of moles of gas. On the contrary, decreasing the
pressure shifts the equilibrium in the direction of forming more number of moles of the
gas. For example, in the reaction,
2CO(g) + O (g) (cid:89)
(cid:90)(cid:90)
(cid:90)
(cid:88)
(cid:90) 2CO (g)
(cid:8)(cid:11)(cid:11)(cid:9)(cid:11)2(cid:11)(cid:10) (cid:8)(cid:11)(cid:9)2(cid:11)(cid:10)
3 molesofgases 2 molesofgases
There are 3 moles of reactants and 2 moles of product.
Therefore, increasing the pressure of the system shifts the equilibrium to the forward
direction. This results in a higher yield of CO . Decreasing the pressure of the gaseous
2
mixture shifts the equilibrium in the reverse direction.
When the number of moles of reactants and products are equal, pressure has no
effect on the equilibrium. For example, in the following reaction;
H (g)+I (g) (cid:89) (cid:90)(cid:90) (cid:90) (cid:88) (cid:90) 2HI(g)
(cid:8)2(cid:11)(cid:9)(cid:11)2 (cid:10) (cid:8)(cid:9)(cid:10)
2 molesofgases 2 molesofgases
the number of moles of reactants and products are equal (2 mol each) and hence no
effect of pressure on the equilibrium.
Exercise 4.16
For the following equilibrium system, how would the position of the equilibrium be
changed if:
a the temperature is increased; b the pressure is decreased?
c the temperature is increased, and d the pressure is decreased
1. N
2
(g) + O
2
(g) (cid:89)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:88)(cid:90) 2NO(g) + heat
2. 2H
2
O(g) (cid:89)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:88)(cid:90) 2H
2
(g) + O
2
(g), ∆H = + 241.7 kJ
3. N
2
(g) + 2H
2
O(g) + heat (cid:89)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:88)(cid:90) 2NO(g) + 2H
2
(g)
4. 2SO
2
(g) + O
2
(g) (cid:89)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:88)(cid:90) 2SO
3
(g) + heat
5. N
2
O
4
(g) + heat (cid:89)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:88)(cid:90) 2NO
2
(g)
6. PCl
3
(g) + Cl
2
(g) (cid:89)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:88)(cid:90) PCl
5
(g) + 21 kJ
158
CHEMICAL REACTIONS AND STOICHIOMETRY
3. Effect of Concentration
According to Le Chatelier’s principle, any change in the concentration of a reactant or
product will lead to a change in the concentration of the substances on the other side
of the equation.
If one of the reactants is added to the equilibrium mixture, the system shifts to the
forward direction and a high yield of product is obtained. To the contrary, if more
product is added to the system, the equilibrium shifts to the reverse direction. For
example, in the reaction,
N + 3H (cid:89)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:88)(cid:90) 2NH
2 2 3
If the concentration of N or H is increased (i.e., if more N or H is added), the
2 2 2 2
equilibrium will shift to the right direction and more NH will be produced.
3
4. Effect of catalysts
Catalysts change the speed of both the forward and reverse reactions equally.
However, catalysts do not affect the state of chemical equilibrium of a reaction. This
means that the position of equilibrium will not be shifted due to the presence of a
catalyst.
How can Le-Chatelier’s principle help in maximizing the yields of products
in industrial production?
Many industrial reactions are reversible reactions. The Haber and contact processes
provide excellent illustrations of the effects of temperature, pressure and catalyst on
the equilibrium systems.
A Haber process (the industrial production of ammonia). In the Haber
process, ammonia (NH ) is industrially manufactured using gaseous nitrogen
3
and hydrogen.
N (g) + 3H (cid:89) (cid:90)(cid:90) (cid:90) Fe(cid:90) (cid:90) (cid:88) (cid:90) 2NH (g); ∆H = – 92 kJ/mol
2 2 3
Catalyst
High yield of ammonia is produced by decreasing the temperature and
increasing the pressure of the system.
However, the yield per unit time is highly increased by using an iron catalyst.
B Contact process (the industrial production of sulphuric acid). Similarly, in
the contact process, sulphuric acid (H SO ) is commercially manufactured by
2 4
the reaction of SO and O . The resulting SO is then converted to H SO .
2 2 3 2 4
SO (g) + O (cid:89) (cid:90)(cid:90) (cid:90) V 2(cid:90) (cid:90) O 5(cid:90) (cid:90) (cid:88) (cid:90) 2SO (g) + heat
2 2 3
159
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
To get high yield of SO, how would you adjust the temperature, pressure and
3
concentration in the above reaction?
Check list
Key terms of the unit
• Activation energy
• Le Chatelier's principle
• Catalysts
• Limiting reactants
• Chemical equilibrium
• Oxidation
• Chemical reaction
• Collision theory • Oxidizing agents
• Combination reaction • Percentage yield
• Decomposition reaction • Products
• Double displacement reaction • Reactants
• Dynamic equilibrium • Reaction rates
• Endothermic reaction • Redox reaction
• Energy changes • Reducing agents
• Energy diagrams
• Reduction
• Enthalpy
• Reversible reaction
• Equilibrium constant
• Single displacement reaction
• Exothermic reaction
• Stoichiometry
• Heat of reaction
• Theoretical and actual yield
• Irreversible reaction
Unit Summary
• Chemical reactions are represented by chemical equations.
• The three basic laws of chemical reactions are: the law of conservation of
mass, the law of definite proportion and the law of multiple proportions.
• A balanced chemical equation is an equation in which all the number of
atoms of reactants and products are equal.
• Most of the chemical reactions are accompanied by energy changes.
• Exothermic reactions release heat energy to the surrounding.
• Endothermic reactions absorb heat energy from the surrounding.
• Heat of reaction or change in enthalpy is the amount of heat energy
liberated or absorbed by a chemical reaction.
• Chemical reactions are classified into combination, decomposition, single
displacement and double displacement reactions.
160
CHEMICAL REACTIONS AND STOICHIOMETRY
• Stoichiometry is the quantitative relationship between reactants and products.
• Mass-mass problems, mass-volume and volume-volume problems are the
main types of stoichiometric calculations.
• Oxidation is the process where a substance loses electron (s) or increases
its oxidation number.
• Reduction is the process where a substance gains electron (s) or decreases
its oxidation number.
• Oxidizing agents are the substances reduced, and reducing agents are the
substances oxidized.
• Rate of reaction is the change in concentration of reactants or products
with time.
• Reversible reactions take place in both the forward and backward directions.
• Irreversible reactions proceed only in the forward direction.
• Chemical equilibrium is the state of a chemical reaction in which the rate
of the forward and reverse reactions is equal.
• Le Chatlier's principle states that when an equilibrium is subjected to a
stress, the system will shift in a direction so as to relieve the stress.
• The chemical equilibrium is affected by temperature, pressure, and
concentrations.
REVIEW EXERCISE ON UNIT 4
Part I: True-False Type Questions
1. In any chemical reaction, each type of atoms is conserved.
2. In a balanced chemical equation, both sides of the equation have the same
number of moles.
3. The oxidizing agent is oxidized by the reducing agent.
4. Most metallic elements are strong reducing agents, whereas most non-metallic
elements are strong oxidizing agents.
5. The higher the percentage yield of a chemical reaction, the more successful the
reaction.
6. The rate of a reaction is directly proportional to time.
7. A catalyst increases the reaction rates by changing the reaction mechanism.
8. The concentrations of reactants and products are equal at the state of chemical
equilibrium.
161
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
9. A chemical equilibrium involves two opposite reactions, where one is endothermic
and the other is exothermic.
10. The amount of product obtained at equilibrium directly indicates how fast
equilibrium is attained.
Part II: Write the missing words in your exercise book
11. The oxidation number of sulphur in CuSO .5H O is ____________ .
4 2
12. The value of the equilibrium constant (K) is changed or affected
by ____________ .
13. Out of all factors, the rate of a heterogeneous reaction is highly influenced
by ____________ . .
Part III: Problems to Solve
14. How many grams of oxygen can be prepared by the decomposition of 12 grams
of mercury (II) oxide?
15. 25 g of NH is mixed with 4 moles of O in the given reaction:
3 2
4NH (g) + 5O (g) (cid:89) (cid:90)(cid:90) (cid:90) (cid:88) (cid:90) 4NO(g) + 6H O(l)
3 2 2
a Which is the limiting reactant?
b What mass of NO is formed?
c What mass of H O is formed?
2
16. Consider the following reaction:
2N O (g) (cid:89) (cid:90)(cid:90) (cid:90) (cid:88) (cid:90) 4NO (g) + O (g)
2 5 2 2
When 40 g of N O decomposes, 4.5 g of O is formed. What is the percent
2 5 2
yield?
17. Consider the following equilibrium:
N (g) + 2H O(g) + heat (cid:89) (cid:90)(cid:90) (cid:90) (cid:88) (cid:90) 2NO(g) + 2H (g)
2 2 2
How would the equilibrium of the system be affected by the following changes?
a Increasing the temperature.
b Increasing the concentration of N .
2
c Removing all NO and H .
2
d Compressing the reaction vessel.
e Decreasing the volume of the reaction vessel.
f Decreasing the amount of N or H O.
2 2
162
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
MAIN CONTENTS
5.1 Introduction
5.2 The kinetic theory and properties of matter
5.3 The gaseous state
5.4 The liquid state
5.5 The solid state
– Unit Summary
– Review Exercise
Start up Activity
Objective of the activity
Scientists have conducted different activities and experiments to describe the
different physical states of matter. The present simple activity will help you to form
an idea about the existence of different states of matter (solid, liquid and gas) by
using ice (solid form of water).
Procedure
1. Take a few pieces of ice in an evaporating dish. Ensure that the ice is present
in solid form.
2. Heat the evaporating dish gently and observe the changes.
3. Cover the evaporating dish with a watch glass and continue heating it for
more time. Record your observations.
Analysis
1. What happens to ice when it is heated?
2. When the ice is heated in the evaporating dish covered with watch glass,
some droplets of water appear on it. What do you conclude from this
observation? Can you name this phenomenon?
3. Name the different forms of water that you notice in the above activity.
4. Form a conclusion about the ice as it exists in solid, liquid, and gaseous state.
Record your observations and present to the class.
164
PHYSICAL STATES OF MATTER
5.1 INTRODUCTION
Competencies
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Name the three physical states of matter.
Activity 5.1
Discuss each of the following in your group and present your discussion to the class.
1. Name two examples for each of solids, liquids and gases.
2. What happens when you heat an ice cube?
You recall that all object around us is called matter. Matter is defined as anything that
occupies space and has mass. It can exist in the form of gas, liquid and solid. The
simplest example is the water we use in our daily life. The three physical states of
water are:
• Steam, water in the form of gas.
• Water, in the form of liquid.
• Ice, water in the form of solid.
The changes of the states of matter are our every day experience. That is, ice melts
and water freezes; water boils and steam condenses.
The physical state of a given sample of matter depends on the temperature and
pressure. Changing these conditions or variables may change the behaviour of the
substances as solids, liquids or gases.
Solid
A solid has a definite shape and a definite volume. Solids are almost completely
incompressible and have very high average density. A high average density reflects the
fact that the particles within solids are usually packed closer than those in liquids or
gases do. The tightly packed particles of solids are also highly organized.
The particles of a solid, whether they are atoms, ions or molecules only vibrate about
a fixed point with respect to the neighboring particles. Because of these, the particles
maintain a fixed position; for example substances like metals, wood, coal and stone,
are solids.
165
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Liquid
A liquid has a definite volume, but does not have a definite shape. Liquids take the
shape of their container. This is explained in terms of arrangement of particles. In the
liquid state, particles vibrate about a point, and constantly shift their positions relative
to their neighbours. At room temperature, water, ethanol, benzene and oil are liquids.
Gas
A gas has neither a definite shape nor a definite volume. This is because its particles
are virtually independent of one another. For example, air, hydrogen, oxygen, carbon
dioxide and nitrogen are gases.
Plasma
Besides, solid, liquid and gas, there exists a fourth-state of matter at very high
temperature (million degrees Celsius). At such high temperatures molecules cannot
exist. Most or all of the atoms are stripped of their electrons. This state of matter, a
gaseous mixture of positive ions and electrons, is called plasma. Because of the
extreme temperatures needed for fusion, no material can exist in the plasma state.
Exercise 5.1
1. Can oxygen exist as a liquid and solid?
2. Compare and contrast the three states of matter.
3. What is dry ice?
5.2 KINETIC THEORY AND PROPERTIES OF MATTER
Competencies
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• give examples for each of the three physical states of matter;
• state kinetic theory of matter;
• explain the properties of the three physical states of matter in terms of kinetic
theory; and
• compare and contrast the three physical states of matter.
166
PHYSICAL STATES OF MATTER
Activity 5.2
Form a group and perform the following task. Present your findings to the class.
1. Select any three different substances; one existing in the solid state, the second in the
liquid state and the third in the gaseous state at room temperature. Use the following
table to explain the motion, distance and attraction between particles.
Substances Motion of Distance between Attraction between
particles particles particles
1
2
3
2. In which state do the particles possess the highest kinetic energy?
5.2.1 The Kinetic Theory of Matter
The three states of matter in which substances are chemically the same but physically
different are explained by the kinetic theory of matter. The kinetic theory of matter gives
an explanation of the nature of the motion and the heat energy. According to the kinetic
theory of matter, every substance consists of a very large number of very small particles
called ions, atoms and molecules. The particles are in a state of continuous and random
motion with all possible velocities. The motion of the particles increases with a rise in
temperature.
Generally, the kinetic theory of matter is based on the following three assumptions:
1. All matter is composed of particles which are in constant motion.
2. The particles possess kinetic energy and potential energy.
3. The difference between the three states of matter is due to their energy contents
and the motion of the particles.
5.2.2 Properties of Matter
Activity 5.3
Form a group and discuss each of the following idea.Present your discussion to the class.
1. Compare and contrast the density of solid, liquid and gaseous forms of a substance.
2. Discuss the compressibility of solid, liquid and gaseous forms of water.
167
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
As discussed earlier, matter exists as gas, liquid, and solid. Their properties are
explained in terms of the kinetic theory as follows:
Properties of Gases
From the kinetic molecular theory of gases, the following general properties of gases
can be summarized.
1. Gases have no definite shape and definite volume. This is because gases assume
the volume and shape of their containers.
2. Gases can be easily compressed. By applying pressure to the walls of a flexible
container, gases can be compressed; the compression results in a decrease in
volume. This happens due to the large spaces between the particles of gases.
3. Gases have low densities compared with liquids and solids. This is due to the
fact that the particles of a gas are very far apart and the number of molecules
per unit volume is very small. A small mass of a gas in a large volume results in
a very low density.
4. Gases exert pressure in all directions. Gases that are confined in a container
exert pressure on the walls of their container. This pressure is due to collisions
between gas molecules and the walls of the container.
5. Gases easily flow and diffuse through one another. A gas moves freely and
randomly throughout in a given space.
Properties of Liquids
Liquids can be characterized by the following properties.
1. Liquids have a definite volume, but have no definite shape. They assume the
shapes of their container. Lack of a definite shape for liquid substances arises
from its low intermolecular forces as compared to that of solids.
2. Liquids have higher densities than gases. Their density is a result of the close
arrangement of liquid particles. Thus, the particles of liquids are closer than
those of gases. This accounts for the higher densities of liquids as compared to
gases.
3. Liquids are slightly compressible. With very little free spaces between their particles
liquids resist an applied external force and thus are compressed very slightly.
4. Liquids are fluids. A fluid is a substance that can easily flow. Most liquids naturally
flow downhill because of gravity. Because liquids flow readily the molecules of
a liquid can mix with each other. They flow much more slowly than gases.
Properties of Solids
1. Solids have a definite shape and a definite volume. This is due to the strong
force of attraction that holds the particles of solids together.
168
PHYSICAL STATES OF MATTER
2. Solids generally have higher densities than gases and liquids. The particles of
solids are very close to each other. There is almost no empty space between
the particles of solids. This closeness of particles makes solids to have more
particles (mass) per unit volume, and hence solids have high density.
3. Solids are extremely difficult to compress. This is because of the high interparticle
forces, and a very short distance between the particles.
4. Solids are not fluids. That is they normally do not flow. This is due to the fact
that solid particles are rigidly held in position by strong forces that cause the
restricted motion of their particles.
Activity 5.4
Form a group and perform the following activity:
Take a balloon and blow air into it. What happens to the volume of balloon. Explain your
observations and findings to the class.
Exercise 5.2
Arrange the three states of matter in order of increasing:
a intermolecular force
b density
c compressibility
d kinetic energy
5.3 THE GASEOUS STATE
Competencies
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• explain the assumptions of kinetic molecular theory of gases;
• describe the properties of gases using kinetic molecular theory;
• describe the behavior of gases by using the variables V (volume), T (Temperature)
P (pressure) and n (number of moles);
• state Boyle’s law;
• perform an activity to show changes in volume and pressure of gases to illustrates
Boyle’s law;
169
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
• apply Boyle’s law in solving problems;
• state Charles’ law;
• perform an activity to show changes in volume and temperature of gases to
illustrate Charles’ law;
• apply Charles’ law in solving problems;
• derive combined gas law equation from Boyle’s law and Charles’ law;
• use the combined gas law to calculate changes in volume, pressure or
temperature;
• define an ideal gas;
• derive an ideal gas equation from Boyle’s law, Charles’ law and Avogadro’s
law;
• compare the nature of real gases with ideal gases;
• solve problems related to ideal gas equation;
• define diffusion;
• state Graham’s law of diffusion;
• carry out an activity to compare the rate of diffusion of two different gases;
• apply Graham’s law of diffusion in solving problems.
Activity 5.5
Form a group and discuss each of the following phenomenon. Present your conclusion to
the class.
Regarding the pressure in the tyres, what would you recommend to the driver of a car
who is taking a trip to an area that is experiencing very cold temperatures, more or less
air? Explain.
5.3.1 The Kinetic Molecular Theory of Gases
The particles in an ideal gas are very widely spaced and they are in a constant
random motion. The pressure of a gas is the result of continuous collisions between
the particles and the walls of their container.
170
PHYSICAL STATES OF MATTER
Assumptions of the kinetic molecular theory of gases
1. The particles are in a state of constant, continuous, rapid, random motion and,
therefore, possess kinetic energy. The motion is constantly interrupted by collisions
with molecules or with the container. The pressure of a gas is the effect of these
molecular impacts.
2. The volume of the particles is negligible compared to the total volume of the
gas. Gases are composed of separate, tiny invisible particles called molecules.
Since these molecules are so far apart, the total volume of the molecules is
extremely small compared with the total volume of the gas. Therefore, under
ordinary conditions, the gas consists chiefly of empty space. This assumption
explains why gases are so easily compressed and why they can mix so readily.
3. The attractive forces between the particles are negligible. There are no forces of
attraction or repulsion between gas particles. You can think of an ideal gas
molecule as behaving like small billiard balls. When they collide, they do not
stick together but immediately bounce apart.
4. The average kinetic energy of gas particles depends on the temperature of the
gas. At any particular moment, the molecules in a gas have different velocities.
The mathematical formula for kinetic energy is K.E. = ½ mν2, where m is mass
and ν is velocity of gas molecules. Because the molecules have different velocities,
they have different kinetic energies. However, it is assumed that the average
kinetic energy of the molecules is directly proportional to the absolute (Kelvin)
temperature of the gas.
5.3.2 The Gas Laws
Activity 5.6
Form a group and discuss the following phenomena in terms of the gas laws. Present your
conclusion to the class.
a The increase in pressure in an automobile tire on a hot day.
b The loud noise heard when a light bulb shatters.
The gas laws are the products of many experiments on the physical properties of
gases, which were carried out over hundreds of years. The observation of Boyle and
other scientists led to the development of the Gas Laws. The gas laws express
mathematical relationships between the volume, temperature, pressure, and quantity of
a gas.
171
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Pressure: pressure is defined as the force applied per unit area.
Force
Pressure=
Area
Pressure is one of the measurable properties of gases. Thus, the pressure of a gas can
be expressed in unit of atmosphere, Pascal, torr, millimetre of mercury. The SI unit of
pressure is Pascal (Pa), and is defined as one Newton per square metre.
1 Pa = 1 N/m2 and
1 atm = 760 mmHg = 76 cmHg = 760 torr = 101325 Pa = 101.325 kPa
Volume: Volume is the space taken up by a body. The SI unit of volume is the cubic
metre (m3). Volume is also expressed in cubic centimetre (cm3) and cubic decimetre
(dm3). Other common units of volume are millilitre (mL) and litre (L).
1 cm3 = (1×10–2 m)3 = 1×10–6 m3
1 dm3 = (1×10–1 m)3 = 1×10–3 m3 = 1 L
A litre is equivalent to one cubic decimeter: The relation is given as follows
1 L= 1000 mL = 1000 cm3 = 1 dm3
Temperature: Temperature is the degree of hotness or coldness of a body. Three
temperature scales are commonly used. These are °F (degree Fahrenheit), °C (degree
Celsius) and K (Kelvin). In all gas calculations, we use the Kelvin scale of
temperature.
We use the following formulae for all necessary inter-conversions:
K = °C + 273
5
°C=(°F–32 )
9
9 
°F= × °C+32
5 
Exercise 5.3
Convert the following:
a 500 mmHg into atm, torr, and cmHg
b 100 dm3 into mL, cm3, L, m3
c 54°C into K and °F.
172
PHYSICAL STATES OF MATTER
Molar Volume and Standard Conditions (STP)
The conditions of a pressure of 1 atmosphere and a temperature of 0oC (273.14 K)
are called standard temperature and pressure or STP for gases. At STP the volume of
one mole of any gas is equal to 22.4 litres. This volume is known as molar gas
volume.
Quantity of gas: The quantity of a gas is expressed in mole (n). Mole is the quantity
of gas in terms of number of particles. It is the number of atoms or molecules in
1 gram-atom or 1 gram-molecule of an element or a compound.
1. Boyle’s Law
Activity 5.7
Form a group and discuss the following phenomenon. Present your discussion to the class.
Explain why a helium weather balloon expands as it rises more in the air. (Assume the
temperature remains constant.)
The first quantitative experiments on gases were performed by the Irish chemist,
Robert Boyle (1627-1691). His experiment helped to analyze the relationship
between the volume and pressure of a fixed amount of a gas at constant temperature.
Decreasing the external pressure, causes the gas to expand and to increase in volume.
Correspondingly, increasing the external pressure allows the gas to contract and
decrease in volume. This is shown in Figure 5.1.
Figure 5.1 The relation between pressure and volume.
Boyle studied the relationship between the pressure of the trapped gas and its volume.
Accordingly, he discovered that at constant temperature doubling the pressure on a
173
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
sample of gas reduces its volume by one-half. Tripling the gas pressure reduces its
volume to one-third of the original. Generally, the volume of a gas decreases, as the
pressure on the gas increases. This volume-pressure relationship is illustrated in
Table 5.1.
Table 5.1 Pressure and volume data for a gas at constant mass and temperature.
Presssure (atm) Volume (mL) P × V
0.5 1200 600
1.0 600 600
2.0 300 600
3.0 200 600
4.0 150 600
5.0 120 600
6.0 100 600
1200
900
L)
m
e
(
m 600
u
ol
V
300
0
0.5 1.0 2.0 3.0 4.0 5.0 6.0
Pressure (atm)
Figure 5.2 Volume versus pressure graph for a gas at constant temperature and mass.
The general volume-pressure relationship illustrated above is called Boyle's law.
Boyle's law states that the volume of a fixed mass of gas is inversely proportional
to the pressure at a constant temperature. The inverse relationship between
pressure and volume is mathematically given as
1
V α (at constant T and n)
P
From which follows,
1
V = k or PV = k;
P
where k is a constant at a specific temperature for a given sample of gas.
174
PHYSICAL STATES OF MATTER
If P and V represent the initial conditions; and P and V represent the new or final
1 1 2 2
conditions, Boyle’s law can be written as:
P V = P V ;
1 1 2 2
Experiment 5.1
Effect of Pressure on the Volume of Gas
Objective: To observe the relationships between the volume and pressure of a gas
at constant temperature.
Apparatus: U-tubes, ruler, rubber tube, burette, glass tube.
Chemicals: Mercury.
Procedure:
1. Join two tubes by a rubber tubing to give a U-arrangement as shown in
Figure 5.3, and then partially fill these two tubes with mercury.
2. Put a ruler in the middle of the tube.
3. The first arm of the tube (A) contains air and is sealed by a tap.
4. By moving the second arm of the tube (B) up and down, the volume of air in
the first tube can be varied.
5. The pressure exerted on the air is obtained from the difference in height of
mercury in the two arms of the tube.
Figure 5.3 Effect of pressure on the volume of a gas at constant temperature.
175
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Observations and analysis:
1. Plot a graph taking pressure on the vertical axis versus volume on the horizontal
axis and comment on the shape of the graph.
2. What can you conclude from this experiment?
Activity 5.8
Discuss the following activity in your group and present your discussion to the class. Plot
a graph of pressure, P, versus 1/V, using the following data:
(Note: Calculate 1/V values from the given volume by yourself)
Pressure(atm) 1 2 3 4 5
Volume(mL) 20 10 6.7 5 4
1. What does the graph look like?
2. What does the graph indicate?
3. What can you conclude from the graph?
Example 1
An inflated balloon has a volume of 0.55 L at sea level (1.0 atm) and is
allowed to rise to a height of 6.5 km, where the pressure is about 0.40 atm.
Assuming that the temperature remains constant, what is the final volume of the
balloon?
Solution:
Givens:
Initial conditions Final conditions
P = 1.0 atm P = 0.40 atm
1 2
V = 0.55 L V = ?
1 2
Use Boyles’ law equation: P V = P V
1 1 2 2
PV 1.0atm
Therefore, V = 1 1 = 0.55 L × = 1.4 L.
2 P 0.40atm
2
176
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
compartment of our refrigerator, its volume shrinks drastically as the air inside cools
(Figure 5.4(c)).
Figure 5.4 Relationship between the volume of air in the balloon and its temperature.
From your observation what can you conclude about the effect of temperature
on the volume of a gas?
In 1848, Lord Kelvin realized that a temperature of -273.15oC is considered as
absolute zero. Absolute zero is theoretically the lowest attainable temperature. Then he
set up an absolute temperature scale, or the Kelvin temperature scale, with absolute
zero as the starting point on the Kelvin scale.
The average kinetic energy of gas molecules is closely related to the Kelvin
temperature. The volume of a gas and Kelvin temperature are directly proportional to
each other. For example, doubling the Kelvin temperature causes the volume of a gas
to double, and reducing the Kelvin temperature by half causes the volume of a gas to
decrease by half. This relationship between Kelvin temperature and the volume of a
gas is known as Charles’ law.
Charles’ law states that the volume of a fixed mass of gas at constant pressure
varies directly with the Kelvin temperature.
178
PHYSICAL STATES OF MATTER
Mathematically;
V a T at constant P and n:
V
V = kT, or = k
T
The value of T is the Kelvin temperature, and k is a constant. The value of k depends
only on the quantity of gas and the pressure. The ratio V/T for any set of volume-
temperature values always equals the same k. Charles' law can be applied directly to
volume-temperature problems using the relationship:
V V
1 = 2
T T
1 2
where V and T represent the initial condition; V and T represent the new
1 1 2 2
condition.
Charles found that the volume of a gas at constant pressure increases linearly with
the temperature of the gas. That is, a plot of the volume of a gas versus its
temperature (K) gives a straight line assuming the pressure remains constant.
Figure 5.5 illustrates the relationship between the volume of a gas and Kelvin
temperature. If the graph is extrapolated to give zero volume for a gas, the
temperature reached is –273.15oC. This temperature is the lowest temperature
attained by a gas and it is called absolute zero.
Figure 5.5 A plot of volume versus the Kelvin temperature.
Note that the ratio V/T is constant for every plot of the curve. Figure 5.5 is drawn
using the data given in Table 5.2 for the same sample of gas. In all cases, V/T is
constant as noted in the table.
179
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Table 5.2 Volume-Temperature Data for a Gas sample (at constant mass and pressure).
Volume (mL) Temperature in Kelvin V/T
600 300 2
500 250 2
400 200 2
300 150 2
200 100 2
100 50 2
Experiment 5.2
Effect of Temperature on the Volume of Gas
Objective: To observe the changes in volume of a gas as temperature changes.
Apparatus: Round bottomed flask, beaker, delivery tube and burner.
Procedure:
1. Set up the apparatus as shown in Figure 5.6.
2. Warm the flask gently with a low Bunsen flame.
3. Cool the flask and note what happens.
4. Record your observation.
Observations and analysis:
1. What do you observe from the experiment?
2. What is your conclusion from this activity?
Figure 5.6 Relationship between temperature and volume of a gas.
180
PHYSICAL STATES OF MATTER
Activity 5.10
Form a group and perform the following activity and present to the class.
Given the following data at a constant pressure:
Volume of Nitrogen gas (L) Temperature (K)
4.28 L 303
5.79 L 410
7.77 L 550
a Draw a graph of the relationship between volume and temperature.
b Calculate the expected volume of the gas when the temperature reaches 700K.
c Explain the relationship between temperature and volume.
Example 2
A quantity of gas occupies a volume of 804 cm3 at a temperature of 127°C.
At what temperature will the volume of the gas be 603 cm3, assuming that
there is no change in the pressure?
Solution:
Given:
Initial conditions Final conditions
T = 127oC T = ?
1 2
= 127 + 273 = 400 K V = 603 cm3
2
V = 804 cm3
1
V V 
Based on Charles’ equation  1 = 2  , the unknown variable (T ) can be
2
T T 
1 2
calculated as:
V V V
T
1 =
T
2 ⇒ T
2
= T
1
×
V
2
1 2 1
3
603cm
=400K× = 300K
3
804cm
181
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Example 3
A gas at 65°C occupies 4.22 L. What will be the volume of the gas at a
temperature of 36.9°C, assuming a constant pressure?
Solution:
Given:
Initial conditions Final conditions
T = 65°C T = 36.9°C + 273 = 309.9 K
1 2
= 65 + 273 = 338 K
V = 4.22 L V = ?
1 2
From Charles’ law
V V T
1 2 1
= fi V = ×T
2 2
T T V
1 2 1
4.22L×309.9K
= =3.87L
338K
Exercise 5.5
1. At constant pressure, by what fraction of its volume will a quantity of gas
change if the temperature changes from -173°C to 27°C?
2. At what temperature will the volume of a gas be
a halved, b doubled,
c tripled at constant pressure if the original temperature is 17°C?
3. At 25°C and 1 atm a gas occupies a volume of 1.5 dm3. What volume will it
occupy at 100°C and 1 atm?
3. The Combined Gas Law
A sample of a gas often undergoes changes in temperature, pressure, and volume.
When this happens, the three variables must be dealt with at the same time.
Boyle’s law and Charles’ law can be combined to give one expression called the
combined gas law. The combined gas law expresses the relationship between
pressure, volume, and temperature of a fixed amount of gas.
Derivation of the combined gas law:
Boyle’s law: V a 1/P
Charles’ law: V a T
Then, V a T/P (combined)
V = kT/P (where k is a constant)
182
PHYSICAL STATES OF MATTER
It follows,
PV PV
1 1 = k and 2 2 = k
T T
1 2
Since in each case k is constant, the combined gas law equation is given as follows:
PV P V
1 1 = 2 2
T T
1 2
Where P , V and T are the initial pressure, volume and temperature; P , V and T
1 1 1 2 2 2
are the final pressure, volume and temperature of the gas respectively.
Example 4
A 300 cm3 sample of a gas exerts a pressure of 60.0 kPa at 27°C. What
pressure would it exert in a 200 cm3 container at 20°C?
Solution:
Given:
Initial Conditions V = 300 cm3 T = 27 + 273 = 300 K P = 60.0 kPa
1 1 1
Final Conditions V =200 cm3 T = 20 + 273 = 293 K P = ?
2 2 2
PV PV 
Using the combined gas law,  1 1 = 2 2 .
 T T 
 1 2 
P 1 V 1 T 2 60.0 kPa × 300cm 3 293K
⇒ P 2 = × = × 3
T V 300K 200cm
1 2
P = 87.9 kPa
2
Exercise 5.6
If a 50 cm3 sample of gas exerts a pressure of 60.0 kPa at 35°C, what
volume will it occupy at STP?
4. Avogadro’s law
Activity 5.11
Form a group and discuss the following phenomena. Present your discussion to the class.
Suppose while you are playing a football in your school football team, the ball is
accidentally deflated. Then immediately you fill the ball with air using air pump.
i. Why did the ball become strong enough?
ii. What happened to the number of particles in the ball?
iii. Which gas law can be obeyed? Explain.
183
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
The relationship between the volume of a gas and its number of molecules was
explained by Avogadro. Avogadro’s law states that equal volumes of different
gases, under the same conditions of temperature and pressure, contain the same
number of molecules. Thus, according to the law the volume of a gas is proportional
to the number of molecules (moles) of the gas at STP.
Mathematically, V α n; where V is the volume and n is number of moles.
5. The Ideal Gas Equation
Activity 5.12
Form a group and discuss the following phenomenon. Present your discussion to the class.
A balloon can burst when too much air is added into it. Describe what happens to the
pressure, volume, temperature, number of moles, and the balloon itself as it is inflated and
finally bursts. Can you derive an equation which describes these relationships?
An ideal gas is a hypothetical gas that obeys the gas laws. Real gases only obey the
ideal gas laws closely at high temperature and low pressure. Under these conditions,
their particles are very far apart. The ideal gas law is a combination of Boyle’s law,
Charles’ law and Avogadro’s law.
We have considered the three laws that describe the behavior of gases as revealed by
experimental observations:
1
Boyle's law: V α (at constant T and n)
P
Charles' law: V α T (at constant P and n)
Avogadro's law: V α n (at constant P and T)
This relationship indicates how the volume of gas depends on pressure, temperature
and number of moles.
nT
Vα
P
nT
or V = R
P
where R, is a proportionality constant called the gas constant.
PV= nRT (the ideal gas equation)
Thus, the ideal gas equation describes the relationship among the four variables P, V,
T and n. An ideal gas is a gas whose pressure-volume-temperature behavior can be
completely explained by the ideal gas equation.
At STP, the values of R can be calculated from the ideal gas equation.
PV (1atm)(22.414L)
R = =
nT (1mol)(273.15K)
184
PHYSICAL STATES OF MATTER
L.atm
=0.082057 =8.314L.kPa/K.mol=8.314J/mol.K
K.mol
For calculations, we round off the value of R to three significant figures
(0.0821 L.atm/K.mol) and use 22.4 L for the molar volume of a gas at STP.
Example 5
Calculate the volume (in liters) occupied by 7.4 g of CO at STP?
2
Solution:
The ideal gas equation is given as
PV = nRT
nRT  mRT 
V = sincen=m/M byrearrangingV = 
P  M P 
7.4g L.atm 273K
= ×0.082 =3.77L
44g/mol K mol 1atm
Example 6
At STP, 0.280 L of a gas weighs 0.400 g. Calculate the molar mass of the
gas.
Solution:
Given: V = 0.280 L, m = 0.400 g
At conditions of standard temperature and pressure
T = 273 K, P = 1 atm
R = 0.082 L.atm/K.mol
⇒ PV = nRT
m m
PV = ⋅RT (Sincen= );
M M
mRT 0.400g×0.082L.atm/K.mol×273K
⇒ M = = =31.98g/mol
PV 1atm×0.280L
185
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Exercise 5.7
The density of a gas at a pressure of 1.34 atm and a temperature of 303 K
is found to be 1.77 g/L. What is the molar mass of this gas?
6. Graham's Law of Diffusion
Activity 5.13
Form a group and discuss the following phenomenon. Present your discussion to the class.
Explain why a helium-filled balloon deflated over time faster than an air-filled balloon does.
(Hint: A balloon has many invisible pinholes).
We have seen that a gas tends to expand and occupy any space available to it. This
spreading of gas molecules is called diffusion.
How do you compare the rate of diffusion of molecules with different
densities?
Thomas Graham (1805 - 1869), an English chemist, studied the rate of diffusion of
different gases. He found that gases having low densities diffuse faster than gases with
high densities. He was able to describe quantitatively the relationship between the
density of a gas and its rate of diffusion. In 1829, he announced what is known as
Graham's law of diffusion.
Graham’s law of diffusion states that at constant temperature and pressure, the rate
of diffusion of a gas, r, is inversely proportional to the square root of its density,
d, or molar mass, M.
Mathematically it can be expressed as:
1 1
r ∝ or r ∝ ;
d M
where r is the rate of diffusion, d is the density and M is the molecular mass of the gas.
For two gases (Gas 1 and Gas 2), their rates of diffusion can be given as:
1 1
r ∝ or r ∝
1 d 1 M
1 1
1 1
and r ∝ or r ∝
2 d 2 M
2 2
Rearranging these relationships gives the following expression
r d r M
1 = 2 or 1 = 2 ;
r d r M
2 1 2 1
186
PHYSICAL STATES OF MATTER
where r , d and M represent the rate of diffusion, density and molecular mass
1 1 1
of gas 1. r , d and M represent the rate of diffusion, density and molecular
2 2 2
mass of gas 2.
Experiment 5.3
Determination of Diffusion of Gases
Objective: To compare the rates of diffusion of HCl and NH gases.
3
Apparatus: Glass tube, cork, cotton and stand.
Chemicals: conc NH , conc. HCl.
3
Procedure:
1. Set up the apparatus as shown in Figure 5.7.
2. Insert pieces of cotton at the two ends of the tube.
3. Add 8 drops of concentrated ammonia on the cotton at one end and 8 drops
of concentrated hydrochloric acid at the other end of the tube at the same
time. Immediately close the two ends with corks.
4. Watch till a white ring is formed and record the time at which the white ring is
formed.
5. Measure the distances between the white ring and the two ends.
Figure 5.7 Determination of diffusion of gases.
Observations and analysis:
1. Which gas has moved the shorter distance to the white ring?
2. How do you compare the rate of diffusion of the two gases?
3. Which gas diffuses faster? HCl or NH ?
3
4. Write your conclusions about the experiment.
187
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Example 7
Which gas will diffuse faster, ammonia or carbon dioxide? What is the relative
rate of diffusion?
Solution:
The molecular weight of CO is 44 g/mol and that of NH is 17 g/mol.
2 3
Therefore, NH diffuses faster than CO .
3 2
We can calculate the rate of diffusion as follows:
Let the rate of diffusion of NH be r
3 NH
3
Let the rate of diffusion of CO be r
2 CO
2
r M 44
NH 3 = CO 2 = = 1.6
r M 17
CO 2 NH 3
This means rate of diffusion of NH is 1.6 times that of CO .
3 2
Example 8
The rate of diffusion of methane (CH ) is twice that of an unknown gas. What
4
is the molecular mass of the gas?
Solution:
Let r and r be the rates of diffusion of CH and the unknown gas
CH4 x 4
respectively.
Let M and M be the molecular masses of CH and the unknown gas
CH4 x 4
respectively.
The rate of diffusion of CH is two times faster than the unknown gas. This
4
can be written mathematically as r = 2r .
CH4 x
Now, substitute 2r in place of r and solve for M using Graham’s law.
x CH4 x
r M r M
1 = 2 fi CH 4 = x
r M r M
2 1 x CH 4
2r M
X = X fi M = 64
X
r 16
X
Therefore, the molecular mass of the unknown gas is 64.
188
PHYSICAL STATES OF MATTER
Also the rate at which a gas diffuses is inversely proportional to the time taken.
Mathematically,
1
r ∝
t
If two different gases (gas 1 and gas 2) under the same conditions of temperature and
pressure diffuse through a porous container, then the time required to diffuse for the
two gases can be given by the following formula:
r t M
1 = 2 = 2
r t M
2 1 1
where t and t are the time taken, r and r are the rates, M and M are the
1 2 1 2 1 2
molecular masses of Gas 1 and Gas 2 respectively.
Activity 5.14
Form a group and discuss the kinetic molecular theory to explain the compression and
expansion of gases. Present your findings to the class.
Reading Check
What names are given for the following ideal gas relationships?
a Volume and moles at constant temperature and pressure.
b Volume and pressure at constant temperature and moles.
c Volume and Kelvin temperature at constant pressure and moles.
5.4 THE LIQUID STATE
Competencies
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• explain the terms: evaporation, boiling, condensation, vapor pressure; boiling point,
molar heat of vaporization and molar heat of condensation;
• carry out an activity to demonstrate the concept of vapor pressure; and
• carry out an activity to determine the boiling points of water and ethanol.
189
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Activity 5.15
Discuss the following activities in your group and present to the class.
1. Why some liquids are volatile and others are not?
2. What is the relationship between altitude and boiling point of a liquid?
You recall that liquids have a definite volume and an indefinite shape. They take the
shape of their containers to the level they fill. On the average, liquids are more dense
than gases, but less dense than solids.
As in a gas, particles in a liquid are in constant motion. However, the particles in a
liquid are closer together than those in a gas. The attractive forces between particles
in a liquid are more effective than between particles in a gas. This attraction between
liquid particles is caused by the intermolecular forces (dipole-dipole forces, London
dispersion forces, and hydrogen bonding).
Liquids are more ordered than gases because of the stronger intermolecular forces
and the lower mobility of liquid particles. Accordingly, liquid particles are not bound
together in fixed positions.
Energy Changes in Liquids
Activity 5.16
Form a group and discuss the following phenomenon:
When you take bath with hot water in your bathroom, the water collects on the mirror of
the bathroom.
Present your discussion to the class.
The process by which a liquid changes to a gas is known as vaporization. Evaporation
is the process by which liquid molecules break freely from the liquid surface and enter
the vapor phase. Evaporation is explained in terms of the energy possessed by the
molecules on the surface of the liquid.
190
PHYSICAL STATES OF MATTER
In an open container, evaporation continues until all of the liquid enters the vapor
phase. However, liquids in a closed container behave differently. The volume of the
liquid decreases for a period of time, and remains unchanged. In closed containers,
the vapor cannot escape. As the vapor concentration increases, some of the vapor
molecules lose energy and return to the liquid state. When a vapor returns to the
liquid state, it is said to condense. The process is called condensation. Evaporation
and condensation are opposing processes.
Liquid (cid:89) (cid:90)(cid:90) (cid:90) E(cid:90)v (cid:90) ap(cid:90) (cid:90) ora(cid:90) (cid:90) tio(cid:90)n (cid:90) (cid:88) (cid:90) (cid:90) (cid:90) Gas
Condensation
The rate of evaporation of a liquid depends on three factors. These are temperature,
intermolecular forces, and surface area of the liquid.
An increase in temperature increases the average kinetic energy of the molecules and
this increases the tendency to change into the gaseous state. Some liquids evaporate
readily at room temperature. Such liquids are said to be volatile. The volatile liquids
have relatively weak forces of attraction between particles. Diethyl ether, ethyl alcohol,
benzene and acetone are volatile liquids.
Non-volatile liquids have a little tendency to evaporate at a given temperature. They
have relatively stronger attractive forces between their molecules, e.g., sulphuric acid,
water, and molten ionic compounds.
Vapour pressure: The partial pressure of the vapour above a liquid is called vapour
pressure. The vapour pressure of a liquid depends up on the temperature. At a given
temperature, vapour pressure is constant. As the temperature increases, the vapour
pressure of a liquid also increases due to high rate of evaporation.
Vapour pressure depends also on the strength of the intermolecular forces between
the particles of the liquid. The stronger the intermolecular forces, the lower the vapour
pressure will be, because fewer particles will have enough kinetic energy to overcome
the attractive force at a given temperature. For example, water and alcohol have
relatively low vapour pressure. On the contrary, liquids with low intermolecular forces
have high vapour pressures at room temperature. For example, diethyl ether, a non-
polar molecule with relatively weak dispersion forces, has a relatively higher vapour
pressure.
191
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Boiling and Boiling Point
Activity 5.17
Form a group and discuss the following ideas. Present your discussion to the class.
1. How does the kinetic-molecular theory explain why atmospheric pressure is greater at
lower altitude than at a higher altitude?
2. Ice melts normally at 0°C. What happens to the melting point of ice in the presence of
impurities? Does it melt below 0°C, above 0°C or exactly at 0°C? Explain.
What is the difference between evaporation and boiling? How does boiling
point depend on the external pressure?
Boiling is the change of a liquid to bubbles of vapour that appear throughout the
liquids. It is the conversion of liquid to vapour within the liquid as well as at its
surface. It occurs when the equilibrium vapour pressure of the liquid equals the
atmospheric pressure. During evaporation only molecules at the surface escape into
the vapour phase, but at the boiling point the molecules within the liquid have sufficient
energy to overcome the intermolecular attractive forces of their neighbors, so bubbles
of vapour are released at the surface. It is the formation of vapour bubbles within the
liquid itself that characterizes boiling and distinguishes it from evaporation.
If the temperature of the liquid is increased, the equilibrium vapour pressure also
increases. Finally, the boiling point is reached. The boiling point of a liquid is the
temperature at which the equilibrium vapour pressure of the liquid equals the
atmospheric pressure. Therefore, the lower the atmospheric pressure, the lower the
boiling point will be.
The boiling point of a liquid can be reduced as lowering the external pressure,
because the vapour pressure of the liquid equals the external pressure at a lower
temperature.
If the external pressure is 1.0 atmosphere (760 mmHg), the boiling point is called
normal boiling point. For instance water boils, at 100°C at 1.0 atmospheric pressure.
Thus, the normal boiling point of water is 100°C.
Where will water boil first? In Addis Ababa or Hawassa? Why?
192
PHYSICAL STATES OF MATTER
Experiment 5.4
Observing the Vapour Pressure of liquid
Objective: To observe the vapour pressure of liquid.
Apparatus: Erlenmeyer flask, rubber bung, U-tube and burner.
Procedure:
1. Set up the apparatus as shown in Figure 5.8.
2. Add about 100 mL of water into the Erlenmeyer flask and put a stopper. Heat
the flask to expel the air above the water in the flask.
3. Half fill the U-tube with water.
4. Connect the U-tube to Erlenmeyer flask and note the water level in the two
arms of the U-tube.
5. Heat the flask gently and observe the water level changes in the arms of the
U-tube.
Fig. 5.8 Determination of vapour pressure.
Observations and analysis:
1. What do you observe? Give an explanation for the observation.
193
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
Experiment 5.5
Determining of Boiling Point
Objectives: To determine the boiling point of water.
Apparatus: Test tube, stopper, thermometer, beaker, burner, clamp, stand and base.
Procedure:
1. Half fill the test tube with a sample of pure water and add some porclein chips.
2. Take a rubber stopper and pierce a thin opening on the side of the rubber
stopper to allow the vapour to escape.
3. Fit the thermometer with the rubber stopper and insert it in the test tube.
4. Put the test tube in a beaker containing oil as shown in Figure 5.9.
5. Heat the oil in beaker gently and record the temperature at which the water boils.
Thermometer
Testtube
Stand
Beaker
Oil
Bunsen
burner
Figure 5.9 Determination of boiling point.
Observations and analysis:
1. What is the boiling point of water that you obtained from the experiment?
2. Does the temperature from the thermometer reading increase after the water
starts to boil?
3. Explain why the thermometer was not put into the liquid.
4. Explain the purpose of adding porclein chips.
194
PHYSICAL STATES OF MATTER
Boiling of a liquid requires a certain amount of heat energy to break the forces of
attraction that holds the molecules together. The amount of heat energy necessary to
bring about the vaporization of a fixed amount of a liquid at a fixed temperature to the
gaseous state is called the heat of vaporization. For example, the heat of vaporization
per mole of water at 298 K and 1 atmosphere is 44.0 kJ. This is called the molar
heat of vaporization (∆H ) of water.
vap
Molar heat of vaporization (∆H ) and molar heat of condensation (∆H ) are
vap cond
equal in magnitude but opposite in sign, i.e., ∆H = – ∆H . Vaporization is an
vap cond
endothermic processes where as condensation is an exothermic process.
Reading Check
1. What are the effects of impurity on the boiling point of liquids?
2. Why does the boiling point of liquid decrease as altitude increases?
5.5 THE SOLID STATE
Competencies
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• explain the terms melting, fusion, sublimation, melting point, freezing point, molar
heat of solidification;
• describe phase changes;
• explain temperature changes associated with phase changes;
• determine melting point of ice; and
• demonstrate an experiment to show the phase changes from ice to liquid water
and then to water vapor.
Activity 5.18
Form a group and discuss the following:
1. When the crystals of iodine are warmed, they disappear into vapours without being
changed into liquid.
2. When ethyl alcohol is taken in an open container it disappeares after sometime.
Present your discussion to the class.
195
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
When a solid is continuously heated its ordered crystalline structure is disturbed. The
particles attain their freedom of motion gradually and melting (or fusion) takes place
where the solid is converted into the liquid state. The temperature at which a
crystalline solid is converted to a liquid is known as the melting point.
In contrast when a liquid is cooled, the molecules become closer and closer, and the
intermolecular forces of attraction become stronger and stronger. The particles arrange
themselves into a regular pattern in the liquid. This process is called freezing or
solidification. Note that the freezing point of a liquid is the same as the melting point of
a crystalline solid. This means that:
• Both melting and freezing take place at the same temperature.
• Both liquid and solid phases coexist at equilibrium with each other at the melting
or freezing point.
To clarify this, let us consider ice, which melts at 0°C and water freezes at 0°C. Ice
and water coexist in equilibrium with each other at 0°C as follows.
Ice (cid:89)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:90) m(cid:90)e (cid:90) lti(cid:90)n (cid:90) g,(cid:90)(cid:90) 0°(cid:90)C (cid:90)(cid:88)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:90) Liquidwater
freezing,0°C
The amount of heat needed to convert one gram of a solid to a liquid at the melting
point is called heat of fusion. The molar heat of fusion or molar enthalpy of fusion
(∆H ) is the quantity of heat needed to convert one mole of a solid at its melting
fus
point to the liquid state. For example, the molar heat of fusion of ice is 6.01 kJ at
0°C. This is the amount of energy needed to break the attractive forces in the solid at
the melting point. Melting requires the supply of energy; therefore, it is an endothermic
process.
During the process of solidification, an amount of heat equal to the heat of fusion must
be liberated. This quantity of heat liberated, which is exactly equal to the heat of
fusion, is called the heat of solidification or heat of crystallization.
The molar heat of crystallization (∆H ) is the quantity of energy that must be
cryst
removed from one mole of a liquid to convert it to the solid state at its freezing point.
∆H = –∆H
cryst fus
Although the motion of the particles in a solid are more restricted than those in a
liquid, many solids have a significant vapour pressure and evaporate directly from the
solid to the vapour state without passing through the liquid state. This process is called
sublimation.
Solid (cid:89)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:90) su(cid:90)b (cid:90) lim(cid:90)(cid:90) at(cid:90)i (cid:90) on(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:88)(cid:90) Vapour(gas)
deposition
196
PHYSICAL STATES OF MATTER
During the sublimation process heat energy is absorbed. That is, it is an endothermic
process.
Molar heat of sublimation (∆H ) is the quantity of heat required to convert one mole
fus
of a solid to a gas at its sublimation point. The heat (enthalpy) of sublimation is related
to the enthalpies of fusion and vaporization by:
DH = DH + DH
sub fus vap
Phase Changes and Energy Changes in Solids
A phase is any part of a system that has uniform composition and properties. A state
of matter represents a phase. Most solid substances undergo two changes of state
when heated. A solid change to a liquid at the melting point, and the liquid changes to
vapour at the boiling point. To understand state changes, we will consider the heating
curve for a substance given in Figure 5.10.
A heating curve is a plot of temperature verses the uniform addition of heat. This can
be illustrated for a hypothetical substance, in which the temperature of the substance is
on the vertical axis and the passage of time during which heat is added to the
substance is on the horizontal axis. Figure 5.10 shows the changes in the temperature
and phases of a pure substance as it is heated, beginning with a solid and continuing
to the gaseous state as described.
Figure 5.10 Heating curve.
Initially, the substance exists in the solid state, and the addition of heat increases its
temperature. When the solid is heated, its temperature rises (A to B) until it reaches
the melting point (point B), and the temperature remains constant (B to C) until all the
197
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
solid is converted to a liquid (point C). The added heat energy is used to break the
intermolecular forces, thus disrupting the solid structure. At point C phase change is
completed. Once melting is completed, heating of the liquid raises its temperature
(C to D) until the boiling point is reached at point D. In region (D to E) the addition
of heat is utilized to break the intermolecular forces of the liquid to change it to a gas.
When all the liquid has been converted into a gas, addition of heat simply raises the
temperature of the gas.
Reading Check
Freezing and melting point of ice takes place at 0oC. Rationalize this.
Check list
Key terms of the unit
• Absolute zero • Ideal gas equation
• Atmospheric pressure • Kelvin temperature
• Avogadro's law • Kinetic molecular theory of
• Boiling gases
• Boiling point • Liquids
• Boyle's law • Melting
• Charles' law • Melting point
• Collision
• Molar heat of condensation
• Combined gas law
• Molar heat of fusion
• Condensation
• Molar heat of sublimation
• Evaporation
• Non-volatile liquid
• Fluid
• Normal boiling point
• Freezing
• Phase change
• Freezing point
• Properties of gases
• Gas constant
• Solidification
• Gas laws
• Standard temperature and
• Gases
pressure (STP)
• Graham's law
• Sublimation
• Heat of condensation
• Vapor pressure
• Heat of vaporization
• Volatile liquid
• Heating curve
198
CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
REVIEW EXERCISE ON UNIT 5
Part I: Assert your answers based on the given instructions:
We have three physical states of substances namely solid, liquid, and gas. Identify the
following as solid, liquid or gas based on the properties given to explain their
characteristics.
1. They have a definite shape and a definite volume.
2. Their molecules are highly disordered.
3. The motion of their molecules is highly restricted.
4. They can be easily compressed.
5. They have a tendency to flow.
6. They can take the shape of their container.
7. They can move in all direction at high speed.
8. They can easily diffuse through each other.
9. They can sublime.
10. They have less density relative to the other states.
Part II: Matching-type questions
A B
11. Melting point A Solid → gas
12. Heat of fusion B Liquid → gas
13. Heat of sublimation C Gas → solid
14. Sublimation point D Solid → liquid
15. Melting E Liquid → solid
16. Freezing F Same as freezing point
17. Sublimation G Same as deposition point
18. Deposition H Same as heat of crystallization
I Similar to fusion
J Similar to crystallization
K Similar to heat of deposition
200
PHYSICAL STATES OF MATTER
Part III: Write the missing words in your exercise book
19. In a solid the particles are very close together and can only _______ about a
fixed position.
20. Sublimation occurs when a solid changes directly to a _______ passing the
_______ state.
21. The melting point of a solid is the same as _______.
22. When the water boils, its vapour pressure is equals to _______.
23. The temperature at which a crystalline solid is converted to a liquid, is called ______.
24. The lowest attainable temperature is ______.
25. “Equal volumes of different gases at the same temperature and pressure contain
equal numbers of molecules”; this is a statement of _______ law.
Part IV: Short-answers type questions
26. What is the difference between volatile and non-volatile substances? Give an
example of each.
27. Why is the temperature of a substance constant at its melting point; even though
heat is added to it?
28. What factors affect the rate of evaporation of a liquid?
Part V: Problems to solve
29. Convert the following pressure measurements:
a 720 mmHg to atm b 1.25 atm to mmHg
c 542 mmHg to atm d 740 mmHg to kPa
e 700 kPa to atm
30. A 2.50 L container is filled with 175 g of argon:
a if the pressure is 10.0 atm, what is the temperature?
b if the temperature is 22 K, what is the pressure?
31. If 0.500 mole of nitrogen gas occupies a volume of 11.2 L at 0°C; what volume
will 2.00 mole of nitrogen gas occupy at the same temperature and pressure?
32. A certain gas is found in the exhaust of automobiles and power plants. Consider
a 1.53 L sample of a gas at a pressure of 5.6 × 104 Pa. If the pressure is
changed to 1.5 × 104 Pa at a constant temperature, what will be the new
volume of the gas?
201
PHYSICAL STATES OF MATTER
Part III: Write the missing words in your exercise book
19. In a solid the particles are very close together and can only _______ about a
fixed position.
20. Sublimation occurs when a solid changes directly to a _______ passing the
_______ state.
21. The melting point of a solid is the same as _______.
22. When the water boils, its vapour pressure is equals to _______.
23. The temperature at which a crystalline solid is converted to a liquid, is called ______.
24. The lowest attainable temperature is ______.
25. “Equal volumes of different gases at the same temperature and pressure contain
equal numbers of molecules”; this is a statement of _______ law.
Part IV: Short-answers type questions
26. What is the difference between volatile and non-volatile substances? Give an
example of each.
27. Why is the temperature of a substance constant at its melting point; even though
heat is added to it?
28. What factors affect the rate of evaporation of a liquid?
Part V: Problems to solve
29. Convert the following pressure measurements:
a 720 mmHg to atm b 1.25 atm to mmHg
c 542 mmHg to atm d 740 mmHg to kPa
e 700 kPa to atm
30. A 2.50 L container is filled with 175 g of argon:
a if the pressure is 10.0 atm, what is the temperature?
b if the temperature is 22 K, what is the pressure?
31. If 0.500 mole of nitrogen gas occupies a volume of 11.2 L at 0°C; what volume
will 2.00 mole of nitrogen gas occupy at the same temperature and pressure?
32. A certain gas is found in the exhaust of automobiles and power plants. Consider
a 1.53 L sample of a gas at a pressure of 5.6 × 104 Pa. If the pressure is
changed to 1.5 × 104 Pa at a constant temperature, what will be the new
volume of the gas?
201
Take Good Care of
This Textbook
This textbook is the property of your school.
Take good care not to damage or lose it.
Here are 10 ideas to help take care of the book:
1. Cover the book with protective material, such as plastic, old
newspapers or magazines.
2. Always keep the book in a clean dry place.
3. Be sure your hands are clean when you use the book.
4. Do not write on the cover or inside pages.
5. Use a piece of paper or cardboard as a bookmark.
6. Never tear or cut out any pictures or pages.
7. Repair any torn pages with paste or tape.
8. Pack the book carefully when you place it in your school bag.
9. Handle the book with care when passing it to another person.
10. When using a new book for the first time, lay it on its back. Open
only a few pages at a time. Press lightly along the bound edge as
you turn the pages. This will keep the cover in good condition.
CHEMISTRY
STUDENT TEXTBOOK
GRADE 10
Authors, Editors and Reviewers:
J.L. Sharma (Ph.D.)
Nell Angelo (M.A.)
Stella Johnson (M.A.)
Amare Legesse (B.Sc.)
Dawit Tafesse (B.Sc.)
Shimeles Admase (Ph.D.)
Evaluators:
Nega Gichile
Mahtot Abera
Solomon Haileyesus
FEDERAL DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF ETHIOPIA
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION
Published E.C. 2002 by the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, Ministry
of Education, under the General Education Quality Improvement Project
(GEQIP) supported by IDA Credit No. 4535-ET, the Fast Track Initiative
Catalytic Fund and the Governments of Finland, Italy, Netherlands and the
United Kingdom.
© 2010 by the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, Ministry of
Education. All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored
in a retrieval system or transmitted in any form or by any means including
electronic, mechanical, magnetic or other, without prior written permission of
the Ministry of Education or licensing in accordance with the Federal
Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, Federal Negarit Gazeta, Proclamation No.
410/2004 – Copyright and Neighbouring Rights Protection.
The Ministry of Education wishes to thank the many individuals, groups and
other bodies involved – directly and indirectly – in publishing this textbook
and the accompanying teacher guide.
Copyrighted materials used by permission of their owners. If you are the
owner of copyrighted material not cited or improperly cited, please contact
with the Ministry of Education, Head Office, Arat Kilo, (PO Box 1367), Addis
Ababa, Ethiopia.
PHOTO CREDIT: Encarta  Encyclopedia, 2009 edition.
AAU (Addis Ababa University, Chemistry Department)
Higher 23 Preparatory School
Developed and Printed by
STAR EDUCATIONAL BOOKS DISTRIBUTORS Pvt. Ltd.
24/4800, Bharat Ram Road, Daryaganj,
New Delhi – 110002, INDIA
and
ASTER NEGA PUBLISHING ENTERPRISE
P.O. Box 21073
ADDIS ABABA, ETHIOPIA
Under GEQIP Contract No. ET-MoE/GEQIP/IDA/ICB/G01/09.
ISBN 978-99944-2-036-0
Page
1
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC
Unit
CHEMISTY ....................................... 1
1.1 Introduction ............................................ 2
1.2 Saturated Hydrocarbons-Alkanes .......... 6
1.3 Unsaturated Hydrocarbons-
Alkenes and Alkynes ............................ 27
1.4 Aromatic Hydrocarbons-Benzene ........ 50
1.5 Natural Sources of Hydrocarbons ........ 54
1.6 Alcohols ................................................ 58
1.7 Industrial and Agricultural Applications
of Organic Compounds ........................ 78
Check List .................................... 83
Unit Summary ............................. 84
Review Exercise ........................... 85
2
IMPORTANT INORGANIC
Unit
COMPOUNDS ................................. 91
2.1 Introduction .......................................... 92
2.2 Oxides ................................................... 93
2.3 Acids .................................................... 103
2.4 Bases .................................................... 124
2.5 Salts ..................................................... 137
Check List ................................... 155
Unit Summary ............................ 156
Review Exercise .......................... 157
III
IV Content
3
Unit
ELECTROCHEMISTRY ................ 161
3.1 Introduction ......................................... 162
3.2 Electrical Conductivity ........................ 163
3.3 Electrolysis .......................................... 167
3.4 Galvanic Cells (Voltaic Cells) ............. 171
3.5 Industrial Applications of Electrolysis 178
Check list .................................... 182
Unit Summary ............................ 182
Review Exercise .......................... 183
4
CHEMISTRY IN INDUSTRY AND
Unit
ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION ....... 188
4.1 Introduction ......................................... 189
4.2 Natural Resources and Industry .......... 190
4.3 Production of some Important Metals
and Non-Metals ................................... 191
4.4 Some Industries in Ethiopia ................ 213
4.5 Environmental Pollution ...................... 225
Check list .................................... 231
Unit Summary ............................ 232
Review Exercise .......................... 234
1
TINU
O
HN—C—NH
2 2
109.5°
— C— C— C C —C C—
Introduction to Organic
Chemistry
Unit Outcomes
After completing this unit, you will be able to:
! know the historical development of organic chemistry and the classification of
organic compounds;
! know the general formulas of alkanes, alkenes, alkynes, alcohols, aldehydes,
ketones, carboxylic acids and esters;
! develop skills in naming and writing the molecular and structural formulas of
simple alkanes, branched-chain alkanes, simple alkenes, branched-chain alkenes,
simple alkynes, alcohols, aldehydes, ketones, carboxylic acids and esters;
! understand isomerism and know possible isomers of alkanes, alkenes and
alkynes;
! know the major natural sources of hydrocarbons;
! understand the physical and chemical properties and the general methods of
preparation of alkanes, alkenes, alkynes, benzene and alcohols;
! know the uses of organic compounds in the manufacture of plastics, beverages,
pharmaceuticals, soaps and detergents, dry cleaning chemicals, fuels, pesticides,
and herbicides; and
! demonstrate scientific inquiry skills: observing, classifying, communicating,
measuring, asking questions, interpreting data, drawing conclusions, applying
concepts, predicting and problem solving.
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
MAIN CONTENTS
1.1 Introduction
1.2 Saturated hydrocarbons (alkanes)
1.3 Unsaturated hydrocarbons (alkenes and alkynes)
1.4 Aromatic hydrocarbons
1.5 Natural sources of hydrocarbons
1.6 Alcohols
1.7 Industrial and agricultural applications of organic compounds
– Unit Summary
– Review Exercise
1.1 INTRODUCTION
Competencies
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• narrate the historical development of organic compounds;
• define the term functional group;
• classify organic compounds based on their functional groups.
Historical Notes
Friedrich Wöhler
In 1828 German chemist, Friedrich Wöhler converted
ammonium cyanate, an inorganic compound, into the organic
substance urea. Wöhler’s discovery revolutionized the study of
chemistry by redefining the manner in which chemists
distinguished between inorganic and organic compounds. He is
also credited for his work in isolating the elements aluminium
Friedrich Wöhler
and beryllium.
Activity 1.1
1.Do you agree with the notion that says: “carbon compounds can be synthesized only by
animals and plants”?
2. Draw diagrams to show how carbon atoms can link to one another in different ways to
form a variety of compounds by considering only four carbon atoms.
Discuss with your group and present it to the class.
2
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
History of Organic Chemistry
Before the beginning of the nineteenth century, chemists classified compounds into two
classes; organic and inorganic. Those derived from living things (plants and animals) were
classified as organic compounds, while those that came from mineral constituents of the
earth or were found with non-living things are classified as inorganic compounds.
What was the basis of this classification? Early chemists believed that organic compounds
differed from inorganic compounds because living things had a special ‘life force’ within
them, which was invisible and hard to detect. According to the theory of ‘life force’, the
only source of organic compounds was nature itself (plants and animals). It was thought
impossible to synthesize them in the laboratory. This was because man could not add or
create the ‘life force’ within them.
The belief in the ‘life force’ theory continued until Friedrich Wöhler synthesized urea for
the first time in 1828. In attempting to prepare ammonium cyanate, NH CNO, from the
4
reaction of silver cyanate, AgCNO, and ammonium chloride, NH Cl, he accidentally
4
and surprisingly obtained urea, (NH ) CO:
2 2
AgCNO(aq) + NH Cl(aq) Æ AgCl(s) + NH CNO(aq)
4 4
Urea was the first organic compound synthesized in the laboratory. The synthesis of
urea by Friedrich Wöhler and subsequent synthesis of other organic compounds marked
the downfall of the ‘life force’ theory.
How do you explain organic compounds at present and define organic chemistry?
The common feature of organic compounds is that they all contain the element carbon. Organic
compounds are the compounds of carbon found in and derived from plants and animals.
They also include those substances synthesized in laboratories except the oxides of carbon,
carbonates, hydrogen carbonates, cyanides and cyanates.
Besides carbon, these compounds contain a few other elements such as hydrogen, oxygen,
nitrogen, sulphur, halogens and phosphorus. The branch of chemistry that studies carbon
compounds is called organic chemistry. This branch of chemistry was developed, starting
from the theory of ‘life force’ to the era in which synthetic organic compounds are used in
our daily lives. The number of inorganic compounds discovered and prepared may be in the
region of some hundred thousand. At present, millions of organic compounds have been
discovered, synthesized, and used.
3
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
The main reason for the presence of millions of carbon compounds is the unique property
of carbon called catenation. Catenation is the ability of atoms of the same element to join
together forming short or long chains and rings. A few other elements like sulphur, silicon
and boron show this behaviour, but to a much lesser extent.
Classification of Organic Compounds
Activity 1.2
CH CH CHO and CHCOCH have the same chemical formula C H O. Write their detailed
3 2 3 3 3 6
structures and observe their difference? Why do these compounds have different
properties? Discuss with your group and present it to the class.
Organic compounds are generally classified based on their functional group.
What are functional groups and what groups of organic compounds are known
on the basis of this classification?
The functional group is the part of a molecule or a compound that determines the chemical
properties of that molecule or compound. This group also determines some of the physical
properties of a compound. Based on the functional groups they possess, the most common
classification of organic compounds including alkanes, alkenes, alkynes, aromatics, alcohols,
aldehydes, ketones, carboxylic acids and esters. The common functional groups of some
organic compounds are given in Table 1.1.
Table 1.1 Some classes of organic compounds, their functional groups, general structural
formula with typical examples (R = alkyl or H).
Organic Functional General
Example
Compound Group Structure
Alkane C C R — CH — CH H C — CH — CH
2 3 3 2 3
Propane
(single bond)
C C H C CH
Alkene R — CH CH 2 2
2 Ethene
(double bond)
C C H — C C — H
Alkyne R — C C—R
(triple bond) Ethyne
Continued next page
4
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
Organic Functional General
Example
Compound Group Structure
H C
3
Aromatic R
(benzenering) Toluene
CH CH OH
Alcohols —OH R—OH 3 2
Ethanol
—CHOgroup R—CHO CH —CHO
3
O
O O
Aldehydes C
C C
H C H
H R H 3
Ethanal
—CO —group CH COCH
3 3
O O
Ketone
C C
H C CH
3 3
Propanone
—COOHgroup R—COOH O
Carboxylic O O
Acid H C C OH
3
C OH R C OH Ethanoicacid
O
—COORgroup
O
Ester
H C—C—O CH CH
3 2 3
C O R O Ethylethanoate
Exercise 1.1
1. Which compounds were classified as organic compounds, according to the early
chemists?
2. According to the belief of early chemists, which class of compounds has a special
‘life force’ within them?
3. What are the differences between organic and inorganic compounds, according to
early chemists?
4. What is the main concept of the theory of ‘life force’?
5
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
5. Who disproved the ‘life force’ theory; and how?
6. What was the first organic compound synthesized in the laboratory?
7. Identify the functional groups in each of the following compounds?
a CH CH COCH CH CH c CH CH CH COOH
3 2 2 2 3 3 2 2
b CH CH COOCH CH d CH CH CH CH OH
3 2 2 3 3 2 2 2
8. Define the following terms.
a Organic chemistry b Catenation c Functional group
9. Why is it necessary to assign organic chemistry exclusively to the study of carbon
compounds?
10. What is the basis for the classification of organic compounds?
11. Write the general structures of:
a alkanes b alkenes c alkynes
d aromatics e alcohols
1.2 SATURATED HYDROCARBONS
Competencies
At the end of this topic, you will be able to:
• define hydrocarbons;
• define saturated hydrocarbons;
• define homologous series;
• write the general formula of alkanes;
• write the first ten members of alkanes;
• write the molecular formulas of alkanes from the given number of carbon atoms;
• explain the physical properties of alkanes;
• write the structural formulas of the first ten alkanes;
• apply IUPAC rules to name straight and branched chain alkanes;
• define isomerism as the way compounds having the same formula differ in the way
their atoms are arranged;
• define structural isomerism;
• write possible structural isomers for C H , C H and C H ;
4 10 5 12 6 14
• describe the general method for the preparation of alkanes in the laboratory;
6
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
• prepare methane in a laboratory by the decarboxylation method;
• carry out a project to produce biogas from cow dung; and
• explain the chemical properties of alkanes.
Activity 1.3
1. Draw the Lewis structure of carbon (Z = 6) and hydrogen (Z = 1) atoms. How many
valence electrons are there in an atom of carbon and hydrogen respectively?
2. Consider three organic compounds containing two carbon atoms each. The two carbon
atoms contributed one electron each in the first, two electrons each in the second and
three electrons each in the third for the bond they form between them by sharing the
electrons. The remaining valence electrons of each carbon atom in all the three
compounds were used to form bonds with hydrogen atoms.
a What type of covalent bond do the two-carbon atoms form between themselves
in the first, the second and the third compound, respectively?
b How many hydrogen atoms can form bonds with each carbon atom in the first, the
second and the third compound, respectively?
c Draw line or dot formula to show the formation of the bonds between the carbon
atoms and carbon and the hydrogen atoms in the first, the second and the third
compound, respectively.
d If the three compounds mentioned above are hydrocarbons, define
hydrocarbons?
f If the first compound is a saturated hydrocarbon, the second and the third are
unsaturated, what is the basis for such a classification of hydrocarbons?
Discuss with your group and present it to the class.
What are hydrocarbons and on what basis do we categorize them?
Hydrocarbons are organic compounds composed of the elements carbon and hydrogen
only. Hydrocarbons are subdivided into two groups, based on the type of bonding between
carbon atoms, as saturated hydrocarbons and unsaturated hydrocarbons.
Saturated Hydrocarbons are those compounds of carbon and hydrogen containing only
carbon-carbon single bonds. Methane, ethane, and propane are typical examples of this
group. Unsaturated Hydrocarbons are those compounds of carbon and hydrogen possessing
one or more multiple bonds (double or triple bonds) between carbon atoms. Alkenes,
alkynes and aromatic hydrocarbons are examples of unsaturated hydrocarbons.
A formula that shows all the bonds and atoms is called a detailed structure. The shorter
structure is called condensed structure.
7
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Example
1.2.1 Alkanes or Paraffins
Activity 1.4
Draw a graph using the information in Table 1.2 by plotting the number of carbon atoms
of each compound on one axis, and hydrogen atoms on the other. Predict the formulas of
the saturated hydrocarbons containing 8, 9 and 10 carbon atoms and complete Table 1.2.
Discuss with your group and present it to the class.
Alkanes are saturated hydrocarbons. They contain chains of carbon atoms linked by single
bonds only. Every carbon atom in the molecule forms four single covalent bonds with other
atoms. Alkanes have the general formula CH , where, n = 1, 2, 3 . . . Using this general
n 2n+2
formula, we can write the molecular formula of any alkane containing a specific number of
carbon atoms. For example, the chemical formulas of alkanes containing one, two and three
carbon atoms are C H = CH , C H =C H , and C H =C H , respectively.
1 2×1+2 4 2 2×2 + 2 2 6 3 2×3 + 2 3 8
When we compare the formulas of CH and C H or C H and C H , they differ by one
4 2 6 2 6 3 8
carbon and two hydrogen atoms or – CH – group called the methylene group. A group of
2
compounds in which each member of the group differs from the next member by a –CH ,
2
is called a homologous series. Compounds in the same homologous series can be represented
by the same general formula. The individual members of the group are called homologues.
Alkanes contain carbon-carbon single bonds (— C — C —) as their functional group.
8
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
The first ten members of the homologous series of straight-chain alkanes are
given in Table 1.2.
Table 1.2 Homologous series and physical constants of the first ten
straight chain alkanes
Name Formula Physical M.P B.P Density No. of
state (at (°C) (°C) at 20°C isomers
room temp.)
Methane CH gas –183 –162 0.717 g/L 1
4
Ethane C H gas –172 –89 1.35 g/L 1
2 6
Propane C H gas –187 –42 2.02 g/L 1
3 8
n-Butane C H gas –135 –0.5 2.48 g/L 2
4 10
n-Pentane C H liquid –130 36 0.63 g/mL 3
5 12
n-Hexane C H liquid –94 68 0.66 g/mL 5
6 14
n-Heptane C H liquid –91 98 0.68 g/mL 9
7 16
n-Octane ? liquid –57 126 0.70 g/mL 18
n-Nonane ? liquid –54 151 0.71 g/mL 35
n-Decane ? liquid –30 174 0.73 g/mL 75
Activity 1.5
1. What happens to the percentage by mass of hydrogen and the physical state of alkanes
as the number of carbon atoms increase?
2. Categorize the petroleum related products you encounter everyday as solids, liquids
and gases? Discuss in your group and present it to the class.
1.2.2 Physical Properties of Alkanes
Do you know which alkanes exist in the liquid, solid or gaseous state at room temperature?
What types of intermolecular forces of attraction exist between the molecules of alkanes?
Explain why the boiling points and melting points of alkanes increase with increasing
number of carbon atoms.
At room temperature, the first four alkanes, methane to butane, are gases; whereas pentane
(C H ) to heptadecane (C H ) are liquids, and the alkanes containing eighteen and
5 12 17 36
more carbon atoms are solids.
Alkanes are nonpolar organic compounds. Weak intermolecular forces called Van der
Waal’s forces hold their molecules together. The strength of these forces increases with the
9
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
increasing surface area (molecular mass) of the alkanes. Since alkanes are non-polar,
they are almost insoluble in polar solvents like water, but, they are soluble in non-polar
solvents like benzene, toluene, ether and carbon tetrachloride.
The density, melting point, and boiling point of the homologous series of alkanes increase
as the carbon number increases. For alkanes of the same carbon number, branched-chain
isomers have lower boiling points than the straight-chain (normal) alkanes. The reason is,
as branching increases, there is a decrease in surface area and the strength of the
intermolecular force, which, in turn, results in a decrease in boiling point; e.g., the boiling
points of n-pentane, iso-pentane and neo-pentane are 36°C, 28°C and 9.5°C, respectively.
Alkanes containing all the carbon atoms in one continuous chain are called normal or
straight-chain alkanes and those containing chains with branches are known as branched-
chain alkanes.
Example
In alkanes (branched or straight-chain) each carbon atom is tetrahedrally bonded to
four atoms with a bond angle of 109.5°.
a Ball and Stick Model of Methane b Tetrahedral structure of methane
Figure 1.1 Structure of methane.
In alkanes containing a continuous chain of carbon atoms, the carbon atoms are not linked
in straight line but in zigzag chains to keep the tetrahedral distribution of atoms.
10
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
Zigzag chain in butane Ball and stick model of butane
Figure 1.2 Zigzag chain and ball and stick model of butane.
Activity 1.6
1. Why rules are important for naming organic compounds? Discuss in your group some
of the rules you know for naming organic compounds and present it to your class.
2. In mathematics, the names pentagon, hexagon, heptagon and octagon are used to
describe polygons. What does each of the prefixes- pent, -hex, -hept and -oct indicate?
What is the significance of these prefixes in chemistry? Discuss in groups and present
it to the class.
1.2.3 Nomenclature (naming) of Alkanes
Organic chemistry uses a simplified and systematic way of naming organic compounds. The
names of alkanes and most of the organic compounds are derived from:
i) a prefix- indicating the number of carbon atoms (listed in Table 1.3)and
ii)a -suffix indicating the type of the functional group present in the molecule.
The following table introduces the prefixes that are used to indicate the presence of one to
ten carbon atoms in the longest continuous carbon chain.
Table 1.3 Prefixes commonly used to indicate one to ten carbon atoms.
Prefix Number of carbon atoms Prefix Number of carbon atoms
Meth- One Hex- Six
Eth- Two Hept- Seven
Prop- Three Oct- Eight
But- Four Non- Nine
Pent- Five Dec- Ten
From Table 1.2, you can note that the names of all alkanes contain the suffix ‘-ane’, which
indicates that their functional group is a carbon — carbon single bond. Thus, to name an
11
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
alkane, you should use the appropriate prefix that indicates the number of carbon atoms and
the suffix ‘-ane’. For example, to name the alkane CH , use the prefix ‘Hex’ that indicate
6 14
the presence of six carbon atoms and add the suffix ‘-ane’ so that the name becomes hexane.
Activity 1.7
Practice naming alkanes using first four prefixes mentioned in Table 1.3. In naming alkanes,
why are number of carbon atoms used as prefixes? Discuss in groups.
Common Names of Alkanes
Lower members of the alkane homologous series have common names. The prefixes used
in the common names are n- (normal), ‘iso-’ and ‘neo-’. The prefix n- is used when all the
carbon atoms form a continuous chain.
Example
Iso- is used when all of the carbon atoms form a continuous chain, except for the one
next to the last carbon.
Example
Neo- is used when the central carbon is bonded to four other carbon atoms.
Example
12
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
IUPAC System of Nomenclature of Alkanes
It is difficult to have common names for the more branched and complex alkanes. In
naming such alkanes, the more systematic, convenient and appropriate one is the
International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) system. In order to apply
this system, it is very important to know the rules to be followed, what alkyl radicals are,
and how they are named.
Alkyl radicals are obtained by removing one hydrogen atom from the corresponding
alkanes. Their general formula is C H , where n = 1, 2, 3 . . . . The names of alkyl
n 2n+1
radicals are derived from the names of the corresponding parent alkanes by changing the
suffix -ane to -yl.
Table 1.4 Formulas, names and structures of some alkyl groups.
Condensed
Formulaof Formulaof Commonname
structureofalkyl
alkane alkylradical ofalkylradical
radical
CH CH – CH – Methyl
4 3 3
C H C H – CH CH – Ethyl
2 6 2 5 3 2
C H C H – CH CH CH – n-Propyl
3 8 3 7 3 2 2
CH —CH — Isopropyl
3
CH
3
C H C H – CH CH CH CH – n-Butyl
4 10 4 9 3 2 2 2
CH CH —CH — Isobutyl
3 2
CH
3
CH
3
sec-Butyl
H C—CH — C—
3 2 (s-Butyl)
H
CH
3
tert-Butyl
H C—C —
3 (t-Butyl)
CH
3
The system of naming organic compounds is based on the recommendations of IUPAC.
The following are the rules established by IUPAC to name branched-chain hydrocarbons.
13
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
1. Select the longest continuous chain of carbon atoms in the molecule as the parent
structure. The name of the straight-chain alkane possessing the same number of
carbon atoms is used as the name of this longest chain. The groups attached to the
parent structure are called side chains or substituents.
Example 1
There are seven carbon atoms in the longest chain (the parent structure). Therefore, it
gets the name “heptane”.
2. Assign numbers to the carbon atoms of the longest chain starting from one end to
the other so that the carbon atoms to which side chains are attached get the lowest
possible number.
To check which direction of numbering is correct; add the locants (numbers assigned
to the carbon atoms to which substituents are attached).
The sum of locants in the first case is 3 + 4 = 7 and in the second case, 4 + 5 = 9.
So numbering should be done from left to right in this case. Thus, the first option is
correct.
3. Indicate the position of the side chain by using the number assigned to the carbon
atom to which it is attached. If the same substituents appear more than once, use the
14
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
prefix di-, tri-, tetra- etc. before the name of the substituent to show two, three,
four, etc. substituents, respectively.
4. Numbers are separated from each other by commas while they are separated from
substituent names by hyphens.
5. Arrange the names of the side chains before the parent name in alphabetical order.
The complete name of the alkane given in the above example will then be 4-ethyl-3-
methylheptane (substituents in alphabetical order).
Example 2
CH Cl CH
3 3
1 2 3 4
H C —C —CH — C —CH
3 3
5 6
CH H C—CH
3 2 3
The longest chain has six carbon atoms and the parent name is hexane. There are two
methyl groups at carbon-2 and another two methyl groups on carbon-4 and one chlorine
atom at carbon-3. Therefore, the correct name of the compound is 3-chloro-2,2,4,4-
tetramethylhexane.
Example 3
The longest chain contains eight carbon atoms. Hence, the parent name of the given molecule
is octane. There are three methyl groups attached to carbon number 3, 4 and 6; one
bromine atom is attached to carbon-4 and two chlorine atoms are attached to carbon-3
and carbon-5. Thus, the correct name of the compound is 4-bromo-3,5-dichloro-3,4,6-
trimethyloctane.
15
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Note:
When F, Cl, Br and I appear as substituents, change the names fluorine, chlorine, bromine
and iodine to fluoro, chloro, bromo and iodo, respectively.
Example 4
CH CH
3 3
H C
1 —2
C —
3
CH —
4
CH —
5 CH—6
CH
—7
CH
3 2 3
CH F CH
3 3
There are seven carbon atoms in the parent structure, so it takes the name heptane. There
are two methyl groups at carbon-2 and two methyl groups at carbon-4 and carbon-5 and
one fluorine at carbon-3. So the name of the compound is 3-fluoro-2,2,4,5-tetramethyl
heptane.
Activity 1.8
Is there any scientific background for the IUPAC rules or is it just a convention? Why IUPAC
recommendations are followed throughout the world. Present your opinion to the class.
Exercise 1.2
1. Write any three possible structures for octane, CH , and give their IUPAC names.
8 18
2. Give the IUPAC name of:
3. Write the structure of 2,2-dimethyl butane.
4. Write the structure of 2,3-dimethylpentane.
5. When F, Cl, Br and I appear as substituents in an organic compound, how are they
named?
16
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
1.2.4 Isomerism
Activity 1.9
1. Write the molecular formula of the following compounds?
Do they have the same or different molecular formula?
2. Do they have the same or different molecular formula? Do they have the same or
different physical and chemical properties? Why? What do we call compounds of this
type? Discuss the results in your group and present it to the class.
There is only one possible structure for each of the first three alkanes, namely, methane
(CH ), ethane (C H ) and propane (C H ). Those alkanes containing four or more carbon
4 2 6 3 8
atoms have more than one structure. The existence of two or more chemical compounds
with the same molecular formula but different structures is called isomerism.
The compounds that have the same molecular formula but different structures are
called isomers. Alkanes exhibit a type of structural isomerism called chain or skeletal
isomerism. These structures differ in the arrangement of the carbon atoms and hydrogen
atoms. To understand what isomers are, consider the isomers of butane (C H ) and
4 10
pentane (C H ).
5 12
1. Isomers of butane (C H )
4 10
Butane has two isomers:
2. Isomers of pentane (C H )
5 12
Pentane has three isomers.
17
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Exercise 1.3
1. Which of the following statements are true about isomers:
a They have the same molecular formula.
b They are different compounds.
c They have different boiling and melting points.
d They have similar chemical properties.
2. Draw all the possible structural isomers for hexane and name them.
1.2.5 Preparation of Alkanes
Alkanes are the major constituents of petroleum and natural gas. They are mainly obtained
by fractional distillation of petroleum. Alkanes can also be prepared in the laboratory.
Some methods of their preparation are as follows:
1. Hydrogenation of alkenes with a metal catalyst.
General Reaction:
Example
2. Wûrtz Synthesis (reaction). This method involves the reaction of a halogenated
alkane with sodium and the reaction is somewhat exothermic.
18
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
General Reaction:
Example
2CH I + 2Na CH — CH + 2NaI
3 3 3
Methyliodide Ethane Sodium iodide
This reaction is named as Wûrtz reaction after the French chemist Charles-Adolphe
Wûrtz (1817–1884).
3. Heating sodium salt of an organic acid with soda lime (mixture of sodium hydroxide
and calcium oxide); the reaction brings about the removal of the carboxylate group
from the sodium salt of the carboxylic acid. This type of reaction is called decarboxylation.
General Reaction:
Example
Methane
Methane is the main constituent (about 90%) of natural gas. It is obtained during fractional
distillation of petroleum. Methane is also formed by the decay and decomposition of animal
and plant remains in swampy or marshy lands.
19
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Activity 1.10
Discuss the following points in groups, and present your ideas to the class.
1. Have you ever walked near a marshy or swampy area? Which characteristic smell do
you observe?
2. In most parts of Ethiopia, the walls of houses are constructed from wood and mud. The
mud for this purpose is usually prepared by mixing soil, water and hay or straw. After
two or three weeks of decay and decomposition, an unusual smell is perceived. What
do you think is the cause of this?
3. If Ethiopia introduces the technology of producing biogas to its residents, what benefits
will be obtained by the country? What materials can be used to generate biogas?
Which compound is the main constituent of biogas?
Experiment 1.1
Laboratory Preparation of Methane
Objective: To prepare methane and study its properties.
Materials required: Sodium acetate (CH COONa) and soda lime (CaO, NaOH),
3
test tubes, delivery tube, stopper, gas jar and gas jar lid, pneumatic trough,
stand, clamp, beehive shelf, Bunsen burner and balance.
Procedure:
Arrange the assembly as shown in Figure 1.3. Mix thoroughly 5 g powdered sodium
acetate with 10 g of soda lime. Place the mixture in the test tube and heat it. Collect the
gas by the downward displacement of water. Collect several jars of the gas.
Rubber
Deliverytube
stopper Gasjar
Sodiumacetate
+
Methane
Sodalime Boilingtube
Pneumatic
trough
Beehive
Water
Bunsen shelf
burner
Figure 1.3 Preparation of methane.
20
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
Carry out the following activities with the collected gas:
Insert a burning splint into the jar full of the gas. Observe what happens in the jar.
Add Ca(OH) solution to the jar and observe. Add a few drops of bromine water
2
to any one of the gas jars filled with methane. Cover the gas jar and shake well.
Observations and analysis:
a What is the colour of the gas? Is it soluble in water?
b Is the gas combustible? Write a balanced equation for the change.
c What change did you observe upon addition of Ca(OH) ?
2
d Is there any change when bromine water is added?
Write a laboratory report on your observation and submit to your teacher.
Methane can be produced in a biogas plant. The biogas plant generates biogas, mainly
consisting of methane by anaerobic fermentation of organic materials such as human excreta,
animal dung and agricultural residue.
The conversion of organic materials into biogas involves a sequence of reactions and is
graphically depicted in Figure 1.4.
Figure 1.4 Reactions in the production of biogas.
The materials that can be used to produce biogas include dung from cattle, pigs, chickens,
chopped green plants and plant wastes. The advantages of biogas technology include
saving on fuel such as kerosene, wood and charcoal, and decrease in local deforestation.The
residue obtained after preparing the biogas can be used as fertilizer.
21
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Experiment 1.2
Production of Methane from Cow Dung
Objective: To prepare biogas from locally available materials.
Materials required: Conical flask, cow dung, water, delivery tube with tap and stopper
with one hole.
Procedure:
1. Mix some cow dung with water and pour it in a conical flask.
2. Fit the conical flask with a stopper in which a delivery tube with a tap is inserted.
3. Cover the conical flask with a cotton wool and place it near a window and leave it
there for 3 to 4 days.
4. Check the formation of methane after 4 days. (Bring a lighted splint closer to the outlet
of the delivery tube and open the tap). See what happens.
Cottonwool
Cowdung+water
Figure 1.5 Preparation of methane gas from cow dung.
Observations and analysis:
a What is the importance of covering the conical flask with a cotton wool and placing
it near the window?
b What is your observation when you bring a burning splint close to the outlet of the
tube?
c What change do you think has occurred in the conical flask that leads to the formation
of methane?
Write a laboratory report in group and present to the class.
PROJECT 1.1
Organize a trip to visit a biogas plant in your Kebele or neighbouring Kebeles if any
and write a report on how it operates. Construct a small scale biogas plant in groups.
22
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
1.2.6 Chemical Properties of Alkanes
Activity 1.11
Discuss the following points in groups and present your opinions to the class.
1. Which chemical property of alkanes is responsible for generating electricity in diesel
power stations or for moving motor vehicles? Name the major product formed when
the fuel has been consumed in the diesel power station.
2. The reaction of methane with oxygen produces two different oxides of carbon, CO
2
and CO.
1 What condition determines whether the product of the methane reaction is CO or CO?
2
b If a domestic heating system is fuelled by methane, what difference does it make
if the combustion produces CO or CO?
2
Alkanes are generally not considered to be very reactive organic compounds. The name
paraffin for alkanes arose from two Latin words ‘parum’ meaning little and ‘affinis’ means
affinity. Thus, paraffin means little affinity. This name was suggested because alkanes are
inert towards many reagents like acids, bases, oxidizing and reducing agents. However,
they undergo several reactions under suitable conditions.
The major reactions of alkanes are the following:
1. Combustion Reactions: If alkanes are burned with limited supply of oxygen,
they will form water and carbon monoxide and will liberate lesser amounts of heat
energy. Alkanes burn in excess oxygen to form carbon dioxide and water, liberating
a greater amounts of heat. The general equation for the reaction is:
Ê3n+1ˆ
C H + O Æ nCO + (n + 1) H O + heat
n 2n+2 Ë 2 ¯ 2 2 2
where n is the number of carbon atoms in the alkane molecule.
Example
C H + 5O Æ 3CO + 4H O + 2299 kJ
3 8 2 2 2
The heat energy liberated is used to generate electricity, to move motor vehicles or
to cook our food.
23
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Activity 1.12
1. Write the general equation for the combustion of alkanes in a limited supply of oxygen
that forms carbon monoxide, water and energy.
2. Why is a petroleum refinery is built in the open air? Present your opinion to the class.
2. Substitution Reaction: This is a reaction that involves the replacement of one
atom or a group of atoms by another atom or group of atoms. Halogenation of
alkanes is a very good example of substitution reaction. This reaction involves
reacting alkanes with chlorine and bromine. The reaction of chlorine and bromine
with alkanes proceeds in presence of heat or sunlight. This type of reaction is
called photochemical reaction. The reaction of alkanes with chlorine and bromine
proceeds in a sequence of steps. For example, let us consider the photochemical
reaction of methane with chlorine (chlorination):
i) Chain Initiating Step: This step involves absorption of energy to generate
reactive particles known as free radicals. A free radical is an atom or a
group of atoms possessing unpaired electron. A free radical is electrically neutral.
A chlorine molecule absorbs light and decomposes into two chlorine atoms:
ii) Chain Propagating Step: This is a step which consumes a reactive particle (free
radical) produced in the chain initiation step and generates another free radical.
iii)Chain Terminating Step: In the chain terminating step reactive particles (free
radicals) are consumed but not generated.
In this step, ‘side reactions’ that do not lead to the formation of the desired products
often take place.
Examples
Such a detailed step by step description of a chemical reaction is called a reaction
mechanism.
24
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
Chlorination of methane may produce different products depending on the relative
amounts of methane and chlorine.
CH (g) + Cl (g) Æ CH Cl (g) + HCl (g)
4 2 3
Methyl chloride
CH Cl (g) + Cl (g) Æ CH Cl (g) + HCl (g)
3 2 2 2
Methylene chloride (dichloromethane)
CH Cl (g) + Cl (g) Æ CHCl (g) + HCl
2 2 2 3
Chloroform (trichloromethane)
CHCl (g) + Cl (g) Æ CCl (g) + HCl (g)
3 2 4
Carbontetrachloride (tetrachloromethane)
The chlorination of methane is an example of a chain reaction that involves a series of
steps.
Activity 1.13
Alkanes do not react with chlorine and bromine in the dark but they do so in the
presence of sunlight. Discuss the role of sunlight for the reaction in your group and
present to the class.
3. Elimination reaction: This type of reaction involves the removal of smaller molecules
from a compound and leads to the formation of a compound containing a multiple
bond (unsaturated compound). It can also involve the removal of hydrogen atoms
from adjacent carbon atoms at relatively high temperatures.
Cycloalkanes
Cycloalkanes are saturated hydrocarbons in which the carbon atoms are linked in such a
manner as to form closed chains or ring structures. They are represented by the general
formula, C H , where n ≥ 3. Cycloalkanes are isomeric with open-chain alkenes. Their
n 2n
names are obtained by prefixing “cyclo” to the name of an alkane containing the same
number of carbon atoms. The following structures represent some examples of cycloalkanes.
25
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Uses of Alkanes
Alkanes are primarily used as fuels. They are also used as solvents, raw materials for
making alkenes, alcohols, soaps, detergents and plastics.
Exercise 1.4
1. Write the molecular formulas of alkanes containing the following number of carbon
atoms.
a 5 b 8 c 15
2. Define the terms
a Homologous series d Substitution reaction
b Alkyl radical e Combustion reaction
c Isomerism f Functional groups
3. Write the balanced equation for the complete combustion of octane.
4. How many chain isomers are there for an alkane that contains 7 carbon atoms?
5. Give IUPAC names to each of the following.
26
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
6. Write the structural formulas of the following compounds.
a 2,3-dimethylbutane
b 2-bromo-3,3,4,4-tetramethylhexane.
c 2-chloro-4-ethyl-2,3-dimethylhexane.
7. Complete and balance the following chemical reaction:
Complete
C H + O ææææææÆ
5 12 2 Combustion
1.3 UNSATURATED HYDROCARBONS
Competencies
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
27
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
• define unsaturated hydrocarbons;
• define alkenes;
• write the general formula of alkenes;
• write the molecular formula for the first nine members in the homologous series of
alkenes;
• define alkynes;
• write the general formula of alkynes;
• write the molecular formula for the first nine members in the homologous series of
alkynes;
• write the molecular formulas of alkenes and alkynes from the given number of carbon
atoms;
• describe the physical properties of alkenes and alkynes;
• apply IUPAC rules to name straight-and branched-chain alkenes and alkynes;
• write the structural formulas of alkenes and alkynes up to ten carbon atoms;
• write the possible structural isomers for C H and C H ;
4 8 5 10
• define geometric (cis-trans) isomerism;
• give examples of molecules that show geometric isomerism;
• construct models that show cis-trans isomerism;
• describe the general methods for the preparation of alkenes in a laboratory;
• prepare ethylene in the laboratory by the dehydration of ethanol;
• describe the general method for preparation of alkynes in a laboratory;
• prepare acetylene in the laboratory by the reaction of CaC with water;
2
• test for unsaturation of ethylene and ethyne;
• explain chemical properties of alkenes;
• explain chemical properties of alkynes;
• explain the uses of ethylene and acetylene;
• compare and contrast the properties of ethane, ethene and ethyne.
28
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
Unsaturated hydrocarbons are those compounds of carbon and hydrogen containing either
double or triple bonds. These groups of hydrocarbons include alkenes and alkynes.
1.3.1 Alkenes or Olefins
Activity 1.14
1. The molecular formulas for the first three members of an alkene series are C H , C H
2 4 3 6
and CH . Derive the general formula for alkenes and compare it with that of alkanes. Is
4 8
there a difference in the number of hydrogen atoms?
2. By referring to Table 1.5, what relationship do you observe between the number of
carbon atoms and melting point, boiling point and density?
Discuss with your group and present it to the class.
Alkenes are unsaturated hydrocarbons containing a carbon-carbon double bond as their
functional group:
They are also known as olefins. They form a homologous series represented by the general
formula C H , where n = 2, 3, 4….
n 2n
Table 1.5 The homologous series of alkenes and their physical constants.
Molecular Condensed IUPAC Melting Boiling Density
formula structure name point (°C) point (°C)
C H CH = CH Ethene –169 –102 0.61 g/L
2 4 2 2
C H CH = CH – CH Propene –185 –48 0.61 g/L
3 6 2 3
C H CH = CH – CH – CH 1-butene –130 –6.5 0.63 g/L
4 8 2 2 3
C H CH = CH – (CH ) – CH 1-pentene –130.5 30 0.64 g/L
5 10 2 2 2 3
C H CH = CH – (CH ) – CH 1-hexene –138 63 0.67 g/L
6 12 2 2 3 3
C H CH = CH – (CH ) – CH 1-heptene –119 93 0.69 g/L
7 14 2 2 4 3
C H CH = CH – (CH ) – CH 1-octene –104 122 0.72 g/L
8 16 2 2 5 3
C H CH = CH – (CH ) – CH 1-nonene –95 146 0.73 g/L
9 18 2 2 6 3
C H CH = CH – (CH ) – CH 1-decene –87 171 0.74 g/L
10 20 2 2 7 3
29
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Physical Properties of Alkenes
Activity 1.15
1. Why some alkenes exist in gaseous and liquid states at room temperature?
2. The melting points, boiling points and densities of alkenes increase with increasing
number of carbon atoms; why?
3. Are alkenes coloured compounds? Do they have smell?
Discuss with your group and present it to the class.
At room temperature, alkenes containing two to four carbon atoms are gases. Those
containing five to seventeen carbon atoms are liquids, and those containing eighteen or
more carbon atoms are solids.
Alkenes are non-polar. Therefore, their molecules are held together by weak inter-molecular
forces. Since they are non-polar, they are almost insoluble in polar solvents like water, but
soluble in non-polar solvents like ether, benzene, toluene and carbon tetrachloride.
Nomenclature of Alkenes
Alkenes can have common names as well as IUPAC names. The common names of alkenes
are obtained by using the prefixes in Table 1.3 and adding the suffix ‘-ylene’:
Table 1.6 Common names of few alkenes.
Formula of Condensed Common
Alkene Structure Name
C H CH = CH Ethylene
2 4 2 2
C H CH = CH – CH Propylene
3 6 2 3
C H CH = CH –CH –CH Butylene
4 8 2 2 3
. . .
. . .
. . .
IUPAC System
Activity 1.16
1. What difference do you expect in the IUPAC names of alkanes and alkenes?
2. If you are asked to name the following hydrocarbons:
30
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
i)
ii)
a How many carbon atoms are there in the longest chain of each hydrocarbon?
b From which end do you start numbering the carbon atoms of the longest chain of
the hydrocarbon shown in structure i?
c From which end do you start numbering the carbon atoms of the longest chain of
the hydrocarbon shown in structure ii?
d Is there any difference in how you assign number to the carbon atoms of the
longest chain represented by structures i and ii? If so, why?
e Which name do you think is more appropriate for the longest chain of carbon
atoms in structure ii? 5-hexene or 1-hexene or hexane? Discuss these questions in
your group and present to the class.
The IUPAC names of alkenes are obtained by using the prefixes listed in Table 1.3 to
indicate the number of carbon atoms in the molecule and adding the suffix ‘-ene’. The
suffix ‘-ene’ indicates the presence of a double bond. For example, the alkene having the
formula C H is named as octene. The prefix oct- indicates that there are eight carbon
8 16
atoms in the molecule and ‘-ene’ signifies the presence of a double bond.
In the IUPAC system of naming alkenes, the rules we follow are similar to those rules we
follow for naming alkanes with slight modifications. These are:
1. Select the longest continuous chain of carbon atoms in the molecule that includes the
double bond as a parent structure. Its name will be the same as the alkene containing
the same number of carbon atoms.
Activity 1.17
Why should the double bond(s) in alkenes be included in the longest continuous chain?
Express your opinion to the class.
31
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
2. Number the carbon atoms starting from one end to the other in such a way that the
carbon atom preceding the double bond takes the lowest possible number and
indicate the position of the double bond by this number in the name.
Example 1
Example 2
The longest chain contains 7 carbon atoms and a double bond between the 2nd
and 3rd carbon atoms. Therefore, it takes the name 2-heptene or hept-2-ene.
There are three methyl groups at carbon number 3, 4 and 5. So the complete name
of the compound is:
3, 4, 5-trimethyl-2-heptene or 3, 4, 5-trimethyl hept-2-ene
Example 3
The parent structure contains 8 carbon atoms and a double bond between 3rd and
4th carbon atoms. Thus, it is named as 3-octene or oct-3-ene. The side chains
attached are chlorine at the 6th, two methyl groups at 5th and 6th and an ethyl
group at carbon number 3. Therefore, the complete name of the compound is:
6-chloro-3-ethyl-5,6-dimethyl-3-octene, or
6-chloro-3-ethyl-5,6-dimethyloct-3-ene.
32
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
Exercise 1.5
1. Write the names of the following compounds, using IUPAC rules:
a
b
2. Write the structure of each of the following compounds:
a 3-methyl-3-heptene b 3,4-diethyl-1-hexene
Isomerism in Alkenes
Alkenes containing two and three carbon atoms have only one possible structure. Alkenes
containing four or more carbon atoms exhibit isomerism. Alkenes show the following three
types of isomerism:
1. Chain isomerism: This is due to the difference in the arrangement of the carbon
atoms in the longest continuous carbon chain.
2. Position isomerism: This is due to the difference in the position of the double bond
in the carbon chain.
Example
Consider the following compounds with the same molecular formula (C H ):
5 12
33
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Compounds (a) and (b) represent the position isomers of pentene, (c) and (d) are
position isomers of methylbutene, (a), (c) and (e) are the chain isomers, while all
these compounds are the isomers of C H .
5 12
3. Geometrical isomerism. This results from the difference in the relative spatial
arrangement of atoms or groups about the double bond. This isomerism exists because
free rotation about the double bond is not possible. To differentiate geometrical
isomers, we use the prefix ‘cis’ if two similar groups are on the same side of the
double bond and ‘trans’ when the two similar groups are on opposite sides of it;
‘cis’ means the same and ‘trans’ means across.
The geometrical isomers of 2-pentene are:
Alkenes have more isomers than the corresponding alkanes.
Exercise 1.6
Write three position isomers of hexene.
PROJECT 1.2
Prepare a model from locally available materials, to show the cis-trans isomers of
2-butene.
Preparation of Alkenes
Do you know the major source of alkenes and the process that leads to their formation?
Alkenes are mainly obtained during fractional distillation of petroleum when the process
called cracking is carried out.
In the laboratory, alkenes can be prepared by:
1. Dehydration of alcohols with concentrated sulphuric acid or alumina (Al O ).
2 3
Dehydration means removal of water.
General Reaction:
34
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
Example
2. Dehydrohalogenation of alkyl halides with a base (KOH). Dehydrohalogenation
means removal of hydrogen and a halogen atom.
Alkyl halides are compounds of an alkyl group and a halogen such as CH Cl and
3
CH – CH – Br.
3 2
General reaction:
Example
Activity 1.18
In the above two methods of preparations of alkenes, (a) what difference do you observe
between the structures of the major reactant and the product? (b) What is the type of
reaction? Share your findings with your group.
Exercise 1.7
Write the complete and balanced chemical equations for each of the following
reactions:
a
b
35
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Experiment 1.3
Laboratory preparation of Ethene
Objective: To prepare ethene and study some of its properties
Materials required: Ethanol, concentrated H SO , water, bromine water, basic
2 4
KMnO . Round-bottomed flask, stopper, delivery tube, gas jar, pneumatic
4
trough, thermometer, tripod, Bunsen burner, stand and clamp, beehive
shelf and wire gauze.
Procedure:
1. Arrange the set-up as shown in Figure 1.6
2. Take ethanol in the flask and add concentrated H SO through the thistle funnel;
2 4
heat carefully until the temperature reaches about 170°C. Discard the initially
formed gas as it might contain air; collect the ethene gas in three gas jars by
downward displacement of water; perform the following activities.
a Insert a lighted splint into the jar containing the gas and see what happens.
b Add two drops of bromine water to the other gas jar, cover the jar and shake
well.
Thistle
funnel
Ethanol Ethene
Inverted
Flask + gasjar
Stand concentrated
sulphuricacid
Burner Beehive
shelf
Water
Figure 1.6 Preparation of Ethene.
36
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
c Add a few drops of alkaline KMnO solution to another jar containing the gas
4
and observe what happens.
Observations and analysis:
a What is the colour and odour of the gas?
b What is the substance left after combustion of the gas in the jar?
c What change is observed when the gas is shaken with bromine water or alkaline
potassium permanganate? Write equations for the reactions?
d Name the dehydrating agent used in the experiment?
e Which method of preparation of an alkene is used in this experiment?
Write a laboratory report about the experiment and submit to your teacher.
Chemical properties of Alkenes
Alkenes are unsaturated hydrocarbons containing double bond (a strong bond and a weak
bond) between the two carbon atoms. They are more reactive than alkanes, because the
weak bond can be used for further reaction. They undergo several types of reactions.
1. Combustion reaction. Alkenes burn in oxygen with a luminous flame to form carbon
dioxide and water.
3n
General reaction: C H +   O Æ nCO + nH O + heat
n 2n  2  2 2 2
Example
C H (g) + 6O (g) Æ 4CO (g) + 4 H O (g) + heat
4 8 2 2 2
2. Addition reaction. Alkenes undergo mainly addition reactions. The addition occurs
at the carbon-carbon double bond.
a Addition of halogens (halogenation): When a halogen molecule, X , (where,
2
X = Cl or Br ) is added to alkenes, the product is a dihaloalkane.
2 2 2
General reaction:
37
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Example
If bromine water (bromine in CCl ) is added to alkenes, the reddish brown
4
colour of Br in CCl will disappear. This is due to the addition of bromine
2 4
(Br ) across the double bond. So, Br in CCl is used to detect unsaturation
2 2 4
(presence of multiple bond) in a compound.
b Addition of hydrogen (Hydrogenation): Addition of hydrogen molecule to
alkenes in the presence of a nickel or platinum catalyst yields alkanes.
General reaction: R –CH ==CH +H Pt→R –CH –CH
2 2 2 3
Alkene Alkane
Example
c Addition of hydrogen halides, HX (hydrohalogenation): Addition of hydrogen
halide (HCl, HBr or HI) to alkenes leads to the formation of alkyl halides. The
product of the reaction can be predicted by Markovnikov’s rule; which states
that “when an alkene reacts with a hydrogen halide to give an alkyl halide, the
hydrogen adds to the carbon atom of the double bond that has the greater number
of hydrogen atoms, and the halogen to the carbon that has the fewer number of
hydrogen atoms”.
The same is true when an alkene reacts with water in an addition reaction to form
an alcohol.
General reaction:
38
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
Example
Have you noticed the location where H and Br have formed bonds?
d Addition of water (hydration): When alkenes are hydrated in the presence of
an acid catalyst, they produce alcohols, in accordance with Markovnikov’s rule.
General reaction:
Example
e Oxidation of alkenes: Oxidation of alkenes with cold alkaline potassium
permanganate solution (KMnO ) forms diols (compounds containing two
4
hydroxyl groups).
General reaction:
Example
39
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Alkaline KMnO solution is also used as a qualitative test for the identification of
4
unsaturation in a compound. The solution is called Baeyer’s reagent. In the
presence of unsaturated hydrocarbons, the purple colour of alkaline KMnO
4
solution fades and a brown precipitate is formed.
f Polymerization (self-addition) of alkenes: Polymerization is the union of small
molecules called monomers to form a large molecule called a polymer.
Example
Uses of Ethene (Ethylene)
Ethene is used in the production of ethanol, and polymers such as polyethene,
polyvinylchloride (PVC), polystyrene and teflon. It is also used in the production
of 1,2-ethanediol, which is used as an antifreeze material; and for the preservation
as well as artificial ripening of fruits.
Activity 1.19
Take some green tomatoes in first basket and put a ripe banana in between them. In a
second basket put only green tomatoes (but not a banana). Compare the tomatoes in the
two baskets. Do the tomatoes ripen at the same rate in both baskets; if not, why? Share
your opinion with your classmates.
Cycloalkenes
Cycloalkenes are unsaturated cyclic hydrocarbons. The carbon atoms are linked in such a
manner as to form a closed chain or a ring structure. They contain a double bond between
carbon atoms and are represented by the general formula C H , where n should be
n 2n–2
equal to or greater than 3. They are isomeric with alkynes. They are named by prefixing
“cyclo” to the name of alkenes containing the same number of carbon atoms. The given
structures show some examples of cycloalkenes.
The IUPAC names for alkynes are obtained by using the prefixes listed in Table 1.3. The
suffix ‘-yne’ is added to the prefixes, which indicates the presence of a triple bond between a
pair of adjacent carbon atoms. Alkynes are named in the same way as alkenes.
40
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
Examples
Exercise 1.8
Complete each of the following equations and name the products:
a CH CH CH==CH + HCl Æ
3 2 2
b CH CH CH==CH + Br Æ
3 2 2 2
+
H
c CH CH CH==CH + H O →
3 2 2 2
Alkaline
→
d CH CH CH==CH
KMnO
3 2 2
4
1.3.2 Alkynes
Alkynes are another group of unsaturated hydrocarbons possessing a triple bond as their
functional group. The homologous series of alkynes is represented by the general formula
C H , where n ≥ 2. The first member of the group is commonly known as acetylene.
n 2n–2
The homologous series of alkynes is also called acetylene series.
Table 1.7 Homologous series of alkynes and their physical constants.
Formula of Condensed IUPAC Melting Boiling
Alkyne Structure Name Point (°C) Point (°C)
C H CH ∫ CH Ethyne – 82 –75
2 2
C H CH ∫ C – CH Propyne –101.5 –23
3 4 3
C H CH ∫ C – CH 1 - butyne –122 9
4 6 2
Continued next page
41
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Formula of Condensed IUPAC Melting Boiling
Alkyne Structure Name Point (°C) Point (°C)
C H CH ∫ C – (CH ) – CH 1 - pentyne –98 40
5 8 22 3
C H CH ∫ C – (CH ) – CH 1 - hexyne –124 72
6 10 23 3
C H CH ∫ C – (CH ) – CH 1 - heptyne –80 100
7 12 24 3
C H CH ∫ C – (CH ) – CH 1 - octyne –70 126
8 14 25 3
1- nonyne –65 151
1- decyne –36 182
Physical Properties of Alkynes
Alkynes are non-polar compounds whose molecules are held together by weak
intermolecular forces. The strength of the intermolecular forces increases with increasing
molecular size. The physical properties of alkynes are almost similar to those of alkenes.
Activity 1.20
1. By looking at the trends for alkynes in Table 1.7, write the molecular formula and and
the structures of the alkynes containing 9 and 10 carbon atoms.
2. Compare the physical state, melting points and boiling points of alkynes with alkenes
and alkanes, as the number of carbon atoms increases. Discuss with your group and
present to the class.
Nomenclature of Alkynes
Alkynes are commonly named as a derivative of acetylene.
Example
IUPAC System: The IUPAC names for alkynes are obtained by using the prefixes listed
in Table 1.3. The suffix ‘-yne’ is added to the prefixes. ‘-yne’ indicate the presence of a triple
bond between a pair of adjacent carbon atoms. Alkynes are named in the same way as
alkenes.
42
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
Example
Isomerism in Alkynes
Alkynes show both chain and position isomerism, but not geometrical isomerism.
Example
Isomers of butyne, C H
4 6
1-Butyne and 2-butyne are position isomers.
Activity 1.21
Write the structural formulas for pentane, pentene, and pentyne. Why are not these three
hydrocarbons considered as isomers? Tell your idea to the class.
Exercise 1.9
1. Write the possible isomers of 1-pentyne and identify which isomers are:
a chain isomers? b position isomers?
2. Write the structures of all isomers of 1-pentyne (C H ) and name them.
5 8
3. How many isomers are possible for 1-hexyne?
43
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Preparation of Alkynes
Alkynes can be prepared by several methods. Some of the general methods of preparation
of alkynes are:
1. Dehydrohalogenation of vicinal (adjacent) dihalides with a base NaOH or KOH or
NaNH .
2
General reaction:
Example
2. Alkylation of sodium acetylide (dicarbide) with a primary alkyl halide.
General reaction:
Example
Exercise 1.10
Write the major product of the following reactions:
44
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
Experiment 1.4
Laboratory Preparation of Ethyne
Objective: To prepare ethyne from calcium carbide and water.
Materials required: CaC , H O, bromine water, round-bottomed flask, separating
2 2
funnel, delivery tube, trough, beehive shelf and gas jar.
Procedure:
1. Arrange the set up as shown in Figure 1.7. Put a layer of sand in a conical flask and
place calcium carbide on the sand.
2. Add water drop by drop from the separating funnel onto the calcium carbide. Watch
carefully and record your observation. Touch the flask with the tip of your finger.
3. Collect several jars of the gas over water and carry out the following tests:
a Burn the gas as you did with methane and ethene.
b Add a few drops of bromine water to another jar filled with ethyne and note the
changes.
Figure 1.7 Laboratory Preparation of Ethyne.
Observations and analysis:
a What do you feel when you touch the flask? Is the reaction exothermic or
endothermic?
b How do you compare the colour of the flame produced with that of methane and
ethene?
Write a complete laboratory report and submit to your teacher.
45
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Chemical Properties of Alkynes
Alkynes are more reactive than alkanes and alkenes. Why?
Alkynes are more unsaturated than alkanes and alkenes due to the presence of a carbon-
carbon triple bond. They can undergo combustion and addition reactions.
Some of the common reactions of alkynes are:
1. Combustion reaction: Alkynes burn with a smoky luminous flame, forming CO and
2
water. Smoky luminous flames result from the combustion of alkynes due to their high
carbon content.
3n–1
General reaction: C H + O Æ nCO + (n – 1) H O
n 2n–2 2 2 2 2
Example
C H + 4O Æ 3CO + 2H O + heat
3 4 2 2 2
2. Addtion reaction: Alkynes undergo addition reaction at the carbon-carbon triple
bond. Some of the addition reactions of alkynes are the following:
a Addition of hydrogen (hydrogenation): In the presence of nickel or
palladium catalyst, alkynes produce alkanes.
General relation:
Example
Partial hydrogenation of alkynes in the presence of Lindlar’s catalyst gives
alkenes. Lindlar’s catalyst is powdered palladium partially deactivated with lead
acetate.
46
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
b Addition of halogens: When molecule of an alkyne reacts with one and two
molecules of halogens, it gives a dihaloalkene and a tetrahaloalkane,
respectively.
General Reaction:
EEEEExxxxxaaaaammmmmpppppllllleeeee
Activity 1.22
1. Do you expect alkynes to decolorize bromine water; if so why?
2. Write the balanced chemical equation for the reaction between C H and 2Br .
2 2 2
47
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
c Addition of Hydrogen Halides: Alkynes react with hydrogen halides to
form a monohaloalkene and a dihaloalkane. The addition reaction occurs
according to Markovnikov’s rule.
General Reaction:
Example
Br
HBr HBr
CH —C CH CH —C CH CH —C— CH
3 3 2 3 3
Br Br
Propyne 2-Bromopropene 2,2-Dibromopropane
Activity 1.23
1. Is Markonikov’s rule applied in the reaction between propyne and hydrobromic acid?
How?
2. The addition reaction of alkynes proceeds in two steps. Explain what changes occur
during the first and the second steps.
3. Compare the reaction products when 1-butyne and 2-butyne react with HBr.
3. Trimerization of Acetylene: Acetylene, on prolonged heating at 600 – 700oC,
yields benzene.
1.3.3 Properties and uses of Acetylene or Ethyne
Acetylene is a colourless, sweet-smelling gas in pure form and is insoluble in water. It is
usually stored as a solution of acetone in steel cylinders. Combustion of acetylene with
oxygen produces an intensely hot flame of about 3000oC. Thus, a large quantity of acetylene
is used as a fuel in oxy-acetylene torches for cutting and welding metals. Acetylene is also
used to prepare acrylonitrile which is a starting material for producing polyacrylonitrile, a
raw material for textile fibre. It is also used for making vinyl chloride which polymerizes to
48
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
give polyvinyl chloride (PVC) commonly used for making floor tiles, electrical insulators,
shoe soles, water pipes etc. Acetylene is used to produce 1,1,2,2-tetrachloroethane that
serves as a solvent for wax, grease, rubber etc.
Table 1.8 Comparison of some properties of Ethane, Ethene and Ethyne
Property Ethane Ethene Ethyne
Nature of flame Non-luminous Luminous Smoky luminous
Effect on colour of Br in CCl No effect Decolorizes Decolorizes
2 4
Effect on colour of alkaline KMnO No effect Decolorizes Decolorizes
4
Exercise 1.11
1. What reagents can be used to test for unsaturation of hydrocarbons?
2. Name the following hydrocarbons.
3. Which of the following hydrocarbons exhibit geometrical isomerism?
a 1-butene c 1-pentene
b 2-butene d 3-hexene
4. Complete the following reactions and name the main products:
heat
a CH CH CH Cl + KOH æææÆ
3 2 2
b CH – CH = CH – CH + Cl Æ
3 3 2
49
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
c CH – CH – CH = CH + HCl Æ
3 2 2
+
H
d CH – CH = CH + H OæææÆ
3 2 2
e CaC + 2H O Æ
2 2
f CH – C ∫ CNa + CH CH Br Æ
3 3 2
Ni
g CH – C ∫ CH + 2H æææÆ
3 2 heat
h CH – CH – C ∫ CH + 2HBr Æ
3 2
i H – C ∫ C – H + Br Æ
2
j H – C ∫ C – H + 2Br Æ
2
1.4 AROMATIC HYDROCARBONS
Competencies
At the end of this section you will be able to:
• define the term aromatic hydrocarbons;
• draw the structure of benzene;
• describe the main physical properties of benzene;
• explain the chemical reactions of benzene;
• carry out test-tube reactions with Br in CCl , KMnO , concentrated H SO .
2 4 4 2 4
Activity 1.24
Discuss the following in your group and present it to the class:
1. What comes to your mind when you hear the word “benzene”?
2. What is the word “aroma” mean? Which substances have an aroma smell?
3. Are aromatic hydrocarbons unsaturated as alkenes? Why?
The term aromatic is derived from the word ‘aroma’ meaning pleasant smell, which was
originally used to describe naturally occurring compounds with pleasant smells. At present,
the term is used without its original significance. Aromatic hydrocarbons are generally
obtained from petroleum and coal tar. They are a group of hydrocarbons characterized by
the presence of a benzene ring or related structures. Some examples of aromatic
hydrocarbon structures are given below:
50
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
Figure 1.9 Structures of some Aromatic Hydrocarbons.
1.4.1 Benzene
Benzene is the simplest aromatic hydrocarbon. Its molecular formula is CH. Friedrich A.
6 6
Kekule, in 1865, suggested that the six carbon atoms of benzene are arranged in the shape
of a hexagon. He also suggested a resonance hybrid structure. He represented benzene by
the resonance structures (Figure 1.10) in which the two structures shown make equal
contribution for the resonance hybrid or actual structure.
Figure 1.10 Resonance structures of benzene.
The bonds in benzene are neither single nor double but have an intermediate character
between those of single and double bonds. All the carbon-carbon bonds in the molecule
are same in length and nature. Since structure I or II given above are not the true structures
of the benzene molecule, the benzene ring is written, in most cases, in its resonance hybrid
form as follows:
51
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
The six electrons in the hexagonal ring are delocalized.
From structures I and II in Figure 1.10, one may think that benzene has three double
bonds and has the same chemistry as that of alkenes. But, this is not true. Benzene and
other aromatic hydrocarbons are not as unsaturated as alkenes because the three double
bonds in benzene are delocalized due to resonance. They are more stable than alkenes.
They undergo substitution reactions to a far greater extent than addition reactions, which is
a different characteristic compared to alkenes.
Physical Properties of Benzene
Benzene is a flammable, colourless, and volatile liquid with a characteristic smell. It is
nonpolar and immiscible with water but miscible with non-polar solvents like ether and
carbon tetrachloride. It freezes at 5.4oC and boils at 80.4oC. It is a carcinogenic (cancer
causing) substance. Benzene is a good solvent for fats, gums, rubber etc., and is used in
the manufacture of dyes, drugs and explosives.
Chemical Properties of Benzene
Benzene and other aromatic hydrocarbons are more stable than alkenes and alkynes due to
the stability of the aromatic ring. It neither decolorizes bromine water (Br in CCl ) nor is
2 4
reactive towards cold potassium permanganate solution. However, benzene undergoes
the following reactions:
1. Combustion reaction: Benzene is highly inflammable. It burns with a smoky luminous
flame to form CO and H O.
2 2
2C H + 15O Æ 12CO + 6H O + Heat
6 6 2 2 2
2. Substitution reaction: The reactions of benzene are chiefly substitution but not
addition reactions. In this reaction, hydrogen atom from the benzene ring is replaced
by another atom or group.
a Halogenation: Benzene reacts with bromine and chlorine in the presence of
iron (III) chloride or aluminium chloride catalyst to form substitution products.
52
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
b Nitration: Concentrated nitric acid mixed with some concentrated sulphuric
acid reacts with benzene at moderate temperatures to form nitrobenzene.
c Sulphonation: Benzene reacts with concentrated sulphuric acid, HSO, at room
2 4
temperature to form benzenesulphonic acid.
3. Addition reaction: Benzene undergoes addition reactions under special conditions.
Example
When a mixture of benzene vapour and hydrogen is passed over finely divided nickel
catalyst at 200°C, cyclohexane is formed.
Experiment 1.5
Chemical Reaction of Toluene
Objective: To distinguish aromatic hydrocarbons from other unsaturated hydrocarbons
Materials required: Toluene, Br in CCl , KMnO , concentrated H SO , test tubes,
2 4 4 2 4
test tube rack, test tube holder, measuring cylinder, Bunsen burner and dropper.
53
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Procedure:
1. Take three test tubes and place them in the test tube rack.
2. Add 5 mL of toluene (methylbenzene) to each of the three test tubes.
3. Add one or two drops of Br in CCl in the first test tube and add the same amount
2 4
of cold KMnO solution in the second test tube and observe the changes.
4
4. Add a few drops of concentrated sulphuric acid to the third test tube and, if necessary,
heat it gently, holding it with a test tube holder.
Observations and analysis:
In which test tube does a reaction occur?
Write a complete report of your observations and submit to your teacher.
Exercise 1.12
1. What is an aromatic hydrocarbon?
2. Are aromatic hydrocarbons saturated or unsaturated?
3. What is the name of the simplest aromatic hydrocarbon?
4. Describe the main reactions of benzene?
5. Benzene does not change the colour of Br in CCl or that of KMnO solution; why?
2 4 4
6. How do you prepare the following compounds from benzene?
a Chlorobenzene b Nitrobenzene c Benzene sulphonic acid.
1.5 NATURAL SOURCES OF HYDROCARBONS
Competencies
After completing this subunit, you will be able to:
• list the major natural sources of hydrocarbons;
• describe natural gas;
• define crude oil;
• explain the fractional distillation of crude oil;
• mention the products of the fractional distillation of crude oil;
• tell the uses of petroleum products;
• describe the composition of coal;
• explain the destructive distillation of coal.
54
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
Activity 1.25
Discuss the following in your group and present it to the class:
1. What do you think is the major component of natural gas?
2. How can petroleum be separated into different fractions?
3. How are natural gas, petroleum and coal formed in nature? Can they be recycled?
A. Natural Gas
The principal sources of hydrocarbons are natural gas, crude oil and coal. Natural gas is
found in association with petroleum or alone. It is found in underground deposits several
hundreds or thousands of metres below the earth’s surface, where it originated from the decay
and decomposition of animal and plant remains millions of years ago. Natural gas mainly
contains methane (more than 90%), ethane, propane, butane and small quantities of higher
alkanes. Other gases such as, CO , N , O and H S, may also be present in natural gas.
2 2 2 2
The composition of natural gas varies, depending on its place of origin. Natural gas is
widely used as a fuel. It is advantageous over liquid and solid fuels and also other gases,
except H , due to its very high heat of combustion.
2
B. Petroleum
The word petroleum is derived from two Latin words, ‘petra’ meaning rock, and ‘oleum’
meaning oil. Thus, petroleum means rock oil. The term petroleum refers to a broad range
of fossil hydrocarbons that are found as gases, liquids or solids beneath the surface of the
earth. The crude oil is generally found along with natural gas in the form of a dark-
coloured viscous liquid, which is a complex mixture of hydrocarbons. Its composition
varies according to its place of origin. However, crude oil mainly contains alkanes,
cycloalkanes and aromatic hydrocarbons. It also contains organic compounds consisting
of nitrogen, sulphur and oxygen in small amounts.
Refining of Crude Oil
Crude oil or petroleum is obtained by drilling wells until the oil-bearing region is reached.
After the crude oil is brought to the surface of the earth, it must be refined before it
can be used.
Crude oil is refined or separated into several components by fractional distillation based
on the differences in boiling ranges of its fractions. (Figure 1.11).
55
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Figure 1.11 Fractional Distillation of Petroleum.
The major products (fractions) obtained from fractional distillation of petroleum and their
uses are given in Table 1.9.
Table 1.9 Common petroleum products.
Fractions Approximate Boiling Uses
composition point range
(carbon number) (°C)
Gases C – C below 20 – As fuel in the form
1 4
of bottled gas.
Petroleum ether C – C 20 – 60 – As solvent, in dry cleaning.
5 7
Gasoline (petrol) C – C 40 – 200 – Motor fuel for internal
5 10
combustion engines.
Kerosene C – C 175 – 275 – Jet engine fuel,
10 16
– household fuel.
Continued next page
56
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
Fuel oil (diesel oil) C – C 250 – 350 – Furnace fuel, diesel
15 18
engine fuel.
Lubricating oils Non-volatile liquids – Lubrication.
¸
Greases ˝ > C
19
Petroleum jelly˛
Paraffin wax Non-volatile – Candles, polishes.
¸
Asphalt Ô solids – Roofing and road
> C
(bitumen) ˝ 20 construction.
Coke Ô – Electrodes, fuel for
˛
power stations.
Most hydrocarbons present in petroleum are long-chain hydrocarbons. However, there is
a very high demand for petrol or gasoline, which contains hydrocarbons, composed of five
to ten carbon atoms. Therefore, the amount of petrol obtained by fractional distillation of
crude oil does not satisfy the demand for it. To satisfy the demand and maximize the output
of petrol or gasoline, the process called cracking is carried out during fractional distillation.
What does cracking mean? Cracking is the decomposition of large hydrocarbon molecules
into smaller ones by the application of heat (thermal cracking or pyrolysis) or in the
presence of catalysts (catalytic cracking).
Example
heat
C H → C H + C H
16 34 8 18 8 16
Hexadecane Octane Octene
Hydrogen gas can be added during cracking to saturate the alkenes formed in the process.
C. Coal
Coal is formed naturally by the decomposition of plant matter over several millions of
years. It is not a pure form of carbon. It is an important source of aromatic hydrocarbons.
Heating mineral coal in the absence of air, or oxygen is called destructive distillation of coal
or coking of coal. When coal is heated in the absence of air it gives volatile products and
coke. The volatile products separate into coal gas and a liquid, called coal tar when cooled.
Aromatic hydrocarbons and many other substances are isolated from coal tar by fractional
distillation.
Coke, which is a solid and relatively pure form of carbon, is used as a fuel in the blast
furnace during the extraction of iron. It is also used to produce gaseous fuels, such as
water gas (mixture of H and CO) and producer gas (mixture of N and CO).
2 2
57
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Exercise 1.13
1. What are the major natural sources of hydrocarbons?
2. Which hydrocarbons are the main constituents of petroleum?
3. What is destructive distillation?
4. Describe how we can obtain aromatic hydrocarbons from coal.
5. Which fraction of petroleum is in very high demand?
6. What process should be carried out during fractional distillation of crude oil to
maximize the output of petrol or gasoline?
7. Describe the main uses of
a petroleum ether; b kerosene; c gasoline;
d diesel oil; e refinery gases.
Research and writing
Consult reference materials in the library and read about products made from
hydrocarbons. Make a list of petroleum-related products you use almost daily.
1.6 ALCOHOLS
Competencies
After completing this section, you will be able to:
• define alcohols;
• tell the functional group of alcohols;
• classify alcohols based on the number of hydroxyl groups;
• write the general formulas of monohydric alcohols;
• write the molecular formulas and the names of the first six members of the
monohydric alcohols;
• give the IUPAC names for the given alcohols;
• classify monohydric alcohols based on the number of alkyl groups attached
to the carbon atom carrying the hydroxyl group;
• give some examples for primary, secondary and tertiary alcohols;
• describe the physical properties of alcohols;
• explain general methods of preparation of alcohols;
• explain the industrial preparation of ethanol;
• perform an experiment to prepare ethanol from sugar;
58
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
• explain the chemical reactions of alcohols such as oxidation, reaction with
active metals, esterification and dehydration;
• carry out an activity to show chemical reactions of alcohols with active metals;
• write the general structural formula of aldehydes;
• write the molecular formulas and names of simple aldehydes;
• write the general structural formula of ketones;
• write the molecular formulas and names of simple ketones;
• write the general structural formula of carboxylic acids;
• write the molecular formulas and names of simple carboxylic acids;
• write the general structural formula of esters;
• write the molecular formulas and names of simple esters.
Activity 1.26
1. List some alcohols you know? Name the alcohol used in alcoholic beverages? What
are the uses of alcohols in industry?
2. Ethiopia uses an alcohol blended with benzene to drive cars. What is the name of the
alcohol? What is the source of this alcohol?
What do you think when you hear the word “alcohol”? Can you define alcohol? Give a
few examples of the uses of alcohols. Most people think of two common alcohols- the
substance that intoxicates people and the one used in clinics and hospitals. However, there
are many types of alcohol. The only alcohol present in all alcoholic beverages is called
ethanol. Other alcohols are used for different purposes.
Alcohols are hydroxyl derivatives of hydrocarbons that can be obtained by replacing one
or more hydrogen atom(s) of a hydrocarbon with the hydroxyl (–OH) group. The hydroxyl
group is the functional group of alcohols.
Examples
59
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
1.6.1 Classification of Alcohols
Alcohols are generally classified as monohydric, dihydric and trihydric depending on the
number of hydroxyl (–OH) groups they contain in their molecular structure.
Monohydric alcohols are alcohols containing only one hydroxyl group.
Examples
Dihydric alcohols are those containing two hydroxyl groups per molecule. They are also
named glycols or diols.
Example
Trihydric alcohols are those containing three hydroxyl groups in their molecular structure.
Polyhydric alcohols are those containing three or more hydroxyl groups in their molecular
structure. Trihydric alcohols are also considered as polyhydric alcohols.
Example
1.6.2 Nomenclature of Alcohols
An alcohol can be considered to be derived from a hydrocarbon by the replacement of at
least one H atom by hydroxyl group. Hence, alcohols can be systematically named by
using the suffix -ol to replace the terminal -e in the corresponding alkane name.
60
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
Table 1.10 IUPAC Names, Condensed Structure and Physical Constants of the First Six
Monohydric Alcohol.
Structure of IUPAC name Melting Boiling point (°C) Density g/mL
monohydric alcohol point (°C)
CH OH Methanol –97 64.7 0.792
3
CH CH OH Ethanol –117 78.3 0.789
3 2
CH CH CH OH 1-Propanol –126 97.2 0.804
3 2 2
CH (CH ) CH OH 1-Butanol –90 117.7 0.810
3 22 2
CH (CH ) CH OH 1-Pentanol –78.5 138 0.817
3 23 2
CH (CH ) CH OH 1-Hexanol –52 156.5 0.819
3 24 2
Activity 1.27
Based on the structural formulas given in table 1.10, derive the general formula for the
homologous series of monohydric alcohols. Discuss in your group and present to the class.
In the IUPAC system of nomenclature of alcohols containing side chains or –OH groups in
different positions, the longest chain to which the –OH group is attached, is chosen as a
parent structure. The chain is then numbered, starting from the end closer to the carbon
atom to which the –OH group is bonded. The other rules are similar to the nomenclature of
hydrocarbons.
Examples
Classification of Monohydric Alcohols
Carbon atoms can be classified as primary (1°), secondary (2°), tertiary (3°) and quaternary
(4°) if they are bonded to one, two, three and four carbon atoms, respectively.
61
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Example
Carbon atoms indicated by letters a, d, and e, are primary. The carbon atom indicated
by letter b is secondary, and the one indicated by letter c is tertiary.
Monohydric alcohols can be classified as primary (1°), secondary (2°) and tertiary (3°)
alcohols, depending on the number of hydrocarbon groups (alkyl groups) attached to the
carbon atom to which the hydroxyl group is bonded.
Primary alcohols are those alcohols which have the hydroxyl group connected to a primary
carbon. They can also be defined as a molecule containing a “–CH OH” group.
2
General Structure:
Examples
Secondary alcohols are those in which the carbon atom bonded to the hydroxyl group is
attached to two alkyl groups or contains an –OH group bonded to a secondary
carbon atom.
General structure: where R and R¢ may be same or different
62
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
Examples
Tertiary alcohols are those in which the carbon atom bonded to the hydroxyl group is
attached to three hydrocarbon (alkyl) groups or contain –OH group attached to a tertiary
carbon atom.
General Structure: where R, R¢ and R¢¢ may be same or different
Example
Exercise 1.14
1. Classify the following alcohols as monohydric, dihydric and trihydric alcohols.
a 2-propanol b 1,3-propanediol c 1,2,3-butanetriol
2. Classify the following monohydric alcohols as primary, secondary or tertiary
alcohols.
a 1-pentanol b 2-pentanol c 2-methyl-2-butanol
1.6.3 Physical Properties of Alcohols
Activity 1.28
1. Why do alcohols have higher boiling points than the corresponding hydrocarbons?
2. Why boiling points of dihydric and trihydric alcohols are higher than those of
monohydric alcohols of comparable molecular size?
63
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
3. Lower alcohols, like methanol and ethanol, are miscible with water in all proportions,
while lower hydrocarbons are not so. Explain.
4. Based on the boiling point of water, H O, and methanol, CH OH, in which one would
2 3
you expect to observe a greater degree of hydrogen bonding? Explain. Discuss with
your group and present to the class.
The hydroxyl group in an alcohol is polar due to the high electronegativity of oxygen. As a
result, there is significant hydrogen bonding in alcohols.
Figure 1.12 Hydrogen bonding between molecules of an alcohol.
Due to the hydrogen bonding in alcohols, they have higher melting and boiling points than
hydrocarbons of comparable molecular size (mass). Hydrogen bonding is also the cause
for even lower members to be liquids at room temperature. The boiling point of more
branched isomer is lower than that of its isomeric straight-chain alcohol.
For Example: CH CH CH CH OH, boils at 117.7°C, while
3 2 2 2
boils at 82.5°C. Dihydric and the trihydric alcohols have higher boiling points than
monohydric alcohols of similar molecular size (mass). Ethane-1,2-diol (dihydric alcohol,
molecular mass = 62), boils at 197°C, while 1-propanol (monohydric, molecular
mass = 60) boils at 97.2°C.
The first three alcohols, methanol, ethanol and 1-propanol are miscible with water in all
proportions, while the solubility in water decreases with increasing carbon number. The
water solubilities of dihydric and trihydric alcohols are higher than those of monohydric
alcohols of similar molecular mass.
1.6.4 Preparation of Alcohols
The general laboratory methods of preparation of alcohols are:
a Acid-catalyzed hydration of alkenes:
General Reaction:
64
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
Example
b Hydrolysis of alkyl halides:
Warming alkyl halides with sodium hydroxide forms alcohols.
General Reaction:
Example
c Hydrolysis of Esters:
Heating esters with potassium hydroxide produce alcohols.
General Reaction:
Example
65
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
The two methods, b and c, involve the replacement of other groups by the –OH group.
Hence, they are examples of substitution reactions.
Ethanol (Ethyl Alcohol), CH CH OH
3 2
Activity 1.29
1 How do the local people in Ethiopia prepare alcoholic beverages like “Tella”, “Tej” and
“Katikalla”? What raw materials and apparatus do they use?
2 Which industrial method of production of ethanol is more or less similar to the method
followed by the local people? Share your ideas with your class.
Ethanol is the second member of the homologous series of monohydric alcohols. It is one
of the constituents of all alcoholic beverages. ‘Tella’, ‘Tej’, beer, wine, ‘Katikalla’, ouzo,
gin and whisky contain ethanol. There are a number of methods for preparing ethanol
using different materials.
Industrial preparation of Ethanol
Ethanol is manufactured industrially by:
1. Fermentation of carbohydrates such as sugar: Fermentation is the slow
decomposition of carbohydrates such as sucrose, starch and cellulose in the presence
of suitable enzyme, that results in the formation of ethanol and carbon dioxide:
Fermentation can produce an alcoholic beverage whose ethanol content is
12 – 15% only. The alcohol kills the yeast and inhibits its activity when the percentage
is higher. To produce beverages of higher ethanol content, distillation of the aqueous
solution is required.
Most liquor factories in Ethiopia use molasses, a by-product of sugar industries, as
a raw material to produce ethanol. In the brewing industry, germinated barley called
malt (in Amharic, ‘Bikil’) is used as the starting material. The whole process taking
place in breweries is summarized as follows:
66
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
2. Catalytic Hydration of Ethene: Most ethanol is manufactured at present by this
method. In this process, ethene is treated with steam at 573 K and 60 atm pressures
in the presence of phosphoric acid, H PO , catalyst.
3 4
Experiment 1.6
Preparation of Ethanol by Fermentation
Objective: To prepare ethanol from sugar.
Materials required: Conical flask, glass rod, distillation flask, condenser, spatula,
thermometer, watch glass, Bunsen burner, beaker, stopper and delivery tube.
Sugar, ammonium phosphate or ammonium sulphate, yeast, Ca(OH) .
2
Procedure:
1. Take 50 mL of distilled water in a conical flask, add 15 g of sugar to it and stir. Add
about 1 gram of yeast and a small amount of ammonium phosphate or ammonium
sulphate to the solution. Arrange the set up, as shown below, and let the flask
stand for three days at a warm place.
Figure 1.13 The Fermentation of Sugar.
67
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Observations and analysis:
a What is the purpose of adding yeast to the solution?
b Why do we add ammonium phosphate or ammonium sulphate to the
sugar solution?
c What happened to the calcium hydroxide solution at the end of the first or
second day? Which gas is produced?
d What is the smell of the solution in the flask after three days?
e What has happened in the flask containing the sugar solution as it stood for
three days?
2. After three days, filter the solution, and arrange the set up as in Figure 1.14. Pour 20
mL of the filtrate in a distilling flask, heat the solution, and collect the liquid in a
receiver.
Thermometer
Condenser
Rubber
stopper
Wateroutlet
Fermented
sugarsolution
Waterinlet
Bunsen
burner
Conical
flask
Ethanol
Figure 1.14 Separation of ethanol by distillation.
Points to observe:
a Observe the colour and identify the smell of the distillate.
b Pour a small amount of the distillate on a watch glass, strike a match and bring the
flame close to the distillate. Does it catch fire?
Write complete laboratory report on this experiment and submit to your teacher.
68
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
Properties and Uses of Ethanol
Ethanol is a colourless liquid with a pleasant smell and a burning taste. It boils at 78.3°C and
freezes at –117°C. It is inflammable and burns with a blue flame. It is miscible with water in all
proportions, non-poisonous and has an intoxicating effect. It is a hypnotic (sleep producer).
Ethanol is a constituent of all alcoholic beverages. It is a good solvent for many organic
compounds that are insoluble in water, such as paints, dyes, perfumes etc. It is also used as
a fuel for cars and spirit lamps, and to make denatured alcohol which is a mixture of
ethanol and other poisonous substance that has been added to make the alcohol unfit for
drinking. For example, methylated spirit is a mixture of 95% ethanol and 5% methanol.
• Currently, Ethiopia uses 5% ethanol with 95% benzene as fuel for cars.
1.6.5 Chemical Properties of Alcohols
Activity 1.30
Why alcoholic beverages such as “Tela”, “Tej”, beer and wine turn sour if they are not
properly stored? Which reaction of alcohols is responsible for this phenomenon? Write a
chemical equation to support your answer. Discuss with your group and present it to the
class.
What types of reactions do alcohols undergo? Alcohols contain a hydrocarbon group and
a functional group (–OH). Which part of alcohols is responsible for most of their chemical
reactions?
Reactions of alcohols may involve the cleavage of the oxygen hydrogen bond (— O — H) or
the carbon-oxygen bond (— C — O).
The reactions of alcohols involving the –O–H bond cleavage are:
a Alcohols react with strongly electropositive metals like Na, K and Ca to form
alkoxides and liberating H gas.
2
General reaction:
Example
69
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Experiment 1.7
Reactions of Alcohols with Active Metals
Objective: To observe the reaction of alcohols with sodium and magnesium.
Materials required: Ethanol, sodium and magnesium metal. Test tubes, test tube holder,
test tube rack, measuring cylinder, Bunsen burner, scissors or knife.
Procedure:
Take two test tubes and add 2-5 mL of ethanol to each of the test tubes. Cut a very
small piece of sodium with a knife and drop it into the first test tube. Take magnesium
ribbon and drop it in the second test tube.
Observations and analysis:
1. What do you observe:
a in the 1st test tube? b in the 2nd test tube?
2. Is there an evolution of gas? What do you think this gas is?
3. If no reaction occurs in any of the test tubes, heat the mixture gently using a Bunsen
burner and write your observation.
4. Which bond of the alcohol is broken in the reaction?
5. Write a general reaction for such reactions?
6. What type of metals react in this manner?
b Oxidation of alcohols: The oxidation products of alcohols depend on the type of
alcohol and the nature of oxidizing agents. Oxidation of alcohols is a very important
method for the production of other oxygen-containing compounds of hydrocarbons,
such as aldehydes, ketones and carboxylic acids.
i) Oxidation of primary alcohols in the presence of mild oxidizing agents yields
aldehydes.
General reaction:
Example
70
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
Strong oxidizing agents, such as acidified KMnO or K Cr O and CrO in
4 2 2 7 3
H SO , oxidize primary alcohol first to aldehydes and then to carboxylic acids.
2 4
It is difficult to stop the reaction at the aldehyde stage.
Example
Note that aldehydes are represented by the general structural formula or
RCHO, where R is an alkyl group. In the case of methanal R = H. For naming aldehydes,
use the suffix -al to replace the terminal -e in the corresponding
alkane name. The suffix “-al” indicates the functional group –CHO. The names
and condensed structures of the first six aldehydes are given in Table 1.11.
Table 1.11 Condensed structures and IUPAC names of some aldehydes.
Molecular formula of Structure of aldehyde IUPAC name
aldehyde
CH O HCHO Methanal
2
C H O CH CHO Ethanal
2 4 3
C H O CH CH CHO Propanal
3 6 3 2
C H O CH (CH ) CHO Butanal
4 8 3 22
C H O CH (CH ) CHO Pentanal
5 10 3 23
C H O CH (CH ) CHO Hexanal
6 12 3 24
ii) Oxidation of secondary alcohols yields ketones.
General reaction:
71
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Example
The general structural formula of ketones is: or RCOR’ where R
and R’ may be same or different. The IUPAC names of ketones are obtained
by using the suffix -one to replace the terminal -e in the corresponding alkane
name. The suffix ‘-one’ indicates the functional group. Unlike aldehydes, the
position of the functional group must be indicated in the name of higher ketones.
To do so, the longest chain containing the functional group is chosen as a parent
structure and then the carbon atoms of the chain are numbered starting from the
end closer to the carbonyl group.
Examples
iii)Tertiary alcohols and ketones are generally resistant to oxidation. However,
they can undergo oxidation under drastic conditions to form a mixture of
carboxylic acids.
72
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
Examples
CH
3
[O]
H C—C—OH H CCOOH + 2HCOOH
3 3
CH
3
3°alcohol Ethanoicacid Methanoicacid
O
[O]
H C—C—CH CH COOH + HCOOH
3 3 3
Propanone Ethanoic Methanoic
(ketone) acid acid
The general structural formula of carboxylic acids is or simply
R– COOH where R – is an alkyl group or hydrogen in case of the first memberof the
carboxylic acid homologous series. The IUPAC names of carboxylic acids
are derived by replacing the final -e of the corresponding alkane with -oic acid.
The suffix ‘-oic acid’ representing the functional group –COOH. The molecular formulas,
condensed structure and IUPAC names of the first six carboxylic acids are shown in
the Table 1.12.
Table 1.12 IUPAC names, formulas and condensed structure of some carboxylic acids.
Formula of carboxylic acid Condensed structure IUPAC name of the acid
HCOOH HCOOH Methanoic acid
CH COOH CH COOH Ethanoic acid
3 3
C H COOH CH CH COOH Propanoic acid
2 5 3 2
C H COOH CH – (CH ) COOH Butanoic acid
3 7 3 2 2
C H COOH CH – (CH ) – COOH Pentanoic acid
4 9 3 23
C H COOH CH – (CH ) – COOH Hexanoic acid
5 11 3 24
Esterification
Experiment 1.8
The reaction of alcohols and organic acids
Objective: To investigate the reaction of ethanol and ethanoic acid.
Material required: Ethanol, ethanoic acid, concentrated sulphuric acid, test tube, test
tube holder, Bunsen burner, beaker, water and glass rod.
73
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Procedure:
1. Pour 2 mL of ethanol and 4 mL of acetic acid in a test tube. Add a few drops of
concentrated suphuric acid to the mixture of the alcohol and acid.
2. Hold the test tube containing the mixture with a test tube holder and heat it gently
from three to five minutes. Allow the contents to cool, add it to a beaker half-filled
with water. Stir the mixture and smell the product.
Observations and analysis:
1. What smell did you recognize? What do you think is the origin of this smell?
2. Write a balanced chemical equation to show what has happened on heating the
mixture of ethanol and ethanioic acid?
3. What is the purpose of adding few drops of concentrated sulphuric acid to the
mixture of the alcohol and acid ?
Write a laboratory report in groups and present to the class.
c Carboxylic acids react with alcohols to form esters. This reaction is known as
esterification.
General reaction:
Example
The general structural formula of esters is: or simply RCOOR¢ where R and R¢
are alkyl groups. In some cases, R can be a hydrogen atom. In the nomenclature of esters
they are considered as derivatives of both carboxylic acids and alcohols.
74
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
Esters are named first by naming the alkyl group derived from the alcohol followed by the
name of the acid changing the suffix “-ic acid” to “-ate”.
Examples
The reactions of alcohols involving the – C – O bond cleavage include:
a Dehydration of alcohols: Heating alcohols in the presence of dehydrating agents, like
concentrated H SO , yield alkenes.
2 4
General reaction:
Example
75
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
The overall tendency of alcohols to undergo dehydration is in the following order:
b Reactions of alcohols with hydrogen halides produce alkyl halides:
General reaction:
Example
Activity 1.31
1. Write the general structural formulas for aldehydes and ketones.
2. What structural difference do you see between aldehydes and ketones?
3. Write the general structural formulas for carboxylic acids and esters.
Discuss with your group and present it to the class.
Exercise 1.15
1. Which functional group characterizes alcohols?
2. What is the basis for the classification of alcohols?
3. What is the general formula of alcohols?
4. Classify the following alcohols as primary, secondary and tertiary alcohols:
76
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
5. Write IUPAC name for each of the following alcohols:
6. What causes the boiling points of alcohols to be higher than hydrocarbons of similar
molecular mass?
7. Complete the following chemical reactions:
a CH I + NaOH Æ
3
b CH CH COOCH CH + KOH Æ
3 2 2 3
8. What is the functional group of aldehydes?
9. What is the functional group of ketones?
10. What suffixes are used in their IUPAC names to indicate the functional group of
aldehydes and ketones respectively?
77
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
11 What functional group characterizes carboxylic acids?
12 Complete the following chemical reactions:
a
[O]
CH CH CH OH
3 2 2
H H
b
[O]
H C—C—C—CH
3 3
H OH
c
+
H
CH CH COOH + CH CH OH
3 2 3 2
1.7 INDUSTRIAL AND AGRICULTURAL APPLICATIONS OF
ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
Competencies
After completing the section, you will be able to:
• discuss the uses of organic compounds in the manufacture of beverages;
• discuss the uses of organic compounds in the manufacture of pharmaceuticals;
• discuss the uses of organic compounds in the manufacture of soaps and detergents;
• discuss the uses of organic compounds in the manufacture of dry cleaning agents;
• discuss the uses of organic compounds in the manufacture of fuels;
• conduct an experiment to prepare soap from naturally existing esters;
• discuss the uses of organic chemicals in the manufacture of pesticides and herbicides;
• discuss the importance and manufacture of urea.
Activity 1.32
1. What are the major application areas of organic compounds?
2. Do you know substances that are used in the preparation of soaps and detergents? If
yes name them?
3. Do you know substances (chemicals) that are used in dry cleaning?
4. What agricultural applications of organic compounds do you know?
Share your ideas with your group.
78
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
Industrial application
Organic chemicals are used for the manufacturing of a large number of industrial products
that have a variety of uses. Some of these products include alcoholic beverages,
pharmaceuticals, soaps and detergents etc.
A. Alcoholic beverages
All alcoholic beverages commonly contain the alcohol known as ethanol. The ethanol
content of all alcoholic beverages is not the same. Some beverages contain small
concentrations of ethanol while others contain higher concentrations. These alcoholic
beverages can be either undistilled or distilled. The undistilled alcoholic beverages include
beer, wine, “Tella”, ‘Tej’ etc while ouzo, gin, brandy, whisky, ‘Katikalla’, and vodka are
among the distilled alcoholic beverages.
Beer: Beer is one of the alcoholic beverages widely manufactured and consumed in
most parts of the world. The common raw materials for its production are barley
and hops. Although the types of beer produced in the world are very many, the
average beer has alcohol content between 3-6 percent by volume.
Wine: Wine is another undistilled alcoholic beverage. The most common raw material for
producing wine are grapes. In the production process, grapes are first crushed and
then steamed. The liquid derived from crushing is called must. It then goes to a
fermentation tank where fermentation takes place. Then it passes to a settling tank,
where sediments are allowed to settle, and it proceeds from there to a filter. The
clear liquid is cooled in a refrigerator and is pasteurized as it passes through a flash
pasteurizer. Most wines have an alcohol content varying from 10-15% by volume.
Liquor: Compared with beer and wine, liquor contains higher concentrations of ethanol. It
is not possible to obtain an alcoholic beverage of more than 15% alcohol by volume
through fermentations. This is because the yeast cells are not able to stay alive in
alcohol of higher concentration. To get alcoholic beverages with higher percentages
of alcohol, the alcohol must be separated from the solution by distillation.
The alcoholic beverages like ouzo, gin, cognac, whisky etc, are made by distillation. Different
types of liquors have different alcohol concentrations. In most distilled alcoholic beverages
the percentage ranges between 30-45% alcohol by volume. However, some alcoholic
beverages like Araki are expected to have a higher percentage of ethanol.
B. Pharmaceuticals
Organic chemicals are used to manufacture drugs and medicines for various uses. These
drugs and medicines are collectively known as pharmaceuticals. Some of the
pharmaceuticals are:
79
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Analgesics: These are substances that reduce pain. For example: aspirin and
paracetamol.
Antiseptics: These are substances that help to prevent infections in wounds by killing
bacteria; for example, acriflavine.
Sedatives: These are drugs that make a person go to sleep or make them feel calm
and relaxed. Examples of such type of medicines are the barbiturates,
which include several important drugs.
Disinfectants: These are substances used to disinfect something or to kill bacteria; for
example, Dettol.
Sulphonamides:These are medicines used as antibiotics. For example: penicillin.
C. Soaps and Detergents
Organic chemicals are used for the synthesis of soaps and detergents. For example, animal
fat and vegetable oils are used for manufacturing soap. Fats and oils are naturally occurring
esters of glycerol and the higher fatty acids. Long open-chain alcohols and alkyl benzene
sulphonic acid can be used for the production of detergents.
Soaps and detergents are substances used to remove dirt. They are also called surfactants
or surface active agents. This is because they reduce the surface tension of water and
change the surface properties.
Soaps are either sodium or potassium salts of higher (long-chain) carboxylic acids. Soaps
that are sodium salts are called hard soaps and those that are potassium salts are soft
soaps. Soaps are prepared by boiling animal fat or vegetable oil with a base. The reaction
that produces soap is called saponification.
Example
80
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
Detergents contain either a sulfate or a sulphonate group. One example of detergents is
sodium lauryl sulfate, C H — O — SO — ONa. It is prepared first by reacting
12 25 2
dodecyl (lauryl) alcohol with sulphuric acid followed by reaction with
sodium hydroxide.
The reaction equation is:
C H — OH + HO — SO — OH C H —O — SO — OH + H O
12 25 2 12 25 2 2
(cid:4)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:2)(cid:1)
Dodecylalcohol Laurylhydrogen
H SO
(laurylalcohol) 2 4 sulphate
C H —O —SO —OH + NaOH C H —O —SO —ONa + H O
12 25 2 12 25 2 2
Sodiumlaurylsulphate
Experiment 1.9
Preparation of Soap
Objective: To prepare soap from animal fat or vegetable oil.
Materials required: Animal fat or vegetable oil, NaOH, NaCl, measuring cylinder,
beaker, glass rod, Bunsen burner, filter paper, funnel, conical flask, and
test tube.
Procedure:
Measure 3 mL vegetable oil or 3 g animal fat and place it in a 100 mL beaker; add
3 mL of ethanol and 3 mL of 5M NaOH. Stir the mixture vigorously with a glass
rod and gently heat over a flame for 15 minutes or until it turns in to a paste. When
the paste begins to form, stir very carefully to prevent frothing. After all the paste
has formed, set the beaker on the bench to cool. Add about 15 mL of saturated
NaCl solution to the paste mixture and stir thoroughly. This process is called salting
out the soap. Filter off the soap mixture by suction filtration and wash the collected
soap precipitate with 15 mL of ice water.
Observations and analysis:
a Why do we add ethanol during the preparation?
b What is the purpose of adding saturated NaCl solution to the paste mixture?
Write a laboratory report and present to the class.
81
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
D. Dry Cleaning
The qualities of some clothes decrease when they are washed with water using ordinary
soap. In order to avoid this, other chemicals are used for washing purposes that remove
dirt in the same manner as soaps. Dry cleaning refers to the use of different chemicals
that are capable of dissolving grease and other dirt stains in a similar manner as soaps
without the use of water. The most commonly used chemicals in dry cleaning are organic
chemicals such as tetrachloromethane, CCl ; tetrachloroethylene, Cl C = CCl ; benzene
4 2 2
and gasoline.
E. Fuels
The term fuel refers to any material that is capable of burning to produce energy, heat and
light. Most fuels occurring in nature are organic compounds. However, some inorganic
substances like hydrogen, producer gas and water gas are also used as gaseous fuels. But,
the most widely used fuels at present are of organic origin. This includes petroleum which
chiefly contains alkanes. Natural gas which is used as a fuel for stoves contains mainly
methane. Gasoline which is used as a fuel for internal combustion engines also contains
alkanes. Paraffin wax which is used to make candles is another fuel to get light energy and
it is a mixture of alkanes containing more than twenty carbon atoms. Besides its use as a
constituent of all alcoholic beverages, ethanol can also be used as a fuel for internal
combustion engines. At present, it is one of the substances that we can rely on for use as a
fuel for automobiles. The use of ethanol as a fuel is now practiced in our country by mixing
it with petrol. Ethanol and other plant seed oils can be classified as bio fuels.
Agricultural Applications
Organic compounds also play an important role in agriculture, specially to increase crop
productivity by controlling the damages caused by insects, rodents, fungi, birds and weeds.
So, organic chemicals can be used in the manufacture of pesticides and herbicides.
What is the distinction between herbicides and pesticides?
Pesticides are the chemicals used for controlling the damage that can be caused by fungi,
insects and other pests that attack crops. Among the pesticides, Bordeaux mixture is used
as fungicide. Other chemicals like DDT, aldrine, dieldrine, malathion are used as insecticides.
Herbicides are the chemicals that are applied on agricultural lands to remove unwanted
plants or weeds. Some examples of compounds that are used as herbicides include paraquat,
diquat, ammonium sulphamate, ammonium glyphosinate, sodium chlorate etc.
Fertilizers: In order to increase crop productivity we use either synthetic or natural
fertilizers. Synthetic fertilizers are grouped into three classes as nitrogen, potash and
phosphate fertilizers. Nitrogen is one of the essential plant nutrients. It is absorbed by
plants in the form of nitrate ion, NO– . Nitrogen enables green plants to synthesize amino
3
acids and proteins, and it is also a constituent of DNA molecules. To provide nitrogen for
82
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
plants, nitrogen-containing fertilizers are usually added to the soil. These include, ammonium
salts like NHCl, (NH)SO nitrates like KNO and urea. Urea is one of the most important
4 4 2 4; 3
nitrogen fertilizers. It is a component of urine. On an industrial scale, urea is manufactured
by the dehydration of ammonium carbamate:
It can also be prepared by direct combination of ammonia and carbon dioxide at
180°C and pressure of about 140 atm.
Check list
Key terms of the unit
• addition reaction • halogenation
• alcohol • hedrohalogenation
• aldehyde • herbicide
• alkane • homologous series
• alkene • hydrogenation
• alkyl halide • inorganic compound
• alkyl radicals • isomers
• alkynes • ketone
• benzene • lifeforce theory
• biogas • Markovnikov’s rule
• carboxylic acid • natural gas
• chain isomerism • nitration
• cracking • organic compound
• crude oil • pesticide
• cycloalkanes • petroleum
• cycloalkene • pharmaceuticals
• decarboxylation • polymerization
• dehydrohalogenation • position isomerism
• destructive distillation • resonance structure
• detergents • saturated hydrocarbons
• elimination reaction • soaps
• ester • substitution reaction
• fermentation • sulphonation
• fertilizer • unsaturated hydrocarbons
• functional group • Wurtz reaction
• geometrical isomerism
83
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
UUUUUnnnnniiiiittttt SSSSSuuuuummmmmmmmmmaaaaa
Unit Summary
• The “life force” theory states that living organisms (plants and animals)
have a special life force which helps them to synthesize organic compounds
and that organic compounds cannot be synthesized artificially by man in the
laboratory.
• Organic chemistry is the study of carbon compounds including natural and
synthetic ones.
• Organic compounds are classified based on the functional group they
contain in their molecules.
• The functional group is a part of a molecule that determines the chemical
and physical properties of a compound.
• Hydrocarbons are compounds composed of carbon and hydrogen atoms
only.
• Saturated hydrocarbons contain only single bonds between carbon atoms
• Unsaturated hydrocarbons are those containing one or more double or triple
bonds between carbon atoms.
• A homologous series is a group of compounds in which each member of
the group differs from the next member by –CH – group.
2
• Alkanes are saturated hydrocarbons represented by the general formula C H .
n 2n+2
Alkanes are named by using prefixes that indicate the number of carbon
atoms and the suffix ‘-ane’.
• Isomerism is the existence of two or more compounds with the same
molecular formula but different structures. These compounds are called isomers.
• Alkenes are unsaturated hydrocarbons containing a carbon-carbon double
bond as their functional group. Their general formula is C H . The suffix
n 2n
‘-ene’ in their names indicates the presence of a carbon-carbon double bond.
• Alkynes are unsaturated hydrocarbons containing a carbon - carbon triple
bond as their functional group. They are represented by the general formula
C H . The suffix ‘-yne’ indicates the carbon-carbon triple bond.
n 2n-2
• Alkenes and alkynes undergo mainly addition reactions while alkanes
undergo substitution reactions.
• Aromatic hydrocarbons are compounds containing benzene rings. Benzene
is the simplest aromatic hydrocarbon.
• Benzene mainly undergoes substitution reactions.
• The natural sources of hydrocarbons are crude oil, natural gas and coal.
84
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
• Crude oil is a complex mixture of hydrocarbons, mainly alkanes, and also
contain cycloalkanes and aromatics.
• Crude oil is separated into a number of useful fractions by fractional distillation.
• Alcohols are compounds containing the hydroxyl (–OH) group as their
functional group and represented by the general formula C H OH.
n 2n+1
• Alcohols are classified depending on the number of hydroxyl groups they
contain as monohydric, dihydric and trihydric alcohols.
• Monohydric alcohols are classified as primary (1°), secondary (2°) and
tertiary alcohols (3°).
• The names of alcohols contain the suffix ‘-ol’ which indicates the presence
of –OH group in the molecule.
• Primary alcohols oxidize to give aldehydes and then carboxylic acids, and
secondary alcohols yield ketones on oxidation.
• Organic chemicals have industrial applications such as in the production
of alcoholic beverages and pharmaceuticals.
• Organic chemicals are also used in the production of fertilizers, pesticides
and weed killers for agricultural uses.
• Organic chemicals are also used as fuels, and to produce soaps and
detergents and also for dry cleaning.
REVIEW EXERCISE ON UNIT 1
Part I: Nomenclature based problems
1. Give the IUPAC names of the following compounds:
Br H H
a
H C — C — C — CH — CH — C — CH
3 2 2 3
H CH CH
3 2
CH
3
CH
3
CH CH
b 2 3
H C — C — C — C C — CH
3 3
H CH
3
85
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
CH
3
H H CH
c 2
H C — C C — CH— C — CH
3 3
CH Br
3
CH H H
d 3
H C — C — C — C— CH
3 3
Br CH
3
H C — CH
2 3
H CH Cl
e 3
H C — C C— C— C— CH
3 3
CH CH H
3 3
H Cl
f
H C — C — C — C— CH
3 3
H — C CH H
3
CH
3
g H CH CH
3 3
H C — C — C — C— CH
3 3
OH CH CH
3 2
CH
3
CH
3
H CH
h 2
H C — C — C — CH
3 3
CH H
2
CH OH
2
2. Write the structural formulas of the following compounds:
a 3-bromo-2-chlorohex-1-ene
86
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
b 4-ethyl-2,2,3-trimethylhexane
c 2-methyl-2-butanol
3. Complete the following chemical equations:
a
b
c
d
e
f
g
h
4. Complete the following reaction equations:
a
b
c
d
e
f
g
h
87
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Part II: Multiple choice Type Questions
5. Which of the following hydrocarbons does not belong to the homologous series
of alkanes?
a C H b C H c C H d C H
3 8 8 18 6 10 10 22
6. Which of the following alkanes is a liquid at room temperature?
a CH b C H c C H d C H
4 10 22 4 10 3 8
7. The hydrocarbon used as a fuel in an oxyacetylene torch is:
a C H b C H c C H d CH
2 2 2 4 4 10 4
8. The general formula that represents the olefin homologous series is:
a C H b C H c C H d C H
n 2n+1 n 2n+2 n 2n–2 n 2n
9. The most common reaction that alkenes undergo is:
a elimination b substitution c addition d decomposition
10. Benzene is an unsaturated hydrocarbon; it mainly undergoes:
a addition b elimination c polymerization d substitution
11. Which of the following compounds is an alkene?
a H C — CH — CH b H C = CH — CH
3 2 3 2 3
c HC ∫∫ C — CH d CH — CH — CH — OH
3 3 2 2
12. Which of the following compounds is a ketone?
a b
c d
13. Which of the following classes of hydrocarbons is the most reactive?
a Alkynes b Alkanes
c Alkenes d Aromatic hydrocarbons
14. The compounds CH OH and CH COOH react in the presence of an acid
3 3
catalyst to form:
a a carboxylic acid b an aldehyde
c a ketone d an ester
15. Which hydrocarbon is the main constituent of natural gas and biogas?
a C H b CH
4 10 4
c C H d C H
2 6 6 14
88
INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (UNIT 1)
16. During the fractional distillation of crude oil, the process of cracking is carried
out to:
a separate the crude oil into different fractions
b vaporize the liquid components
c maximize the output of petrol or gasoline
d separate alkanes from alkenes
17. Ethyne decolorizes Br in CCl . This is due to the formation of:
2 4
a 1,1-dibromoethane b 1,1,2,2-dibromoethene
c 1,2-dibromoethane d 1,1,2,2-dibromoethane
18. The following reaction can be classified as:
CH + Br Æ CH Br + HBr
4 2 3
a an addition reaction b an elimination reaction
c a substitution reaction d a saponification reaction
19. Which one of the following substance is not used in dry cleaning?
a CCl b Cl C == CCl
4 2 2
c C H d CH COOH
6 6 3
20. The compound with the structure is a:
a secondary alcohol b trihydric alcohol
c carboxylic acid d dihydric alcohol
21. Which of the following alcohols is the easiest to dehydrate?
a b
c d
89
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
22. Alcohols that yield ketones on oxidation are classified as:
a primary alcohols b secondary alcohols
c dihydric alcohols d trihydric alcohols
23. The first organic compound was synthesized in the laboratory by:
a Friedrich Wohler b A. Kekule
c John Dalton d Wurtz
Part III: Which of the following statements are true?
24. a A weed killer is a pesticide.
b Carbon tetrachloride is used in dry cleaning.
c Antiseptics are sleep inducing drugs.
d ‘Tella’ is a distilled alcoholic beverage.
e Soaps and detergents are surfactants.
f Alkanes easily undergo addition reactions.
g Benzene burns with a sooty flame.
h Biogas mainly contains n-butane.
90
2
TINU
Important Inorganic
Compounds
Unit Outcomes
After completing this unit, you will be able to:
(cid:40) understand the classification of inorganic compounds on the basis of their
composition and/or their chemistry;
(cid:40) know the types of oxides and their chemical properties;
(cid:40) understand the Arrhenius, Brønsted-Lowry and Lewis concepts of acids and
bases;
(cid:40) understand the classification of acids and salts;
(cid:40) know the general properties, preparations and uses of common acids, bases
and salts;
(cid:40) understand the differences between strong and weak acids/bases, and concentrated
and dilute acids/bases;
(cid:40) recognize the corrosive nature of acids and bases, and exercise the necessary
precautions in handling and using them;
(cid:40) develop skills for identifying acidic, basic and neutral compounds;
(cid:40) develop skills in calculating, pH, pOH, H+ ion and OH– ion concentration of
a solution;
(cid:40) know essential plant nutrients, fertilizers and pesticides; and
(cid:40) demonstrate scientific inquiry skill: observing, classifying, comparing and
contrasting, inferring, predicting, communicating, measuring, asking questions,
interpreting data, drawing conclusion, applying concepts, relating cause and
effect and problem solving.
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
MAIN CONTENTS
2.1 Introduction
2.2 Oxides
2.3 Acids
2.4 Bases
2.5 Salts
– Summary
– Review Exercise
2.1 INTRODUCTION
Competencies
By completing this section, you will be able to:
• define inorganic compounds; and
• classify inorganic compounds as oxides, acids, bases and salts.
Activity 2.1
In the laboratory, take samples of different compounds and classify them as organic and
inorganic. When these compounds are burnt in air, it has been found that most organic
compounds burn when heated in air, but most inorganic compounds just melt or vaporize;
why? Discuss your observations in groups and share your opinion with the class.
Inorganic compounds are the compounds consisting of mineral constituents of the earth
or generally found in non-living things. The term inorganic compound refers to all
compounds that do not contain carbon. Although, carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide,
carbonates and hydrogen carbonates are carbon-containing compounds, which are
classified as inorganic compounds. Inorganic compounds are mostly found in nature as
silicates, oxides, carbonates, sulphides, sulphates, chlorides and nitrates, etc.
There are different ways for the classification of inorganic compounds. They can be
classified on the bases of their composition. For example; they can be classified on
the basis of the:
i) metal they contain such as copper compounds, aluminium compounds, etc.
92
IMPORTANT INOGANIC COMPOUNDS (UNIT 2)
ii) non-metal they contain such as sulphur compounds, nitrogen compounds, etc.
iii) group they contain such as sulphates, nitrates, carbonates, etc.
This unit emphasizes on the four groups of inorganic chemicals namely oxides, acids,
bases and salts.
Exercise 2.1
1. List some inorganic compounds with which you are familiar.
2. Which branch of chemistry is concerned with the study of all elements?
2.2 OXIDES
Competencies
After Completing this section, you will be able to:
• define oxides;
• classify oxides as acidic, basic, amphoteric, neutral and peroxides;
• define acidic oxides and give examples;
• explain the chemical properties of acidic oxides;
• define basic oxides and give examples;
• explain the chemical properties of basic oxides;
• conduct experiments to distinguish acidic oxides from basic oxides;
• compare and contrast acidic and basic oxides;
• define amphoteric oxides and give examples;
• explain the chemical properties of amphoteric oxides;
• discuss the salt forming nature of acidic, basic and amphoteric oxides;
• define neutral oxides and give examples;
• define peroxides and give examples;
• explain the chemical properties of peroxides; and
• conduct an experiment to distinguish peroxides from other oxides.
What are oxides? Oxygen reacts directly with almost all elements except the noble
gases and inactive metals like gold, platinum, and palladium. Such compounds of oxygen
are called oxides. Oxides are binary compounds containing oxygen and any other
element (metal, non-metal or metalloid). Binary compounds are those consisting of
93
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
only two elements. Examples of oxides are calcium oxide, CaO, aluminium oxide,
Al O , sulphur dioxide, SO , and carbon monoxide, CO.
2 3 2
The classification of oxides into different groups is based on their chemical behaviour;
they are classified as:
• Acidic oxides
• Basic oxides
• Amphoteric oxides
• Neutral oxides, and
• Peroxides
Exercise 2.2
Decide whether the following compounds are oxides or not:
a Na O d P O g Na CO
2 4 6 2 3
b KOH e N O h KNO
2 4 3
c Ga O f H O i H SO
2 3 2 2 4
Activity 2.2
1. The oxides, CO , N O , P O , SO are acidic oxides.
2 2 5 4 10 2
a Are these oxides formed by the combination of oxygen with
i) metals ii) non-metals or iii) metalloids?
b What general conclusion can you draw about the composition of acidic oxides?
2. The presence of CO is confirmed by reacting CO with lime water.
2 2
a What is lime water? Is it a base or an acid?
b Write a balanced chemical equation for the above reaction.
c What type of oxides react with bases?
Discuss in your group and present your findings to the class.
A Acidic Oxides
Acidic oxides are the oxides formed by the chemical combination of oxygen with non-
metals. Thus, acidic oxides are non-metal oxides. These oxides are also called acid
anhydrides, since they form acidic solutions when reacted or dissolved in water. Acid
anhydride means acid without water.
94
IMPORTANT INOGANIC COMPOUNDS (UNIT 2)
Generally speaking, acidic oxides are non-metal oxides. Examples of acidic oxides
include carbon dioxide, CO , nitrogen dioxide, NO , and sulphur dioxide, SO .
2 2 2
However, it is very important to note that all non-metal oxides are not necessarily
acidic oxides. For example, carbon monoxide, CO, and di-nitrogen monoxide, N O,
2
are non-metal oxides, but they are neutral oxides which will be discussed later.
Chemical Properties of Acidic Oxides
Acidic oxides undergo the following reactions:
1. Acidic oxides (acid anhydrides) dissolve in water to form acidic solution (acid).
Acid anhydride + water Æ Acid
Examples
CO + H O Æ H CO (Carbonic acid)
2 2 2 3
N O + H O Æ 2HNO (Nitrous acid)
2 3 2 2
SO + H O Æ H SO (Sulphurous acid)
2 2 2 3
2. Acidic oxides react with basic or metallic oxides to form salt.
Acidic oxide + Basic oxide Æ Salt
Examples
CO + Na O Æ Na CO
2 2 2 3
SO + CaO Æ CaSO
3 4
3. Acidic oxides react with bases to form salt and water. This reaction is called
neutralization reaction.
Acidic oxide + Base Æ Salt + Water
Examples
SO + 2NaOH Æ Na SO + H O
2 2 3 2
CO + 2LiOH Æ Li CO + H O
2 2 3 2
Exercise 2.3
1. List five examples of acidic oxides.
2. Complete and balance the following equations.
a P O + H O Æ
4 6 2
95
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
b SO + H O Æ
3 2
c CaO + CO Æ
2
d Ca(OH) + SO Æ
2 3
e NaOH + CO Æ
2
B. Basic Oxides
Oxides that are composed of metals and oxygen are basic oxides. But, all metal oxides
are not necessarily basic oxides; for example Al O and ZnO are amphoteric oxides,
2 3
which will be discussed in part (C).
Oxides of metals that dissolve in water and react with it to form basic or alkaline solutions
are called basic anhydrides. There are metallic oxides which have basic properties but
are insoluble in water. These oxides react with acids to give salt and water.
Example
FeO + 2HCl Æ FeCl + H O
2 2
The oxides of active metals, group IA and heavier members of group IIA, dissolve in
water and readily form bases. The term base is used to describe both soluble and
insoluble basic oxides. Some examples of basic oxides are Li O, Na O, K O, MgO,
2 2 2
CaO, BaO, and CuO.
Chemical Properties of Basic Oxides
What common reaction do basic oxides undergo? What products do they form
in their reactions with water, acidic oxides and acids?
1. Basic oxides dissolve in water to form alkaline solutions. As they dissolve, they
react with water to form the corresponding metal hydroxides.
Basic oxide + water Æ Base (Alkali)
Examples
Li O + H O Æ 2LiOH
2 2
CaO + H O Æ Ca(OH)
2 2
2. Basic oxides react with acidic oxides to form salts.
Basic oxide + acidic oxide Æ salt
96
IMPORTANT INOGANIC COMPOUNDS (UNIT 2)
Examples
BaO + SO Æ BaSO
3 4
CaO + CO Æ CaCO
2 3
Na O + CO Æ Na CO
2 2 2 3
3. Basic oxides react with acids to form a salt and water.
Basic oxide + Acid Æ salt + water
Example
CaO + 2HCl Æ CaCl + H O
2 2
CuO + H SO Æ CuSO + H O
2 4 4 2
Exercise 2.4
1. Complete and balance the following chemical equations:
a K O + H O Æ e BaO + H SO Æ
2 2 2 4
b MgO + H O Æ f CuO + HCl Æ
2
c Na O + CO Æ
2 2
d Li O + SO Æ
2 2
2. Classify the following oxides as basic or acidic:
a MgO b BaO c P O d N O
4 10 2 5
e Cu O f Fe O g K O h SO
2 2 3 2 2
Experiment 2.1
Test for Acidity and Basicity of Oxides
Objective: To identify basic and acidic oxides.
Materials required: Deflagrating spoon, gas jar and gas jar lid, test tubes. Sulphur,
magnesium or calcium metal, water, universal indicator, litmus paper (blue
and red).
97
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Procedure:
1. Ignite a small amount of powdered sulphur on a deflagrating spoon and insert
in a gas jar of oxygen. Add 10 mL water after ignition is complete. Cover the
gas jar with a lid and shake. Take two test tubes and pour 5 mL of the
solution to each test tube. Add a few drops of universal indicator solution to
the first test tube and blue litmus paper in the second.
2. Ignite a small amount of magnesium or calcium metal on a deflagrating spoon and
insert in to a gas jar of oxygen. Add 10 mL water to the ash formed and shake. Take
two test tubes and pour 5 mL of the solution to each of the test tubes. Add a few
drops of universal indicator in the first and red litmus paper to the second test tube.
Observations and analysis:
a What compounds are formed by the combustion of sulphur and magnesium or
calcium? Write chemical equations to show the reactions.
b What happens when water is added to the gas jars in which sulphur was burnt?
c What colours are observed by adding drops of universal indicator and blue or
red litmus to the solutions in the test tubes?
d Why does the change in the colour of indicators occur in the various solutions?
Write a laboratory report and submit to your teacher.
Universal indicator and litmus paper serve as indicators. Indicators are substances
used to identify whether a given solution is acidic or basic by showing colour changes.
Table 2.1 shows some common indicators and the colour they develop in acidic and
basic solutions.
Table 2.1 Some common indicators and their colours in acidic and basic solution.
Indicator Colour in aqueous solution Colour in aqueous
of acidic oxide solutionof basic oxide
Universal Indicator Yellow – Orange (in weakly acidic) Blue (in weakly basic) and
and red (in strongly acidic) purple (in strongly basic)
Litmus Red Blue
Phenolphthalein Colourless Pink (red)
Methyl orange Red Yellow
In addition to their effects on indicators, acidic and basic oxides can be identified by their
chemical properties. Acidic oxides react with bases while basic oxides react with acids.
But acidic oxides do not react with acids and basic oxides do not react with bases.
98
IMPORTANT INOGANIC COMPOUNDS (UNIT 2)
C. Amphoteric Oxides
Activity 2.3
1. How would you classify the oxides of period III elements?
2. What trend do you observe in the properties of oxides of the elements in a period as
you go from left to right in the periodic table?
Discuss this in your group and present to the class.
There are oxides which exhibit both acidic and basic properties. These are known as
amphoteric oxides. In their reaction with acids, they behave as bases and, in their
reaction with bases they act as acids. The following reaction shows the amphoteric
behaviour of aluminium oxide, Al O .
2 3
Amphoteric oxide + Acid Æ salt + water
Al O (s) + 6HCl (aq) Æ 2AlCl (aq) + 3H O (l)
2 3 3 2
Amphoteric oxide + base Æ salt + water
Al O (s) + 2NaOH (aq) Æ 2NaAlO (aq) + H O (l)
2 3 2 2
sodium aluminate
Some other examples of amphoteric oxides are ZnO, PbO, PbO , SnO, and SnO . It
2 2
is also important to realize that hydroxides which react with both acids and bases are
described as amphoteric substances. For example, aluminium hydroxide, Al(OH) , reacts
3
with both acids and bases to form salt and water. So, Al(OH) , is amphoteric in nature.
3
What is the common characteristic of acidic, basic and amphoteric oxides? Acidic
oxides form salts when reacted with basic oxides and bases. Basic oxides also produce
salts in their reactions with acidic oxides and acids. Amphoteric oxides form salts
when they react with acids and bases. Thus, acidic oxides, basic oxides and amphoteric
oxides are salt-forming oxides.
Exercise 2.5
Write chemical equations to show the amphoteric properties of ZnO and PbO
when they react with:
a HCl
b NaOH
c HNO
3
d KOH
99
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Experiment 2.2
Investigating Amphoteric Behaviour of Oxides
Objective: To observe the amphoteric behaviour of Al O .
2 3
Materials required:
Spatula, reagent bottles, beakers, glass rod, Al O , HCl, NaOH, Universal
2 3
indicator and water.
Procedure:
1. Prepare solutions by:
a mixing 20 mL concentrated HCl and 80 mL water in one reagent bottle;
b dissolving 8 g NaOH in 100 mL water in another reagent bottle.
c Add universal indicator to the acid and base, and observe the colour change.
2. Take two beakers and place a spatula full of Al O in each of the beakers.
2 3
3. Pour the HCl solution (which you prepared) into one of the beakers and NaOH
solution into the other. Stir the mixture with a glass rod.
4. Add universal indicator in the two beakers and observe the colour change.
Observations and analysis:
1. Does Al O react with the substances in both solutions?
2 3
2. What does the change in colour of the indicator in the mixtures indicate?
3. Write chemical equations to show what has happened?
Write a laboratory report and present to the class.
D. Neutral Oxides
Neutral oxides react neither with acids nor with bases to form salt and water. Hence,
neutral oxides do not show basic and acidic properties. Examples of neutral oxides
are water, H O, carbon monoxide, CO, dinitrogen monoxide, N O, and nitrogen
2 2
monoxide, NO. Neutral oxides are very few in number.
Activity 2.4
1. In a beauty saloon which chemical is used to decolorize hair? What is the oxidation
number of oxygen in this compound?
100
IMPORTANT INOGANIC COMPOUNDS (UNIT 2)
2. If Na O and CaO are reacted with water, do you get the same compound, which is
2 2 2
used to decolorize hair? Compare the oxidation number of oxygen in Na O and MgO
2
with the oxidation number of the compound used for decolorizing hair.
Discuss your findings in group and present to the class.
E. Peroxides
In acidic, basic, amphoteric and neutral oxides, the oxidation state of oxygen is –2,
but in peroxides it is –1. In peroxides, the two oxygen atoms are linked to each other
and with atoms of other elements. They contain the peroxide, “– O – O –” link. In
the oxides discussed above, oxygen atoms are linked directly with atoms of other elements.
Some examples of peroxides are hydrogen peroxide, H O , sodium peroxide, Na O ,
2 2 2 2
calcium peroxide, CaO , barium peroxide, BaO , and strontium peroxide, SrO .
2 2 2
Most peroxides of metals are formed by burning the metals in a sufficient amount of oxygen.
2Na (s) + O (g) Æ Na O (s)
2 2 2
Ca (s) + O (g) Æ CaO (s)
2 2
Chemical Properties of Peroxides
What chemical properties do the peroxides exhibit? Some of the chemical properties
of peroxides include:
a Peroxides are powerful oxidizing agents; they react with different substances
by losing oxygen.
Examples
PbS (s) + 4H O (aq) Æ PbSO (s) + 4H O (l)
2 2 4 2
2KI (aq) + H SO (aq) + H O (aq) Æ I (s) + K SO (aq) + 2H O (l)
2 4 2 2 2 2 4 2
b Peroxides react with aqueous acids to form hydrogen peroxide.
Examples
Na O (s) + 2HCl (aq) Æ 2NaCl (aq) + H O (aq)
2 2 2 2
CaO (s) + H SO (aq) Æ CaSO (s) + H O (aq)
2 2 4 4 2 2
Hydrogen Peroxide
The structure of the hydrogen peroxide molecule is:
101
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Hydrogen peroxide decomposes to release oxygen. This reaction is slow but can be
speeded up by the addition of manganese (IV) oxide, MnO , as a catalyst.
2
2H O (aq) Æ 2H O (l) + O (g)
2 2 2 2
Hydrogen peroxide is a strong oxidizing agent. Its oxidizing power is responsible for
its effectiveness as an antiseptic for mouthwash and cleansing wounds. It is also used
as a bleaching agent. When hydrogen peroxide is added to a coloured dye, the molecule
responsible for the colour will oxidize and so the colour will disappear. For example,
if hydrogen peroxide is added to a black dye (paint) that contains lead sulphide, PbS,
the black colour turns white. This is due to the oxidation of PbS to PbSO . The
4
equation for this process is:
PbS (s) + 4H O Æ PbSO + 4H O (l)
2 2 4 2
Experiment 2.3
Distinguishing Peroxides from Other Oxides
Objective: To identify peroxides from other oxides.
Materials required:CaO or MgO, Al O or ZnO or PbO, Na O or BaO ,
2 3 2 2 2,
P O , KI, dilute H SO , starch, water, reagent bottle, six beakers, dropper,
4 10 2 4
and spatula.
Procedure:
1. Take three beakers. In the first beaker, dissolve 20 g KI in water to prepare
a 250 mL solution. Dilute 2 mL concentrated H SO by pouring it in 18 mL
2 4
of water in the second beaker. Prepare starch solution in the third beaker by
boiling 1g starch in 100 mL water.
2. Take four beakers and pour 50 mL KI solution to each of them. Acidify the
solutions in each of the beakers by adding 5-10 drops of dilute H SO . Add
2 4
a spatula full of CaO or MgO in the first, Al O or ZnO or PbO in the
2 3
second, Na O or BaO in the third and P O in the fourth beaker and then
2 2 2 4 10
add about 5 mL starch solution to each of the four beakers.
Observations and analysis:
a In which beaker do you see a colour change?
b What is the cause of the colour change?
c Write a balanced chemical equation for the change?
Write a laboratory report and present to the class.
102
IMPORTANT INOGANIC COMPOUNDS (UNIT 2)
Exercise 2.6
1. Classify the following oxides as acidic, basic, amphoteric, neutral and peroxides:
a K O c SO e CaO
2 2
b CO d Al O f NO
2 3 2
g MgO k NO n CaO
2
h N O l PbO o Li O
2 2
i ZnO m Na O p P O
2 2 4 6
j BaO
2
2. Complete and balance the following equations:
a BaO + P O Æ e Al O + HNO Æ
4 10 2 3 3
b SrO + SO Æ f CaO + HCl Æ
3
c CO + KOH Æ g PbO + NaOH Æ
2
d ZnO + H PO Æ h MgO + H SO Æ
3 4 2 4
3. Which acidic oxide should react with water to form each of the following
acids?
a HNO d H SO
3 2 3
b H CO e H PO
2 3 3 4
c H SO f H PO
2 4 3 3
4. Identify the basic anhydrides that react with water to form each of the following
bases:
a Ba(OH) e KOH
2
b Sr(OH) f CsOH
2
c Mg(OH)
2
d LiOH
5. How do peroxides differ from other groups of oxides?
6. How can you identify whether an oxide is acidic or basic?
2.3 ACIDS
Competencies
After completing this section, you will be able to:
• define acids in terms of Arrhenius, Brønsted-Lowry and Lewis;
103
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
• give examples of acids based on Arrhenius, Brønsted-Lowry and Lewis concepts;
• classify acids as monoprotic and polyprotic based on the numbers of ionizable
hydrogen atoms;
• group acids as binary and ternary based on the number of elements they contain;
• explain the general properties of acids;
• define strong and weak acids;
• distinguish between strong and weak acids;
• define concentrated and dilute acids;
• describe the conceptual difference between strong and concentrated acids;
• use the necessary precautions while working with acids;
• define pH and describe the pH scale;
• identify a given pH labelled solution as acidic, basic or neutral;
• perform activities to determine the pH of some common substances using
universal indicator or a pH-meter;
• calculate the pH of a given acidic solution;
• calculate the hydrogen ion concentration from the given information;
• perform activities to investigate some physical properties of acids;
• perform activities to investigate some chemical properties of acids;
• explain the direct combination of elements, the reaction of acidic oxides with
water, formation of volatile acids from non-volatile acids as the three methods
of preparation of acids;
• conduct simple experiments to prepare acids in a laboratory; and
• describe the uses of three common laboratory acids.
Activity 2.5
1. How do you describe an acid?
2. Give some examples of acids and bases that you have encountered in your everyday
life?
3. List as many sour foods as possible which you have ever tasted.
4. In which form does the hydrogen ion, H+, exist in aqueous solutions?
Discuss with your group and present it to the class.
104
IMPORTANT INOGANIC COMPOUNDS (UNIT 2)
Acids are among the most familiar of all chemical compounds. Acetic acid in vinegar,
citric acid in lemons and other citrus fruits, are among the acids that we encounter
every day. Hydrochloric acid is the acid in gastric juice; it is essential to digestion.
Phosphoric acid gives flavour to many carbonated beverages.
Definitions of Acids
a Arrhenius Definition of Acids
The simplest definition of acids is suggested by Savante Arrhenius, a Swedish Chemist.
Arrhenius defined an acid as a substance that releases hydrogen ion or proton, H+, or
hydronium ion, H O+, in aqueous solution.
3
Example
HCl(aq) Æ H+(aq) + Cl–(aq)
or,
HCl(aq) + H O(l) Æ H O+(aq) + Cl–(aq)
2 3
Some examples of Arrhenius acids are HCl, HNO , H SO , HI, HBr, and HF. For a
3 2 4
substance to be called an Arrhenius acid, it should contain ionizable hydrogen.
Despite its early success and usefulness, the definition of an acid, first proposed by
Arrhenius has some limitations. The Arrhenius definition of acids explains their behaviour
only in aqueous solution. In addition, it does not explain why some substances show
acidic behaviour in the gaseous state and in non-aqueous solutions.
For example, when ammonia and hydrogen chloride gases are brought together, they
react to form ammonium chloride as follows:
NH (g) + HCl (g) Æ NH Cl (s)
3 4
In this reaction, the hydrogen chloride provides hydrogen ion (or proton), H+, which
reacts with NH to form NH +. But, this happens in the gaseous state not in aqueous
3 4
solution. Due to the limitations of Arrhenius’ definition, chemists tried to define acids in
a more general way.
Brønsted-Lowry Definition of Acids
A broader and more general definition of acids was provided independently in 1923,
by Johannes Brønsted and Thomas M. Lowry. According to Brønsted-Lowry definition;
an acid is a substance that donates protons, H+, to some other substance.
105
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Examples
HCl (aq) + H O (l) Æ H O+ (aq) + Cl– (aq)
2 3
NH (aq) + H O (l) (cid:85) NH+ (aq) + OH– (aq)
3 2 4
H PO (aq) + 2H O (l) (cid:85) HPO2– (aq) + 2H O+ (aq)
3 4 2 4 3
In the above reactions, HCl in the first, H O in the second and H PO in the third
2 3 4
are Brønsted-Lowry acids because they are proton donors. Here it is very important
to realize that all Arrhenius acids are Brønsted-Lowry acids. However, the reverse
is not true because Brønsted-Lowry acids include substances that are not acids
according to Arrhenius.
Although the Brønsted-Lowry definition of an acid is more general than the definition
proposed by Arrhenius, it still depends on the transfer of protons. However, the
presence of acids that are not proton-donors, initiated chemists to search for another
definition of acids.
b Lewis Definition of Acids
In 1923, the American chemist Gilbert Newton Lewis produced a definition of acid
that extends the concept of acids even further than that of Brønsted-Lowry.
According to Lewis, an acid is a substance that can form a coordinate covalent
bond by accepting an electron pair from another substance. In other words, an
acid is an electron-pair acceptor. Consider the following reactions:
In the above reaction, between BF and F–, BF acts as a Lewis acid since it accepts
3 3
a pair of electrons from F–.
The Lewis definition of an acid is also valid for the Arrhenius concept of an acid.
This is because as the acid releases an hydrogen ion, H+, in aqueous solution, the
released proton or H+ accepts a pair of electrons from a water molecule to form an
hydronium, H O+ ion.
3
106
IMPORTANT INOGANIC COMPOUNDS (UNIT 2)
The Lewis definition of an acid is also valid for the Brønsted-Lowry concept of
acids. Since Brønsted-Lowry defined an acid as a proton donor, the donated proton
can be accepted by a molecule or species that has lone pair of electrons. So the
proton, H+, is an electron pair acceptor and hence a Lewis acid. Consider the
following reaction.
NH (g) + H O (l) (cid:85) NH+ (aq) + OH– (aq)
3 2 4
In this reaction, H O is a proton donor and hence a Brønsted-Lowry acid. The donated
2
proton from water to ammonia, accepts a pair of electrons from the nitrogen atom in
NH to form NH + as shown below:
3 4
The Lewis concept of acids not only includes H+ as an acid, but also ions or molecules
capable of accepting an electron pair that neither release H+ in aqueous solution nor
donate a proton.
Classification of Acids
Activity 2.6
Phosphoric acid, H PO , has three hydrogen atoms and it is a triprotic acid. Acetic acid,
3 4
CHCOOH, has four hydrogen atoms and is classified as a monoprotic acid. Discuss the
3
reason in your group and present it to the class.
There are different ways of classifying acids; they can be classified depending on the
number of replaceable (ionizable) hydrogen atom(s) they contain per molecule as
monoprotic or polyprotic acids.
Monoprotic acids are the acids containing only one ionizable (replaceable)
hydrogen atom per molecule or those acids that can furnish only one hydrogen
107
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
ion per molecule in aqueous solution. Common examples of monoprotic acids are
HCl, HNO , HBr, HI, and CH COOH. The ionization of a monoprotic acid in aqueous
3 3
solution is presented using HCl and HNO as specific examples, as shown below:
3
HCl (aq) Æ H+ (aq) + Cl– (aq)
HNO (aq) Æ H+ (aq) + NO– (aq)
3 3
Polyprotic acids are those acids containing more than one ionizable (replaceable)
hydrogen ion in aqueous solution. Example of acids in this category includes H SO ,
2 4
H CO , and H PO .
2 3 3 4
The ionization of polyprotic acids in aqueous solution is shown in the following chemical
equations:
H SO (aq) Æ 2H+ (aq) + SO2– (aq)
2 4 4
H CO (aq) (cid:85) 2H+ (aq) + CO2– (aq)
2 3 3
H PO (aq) (cid:85) 3H+ (aq) + PO3– (aq)
3 4 4
Polyprotic acids which contain two ionizable hydrogen atoms such as H SO , H S,
2 4 2
and H CO are also called diprotic acids; those containing three ionizable hydrogen
2 3
atoms like H PO are called triprotic acids.
3 4
Activity 2.7
Ammonia and phosphoric acid have three hydrogen atoms but ammonia does not behave
as triprotic acid. Why? Discuss in your group and present it to the class.
Acids can also be classified depending on the number of their constituent elements as
binary and ternary acids. Binary acids are those acids composed of only two elements.
Examples of binary acids are HCl, HBr, HF, HI, and H S.
2
Ternary acids also called oxy-acids are acids composed of three different elements.
They usually contain hydrogen, oxygen and a non-metal. Examples are H SO , H CO ,
2 4 2 3
HClO , and H PO .
4 3 4
General Properties of Acids
Activity 2.8
Add a drop of lemon juice on your tongue and try to identify its taste. Repeat your
observation with orange juice. Do the two juices taste bitter or sour? Try to classify them
as acid or base, depending on their taste. Share your observations with the rest of class.
108
IMPORTANT INOGANIC COMPOUNDS (UNIT 2)
Acids generally have the following properties:
1. Acids have a sour taste
Aqueous solutions of acids have a sour taste. Lemon juice and orange juice taste
sour due to the presence of citric acid. Citric acid is harmless. However, most
concentrated acids are corrosive and poisonous. So it is strictly forbidden to attempt
to identify such acids by tasting them.
2. Acids change the colour of indicators
The common indicators available in high school laboratories are litmus,
phenolphthalein, methyl orange or methyl red and universal indicator. The effect of
acids on the colour of indicators is summarized in Table2.1, Section 2.2.
Experiment 2.4
Effect of Acids on Indicators
Objective: To detect acidity of a solution using indicators.
Materials required: Lemon juice, dilute HCl, dilute HNO , dilute H SO
3 2 4
phenolphthalein, litmus, methyl red, universal indicator, test tubes, test tube rack,
test tube holder, and reagent bottles.
Procedure:
Take four clean test tubes and place some lemon juice in the first, dilute HCl
in the second, dilute HNO in the third and dilute H SO in the fourth. Dip a
3 2 4
strip of blue litmus paper into each of the four test tubes and observe. Follow
the same procedure and repeat the experiment until each acid has been tested
by each indicator. Record your observation.
Observations and analysis:
What colours have you observed when each indicator was added to each of
the four acid solutions? Use the following Table to record your observation:
Colour of indicator in
Indicator Lemon juice dilute HCl dilute HNO dilute H SO
3 2 4
Phenolphthalein
Litmus
Methyl red
Universal
indicator
Write a laboratory report and present to the class.
109
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
3. Acids react with active metals to form salt and hydrogen gas
Metals like magnesium, zinc, and iron react with dilute acids to form salt and liberate
hydrogen gas.
Acid + Active metal Æ Salt + Hydrogen gas
Examples
2HCl + Zn Æ ZnCl + H
2 2
H SO + Mg Æ MgSO + H
2 4 4 2
Very active metals like sodium, potassium, and calcium react very violently with dilute
acids. The reaction is very dangerous and should not be performed.
Acids reacting with metals do not necessarily produce hydrogen gas. For example,
concentrated nitric acid and hot concentrated sulphuric acid react with copper producing
nitrogen dioxide and sulphur dioxide gases, respectively, instead of hydrogen. This is
because concentrated HNO and hot concentrated H SO are oxidizing acids. The
3 2 4
reactions of these acids with copper are given by the following equations:
Cu + 4HNO Æ Cu(NO ) + 2NO + 2H O
3 3 2 2 2
Cu + 2H SO Æ CuSO + SO + 2H O
2 4 4 2 2
Experiment 2.5
Investigating the Reactions of Metals with Dilute Acids
Objective: To investigate the reaction between active metals and dilute acids.
Materials required: Dilute H SO , dilute HCl, zinc, magnesium and iron, test
2 4
tubes, test tube holder, test tube rack, burner, wooden splint, spatula.
Procedure:
Take three test tubes and place a spatula-full of powdered zinc in the first,
powdered magnesium in the second and iron filings in the third. Pour dilute
HCl into each of the test tubes until the metals are completely covered by the
acid. To test the type of gas evolved, cover one of the test tubes with a piece
of cardboard for a few seconds. Bring a burning splint close to the mouth of
the test tube and remove the cardboard.
Repeat the experiment with dilute H SO after placing each of the three metals
2 4
in three different test tubes.
110
IMPORTANT INOGANIC COMPOUNDS (UNIT 2)
Observations and analysis:
a What does the formation of bubbles indicate?
b What sound do you hear when the burning splint is close to the mouth of
the test tube?
c Which gas is evolved during the reaction?
d Which metal’s reaction with dilute HCl or H SO is the most violent?
2 4
Write a laboratory report on your observations and present to the class.
4. Acids react with carbonates and hydrogen carbonates to form salt, water
and carbon dioxide gas
Acid + hydrogen carbonate Æ salt + water + carbon dioxide
Acid + carbonate Æ salt + water + carbon dioxide
Examples
2HCl + MgCO Æ MgCl + H O + CO
3 2 2 2
H SO + Ca(HCO ) Æ CaSO + 2H O + 2CO
2 4 3 2 4 2 2
2HNO + Na CO Æ 2NaNO + H O + CO
3 2 3 3 2 2
Experiment 2.6
Reactions of Acids with Carbonates and Hydrogen Carbonates
Objective: To investigate the reaction between acids and carbonates and bicarbonates.
Materials required: Sodium carbonate, calcium carbonate, calcium or magnesium
or sodium bicarbonate, dilute HCl, dilute H SO , dilute HNO , lime water
2 4 3
(Ca(OH) solution) blue and red litmus paper, conical flask, delivery tube,
2
rubber stopper, beaker.
Procedure:
1. Take three conical flasks and add powdered Na CO in the first, powdered
2 3
CaCO to the second and powdered sodium bicarbonate to the third. Pour
3
dilute HCl into each of the three conical flasks until the acid covers the carbonates
and bicarbonate. Hold damp blue litmus paper close to the mouth of the conical
111
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
flasks. Repeat this with damp red litmus paper and record your observations.
Bubble the gas through limewater as shown in Figure 2.1.
Deliverytube
Rubberstopper
Conicalflask
Beaker
Gasbubbles
CaCO DiluteHCl Limewater
3
Figure 2.1 Test for Carbon dioxide.
2. Repeat the experiment using the same carbonates and hydrogencarbonate with
dilute H SO and dilute HNO .
2 4 3
Observations and analysis:
a What does the formation of bubbles in the conical flasks indicate?
b Does the colour of the damp blue litmus paper change when you hold it close
to the mouth of the conical flasks? What about the colour of damp red litmus?
c What happened to the colour of lime water when you bubble the gas through
it? If there was any change, what did it prove? Write a balanced chemical
equation for the change?
Write a laboratory report on your observation and present to the class.
5. Concentrated acids react with sulphites liberating sulphur dioxide gas
and forming a salt and water
Sulphite + Acid Æ Sulphur dioxide + Salt + Water
Examples
Na SO + 2HCl Æ SO + 2NaCl + H O
2 3 2 2
CaSO + H SO Æ SO + CaSO + H O
3 2 4 2 4 2
6. Acids neutralize basic oxides and bases or alkalis to form salt and water
The reaction of acids with basic oxides or bases to form salt and water is called
neutralization reaction.
Acid + Basic oxide Æ Salt + Water
112
IMPORTANT INOGANIC COMPOUNDS (UNIT 2)
Examples
2HCl + MgO Æ MgCl + H O
2 2
H SO + CaO Æ CaSO + H O
2 4 4 2
Acid + Base Æ Salt + Water
Examples
H SO + 2NaOH Æ Na SO + 2H O
2 4 2 4 2
HNO + KOH Æ KNO + H O
3 3 2
Experiment 2.7
Neutralization Reaction
Objective: Investigate the reaction between acids and bases
Materials required: 1 M HCl, 1 M NaOH, 0.5 M Ca(OH) , red and blue litmus
2
papers, four 150 mL beakers, two droppers, stirring rod, two watch glasses.
Procedure:
1. Make 1 M NaOH solution by dissolving 4.0 g NaOH in enough water to
make 100 mL solution.
2. Make a 1 M HCl solution by dissolving 8.3 mL of concentrated HCl in enough
distilled water until the volume of the solution is 100 mL.
3. Dissolve 3.7 g of Ca(OH) in enough distilled water to make 100 mL solution.
2
4. To a 150 mL beaker add 10 mL HCl solution and 9.5 mL NaOH solution and
stir thoroughly and test with blue and red litmus paper. Continue adding NaOH
solution dropwise using a dropper, stirring after each addition and checking
with red and blue litmus until the blue remains blue and the red stays red. Put
2 mL of the neutral solution in a watch glass and allow the water to evaporate
until the next day.
5. To another 150 mL beaker add 10 mL Ca (OH) solution and 9.5 mL HCl
2
solution. Repeat all the steps, which you followed in procedure 4.
113
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Observations and analysis:
a Is there any colour change, when you dip blue and red litmus papers into the
solution of the acid and the base?
b Why is it necessary to add NaOH solution dropwise (one drop at a time) in
procedure 4?
c During this experiment, under what conditions does the blue litmus remain blue
and the red remain red?
d What are the products formed in procedures 4 and 5? Write balanced chemical
equations for the reactions?
Write a laboratory report on your observations and submit to your teacher.
7. Acids are electrolytes They conduct electricity in aqueous solutions.
Strength of Acids (Strong and Weak Acids)
Activity 2.9
1. Add a few drops of citric acid solution and nitric acid separately on a piece of waste
cotton cloth; what happens? Based on your observations, can you classify these acids as
weak acid or strong acid?
2.You are allowed to taste some acids like acetic acid (in the form of vinegar), and citric
acid at home, but you are never allowed to taste any kind of acids in the laboratory.
What is the reason?
Discuss your findings in your group and present to the class.
Acids can be classified as strong acids and weak acids depending on their degree of
ionization in aqueous solution, i.e., the extent to which the acids dissociate to form
hydrogen or hydronium ions when they dissolve in water. A strong acid is one that
ionizes almost completely in aqueous solution. Examples of strong acids are HClO ,
4
HI, HBr, HCl, HNO , and H SO . These acids dissociate to a very high extent as
3 2 4
shown below:
HCl (aq) Æ H+ (aq) + Cl– (aq)
HNO (aq) Æ H+ (aq) + NO– (aq)
3 3
HClO (aq) Æ H+(aq) + ClO– (aq)
4 4
A dilute aqueous solution of strong acids contains predominantly the ions derived from
the acids instead of the acid molecules. For example, HCl and HNO are almost
3
completely ionized in water.
114
IMPORTANT INOGANIC COMPOUNDS (UNIT 2)
An acid that releases few hydrogen ions in aqueous solution is a weak acid. The
aqueous solution of a weak acid contains hydronium ions, anions and dissolved
molecules of the acid.
Organic acids which contain the acidic carboxyl group –COOH, are generally weak
acids. For example, CH COOH, ionizes slightly in water to give hydronium ions and
3
acetate ions, CH COO–.
3
CH COOH (aq) + H O(l) (cid:85) CH COO– (aq) + H O+(aq)
3 2 3 3
Concentrated and Diluted Acids
Activity 2.10
1. In a solution, if there is 95% H O and the rest is HCl, what kind of solution is it?
2
2. In a car battery, the electrolyte used is 35% of H SO . How many percent of it is water?
2 4
What do you think about the concentration of the electrolyte?
“Concentrated” and “dilute” are terms used to describe the relative amount of acid in
a given acid solution.
A concentrated acid contains a relatively large amount (percentage) of acid and a
small amount of water. For example, concentrated sulphuric acid is 98% H SO and
2 4
2% water. Concentrated acetic acid is 99% acetic acid and 1% water. But, H SO is
2 4
a strong acid and CH COOH a weak acid.
3
A dilute acid contains a relatively small amount of acid dissolved in large amount of
water. For example, a diluted solution of sulphuric acid may contain 10% H SO and
2 4
90% H O.
2
The concentration of an acid is the measure of the number of moles of the acid in one
litre of acid solution and is expressed in mol/L. This unit of concentration is called
Molarity, denoted by M. Mathematically,
Numberof molesof thesubstancedissolved
Molarity (M) =
Volumeof solutioninlitres
Mass of the substance dissolved in grams
Number of moles of the substance =
Molar mass of the substance
For example, the concentration of 98% H SO is about 18 mol/L. If one litre of this
2 4
acid is added to 2 litres of water to make 3 litres of solution, the concentration will
115
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
become 6 mol/L. The new solution obtained is a dilute solution of H SO . Thus,
2 4
concentrated acids contains a greater number of moles of acid while dilute acids contain
less number of moles of the acid per litre of the acid solution.
Example
How many moles of HCl are present in 0.8 L of a 0.5 M HCl solution?
Solution:
n
M = fi n = MV = 0.5 M × 0.8 L = 0.4 mol HCl, where M is the
V
molarity, n, the number of moles and V, volume of solution in litre.
An important aspect of the property of acids is that they conduct electricity in aqueous
solutions, i.e., the acids are electrolytes. The extent of conduction of electricity depends
on the amount of ions present in the solution. Thus, aqueous solutions of strong acids
are better conductors of electricity than the same concentrations of weak acid solutions.
The conduction of electricity through acid solution is also used as one means of
identification between weak and strong acids.
Experiment 2.8
Can Aqueous Acid Solution Conduct Electricity?
Objectives: To investigate the conductivity of acids
Materials required: 1 M HCl, 1 M HNO ,1 M CH COOH, three 150 mL beakers,
3 3
two graphite electrodes, insulated electric wires, two dry cells, and bulb
Procedure:
Take about 100 mL of 1 M HCl in the first beaker, the same volume and
concentration of HNO and CH COOH in the second and third beakers respectively.
3 3
Arrange the set up as shown in Figure 2.2. First test the conduction of electricity
through HCl solution by inserting the two graphite electrodes. See whether the
bulb glows or not. Is the light bright or dim? Record your observation. Repeat
the same activity with HNO and CH COOH. Rinse the electrodes after use
3 3
in each of the acid solutions. Compare the intensity of light produced with
HNO and CH COOH.
3 3
116
IMPORTANT INOGANIC COMPOUNDS (UNIT 2)
Bulb
+ –
Battery
Switch
Anode(+) Cathode(–)
HClsolution
Figure 2.2 Conductivity of acid solution.
Observations and analysis:
a In which of the acid solutions does the bulb produce:
i) bright light? ii) dim light?
b What conclusions can you draw from your observations?
Write a laboratory report on your observations and present to the class.
Precautions when Handling Acids
Concentrated acids are extremely corrosive and poisonous. They can destroy metals
and clothes; produce a chemical burn on skin or inside the body. If taken internally
they can be fatal. So acids must be handled with care.
The following precautions are helpful while working with acids:
a Wear goggles, gloves and a laboratory coat.
b If a concentrated acid is spilled or splashed on your body, first wash the affected
part with running water and then with 10% Na CO solution.
2 3
c If concentrated acid is spilled on to cloth, immediately wash it with running water.
d If an acid enters your eye, wash with water repeatedly and then consult a doctor.
117
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
e If corrosive acids are swallowed, administer weak bases such as Mg(OH) or
2
Al(OH) .
3
f Use bellows to pipette acid instead of sucking using yours lips.
g To dilute concentrated acids, pour the concentrated acid in to water and not
water in to the acid.
pH and pH scale
Expressing acidity as the concentration of H O+ can be cumbersome because the
3
values tend to be very small. A more convenient quantity called pH is used to indicate
the concentration of H O+. The letter pH stands for the French words pouvoir
3
hydrogène, meaning “hydrogen power”.
pH is defined as the negative logarithm of the hydrogen ion concentration (hydronium
ion concentration). The mathematical expression is:
1
pH = log = – log [H+]
[H+]
The square bracket [ ] means concentration in mol/L.
To calculate the hydrogen ion concentration of a solution from its pH we can proceed
as follows.
[H+] = antilog (–pH) = 10–pH
The pH of a solution can be measured using universal indicator solution, pH indicator
paper or a pH-meter. When universal indicator solution or pH indicator papers are
added to an acid solution, they develop different colours depending on the pH of the
solution. So, to identify the pH, we need to compare the colour developed with the
standard colour chart. A pH meter is an electronic device, which reads the pH of a
solution directly. (Figure 2.3).
b
a
Figure 2.3 a) The colour of universal indicator in solutions of pH from 1 to 12,
b) A pH meter with its electrical probe dipped into an orange.
118
IMPORTANT INOGANIC COMPOUNDS (UNIT 2)
Acidity and alkalinity are usually expressed on the pH scale. The range is between 0
and 14.
A neutral solution has a pH value of 7 at 298 K. Acidic solutions have pH values less
than 7. As the pH value decreases the acidity of the solution increases. For example,
if two solutions A and B have pH values of 4 and 6, respectively, then we can conclude
that solution A is more acidic than solution B. The hydrogen ion concentration in
solution A is one hundred times greater than that in B.
The following examples will guide us through how to calculate pH values of solutions.
Example
Calculate the pH of a 0.001 M solution of HCl?
Solution:
HCl is a strong acid and dissociates almost completely.
The dissociation of 0.001 M (0.001 mol/L) of HCl produces 0.001 mol/L of
H+ and 0.001 mol/L of Cl– as follows:
HCl (aq) Æ H+(aq) + Cl– (aq)
0.001 mol/L 0.001mol/L 0.001 mol/L
Thus, [H+] = 0.001 mol/L = 1 × 10–3 M
pH = –log [H+] = – log 1 × 10–3 = 3
Example
The hydrogen ion concentration in a dilute solution of vinegar is 4.6 × 10-5 M.
What is the pH of the solution?
Solution:
pH = – log [H+] = – log (4.6 × 10–5) = – (log 4.6 + log 10–5)
= – (log 4.6 – 5) = – (0.663 – 5) = 4.337
119
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Example
The pH of lemon juice was determined to be 3. What is the hydrogen ion
concentration in the lemon juice?
Solution:
pH = – log [H+]; –pH = log [H+]
[H+] = antilog (–pH) = 10–pH = 10–3M
Exercise 2.7
1. The pH of a given solution is 8. What is the hydrogen ion concentration of the
solution?
2. Two solutions A and B have pH values of 2 and 6 respectively. How many
times greater is the hydrogen ion concentration in solution A than that of
solution B?
Experiment 2.9
pH of Solutions of Common Substances
Objective: To determine the pH of different substances
Materials required: Lemon juice, vinegar, tonic water, tomato juice, beakers, and
universal indicator solution or pH indicator paper
Procedure:
Take four beakers and place lemon juice in the first, vinegar solution in the
second, tonic water in the third and filtered tomato juice solution in the fourth.
Then pour a few drops of universal indicator solution or dip a piece of pH
indicator paper into each of the solutions. Compare the colour developed with
standard colour chart to decide the pH of each solution.
Observations and analysis:
a What is your conclusion based on your observations?
b Are the substances used in this experiment acidic or neutral? Why?
c Record your observations using the following Table:
120
IMPORTANT INOGANIC COMPOUNDS (UNIT 2)
Substance Colour developed pH
Lemon juice
Vinegar solution
Tonic water
Tomato juice
Write a laboratory report on your observations and present to the class.
Preparation of Acids
Acids can be prepared by:
1. The reaction of oxides of non-metals (acidic oxides) and water:
Acidic oxide + Water Æ Acid
Examples
SO (g) + H O (l) Æ H SO (aq)
2 2 2 3
N O (s) + H O (l) Æ 2HNO (aq)
2 5 2 3
P O (s) + 6H O (l) Æ 4H PO (aq)
4 10 2 3 4
2. Direct combination of some non-metals like S, Cl, Br with hydrogen:
This method is mostly used to prepare binary acids (acids consisting only two
elements)
Examples
H (g) + Cl (g) Æ 2HCl (g)
2 2
H (g) + Br (g) Æ 2HBr (g)
2 2
When gaseous hydrogen chloride and hydrogen bromide dissolve in water,
they form hydrochloric acid and hydrobromic acid respectively.
3. Using a non-volatile acid: Volatile acids can be prepared by heating their
salts with a non-volatile acid such as concentrated sulphuric acid, H SO .
2 4
Hydrochloric acid HCl and nitric acid, HNO can be prepared by this method
3
according to the following equations.
NaCl (s) + H SO (l) Æ NaHSO (s) + HCl (l)
2 4 4
NaNO (s) + H SO (l) Æ NaHSO (s) + HNO (l)
3 2 4 4 3
121
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Experiment 2.10
Preparation of Chlorous Acid
Objective: To investigate the product formed from Ba(ClO ) and H SO
2 2 2 4
Materials required: Two 250 mL beakers, glass rod, water, dropper, test tubes,
test tube rack, blue and red litmus papers, methyl red, Ba(ClO ) and
2 2
concentrated H SO .
2 4
Procedure:
1. Dissolve 12 g Ba(ClO ) to prepare 100 mL solution in one beaker. Dilute 2
2 2
mL concentrated H SO with water to prepare 50 mL of dilute H SO solution
2 4 2 4
in the second beaker.
2. Add 80 mL of Ba(ClO ) solution to the dilute solution of H SO in the second
2 2 2 4
beaker. Is there any formation of the white precipitate? What do you think is
the precipitate formed? Wait for some time till the precipitate settles. Continue
adding Ba(ClO ) solution using a dropper, one drop at a time until formation
2 2
of white precipitate stops. After all the precipitate settles, take 5 mL of the
clear liquid in a test tube and test with litmus or methyl red.
Observations and analysis:
a Is the final solution acidic or basic?
b Which acid is formed?
c Write a balanced chemical equation for the reaction.
Write a laboratory report as a group and present to the class.
Reading assignment
Refer to chemistry books from the library and write the uses of sulphuric acid, nitric
acid and hydrochloric acid.
Uses of some important acids
Activity 2.11
1. List uses of some common acids in your daily life.
2. High consumption of sulphuric acid in a country indicates the economic growth of the
country. What is the reason? Discuss in groups and present to the class.
122
IMPORTANT INOGANIC COMPOUNDS (UNIT 2)
Hydrochloric Acid, HCl is present naturally in the gastric juice of our body and
helps in the digestion of food. Industrially, hydrochloric acid is important for pickling
of iron and steel (to remove surface impurities) before galvanizing and tin plating. It
is also used to produce aniline dyes, drugs, photographic films, plastics like polyvinyl
chloride (PVC), and to recover magnesium from sea water.
Nitric Acid, HNO is used industrially in the manufacture of explosives such as
3
trinitrotoluene (TNT) and trinitroglycerine, fertilizers such as KNO and NH NO ,
3 4 3
rubber, chemicals, plastics, dyes and drugs.
Sulphuric acid, H SO is the leading industrial chemical. It is widely used in the
2 4
production of sulphate and phosphate fertilizers, synthetic fibres, paints, drugs,
detergents, paper and dyes. It is also used in petroleum refining, production of metals
and as electrolyte in car batteries.
Exercise 2.8
1. Which one of the following substances are Arrhenius acids:
a HClO d BF
4 3
b HI e HF
c HBr f PCl
5
2. In each of the reactions listed below, identify the Brønsted-Lowry acid:
a CH COOH (aq) + H O (l) (cid:85) CH COO– (aq) + H O+ (aq)
3 2 3 3
b HCN (aq) + SO 2– (aq) (cid:85) CN– (aq) + HSO– (aq)
4 4
c HF (aq) + NH (g) (cid:85) F– (aq) + NH + (aq)
3 4
d HClO (aq) + N H (aq) (cid:85) ClO– (aq) + N H + (aq)
4 2 4 4 2 5
3. Identify the Lewis acids in each of the following reactions:
a AlCl + Cl– Æ AlCl –
3 4
b BF + NH Æ F B – NH
3 3 3 3
c SiCl + 2Cl– Æ SiCl –2
4 6
d PF + F– Æ PF –
5 6
123
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
4. Classify the following acids as monoprotic, diprotic or triprotic, binary or ternary,
strong or weak acids. (give three answers for each type):
a HClO h HNO
4 3
b H SO i CH COOH
2 4 3
c H CO j H SO
2 3 2 3
d HF k H S
2
e HCl l H PO
3 4
f HNO
2
g HCN
5. A reagent bottle (labelled as A) is filled with HCl solution and the other (labelled
as B) is filled with water. Both liquids in the bottles are colourless. What
method do you recommend to identify the acid and water?
6. What is the basis for the classification of acids as strong and weak?
7. What is the pH of a solution having the following hydrogen ion concentrations?
a 5 × 10–3 M b 0.003 M c 2.0 × 10–6 M
8. Calculate the hydrogen ion concentrations in solutions having the following pH
values:
a 4 b 2 c 5
9. How many moles of H SO are present in 0.500 L of a 0.150 M H SO
2 4 2 4
solution?
2.4 BASES
Competencies
After completing this section, you will be able to:
• define bases in terms of the concepts of Arrhenius, Brønsted-Lowry and Lewis;
• give examples of bases based on Arrhenius, Brønsted-Lowry and Lewis
concepts;
124
IMPORTANT INOGANIC COMPOUNDS (UNIT 2)
• explain the general properties of bases;
• define strong and weak bases;
• distinguish between strong and weak alkalis (soluble bases);
• define concentrated and dilute alkalis;
• distinguish between concentrated and dilute alkalis (soluble bases);
• use the necessary precautions while working with bases;
• define pOH;
• show the mathematical relationship between pH and pOH;
• calculate the pOH of a given solution;
• calculate the concentration of hydroxide ions from the given information;
• conduct activities to investigate some chemical properties of bases;
• explain the reaction of active metals with water, the reaction of basic oxides
with water, and double displacement reactions as the three methods of preparation
of bases;
• conduct simple experiments to prepare bases in a laboratory;
• describe the uses of the three common laboratory bases (NaOH, Ca(OH)
2
and NH ).
3
Activity 2.12
1. Have you ever wondered about the origin of the saying “it is a bitter pill (kosso) to
swallow”? Discuss and give a meaning to the saying.
2. Discuss why farmers sometimes need to put crushed limestone on their soil.
3. While taking bath, have you ever had soap in your mouth? How does it taste?
Share your experience with your class.
Bases belong to the class of inorganic compounds that include most oxides and
hydroxides of metals. They are of great importance in chemical industries and in our
daily lives, directly or indirectly. For example, sodium hydroxide, NaOH is used in the
production of soap, paper, textile etc. Potassium hydroxide, KOH is used to produce
soft soap, fertilizers etc. Calcium hydroxide, Ca(OH) , is used to manufacture mortar
2
and bleaching powder, to remove soil acidity etc.
Definition of Bases
There are different definitions of bases, as suggested by different chemists namely Arrhenius,
Bronsted-Lowry and Lewis.
125
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Arrhenius definition of bases: A base is any substance that ionizes (dissociates) in
aqueous solution to release hydroxide, OH– ions. Arrhenius bases are mostly ionic
metal hydroxides such as, LiOH, NaOH, KOH and Ba(OH) . The dissociation of a
2
few bases is shown by the following equations:
NaOH (aq) Æ Na+ (aq) + OH– (aq)
Ba(OH) (aq) Æ Ba2+ (aq) + 2OH– (aq)
2
Brønsted-Lowry definition of bases: A base is a substance that is capable of
accepting proton(s), H+. Thus, a base is a proton, H+ acceptor.
Note:
Note that not all Brønsted-Lowry bases are Arrhenius bases, but all Arrhenius
bases contain the hydroxide ion which is a Brønsted-Lowry base. This is because
OH- can accept a proton, H+, to form water.
According to the Brønsted-Lowry definition, an acid-base reaction is the transfer of a
proton from an acid to a base.
Example
NH (aq) + HCl (aq) Æ NH + (aq) + Cl– (aq)
3 4
Base Acid
HCO– (aq) + OH– (aq) (cid:85) CO2−(aq) + H O (l)
3 3 2
Acid Base
Lewis Definition of Bases
The Lewis definition is a more general definition than the Arrhenius and Brønsted-
Lowry definitions. According to Lewis, a base is a substance that is capable of
donating a pair of electrons. In other words, a base is an electron-pair donor.
Brønsted-Lowry bases are also bases according to the Lewis concept. This is
because for Brønsted-Lowry bases to accept a proton, H+ they should have a
lone pair. However, Lewis base include other species that can form a coordinate
covalent bond by sharing their lone pair with substances other than a proton, H+.
It is important to note that Lewis acid-base reactions include many reactions that
do not involve protons. The following equation shows an acid-base reaction
according to Lewis concept:
126
IMPORTANT INOGANIC COMPOUNDS (UNIT 2)
Example
Activity 2.13
Consider the following reactions:
NH + H+ Æ NH+
3 4
BF + F– Æ BF–
3 4
In the above reactions, name the Lewis acids and Lewis bases. Do NH and F– act as Lewis
3
acid or Lewis base? Why?
General Properties of Bases
Activity 2.14
Dissolve one table-spoon of washing soda in a glass of water. Try to wash your hands with
this solution. How do you feel? Does it give a soapy touch or an oily touch. Share your
observations with the rest of the class.
Bases like NaOH, KOH, and Ba(OH) are readily soluble in water, while others such as
2
Mg(OH) are slightly soluble. Bases that are soluble in water are also called alkalis.
2
Bases or alkalis show the following properties:
1. Bases are slippery to the touch and have a bitter taste: Bases have a bitter
taste; feel slippery to the skin in dilute aqueous solutions. Strong bases such as
NaOH and KOH are very corrosive and poisonous. So they should be neither
brought in to contact with the skin nor tasted.
2. Soluble bases change the colour of indicators: Aqueous solutions of bases
turn the colour of red litmus to blue, phenolphthalein to pink (red), methyl red to
yellow and universal indicator blue (purple).
127
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
3. Soluble bases release hydroxide ion in aqueous solution: The characteristic
properties of bases in aqueous solutions are due to the presence of the hydroxide
ion, OH– which they release on dissolution.
Examples
KOH (aq) Æ K+ (aq) + OH– (aq)
Ca(OH) (aq) (cid:85) Ca2+ (aq) + 2OH– (aq)
2
4. Bases neutralize acids or acidic oxides to form salt and water:
Base + Acid (or acidic oxide) Æ Salt + Water
Examples
2NaOH (aq) + H SO (aq) Æ Na SO (aq) + 2H O (l)
2 4 2 4 2
2KOH (aq) + SO (g) Æ K SO (aq) + H O (l)
3 2 4 2
Ca(OH) (aq) + 2HCl (aq) Æ CaCl (aq) + 2H O (l)
2 2 2
5. Aqueous solutions of bases conduct electricity: Soluble bases are electrolytes.
Solutions of strong bases are good conductors while solutions of weak bases are
poor conductors.
Strength of Bases (Strong and Weak Bases)
Activity 2.15
Is a concentrated base a strong base and a dilute base a weak base? Discuss in your
group and present to the class.
Both acids and bases are classified as strong and weak depending on their degree of
ionization (dissociation) in aqueous solution.
Strong bases are those which ionize (dissociate) completely or almost completely in
water solutions. Examples of strong bases include hydroxides of alkali (Group IA)
metals and lower members of alkaline earth metals such as LiOH, NaOH, KOH, and
Ba(OH) .
2
Examples
LiOH (aq) Æ Li+ (aq) + OH– (aq)
KOH (aq) Æ K+ (aq) + OH– (aq)
128
IMPORTANT INOGANIC COMPOUNDS (UNIT 2)
Weak bases are those bases which ionize (dissociate) only partially or slightly in aqueous
solution. Examples of weak bases include NH , and Ca(OH) .
3 2
The dissociation of a weak base can be shown as follows using, NH , as an example.
3
NH (g) + H O (l) (cid:85) NH + (aq) + OH– (aq)
3 2 4
The double arrow shows that the dissociation of a weak base does not proceed to
completion. This means an aqueous solution of a weak base contains only a small
amount of ions derived from the dissociation of the base and a large amount of the
non-ionized base. For example, a solution of ammonia containing 0.1 mole NH per
3
litre of solution ionizes only to the extent of 1.3%.
Concentrated and Dilute Bases
Concentrated and dilute solutions are terms used to describe the amount of a substance
present in a given volume of solution. The amount can be described in terms of either
percentage or number of moles. Concentrated bases contain relatively large amounts
of a base in a given volume of solution while dilute base solutions contain only a small
amount of base. The concentration of a base is the measure of the number of moles
of the alkali (base) dissolved in one litre of solution. The concentration is expressed
in terms of mole per litre (Molarity).
number of moles of the base
Molarity of the base =
volume of solution in litres
The greater the number of moles of the base per litre of the solution the more
concentrated is the solution. For example, a solution containing ten moles of NaOH
per litre is more concentrated than the solution containing two moles of NaOH per
litre. The latter solution is more dilute than the former. Thus, both a strong base and a
weak base may be concentrated or dilute depending on the number of moles of the
base present per litre.
Precautions when Handling Bases
Strong bases such as sodium hydroxide and potassium hydroxide can attack human
skin, and even damage animal and plant tissues. That is why NaOH and KOH are
named caustic soda and caustic potash respectively. The word “caustic” refers to a
substance that can cause burning. Thus, it is very important to avoid the contact of
bases with any part of our body or clothing. Not only strong bases but weak bases
are also corrosive. For example, concentrated ammonia solution can cause blindness if
splashed into the eye.
129
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
The following safety precautions are useful in handling bases in school laboratories or
anywhere while working with them.
a Wear eye goggles, gloves and a laboratory coat.
b If bases are spilled on your working table wipe the spillages immediately.
c Whenever bases are splashed on your cloth, wash the affected part with running
water.
d If a base enters your eyes, wash with water repeatedly as first aid treatment
and seek medical advice.
e If a base is swallowed by accident, drink 1-2% acetic acid or lemon juice
immediately.
f Whenever bases come in to contact with your skin, wash the affected part with
plenty of water and then wash the affected part with a very dilute solution (about
1%) of a weak acid such as acetic acid.
pOH
Activity 2.16
1. Since water, H O, has H+ and OH–, it is both acidic and basic. Is this true?
2
2. If [OH–] increases in a solution what happens to its [H+]? Share your comments with
your group.
pH is the measure of the hydrogen (H+) or hydronium (H O+) ion concentration in a
3
solution. In the same manner, pOH is the measure of the hydroxide, OH– ion
concentration in a solution. It also measures the acidity or alkalinity of a solution as
pH does.
pOH is defined as the negative logarithm of hydroxide, OH” ion concentration.
pOH = –log [OH–]
To calculate the hydroxide ion concentration from a given pOH value, we proceed as
follows:
[OH–] = antilog (–pOH) = 10–pOH
Relationship Between pH and pOH
How can you derive the mathematical relationship between pH and pOH? To
understand the relationship between pH and pOH let us start from the ionization of
water. Water undergoes ionization to a small extent as follows:
H O (l) (cid:85) H+ (aq) + OH– (aq)
2
130
IMPORTANT INORGANIC COUMPOUNDS (UNIT 2)
or
2H O (l) (cid:85) H O+ (aq) + OH– (aq)
2 3
We can write a mathematical expression for the ionic product of water or dissociation
constant for water, K as
w
K = [H+] [OH–] = [H O+] [OH–] (2.1)
w 3
K = 1.0 × 10–14 (mol/L)2 at 25°C
w
Since water is neutral, [H+] = [OH–] or [H O+] = [OH–]. So we can write equation
3
2.1 as
K = [H+] [OH–] = [H+]2 = 1.0 × 10–14(mol/L)2
w
Solving for [H+]
[H+] = 1.0 × 10–14(mol )2 =1.0 × 10–7mol/L
L
Thus, in any neutral aqueous solution at 25°C,
[H+] = [OH–] = 1.0 × 10–7 mol/L
In an acid solution, [H+] > [OH–] and in a basic solution, [OH–] > [H+]. However,
the product [H+] × [OH–] remains constant, i.e., 1.0 × 10–14 at 25°C. Thus, if the
concentration of either H+ or OH– is known in a given solution, we can calculate the
concentration of the other.
K K
[OH–] = + W ; [H+] = W
[H ] [OH–]
To find the relationship between pH and pOH let us begin with equation 2.1.
K = [H+] [OH–] = 1.0 × 10–14 (mol/L)2
w
Take the negative logarithm of both sides
–log K = –log [H+] [OH–] = –log 1.0 × 10–14
w
–log K = –log [H+] + (–log [OH–]) = –log 1.0 ×10–14
w
but, –log K = pK ,
w w
–log [OH–] = pOH,
–log [H+] = pH
–log 1.0 × 10–14 = 14
So, the above equation becomes
pk = pH + pOH = 14 (at 25°C) (2.2)
w
131
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Thus, the sum of pH and pOH is 14 for any aqueous solution, at 25°C. Since pH,
pOH, [H+] and [OH–] are interrelated through K , knowing any one of the values
w
enables us to determine the others.
Table 2.2: Acidity and Basicity in relation to [H+], [OH–], pH and pOH.
Solution [H+] (mol/L) [OH–] (mol/L) pH pOH
Acidic solution > 10–7 < 10–7 < 7 > 7
Basic solution < 10–7 > 10–7 > 7 < 7
Example
The hydroxide ion concentration in a solution is 5.0 × 10–5M? Calculate:
a pOH b [H+] c pH
Solution:
a To calculate pOH we proceed as follows.
pOH = – log [OH–] = – log (5 ×10–5) = – (log10–5 – log 5)
= 5 – log 5 = 4.3
b [H+] is calculated using the relationship
K 1.0×10 –14 (mol/L)2
[H+] = W = = 2.0 × 10–10 M
[OH–] –5
5.0×10 mol/L
c pH = –log [H+] = –log 2.0 × 10–10
= 10 – log 2 = 9.7
Since the pOH of the solution is found in part (a), we can also calculate the
pH using the relationship
pH + pOH = 14
pH + 4.3 = 14
pH = 14 – 4.3 = 9.7
Exercise 2.9
1. Determine the [OH–] in 3 × 10–5 M solution of HCl.
2. Determine the pH of 2.0 × 10–2 M Sr(OH) solution assuming complete
2
dissociation.
132
IMPORTANT INORGANIC COUMPOUNDS (UNIT 2)
Experiment 2.11
Chemical Behaviour of Bases
Objectives: To investigate the thermal stability and reaction of bases with acids.
Materials required: NaOH or KOH, Ca(OH) , HNO , water, blue and red litmus
2 3
papers, cobalt chloride, test-tube, test-tube rack, test-tube holder, Bunsen
burner, three beakers, dropper, measuring cylinder, glass rod and watch glass.
Procedure:
1. Place 4.5 g NaOH or KOH in one test-tube and the same amount of Ca(OH)
2
in another test-tube. Heat the test-tube containing NaOH or KOH gently using
a Bunsen burner, by holding the test tube with a test tube holder. Hold the
cobalt chloride paper partly inserted in the test tube. See whether the cobalt
chloride paper shows a colour change or not. Repeat the same experiment
with the second test tube that contains Ca(OH) .
2
2. Dissolve 3.6 g KOH in distilled water to prepare 100 mL solution in one
beaker. Dilute 2 mL concentrated HNO to make a 50 mL solution in another
3
beaker. Add 10 mL KOH solution and 9.5 mL HNO to the third beaker, stir
3
thoroughly and test with blue and red litmus papers. Continue adding HNO
3
using a dropper, one drop at a time stirring after each addition and checking
with red and blue litmus until the blue remains blue and the red remains red.
Put 5 mL of the neutral solution on a watch glass and allow the water to
evaporate until the next day.
Observations and analysis:
1. What type of reaction occurred between the KOH and HNO ? Write the balanced
3
chemical equation for the reaction.
2. What is left on the watch glass?
3. Which hydroxide melts on heating? Which base decomposes on heating to give
metal oxide and water? How do you know this? Write the balanced chemical
equation for the reaction.
Write a laboratory report and present to the class.
Preparation of Bases
Bases containing hydroxide ion (hydroxide bases) can be prepared by the following
methods:
133
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
1. By the reaction of highly reactive metals from Group IA and Group IIA (below
magnesium) with water. This reaction produces the metal hydroxide with the
liberation of hydrogen gas.
Examples
2Li (s) + 2H O (l) Æ 2LiOH (aq) + H (g)
2 2
2K (s) + 2H O (l) Æ 2KOH (aq) + H (g)
2 2
Ca (s) + 2H O (l) Æ Ca (OH) + H (g)
2 2 2
2. By the reaction of Group IA or Group IIA metal oxides with water, which
gives the metal hydroxides.
Metal oxide + Water Æ Metal hydroxide
Examples
Na O (s) + 2H O (l) Æ 2NaOH (aq)
2 2
CaO (s) + 2H O (l) Æ Ca(OH) (aq)
2 2
BaO (s) + 2H O (l) Æ Ba(OH) (aq)
2 2
3. By double displacement reaction.
This method involves the reaction of an aqueous solution of a soluble base and
a soluble salt, which gives another soluble base and an insoluble salt as products.
Soluble base + Soluble salt Æ Another Soluble base + Insoluble salt
Examples
Ba(OH) (aq) + K SO (aq) Æ 2KOH (aq) + BaSO (s)
2 2 4 4
Ca(OH) (aq) + Na CO (aq) Æ 2NaOH (aq) + CaCO (s)
2 2 3 3
Experiment 2.12
Preparation of Bases
Objective: To prepare bases from metal and metal oxides.
Materials required: Water, trough, a knife, tongs, filter paper, litmus paper,
test tubes, test tube rack, calcium or sodium metal, CaO or MgO, Na SO
2 4
134
IMPORTANT INORGANIC COUMPOUNDS (UNIT 2)
or K SO , Ba(OH) solution, spatula, balance, three beakers, measuring
2 4 2
cylinder, dropper, glass rod.
Procedure:
1. Pour clean water into a trough to three-fourth of its volume. Then take a piece
of sodium metal or calcium metal from the bottle with tongs. If you use sodium,
place it on filter paper and then blot it to remove the oil. Carefully cutoff a
very small piece with a knife and drop this piece onto the surface of the water
in the trough. Observe the reaction.
After the reaction is complete, take some solution from the trough and add it
to two test tubes. Test the solution in the first test tube using red litmus paper
and add a few drops of methyl orange to the second.
2. Add a half a spatula measure of CaO or MgO to a test tube containing clean
water. Shake well and then test whether the solution is acidic or basic using
red litmus paper. Does the colour of the red litmus paper change?
3. Add 6 g Na SO or 7 g K SO to the first and 7 g Ba(OH) to the second
2 4 2 4 2
beaker. Add water to each beaker and stir with a glass rod to prepare a 100
mL solution of each sample. After dissolution is complete, take 20 mL Ba(OH)
2
solution and pour it into the third beaker. Measure 20 mL Na SO or K SO
2 4 2 4
solution, mix it with the solution in the third beaker and shake well. Observe
what is happening. Continue adding Na SO or K SO solution drop by drop
2 4 2 4
using a dropper while shaking the solution after the addition of each drop.
When the formation of a white precipitate does not occur anymore stop adding
Na SO or K SO solution and test whether the solution in the third beaker is
2 4 2 4
acidic or basic using litmus paper.
Observations and analysis:
1. Does the colour of red litmus paper change when dipped into the solutions obtained
in procedure 1 and 2? Are the solutions acidic or basic?
2. What gas is given off during the reaction in procedure 1?
3. Why do you think is the white precipitate formed?
4. What is the nature of the final solution in the third beaker?
5. Write balanced chemical equations for the reactions.
Write a laboratory report on your observations and present to the class.
135
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Uses of Some Important Bases
Sodium hydroxide, NaOH: This is known by the common name lye or caustic soda.
It is one of the most important laboratory and industrial chemicals. It is used in the
laboratory for absorbing carbon dioxide and other acidic gases, in a number of organic
reactions and in chemical analysis. Industrially, it is used in the manufacture of soaps
and detergents, pulp and paper, textiles, dyes, cosmetics, pharmaceuticals, in purifying
aluminium ore and petroleum refining. It is also used to clean drains since it dissolves
grease and other organic matter.
Potassium hydroxide, KOH: It is commonly known as caustic potash. It is a stronger
base and is more expensive than NaOH and has limited uses. It is used as an electrolyte
in some dry cells and to make soft soap.
Calcium hydroxide, Ca(OH) : It is also called slaked lime or lime water when it is
2
dissolved in water. It is a weaker base than NaOH and KOH, and is widely used to
remove soil acidity, to make mortar (mixture of lime, sand and water) which serves
as binding material for bricks and plastering walls, to remove temporary hardness of
water and in manufacturing bleaching powder. Its aqueous solution is also used to test
for carbon dioxide gas.
Ammonia: A solution of gaseous ammonia, NH in water is used as household cleaning
3
agent and as a laboratory reagent. It is used to manufacture ammonium fertilizers,
Reading Assignment
The common uses of NaOH, KOH, Ca(OH) and NH have been described
2 3
above. After reading reference books in your library, search for some more uses
of these compounds. Present your findings to the class.
Exercise 2.10
1. Identify the Brønsted-Lowry bases and acids in each of the following chemical
reactions:
a HCOOH (aq) + CN– (aq) (cid:85) HCOO– (aq) + HCN (aq)
b H S (g) + OH– (aq) (cid:85) HS– (aq) + H O (l)
2 2
2. Identify the substances acting as Lewis bases and acids in each of the following
chemical reactions:
a AlCl (aq) + Cl– (aq) Æ AlCl– (aq)
3 4
b H+ (aq) + NH (g) Æ NH + (aq)
3 4
136
IMPORTANT INORGANIC COUMPOUNDS (UNIT 2)
3. What is the concentration of the base (in molarity) containing:
a 80 g NaOH is dissolved in water to make 1 litre of solution?
b 224 g KOH is dissolved in water to make 2 litres of solution?
4. Calculate the pOH, [H+] and pH of the solutions having the following hydroxide
ion concentrations:
a [OH–] = 4.6 × 10–3 mol/L b [OH–] = 2.5 × 10–6 mol/L
5. Potassium hydroxide solution is added from a burette to dilute hydrochloric
acid solution in a beaker. Which of the following changes will not occur in the
beaker:
a The pH of the solution in the beaker increases.
b The [H+] of the solution in the beaker decreases.
c The pOH of the solution in the beaker increases.
6. How many moles of NaOH are contained in 65 mL of a 2.20 M solution of
NaOH in H O?
2
7. A solution of barium hydroxide, Ba(OH) , contains 4.285 g of barium hydroxide
2
in 100.0 mL of solution. What is the molarity of the solution?
2.5 SALTS
Competencies
After completing this section, you will be able to:
• define salts;
• give examples of salts;
• classify salts as acidic, normal and basic salts;
• explain the direct combination of elements, the reaction of acids with bases and
the reaction of acids with metals as methods of salt preparation;
• conduct simple experiments to prepare a salt by neutralization;
• list some important salts and discuss their uses;
• explain the properties of salts;
• describe the chemical tests of some salts by conducting activities;
• mention the essential nutrients of plants;
• describe the functions of nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium in plant growth;
137
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
• define fertilizers;
• list some common fertilizers;
• explain the importance of fertilizers; and
• list some common inorganic compounds that are used as pesticides and herbicides.
Activity 2.17
Discuss the following in your group and present it to the class:
1. List all the salts that you know and tell where they are found.
2. Make a list of coloured salts available in your school laboratory.
3. Which salts are found in Dalol area, Ethiopia?
Salts are ionic compounds that contain positive ions (cations) derived from bases and
negative ions (anions) derived from acids. Salts are also defined as ionic compounds
formed when the ionizable hydrogen of acids are partly or completely replaced by
metal ions or ammonium ions. For example, Ca(HCO ) and CaCO are salts derived
3 2 3
from the acid H CO while the salts Mg(H PO ) , MgHPO and Mg (PO ) are
2 3 2 4 2 4 3 4 2
salts derived from H PO .
3 4
• A salt is produced when an acid is neutralized by a base:
Acid + Base Æ Salt + Water
Examples
HCl (aq) + NaOH (aq) Æ NaCl (aq) + H O (l)
2
H SO (aq) + Ca(OH) (aq) Æ CaSO (s) + 2H O (l)
2 4 2 4 2
Some common examples of salts are sodium chloride (NaCl), calcium carbonate
(CaCO ), potassium nitrate (KNO ), copper sulfate (CuSO ) etc.
3 3 4
Classification of Salts
Activity 2.18
Recall the concept of the neutralization reaction between an acid and a base to give a salt and water.
a What would be the nature of the salt, if all the acid hydrogen ions are not replaced by
metal ions or ammonium ion?
138
IMPORTANT INORGANIC COUMPOUNDS (UNIT 2)
b What would be the nature of the salt, if all the base hydroxide ions are not replaced by
the anions of the acid?
Discuss in your group and present the findings to the class.
Salts can be classified as:
• Acidic salts: These are salts in which not all of the hydrogen ions in an acid have
been replaced by metal ions or ammonium (NH+) ions.
4
Example: Sodium hydrogen sulphate, NaHSO .
4
When acidic salts are dissolved to make an aqueous solution, they release H+
ions which make the solution acidic. For example, NaHSO releases ions in
4
aqueous solution as follows:
NaHSO (aq) Æ Na+ (aq) + H+ (aq) + SO2– (aq)
4 4
• Normal salts: These are salts in which all of the hydrogen ions in an acid
have been replaced by metal ions or ammonium ions.
Example: Sodium sulphate, Na SO .
2 4
Normal salts do not contain ionizable H+ or OH–.
Example
Na SO release ions as follows:
2 4
Na SO (aq) Æ 2Na+ (aq) + SO2– (aq)
2 4 4
• Basic salts: These are salts in which not all of the hydroxide ions in a base
have been replaced by the anions of the acid.
Example: Zinc hydroxychloride, Zn(OH)Cl.
When basic salts are dissolved to make an aqueous solution, they release OH–
ions and this makes the solution basic.
Zn(OH)Cl (aq) Æ Zn2+ (aq) + OH– (aq) + Cl– (aq)
Preparation of Salts
Activity 2.19
List a few methods to prepare sodium chloride in the laboratory? Discuss in groups and
present it to the class.
139
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Salts can be prepared by the following methods:
1. Direct combination of elements: This method is used to prepare binary
salts, that is, salts consisting of only two elements.
Examples
2Na (s) + Cl (g) Æ 2NaCl (s)
2
Fe (s) + S (s) Æ FeS (s)
Fe (s) + 3Cl (g) Æ 2FeCl (s)
2 3
2. Reacting active metals with dilute acids:
Active metal + Acid Æ Salt + Hydrogen gas
Examples
2Al (s) + 6HCl (aq) Æ 2AlCl (aq) + 3H (g)
3 2
Mg (s) + 2HCl (aq) Æ MgCl (aq) + H (g)
2 2
Zn (s) + H SO (aq) Æ ZnSO (aq) + H (g)
2 4 4 2
Since, the reactions of metals of Group IA like sodium and potassium are very
vigorous, it is advisable not to use the metals of Group IA for the preparation
of salts by this method.
Sometimes, the reaction of active metals with dilute acids to prepare salts may
not be as successful as expected. For example, calcium sulphate is only sparingly
soluble in water. So in the reaction with dilute sulphuric acid, calcium tends to
become coated with calcium sulphate which inhibits the reaction from proceeding.
3. Reacting metal oxides with acids (by neutralizing basic oxides with
dilute acids):
Metal oxide + Dilute acid Æ Salt + Water
Examples
CaO (s) + 2HCl (aq) Æ CaCl (aq) + H O (l)
2 2
CuO (s) + H SO (aq) Æ CuSO (aq) + H O (l)
2 4 4 2
ZnO (s) + 2HNO (aq) Æ Zn(NO ) (aq) + H O (l)
3 3 2 2
140
IMPORTANT INORGANIC COUMPOUNDS (UNIT 2)
4. Reacting metal hydroxides with dilute acids: This reaction is commonly called
neutralization.
Metal hydroxides + Dilute acid Æ Salt + Water
Examples
NaOH (aq) + HCl (aq) Æ NaCl (aq) + H O (l)
2
2KOH (aq) + H SO (aq) Æ K SO (aq) + 2H O (l)
2 4 2 4 2
5. Reacting metal carbonates or hydrogen carbonates with dilute acids:
The reaction of carbonates or hydrogen carbonates with dilute acids always
releases carbon dioxide gas along with the formation of a salt and water.
Metal carbonates + Dilute acid Æ Salt + Water + Carbon dioxide
Examples
MgCO (s) + H SO (aq) Æ MgSO (aq) + CO (g) + H O (l)
3 2 4 4 2 2
CuCO (s) + 2HCl(aq) Æ CuCl (aq) + H O (l) + CO (g)
3 2 2 2
Na CO (s) + 2HNO (aq) Æ 2NaNO (aq) + H O (l) + CO (g)
2 3 3 3 2 2
Ca(HCO ) (s)+ 2HCl(aq) Æ CaCl (aq) + 2H O (l) + 2CO (g)
3 2 2 2 2
6. Double decomposition reaction (double displacement reaction): In this
method, two different soluble salts react to form a soluble and an insoluble salt
as products that can be separated easily.
Examples
Pb(NO ) (aq) + NaI (aq) Æ PbI (s) + 2NaNO (aq)
3 2 2 3
CaCl (aq) + Na CO (aq) Æ CaCO (s) + 2NaCl (aq)
2 2 3 3
It may be noted that each method of preparing salts cannot be used to make
every salt; i.e., different methods may be used to make different salts.
141
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Experiment 2.13
Preparing salts from Metallic Oxides and Acid
Objective: To prepare copper sulphate from copper oxide and sulphuric acid.
Materials required: Copper oxide, sulphuric acid, beaker, filter funnel, filter paper,
evaporating dish.
Procedure:
1. Pour some sulphuric acid in beaker and add copper (II) oxide, warm and stir
gently.
2. When the reaction is complete, filter the solution to remove excess copper
oxide.
3. Transfer the filtrate to the evaporating dish and evaporate some of the water
from the filtrate. Leave for the salt to crystallize out.
Observations and analysis:
1. What is the product formed? Write a balance chemical equation for the reaction.
2. What is the colour change as the reaction occurs? What does this show?
Write a laboratory report and present to the class.
Some Important Salts and their Uses
Activity 2.20
1. Have you ever taken Oral Rehydration Salt (ORS) for diarrhoea? What are the contents
of the ORS?
2. Can you prepare your own ORS?
Discuss in your group and present to the class.
Sodium chloride (common salt, NaCl) is widely used in the preparation and
preservation of food, as raw a material for the manufacture of sodium, chlorine, and
sodium hydroxide. It is used as component of Oral Rehydration Salt (ORS) that has
medical applications. It is also used to manufacture baking soda (NaHCO ) and
3
Na CO that serve as raw materials for the production of glass.
2 3
Ammonium nitrate, (NH NO ) is used as a nitrogenous fertilizer and in explosives.
4 3
142
IMPORTANT INORGANIC COUMPOUNDS (UNIT 2)
Copper (II) sulphate, (CuSO ) is used to make Bordeaux mixture (mixture of CuSO
4 4
and Ca(OH) ) and other fungicides. Bordeaux mixture is used to prevent fungal attack
2
of leaves and vines. CuSO is also useful in electroplating.
4
Iron (III) chloride, (FeCl ) is used in the treatment of waste water, and in etching
3
printed circuits.
Potassium nitrate, (KNO ) is used in making gun powder (mixture of KNO , carbon
3 3
and sulphur) and other explosives. It is also used as a fertilizer.
Calcium sulphate, (CaSO .2H O, Gypsum) is used for plastering walls and
4 2
supporting fractured bones.
Barium sulphate, (BaSO ) is given to patients as a “barium meal” before gastro-
4
intestinal x-ray photography; it is also used as a white pigment.
Iron (II) sulphate (FeSO ) is given as iron tablets to patients who suffer from anaemia.
4
Properties of salts
Salts can be classified depending on the anion (negative ion) they possess, because
the anion is partly responsible for the solubility of the salt.
1. Solubility of salts. The following table summarizes some simple observations
about the solubility of some groups of salts.
Table 2.2 Solubility of salts.
Soluble salts Exceptions
(cid:127) All nitrates (NO–), perchlorates (ClO–), (cid:127) No exception
3 4
chlorates (ClO–) and acetates
3
(CH COO–)
3
(cid:127) Most halides (cid:127) Those containing Ag+, Hg2+, Pb2+
(AgCl, AgBr, AgI, HgCl , HgBr , HgI , PbCl , PbBr ,
2 2 2 2 2
PbI ) (PbCl is soluble in hot water)
2 2
(cid:127) Most sulphates (cid:127) BaSO , HgSO , PbSO , SrSO
4 4 4 4
(cid:127) Carbonates (CO2–), phosphates (PO3–) (cid:127) All carbonates, phosphates and
3 4
and sulphides (S2–) of alkali metals sulphides of other elements are insoluble
and ammonium ion (NH+)
4
(cid:127) Sulphides of alkaline-earths, Group IIA,
elements
2. Tendency to absorb water from the atmosphere or release water to the
atmosphere.
143
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Depending on their tendency to absorb water from or release water to the
atmosphere, salts can be classified as hygroscopic, deliquescent and
efflorescent.
Hygroscopic salts are those which absorb water from the atmosphere but remain
solid.
Deliquescent salts absorb water from the atmosphere to form a solution. The
process of absorbing water from the atmosphere by a solid to form a solution
is called deliquescence.
Efflorescent salts lose their water of crystallization to the atmosphere. The
loss of water of crystallization by solid crystals to the atmosphere is known as
efflorescence.
It is very important to note that all deliquescent substances are hygroscopic,
but all hygroscopic substances are not necessarily deliquescent.
Table 2.3 Examples of hygroscopic, deliquescent and efflorescent salts.
Deliquescent Hygroscopic Efflorescent
(cid:127) Calcium chloride , CaCl (cid:127) Anhydrous Copper( II) (cid:127) Hydrated sodium
2
sulphate, CuSO carbonate Na CO (cid:127)10H O
4 2 3 2
(cid:127) Sodium Nitrate, NaNO (cid:127) Hydratedsodium sulphate,
3
Na SO (cid:127)10H O
2 4 2
(cid:127) Iron (III) chloride, FeCl
3
(cid:127) Magnesium chloride, MgCl
2
(cid:127) Lithium nitrate, LiNO
3
(cid:127) Sodium nitrate, NaNO
3
3. Aqueous solutions of soluble salts are good conductors of electricity, because
they release mobile positive and negative ions in solution.
Examples
NaNO (aq) Æ Na+ (aq) + NO– (aq)
3 3
CaCl (aq) Æ Ca2+(aq) + 2Cl– (aq)
2
4. Thermal stability of salts: When different salts containing the same anion
are heated, they may not show similar behaviour. Some salts are thermally
stable while others undergo decomposition. The following examples illustrate
this fact.
144
IMPORTANT INORGANIC COUMPOUNDS (UNIT 2)
a Thermal decomposition of carbonates:
Carbonates are salts containing a carbonate,as an anion. Carbonates of Group
IIA and most transition metals decompose on heating to give the metal oxides
and carbon dioxide:
heat
MgCO (s) → MgO (s) + CO (g)
3 2
heat
CuCO (s) → CuO (s) + CO (g)
3 2
However, carbonates of sodium and potassium are not decomposed by heat.
b Thermal decomposition of nitrates
Nitrates are salts containing a nitrate, asan anion. Heating nitrates of Group IIA
and most transition metals produces a metal oxide, nitrogen dioxide and oxygen:
heat
Nitrate → Metal oxide + Nitrogen dioxide + Oxygen
Examples
heat
2Mg(NO ) (s) → 2MgO (s) + 4NO (g) + O (g)
3 2 2 2
heat
2Pb(NO ) (s) → 2PbO (s) + 4NO (g) + O (g)
3 2 2 2
Nitrates of sodium and potassium decompose on heating to give nitrites and
oxygen gas;
heat
2NaNO (s) → 2NaNO (s) + O (g)
3 2 2
heat
2KNO (s) → 2KNO (s) + O (g)
3 2 2
The carbonate and nitrate of lithium differ from those of sodium and potassium;
they decompose on heating in the following manner:
heat
4LiNO (s) → 2Li O (s) + 4NO (s) + O (g)
3 2 2 2
heat
Li CO (s) → Li O (s) + CO (g)
2 3 2 2
145
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Chemical Tests of Some Ions in Salts
Activity 2.21
1. Do you know why fireworks give different colours? Consult books in your library, and
discuss in your group. Explain to the class.
2. How do chemists know of the presence of certain ions in a compound?
There are several simple tests which may help in the identification of metal ions and
anions present in salts.
1. Flame tests: Certain metals give a characteristic colour to a Bunsen flame
when their solid salts or moist salts are heated directly in the flame.A flame test
is commonly used to identify the presence of lithium, sodium, potassium, calcium,
strontium and barium ions in salts.
Experiment 2.14
Test for cations-I
Objective: To identify the presence of Li+, Na+, K+, Ca2+, Sr2+ and Ba2+ in salts by
flame tests.
Materials required: Platinum or nichrome wire, watch glass, Bunsen burner, distilled
water, salts containing Li+, Na+, K+, Ca2+, Sr2+ and Ba2+.
Procedure:
1. Place a small amount of the salt containing a Li+ ion on a watch glass, moisten it
with pure concentrated HCl, dip the tip of the platinum or Nichrome wire into the
moist salt and then bring to the Bunsen flame.
2. Observe the colour produced.
3. Repeat the same step for salts containing Na+, K+ Ca2+, Sr2+ and Ba2+ and record
your observations. Rinse the platinum or Nichrome wire with distilled water after
each test.
Observations and analysis:
a Write the colour of the flame produced in the following table.
146
IMPORTANT INORGANIC COUMPOUNDS (UNIT 2)
Metal ion in the salt Colour of flame produced
Lithium (Li+)
Sodium (Na+)
Potassium (K+)
Calcium (Ca2+)
Strontium (Sr2+)
Barium (Ba2+)
Write a laboratory report and present to the class.
Experiment 2.15
Test for cations-II
Objectives: To identify the presence of Cu2+, Fe2+ and Fe3+ in salts.
Materials required: Beakers, test tubes, test tube rack, glass rod, ammonia solution,
sodium hydroxide solution, salts containing each of Cu2+, Fe2+ and Fe3+ ions
Procedure:
1. Dissolve a salt containing Cu2+ in the first beaker, Fe2+ in the second and Fe3+
in the third. Take three test tubes and add a 2 mL solution of (each ion) Cu2+
salt to the first, Fe2+ salt solution to the second and Fe3+ salt solution to the
third.
2. Add aqueous ammonia in small quantities until it is in excess, to the first test
tube containing a copper (II) salt solution and record your observations.
3. Add sodium hydroxide solution in small quantities, until it is present in excess,
to the second and third test tubes, and record your observations.
Observations and analysis:
1. What does the formation of a blue precipitate in the first indicate? Write the chemical
equation for the blue precipitate formation.
2. Observe the colours of the precipitates formed and complete the following Table:
147
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Colour observed Confirms the presence of
3. Write balanced chemical equations for the reactions.
Write a laboratory report in group and present to the class.
Experiment 2.16
Test for Halide Ions
Objectives: To identify the presence of Cl–, Br– and I– ions.
Materials required: test tubes, test tube rack, NaCl, NaBr, NaI, AgNO , ammonia
3
solution, reagent bottles, dilute HNO
3
Procedure:
1. Prepare 125 mL solution by dissolving 2.0 g AgNO in the first, 1.59 g NaCl
3
in the second, 2.50 g NaBr in the third and 3.75 g NaI in the fourth reagent
bottle respectively.
2. Take three test tubes and pour about 5 mL of NaCl solution in to the first, 5
mL NaBr solution in to the second and 5 mL NaI solution in to the third. To
each of the solutions in the test tube add 1 mL of dilute HNO followed by
3
addition of about 5 mL AgNO solution. Observe if a precipitate is formed in
3
each beaker.
3. After a precipitate has been formed, add ammonia solution to each test tube
and see what happens to the precipitate.
Observations and analysis:
1. What did the formation of the white precipitate in the first test tube confirm? Name
the compound formed as the white precipitate.
2. What did the formation of the yellow precipitate in the second test tube confirm?
Name the compound formed as the yellow precipitate.
3. What did the formation of the deep-yellow precipitate in the third test tube confirm?
Name the compound formed as the deep-yellow precipitate.
148
IMPORTANT INORGANIC COUMPOUNDS (UNIT 2)
4. What happened to the contents in the three test tubes, when ammonia solution was
added to each of the test tubes?
5. Write balanced chemical equations for the reactions taking place in each test tube.
Write a laboratory report and present to the class.
Experiment 2.17
Test for Sulphates
Objective: To identify for the presence of sulphate using barium salts.
Materials required: Beakers, test tubes, and test tube rack, any soluble sulphate
salt (such as sodium sulphate), barium chloride or barium nitrate solution, and
dilute HCl.
Procedure:
Add some sodium sulfate solution to a test tube and acidify the solution by
adding a few drops of dilute HCl. Then add BaCl or Ba(NO ) solution and
2 3 2
note if a white precipitate is formed.
Observations and analysis:
1. Name the white precipitate formed?
2. Why is it necessary to add a few drops of dilute HCl?
3. Write a balanced chemical equation for the reaction.
Write a laboratory report and present to the class.
Experiment 2.18
Test for Carbonates and Hydrogen Carbonates
Objective: To distinguish betweem carbonates and hydrogen carbonates
Materials required: Na CO , NaHCO , dilute HCl, lime water, conical flasks,
2 3 3
beakers, rubber stopper, gas delivery tube, calcium chloride solution
149
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Procedure:
1. Take 20 mL solution of Na CO and add it to one conical flask and 20 mL
2 3
NaHCO solution to another. Add the same amount of dilute HCl to each of
3
the conical flasks; Fit a rubber stopper to which a delivery tube is inserted to
each conical flask. Allow the gas produced to pass through lime water and
observe the changes.
2. Again take Na CO solution in one conical flask and NaHCO solution in the
2 3 3
other. Add the same amount of CaCl solution to each of the conical flasks.
2
Observations and analysis:
1. What has happened to the lime water in each case?
2. Which solution forms a white precipitate on the addition of CaCl solution?
2
3. Write balanced chemical equations for all the reactions.
Write a laboratory report and present to the class.
Experiment 2.19
Test for Nitrates (Brown Ring Test)
Objectives: To identify the presence of nitrate in a solution.
Materials Required: Test tube, test tube rack, beaker, nitrate solution, iron (II) sulphate
solution, concentrated H SO
2 4
Procedure:
Take 2 mL of nitrate solution in a test tube and add an equal volume of freshly
prepared iron (II) sulphate solution. Hold the test tube in an inclined position
and carefully pour concentrated sulphuric acid down along the inclined side of
the test tube. The acid sinks to the bottom. Carefully observe the changes in
test tube.
Observations and analysis:
1. Where is the brown ring formed?
2. Write the chemical equation for the formation of the brown ring.
3. What does the formation of brown ring in the solution indicate?
Write a laboratory report and present to the class.
150
IMPORTANT INORGANIC COUMPOUNDS (UNIT 2)
Exercise 2.11
1. Name the acid and base pairs required to prepare each of the following salts:
a K SO c MgBr
2 4 2
b Ca(NO ) d BaI
3 2 2
2. Suggest at least three methods for the preparation of salts.
3. Classify the following salts as soluble or insoluble in water:
a NH Cl e Li PO
4 3 4
b FeCO f AgCl
3
c AgNO g CaCl
3 2
d PbSO h Na S
4 2
4. Why do aqueous solutions of soluble salts conduct electricity?
5. Which carbonates do not decompose on heating?
6. Nitrates mostly decompose by heat to give metal oxide, nitrogen dioxide and
oxygen. Which nitrates do not give these products on heating?
7. What reagents do you use to identify the presence of the following ions in
salts?
a Halide ions?
b Fe2+ and Fe3+ ions?
c Sulphate, SO 2– ions?
4
8. An unknown salt when heated with a Bunsen flame produced a bright-yellow
flame. An aqueous solution of this salt when reacted with dilute HCl released a
gas that turns lime water milky. Upon addition of calcium chloride solution to
an aqueous solution of this salt, a white precipitate is formed. What is the
unknown salt?
Plant Nutrients
Essential nutrients
Activity 2.22
1. Form a group and list the kind of fertilizers you are familiar with. Which of the listed
fertilizers are inorganic salts?
151
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
2. Plants need nitrogen for their growth, and there is plenty of nitrogen in the air. If this
is so, why do we apply nitrogeneous fertilizers for plants?
3. Some people prefer to eat organic food that has been grown without fertilizers and
pesticides. Does eating organic food overcome the problems caused by artificial
fertilizers? Discuss in groups and present to the class.
The growth and development of plants is determined by various factors of soil, climate,
and by factors inherent in the plants themselves. Minerals required by plants for their
growth and development are called plant nutrients. For a soil to produce crops
successfully, it must have an adequate supply of all the necessary nutrients that plants
take from the soil. The required nutrient elements must be present in the soil in forms
that plants can use and also there should be a rough balance among them in accordance
with the amounts needed by plants. When any one of these elements is lacking or is in
excess of the required proportion, the normal plant growth will not take place.
Elements required by plants for their growth and development are called essential
nutrients. The elements considered as essential nutrients are carbon, hydrogen, oxygen,
sulphur, nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium, calcium, magnesium, iron, manganese, boron,
copper, zinc, molybdenum, cobalt and chlorine. All these seventeen elements have
their own roles in the growth and development of plants. Depending on the amount
required by plants, these elements are classified as macronutrients and micronutrients.
Activity 2.23
Try to identify the (a) micronutrients, (b) macronutrients, required for the growth of wheat,
maize, and rice crops, by consulting the books in your library. Share your findings with the
class.
Macronutrients are the elements required in relatively large amounts by plants. These
are nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium, calcium, magnesium, sulphur, carbon, hydrogen and
oxygen.
Micronutrients are the elements required by plants in relatively small (trace) amounts.
These elements are iron, cobalt, zinc, manganese, molybdenum, copper, boron and
chlorine.
The elements carbon, hydrogen and oxygen are obtained by plants from air and water.
These are not considered as mineral nutrients. Nitrogen, phosphorous and potassium
152
IMPORTANT INORGANIC COUMPOUNDS (UNIT 2)
are said to be primary mineral nutrients. The roles of nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium
in the plant growth are discussed below:
Nitrogen is a very important plant nutrient. It is absorbed by plants in the form of
nitrate ions (NO –). In the growth and development of plants, nitrogen is utilized in the
3
synthesis of amino acids, proteins, coenzymes and nucleic acids. The proteins formed
control the metabolic processes that occur in plant cells. Nitrogen is also involved in
the synthesis of chlorophyll to produce a deep green colour.
Phosphorus is an important element without which the growth of plants is impossible.
It facilitates early growth and root formation, quick maturity and promotes seed or
fruit production. Phosphorus is absorbed by plants mainly in the form of H PO – and
2 4
HPO 2– in small amounts. Phosphorus has a role in the formation of some amino
3
acids and proteins, coenzymes, nucleic acids and high energy phosphate compounds
like Adenosine Triphosphate (ATP).
Potassium is absorbed by plants in the form of the K+ ion. It is a component of
enzymes that facilitate the process of photosynthesis and protein synthesis. It also adjusts
stomata movement. It is the most important ion in controlling the turgidity of plant
cells. It increases in the solute potential (sap concentration) within the cells which
leads to an increase in the amount of water that enters the cells osmotically.
Exercise 2.12
1. What is the importance of the following elements for the growth of food crops?
a nitrogen b phosphorus c potassium
2. In what form do plants absorb these elements?
Fertilizers
During the growth and development of plants, the plants consume the essential nutrients
from the soil. The concentration of these nutrients will decrease in the soil. If the
plants are specially food crops, the nutrients can be lost from the soil when the plants
are removed on harvest. So for the soil to be suitable for the growth of plants in the
next round, the nutrients lost must be replaced.
How can we replace the nutrients lost from the soil? How can we increase the
crop producing potential of soils? The nutrients lost from the soil can be replaced or
the crop producing potential of soils can be increased by adding the appropriate fertilizers
to the soil.
153
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
What are fertilizers? Fertilizers are materials that are added to soils to increase the
growth, yield or nutrient value of crops. Fertilizers are usually classified as organic
(natural) fertilizers and synthetic or artificial fertilizers.
Organic (natural) fertilizers are those derived from animals and plants. This includes
animal dung, urine and substances obtained from the decay and decomposition of
plants. These fertilizers provide readily available nutrients to plants after some period
of decay and decomposition. These fertilizers can supply the elements nitrogen,
phosphorus, potassium and various trace elements to the soil.
Synthetic or artificial fertilizers contain all three major plant nutrients i.e., nitrogen,
phosphorous and potassium, and are known as complete fertilizers.
A mixed artificial fertilizer may contain nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium. Such a
type of fertiliser is called a complete fertiliser. The term NPK is used to describe
fertilizers containing the elements nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium.
Examples of artificial fertilizers are ammonium sulphate, (NH ) SO , potassium nitrate
4 2 4
(KNO ), ammonium nitrate (NH NO ), and diammonium hydrogen phosphate, DAP
3 4 3
((NH ) HPO ).
4 2 4
The most important mineral nutrients that need to be added to the soil are usually
nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium. All the three elements are needed in large quantities.
Commercial fertilizers are normally given a “grade”, which reflects the percentages
they contain of N, P and K by dry weight. For example, a NPK fertilizer may be
described as 10:10:10 indicating that there is 10% of each element in the fertilizer. The
suitable proportions are best determined in relation to the tested fertility of the soil and
the requirements of the particular crop that is being grown on it. This means fertilizers
of the same composition are not used for different purposes. In nitrogen deficient soil,
a fertilizer containing a higher percentage of nitrogen than phosphorus and potassium
must be used. In addition to this, all fertilizers are not used for treatment of all kinds
of soil. For example, ammonium sulphate is more suitable for use in basic soils than in
acidic or neutral soils.
Exercise 2.13
1. Classify the following as organic or synthetic fertilizers:
a NH NO b urea c (NH ) SO
4 3 4 2 4
2. Can the same fertilizer be applied to all types of soil? Explain.
Pesticides
Pesticides are chemicals that can be applied to agricultural crops to kill pests which
affect the growth and development of plants. Parasitic fungi, insects and animals like
rodents, rabbits and birds reduce crop yields or even completely destroy crops.
154
IMPORTANT INORGANIC COUMPOUNDS (UNIT 2)
Pesticides are used to overcome the damage caused by fungi and pests. The majority
of the pesticides used in agriculture are organic compounds. However, there are some
inorganic substances that serve as pesticides. These include fumigant insecticides that
exist in the vapour phase. Examples of fumigants are hydrogen cyanide (HCN), sulphur
dioxide (SO ), carbon disulphide (CS ) and phosphine (PH ). These pesticides are
2 2 3
mostly used in the treatment of empty transport containers, grain stores, warehouses,
harvested products prior to or during storage and to destroy pests in the soil. The
other inorganic pesticides are mostly copper compounds such as CuCl , Cu(OH) ,
2 2
Cu(NO ) , CuSO , Cu O and CuCO . Among the inorganic compounds, CuSO
3 2 4 2 3 4
and Cu O are used as fungicides where as HCN, SO , PH , CuCl , Cu(OH) ,
2 2 3 2 2
Cu(NO ) and CuCO are used as insecticides.
3 2 3
Herbicides
Herbicides are also called weed killers. They are used to control the damage caused
by weeds. Inorganic compounds used as herbicides include ammonium sulphamate
((NH )SO –NH ), borax (Na B O .10H O), sodium chlorate (NaClO ) and ferrous
4 3 2 2 4 7 2 3
sulphate (FeSO .7H O).
4 2
Check list
Key terms of the unit
• acidic oxide • Lewis acid
• amphoteric oxide • Lewis base
• Arrhenius acid • litmus
• Arrhenius base • molarity
• acid, basic and normal salt • neutral oxide
• basic oxide • neutralization
• Bronsted - Lowery acid • non-volatile acid
• Bronsted - Lowery base • peroxide
• concentrated acid • pH
• dilute acid • plant nutrient
• deliquescent • pOH
• dissociation constant for water (kw) • salt
• efflorescent • strong acid
• electrolyte • strong base
• flame test • universal indicator
• hygroscopic • weak acid
• indicator • weak base
155
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Unit Summary
• Inorganic compounds are those compounds that originate from mineral constituents
of the earth’s crust.
• Inorganic compounds may be classified as oxides, acids, bases and salts.
• Oxides are binary compounds consisting of oxygen and any other element.
• Most common oxides are classified as acidic, basic, amphoteric, neutral oxides
and peroxides.
• Acidic oxides are oxides of non-metallic elements.
• Basic oxides are oxides of metals. These metal oxides which dissolve in water
are also called basic anhydrides.
• Amphoteric oxides are those oxides which show the properties of both acids
and bases.
• Neutral oxides are those oxides which do not show basic or acidic properties.
• Peroxides are oxides containing a peroxide (-O-O-) link and the oxidation
state of oxygen is -1.
• Arrhenius acids are substances that release hydrogen ions or protons in aqueous
solution.
• Arrhenius bases are substances that release hydroxide (OH–) ions in aqueous
solution.
• A Brønsted-Lowery acid is a proton-donor.
• A Brønsted-Lowery base is a proton-acceptor.
• A Lewis acid is an electron-pair acceptor.
• A Lewis base is an electron-pair donor.
• Strong acids and strong bases ionize almost completely in aqueous solution.
• Weak acids and weak bases ionize only slightly in aqueous solution.
• pH is the negative logarithm of hydrogen ion concentration pH = –log [H+].
• pOH is the negative logarithm of hydroxide ion concentration pOH = –log
[OH–].
• K = [H+][OH—] = 1 × 10–14 at 25°C.
W
• pK = pH + pOH = 14 at 25°C.
w
• A salt is an ionic compound containing a cation derived from a base and anion
derived from an acid.
156
IMPORTANT INORGANIC COUMPOUNDS (UNIT 2)
• Salts may be classified as acidic, normal and basic salts.
• An acid salt is formed when ionizable hydrogen atoms of an acid are replaced
partly by a metal ion or ammonium ion.
• A normal salt is formed when all ionizable hydrogen atoms of an acid are
completely replaced by a metal or ammonium ion.
• A basic salt is a salt containing ionizable hydroxide ion.
• Hygroscopic substances absorb water from the atmosphere.
• Deliquescent substances absorb water from the atmosphere and dissolve in
the water absorbed to form solutions.
• Efflorescent substances lose their water of crystallisation to the atmosphere.
• Plant nutrients are minerals required by plants for their growth and development.
• The elements plants need for their growth and development are classified as
macronutrients and micronutrients depending on the amount utilised by them.
• Fertilizers are natural products or synthetic chemicals that are added to the
soil to increase its crop producing potential.
• Synthetic fertilizers are classified as nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium fertilizers.
• Pesticides are chemicals used in agriculture to kill pests that reduce crop yields.
REVIEW EXERCISE ON UNIT 2
Part I: Write the missing words in your exercise book
Acidic litmus salt ammonia Alkalis
react acids hydroxide soluble
Most oxides of non-metals are 1 oxides, acidic oxides react with 2 to
form a 3 and water. Some acidic oxides 4 with water to form solutions of
acids. These solutions turn blue 5 red. Alkalis are 6 bases. Examples of
alkalis are 7 and sodium 8 . Alkalis react with 9 to form a 10 and
water.
157
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Part II: A Match the substances on the left with those
properties stated on the right
1. Vinegar (pH ª 4.5) a strongly acid
2. dish-washing powder (pH ª 12) b weakly alkaline
3. soap (pH ª 7.5) c neutral
4. distilled water (pH ª 7) d strong alkaline
5. concentrated hydrochloric acid e weakly acidic
Part II: B Match the ions or molecules on the left with
the correct test reagent on the right
6. Iron (II) ion a silver nitrate
7. Iodide ion b acidified barium nitrate
8. Sulphate ion c heat with aluminium
9. Carbon dioxide d iron (II) sulphate and sulphuric acid
10. Nitrate ion e sodium hydroxide
f limewater
Part III: Choose the correct answer from the given
alternatives
11. A solution has a pH of 9. The solution is best described as:
a strongly alkaline c weakly alkaline
b weakly acidic d strongly acidic
12. Which one of these statements about magnesium oxide is true:
a it reacts with hydrochloric acid to form a salt
b it reacts with sodium hydroxide to form a salt
c it reacts with water to form an acid
d it reacts with basic oxide to form a base
13. Sodium hydroxide is added to solution M. A reddish-brown precipitate is
formed, solution M contains:
a iron (II) ions c copper (II) ions
b iron (III) ions d silver (I) ions
14. Which one of these statements about fertilizers is true?
158
IMPORTANT INORGANIC COUMPOUNDS (UNIT 2)
a ammonium nitrate can be used as a fertilizer
b primary fertilizers contain nitrogen, sulphur and iron
c fertilizers are added to the soil to make it more alkaline
d fertilizers are made by combining calcium with oxygen
15. Which of the following is not the characteristic of an acid:
a an acid changes the colour of an indicator
b an acid has a bitter taste
c an acid ionizes in water
d an acid produces hydronium ions in water
16. When an acid reacts with an active metal:
a hydronium ion concentration increases
b metal forms anions
c hydrogen gas is produced
d carbon dioxide gas is produced
17. Which of the following is the correct definition of a Brønsted-Lowry base?
a an electron pair donor
b an electron pair acceptor
c a proton donor
d a proton acceptor
18. The pH of a solution is 6.32. What is the pOH of the solution:
a 6.32 C 7.68
b 4.8 × 10¯7 d 2.1 × 10–8
19. A neutral aqueous solution:
a has a 7.0 M H O+ concentration
3
b contains neither hydronium ion nor hydroxide ion
c has an equal number of hydronium ions and hydroxide ions
d has an unequal number of hydronium ions and hydroxide ions
20. Which of the following solutions would have a pH value greater than 7:
a [OH–] = 2.4 × 10–2 M c 0.0001 M HCl
b [H O+] = 1.53 × 10–2 M d [OH¯] = 4.4 × 10–9 M
3
159
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Part V: Give Short Answers
21. Write equations for the reaction of zinc oxide with:
a hydrochloric acid
b aqueous sodium hydroxide
22. Calcium oxide reacts with hydrochloric acid to form calcium chloride and water.
a Write a balanced equation for this reaction.
b Farmers often add calcium oxide to the soil. Explain why they do this.
23. Fertilizers are spread on fields by farmers.
a Why do farmers use fertilizers?
b State the names of three elements most commonly found in fertilizers.
c Ammonium sulphate is a fertilizer. Describe how you can make ammonium
sulphate in the laboratory from aqueous ammonia and sulphuric acid.
d Ammonium nitrate is also a fertilizer. Write a word equation to show how
ammonium nitrate can be produced.
24. State the names of a suitable acid and alkali you can use to make each of the
following fertilizers:
a ammonium sulphate
b potassium phosphate
c ammonium nitrate
25. A classmate states, “All compounds containing H atoms are acids, and all
compounds containing OH groups are bases.” Do you agree? Give examples
and explanations.
26. For the following three reactions, identify the reactants that are Arrhenius bases,
Brønsted-Lowry bases, and/or Lewis bases. State the type(s) of bases in each
case. Explain your answer.
a NaOH (s) Æ Na+ (aq) + OH– (aq)
b HF (aq) + H O (l) Æ F–(aq) + H O+ (aq)
2 3
c H+ (aq) + NH (aq) Æ NH+(aq)
3 4
160
3
TINU
Electrochemistry
Unit Outcomes
After completing this unit, you will be able to:
(cid:40) understand how a chemical reaction produces an electric current and how
electricity brings about chemical reactions in electrochemical cells;
(cid:40) understand the differences between metallic conduction and electrolytic
conduction;
(cid:40) develop skills in writing the oxidation half-reaction, reduction half-reaction
and cell reaction for the electrolysis of molten electrolytes that occur in electrolytic
cells;
(cid:40) know three types of voltaic cell;
(cid:40) understand the difference between electrolytic cells and voltaic cells;
(cid:40) appreciate the industrial applications of electrolysis in the production of certain
metals, non metals and chemicals and electroplating, and purification of metals;
(cid:40) demonstrate scientific inquiry skills: observing, comparing and contrasting,
measuring, asking questions, designing experiment, interpreting data, predicting,
classifying, communicating and problem solving.
MAIN CONTENTS
3.1 Introduction
3.2 Electrical Conductivity
3.3 Electrolysis
3.4 Galvanic (Voltaic) Cells
3.5 Industrial Application of Electrolysis
– Unit Summary
– Review Exercise
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
3.1 INTRODUCTION
Competencies
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• explain electrochemistry;
Activity 3.1
Discuss the following in groups and one of your group members will present your ideas
to the class.
Dry cells which we use in portable radios and flashlights are energy converters.
a Peel the external cover of a dry cell battery and observe the components. How many
different components do you see? What are they?
b What type of energy do we get from dry cells? How does the cell generate this
energy?
Electrochemistry is a field of chemistry that deals with the relationship between
electrical energy and chemical energy. It is a field of chemistry concerned with
processes that bring about chemical reactions (changes) using electricity or generating
electrical energy from chemical reactions. Thus, electrical energy and chemical energy
are inter-convertible.
The devices that convert chemical energy to electrical energy or electrical energy to
chemical energy are called electrochemical cells. These cells can be classified as
electrolytic cells and galvanic or voltaic cells. Electrolytic cells use electrical energy to
bring about chemical changes that produce many desirable substances in our daily
lives. Galvanic or voltaic cells convert chemical energy to electrical energy. The cells
we use in flashlight batteries, wrist watches, cameras and car batteries are examples
of Galvanic cells. The reactions between the chemicals in these cells are responsible
for the generation of electricity.
Electrochemistry has practical applications in our modern world and in everyday life.
Electrolysis is used to manufacture metals like sodium, aluminium; non-metals like
chlorine, hydrogen and compounds like sodium hydroxide and sodium hypochlorite.
Electrochemistry also has a role in the production of dry cells and lead storage
batteries used in the automotive industry.
162
ELECTROCHEMISTRY (UNIT 3)
3.2 ELECTRICAL CONDUCTIVITY
Competencies
After completing this subunit, you will be able to:
• define electrical conductivity;
• explain metallic conductivity;
• explain electrolytic conductivity;
• distinguish between metallic and electrolytic conduction;
• distinguish between weak and strong electrolytes;
• use conductivity apparatus to test the conductivity of substances.
Why do metals conduct electricity? Do you know any non-metal, which conducts
electricity? Electrical conductivity is the capacity of a substance to transmit electricity.
The materials that allow the passage of electricity through them are called electrical
conductors.
Conductivity apparatus is used to test the conductivity of different solid substances or
that of aqueous solutions of different compounds. The basic components of
conductivity apparatus include electric wires, electrodes, a d.c. source or dry cells, a
switch and light bulb. The components of the apparatus can be connected to one
another as shown in Figure 3.1.
+ –
Battery
Switch
Carbon
electrodes
Aqueoussolution
ofasubstance
Figure 3.1 Conductivity cell.
163
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Depending on the nature of the particles responsible for the flow of electric charges
through conductors, electrical conductivity can be classified as metallic conductivity or
electrolytic conductivity.
a) Metallic conductivity
Activity 3.2
1. With the help of your teacher collect pieces of iron bars, zinc metal, sodium chloride
crystal, rubber stoppers, rubber bands, coins, stone, glass, pieces of dry wood, a spoon, a
pencil, chalk and solid sulphur.
2. Identify the substances that conduct electricity and classify them as conductors and
non-conductors.
3. From your observations above, (a) what type of solids conduct electricity, (b) why do
you think some of the materials conduct electricity? (c) Does graphite have the same
nature as the other conductors of electricity?
Discuss in groups and present it to the class
Why do metals transmit electric current? What are the charge carriers in metals?
Metallic conductivity refers to the transmission of electric current through metals. This
transmission is directly related to the structure of metals. In atoms of metals, the
valence electrons are bounded very loosely to their respective nuclei and move very
easily throughout the metal. This means metals contain electrons that do not have fixed
positions and are relatively free to move. These electrons are called free electrons or
mobile electrons or delocalized electrons. Thus, the structure of the metals can be
regarded as a series of positively charged metal ions, or cations, in a sea of negatively
charged electrons.
+
+ + +
Electron
in
+ + + Ele o c u tr t on
+
FreeElectrons Nucleus
Figure 3.2 Electrical conductivity in metals.
164
ELECTROCHEMISTRY (UNIT 3)
The electrons entering the metal displace (repel) the freely moving electrons at the
point of entry. The displaced electrons occupy new positions by pushing neighbouring
electrons ahead. This will continue until electrons are forced out of the wire at the
opposite end. So, metallic conductivity is caused by the flow of mobile electrons due
to repulsion exerted on them from the electrons entering the metal from the source of
electricity. The charge carriers in metallic conduction are electrons. Hence, metallic
conductivity is also called electronic conductivity.
Non-metals are generally non-conductors of electricity, because they do not have freely
moving electrons. Graphite is a form of carbon in which the carbon atoms are bonded in
trigonal planar fashion to the three other carbon atoms, to form inter-connected hexagonal
rings, as shown in Figure3.3. Electrons move freely through the hexagonal layers, making
graphite a good conductor of electricity.
Figure 3.3 Structure of graphite (The blue colour is added to emphasize the planarity of the carbon layers.)
b) Electrolytic conductivity
Electrolytes are substances that transmit electricity in a molten state or in aqueous
solution. Based on their degree of ionization or the extent to which they produce
anions and cations, electrolytes can be classified as strong electrolytes or weak
electrolytes. Strong electrolytes ionize almost completely in aqueous solutions. Weak
electrolytes ionize only slightly. When electrical potential is applied through an
electrolyte solution, the positive ions (cations) move in one direction and the negative
ions (anions) move in the opposite direction. This movement of ions through the
electrolyte, brought about by the application of electricity, is called electrolytic
conductivity. Hence, the charge-carriers in electrolytic conductivity are ions (anions
and cations).
165
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Project 3.1
Construct a conductivity apparatus in your group. To construct the apparatus,
you will need a light bulb, three dry cells, some electric wire, two graphite
electrodes and a switch. You can get the graphite electrodes by peeling off
two old dry cells. A graphite electrode is the long cylindrical black rod inside
the cell. Ask your teacher for further assistance. Assemble the materials as
shown in Figure 3.4. Demonstrate the experimental set-up to the class.
Experiment 3.1
Conductivity of electrolytes
Objectives: To test the conductivity of different electrolytes.
Materials required: Conductivity apparatus, distilled water, table salt, copper
sulphate, hydrochloric acid, sodium hydroxide, acetic acid, ammonia solution,
molten lead bromide and sugar solution.
Procedure:
1. Arrange the conductivity apparatus as shown in Figure 3.4.
Battery
+ –
Switch
Anode(+) Cathode(–)
Aqueoussolution
ofanelectrolyte
Figure 3.4 Conductivity of electrolytic solution.
2. Pour some distilled water in the beaker, dip the electrodes into the water and
turn the switch on.
3. Repeat the experiment with separate solutions of table salt, copper sulphate,
hydrochloric acid, sodium hydroxide, acetic acid, ammonia and sugar solutions
(use 1.0 M solutions of each).
166
ELECTROCHEMISTRY (UNIT 3)
Observations and Analysis:
a Does the bulb glow when the switch is turned on?
b Solutions of which substances make the bulb glow and not glow, when you
turn on the switch?
c Solutions of which substances make the bulb to glow with a:
i bright light?
ii dim light?
d Classify the substances used in this experiment as strong conductors, weak
conductors and non-conductors by completing the table below:
Strong conductors Weak conductors Non-conductors
e Which substances in the experiment are used as:
i strong electrolytes ii weak electrolytes
Write a laboratory report on what you have observed and submit to your teacher.
Exercise 3.1
1. Explain the difference between i) metallic and electrolytic conductivity ii)
electrolyte and non-electrolyte.
2. Why do NaCl and CaCl conduct electricity when they are dissolved in water
2
or when they are in the molten form, but not in the solid state?
3. Why are solutions of strong electrolytes better conductors of electricity than
weak electrolytes?
The substances that do not transmit electricity either in solution or in a molten state are
called non-electrolytes. Ionic compounds are non-conductors of electricity in the solid
state. This is because their ions are held at fixed positions and cannot move. Other
examples of non-electrolytes include sugar, ethanol, oil, benzene, and liquid nitrogen.
3.3 ELECTROLYSIS
Competencies
After completing this section, you will be able to:
• define the term electrolysis;
• define the terms electrode, anode, cathode, electrolyte, anion and cation;
167
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
• describe an electrolytic cell;
• draw and label a diagram of an electrolytic cell;
• define the terms half-cell reaction and cell reaction;
• write the oxidation half-reaction, reduction half-reaction and cell reaction for the
electrolysis of molten or fused electrolytes;
• perform an activity to show the electrolysis of molten electrolytes.
Activity 3.3
Give an opinion on the following questions and present your ideas to the class.
1. How do you identify whether an electrode is a cathode or an anode?
2. Can you suggest why positive and negative ions are named as cations and anions
respectively?
Electrolysis is a process in which electrical energy is used to produce chemical
changes. This process is carried out in an electrochemical cell known as an
electrolytic or electrolysis cell. A typical electrolysis cell contains a source of direct
electric current, an electrolyte and connecting wires that join the source to the
electrodes.
Electrodes are strips of metal or graphite that allow electrons to leave or enter the
electrolytes. They can be chemically active or inert. Active electrodes directly take
part in reactions. Examples include zinc and magnesium. Inert electrodes do not
directly take part in chemical reactions. They only serve to transfer electrons.
Examples include platinum and graphite.
The electrode connected to the positive terminal of the source is positively charged
and is called the anode. It is the electrode through which electrons leave the cell. The
electrode connected to the negative terminal of the source is negatively charged and is
called the cathode. It is the electrode through which electrons enter the cell.
During electrolysis, the ions of the electrolyte migrate to the electrodes of the opposite
charge. The positive ions are attracted to the cathode and are called cations. Since
the cathode has excess electrons, the cations will discharge by gaining electrons. This
process of gaining electrons is called reduction. The negative ions are attracted by the
positive electrode (anode) and are called anions. These ions are discharged by losing
electrons at the anode. This process of losing electrons is called oxidation.
Thus, the cathode is the electrode at which reduction occurs and the anode is the
electrode at which oxidation takes place.
168
ELECTROCHEMISTRY (UNIT 3)
The reaction that takes place at each electrode is known as a half-cell reaction. Oxidation
half-reactions occur at the anode and reduction half reaction at the cathode. The net
reaction that takes place in the electrolytic cell is known as a cell reaction. This overall
reaction is also referred to as an oxidation-reduction reaction or redox reaction. So
electrolysis is a process in which electric energy is used to bring about an oxidation-
reduction reaction. It is also defined as the decomposition of an electrolyte, using electricity.
The process of electrolysis includes electrolyzing aqueous solutions of electrolytes.
However, at this level, electrolysis of molten electrolytes will be discussed.
Electrolysis of Molten (Fused) Electrolytes
When ionic solids melt, they dissociates into positive and negative ions that are not
held in fixed positions. To understand the chemical reactions that occur during
electrolysis, consider a hypothetical electrolyte, MX, that dissociate into M+ and X–.
MXmelting→M+ + X–
During electrolysis, the cations, M+ ions, move toward the cathode, gain one electron
each and become M atoms. The anions, X– ions, move toward the anode, lose one
electron and become X atoms. The reaction at each electrode and the entire reaction
in the electrolytic cell are represented by the following equations.
Cathode reaction: M+ + 1e– Æ M (Reduction-half reaction)
Anode reac tion: X–Æ X + 1e– (Oxidation half-reaction)
Cell reaction: M+ + X–electrolysis→M + X (Oxidation-reduction)
Figure 3.5 Electrolysis of fused Electrolyte, MX.
Here, it is very important to realize that the number of electrons gained by the cations
at the cathode is exactly equal to the number of electrons lost by anions at the anode
during electrolysis. This is true for any oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction.
Moreover, oxidation and reduction reactions proceed simultaneously. Reduction and
oxidation cannot occur separately. Oxidation is always accompanied by reduction and
there cannot be reduction in the absence of oxidation, and vice versa.
169
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Electrolysis of Molten (Fused) lead bromide
Experiment 3.2
Electrolysis of fused lead Bromide (PbBr )
2
Objectives: To observe substances produced at the electrodes during electrolysis.
Materials required: Stand and clamp, two graphite electrodes, wires, switch, light
bulb, test tube (bigger in size), Bunsen burner, lead bromide crystals.
Precaution: Bromine causes very severe burn on the skin.
Procedure:
1. Assemble the materials as shown in Figure 3.6.
+ – Bulb
Switch
Brominegas
Moltenlead
Moltenlead
bromide
Figure 3.6 Electrolysis of Fused Lead Bromide.
2. Place small amount of lead bromide crystals in a beaker. Insert the two
electrodes, as shown in Figure 3.6, until they are in contact with the lead
bromide crystals. Then turn on the switch. Does the bulb glow?
3. Heat the lead bromide in a beaker gently, using a Bunsen burner. When the
lead bromide melts, turn on the switch.
Observations and Analysis:
1. Does the bulb glow? If yes, what is the reason?
2. Write the dissociation reaction for PbBr .
2
3. Identify the ions which migrate to the respective electrodes.
4. Write the products formed at each electrode.
5. Identify the half reactions as oxidation and reduction.
Write a laboratory report on your observation and present to the class.
170
ELECTROCHEMISTRY (UNIT 3)
Exercise 3.2
Consider the electrolysis of KI and NaCl
a Identify ions which migrate towards the anode.
b Identify ions which migrate towards the cathode.
c Write down the half-reactions at the anode and cathode and cell reactions.
d Write the substances produced at the electrodes.
3.4 GALVANIC (VOLTAIC) CELLS
Competencies
After completing this section, you will be able to:
• construct a simple galvanic cell, using strips of zinc, copper, ZnSO and CuSO
4 4
solutions;
• mention different types of voltaic cells;
• describe how voltaic cells can be used to make commercially useful batteries;
• distinguish between voltaic cell and an electrolytic cell;
• describe voltaic cells.
Activity 3.4
Discuss the following and present your ideas to the class:
1. Have you seen the expiry date written on dry cells? Can we get the expected amount
of electric energy after the expiry date of the cell; why?
2. Do we throw away car batteries when they fail to generate electricity? Explain.
3. Galvanic cells available in the market have positive and negative terminals. Does this
show that they also possess an anode and cathode?
In the previous section, electrolytic cells were defined as electrochemical cells in which
electricity was used to bring about chemical reactions. The chemical reaction in an
electrolytic cell is caused by electricity and is a non-spontaneous redox reaction. This
means the reaction can proceed only in the presence of electricity. If we stop passing
electricity through the electrolyte, the reaction will stop.
In a Galvanic cell, the reaction that occurs inside the cell is a spontaneous redox
reaction. The reaction that occurs inside the cell will proceed on its own without any
171
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
external influence. This reaction enables a galvanic cell to generate electricity.
Therefore, Galvanic cells are electrochemical cells in which spontaneous redox
reactions generate electricity. They convert chemical energy into electrical energy.
Galvanic or voltaic cells are classified into primary cells, secondary cells, and fuel
cells. For this level, only primary and secondary cells will be discussed.
Primary Cells
Primary galvanic cells are those cells that are not rechargeable. This is because the
electrode reaction as well as the entire cell reaction cannot be reversed on recharging.
Once the chemicals in the cells that serve as reactants are completely used up, it is
not possible to recover them by charging the cells. Examples of primary cells include
Daniel’s cell and zinc-carbon (Leclanche) dry cells. The common feature of all
Galvanic cells is that they contain two electrodes in contact with an electrolyte. The
electrolyte in a Galvanic cell can be in the form of a solution or a paste. The cells
containing electrolytes in the form of solution are called wet cells, and those containing
electrolytes in the form of paste are called dry cells.
An example of a wet primary cell is the Daniell cell. It consists of a zinc strip placed
in ZnSO solution in one compartment and a copper strip placed in copper sulphate,
4
CuSO , solution in another compartment. Each compartment is called a half-cell, and
4
the reactions occurring in each compartment are called half-cell reactions. The
solutions in the two compartments are linked by a salt bridge as shown in Figure 3.7.
The salt bridge consists of a delivery tube filled with warm mixture of conc. KCl
solution and agar solution, which is then allowed to cool so that it sets in the form of
a gel.
Alternately, a porous barrier is used to separate the solutions. The zinc atoms from the
zinc electrode lose two electrons each and become zinc ions, Zn2+. The ions enter
into the solution, and the electrons remain on the electrode and flow through the
external wire to the copper electrode. This situation causes the zinc electrode to be
negative and the solution to have an overall positive charge.
On the other hand, in the compartment containing the copper electrode, copper ions,
Cu2+, from the solution move to the cathode and gain two electrons each, to become
copper atoms and deposit on the surface of the copper electrode. This condition
causes the electrode to be positive and the solution to have a negative charge.
172
ELECTROCHEMISTRY (UNIT 3)
Zincelectrode Copperelectrode
Zinc Copper
Cu2++2e– Cu
Reduction
Figure 3.7 The Daniell Cell.
Note that the anode is the negative electrode and the cathode is the positive electrode
in galvanic cells, as opposed to the situation in an electrolytic cell. But, it is always
oxidation that occurs at the anode and reduction at the cathode.
The half-cell reactions and the cell reaction in Daniell cells are represented as
Anode reaction: Zn (s) Æ Zn2+ (aq) + 2e–
Cathode reaction: Cu2+ (aq) + 2e– Æ Cu (s)
Cell reaction: Zn (s) + Cu2+ (aq) Æ Zn2+ (aq) + Cu (s)
Due to the oxidation-reduction reaction in the cell, the Daniell cell generates electricity.
What is the purpose of the salt bridge in Figure 3.7?
From the preceding discussion, it is clear that the solution in which the zinc electrode
is placed has an overall positive charge while the solution in the copper compartment
has a negative charge. Unless the two solutions are neutral, the cell cannot produce
electricity. Thus, the purpose of the salt bridge is to:
a maintain electrical neutrality between the two solutions. In this process the anions
(negative ions) from the salt bridge diffuse into the solution containing the zinc
electrodes, and the cations (positive ions) diffuse into the solution containing
the copper electrode to compensate for the excess positive and negative charges,
respectively;
173
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
b allow electrical contact between the two solutions;
c prevent mixing of the electrode solutions.
Although, wet cells like the Daniell cell can serve as a source of electricity, they are
not portable since they contain solutions. Due to this practical problem of using wet
cells, dry cells were developed.
In a dry cell, a moist electrolyte paste is used instead of solutions. This cell was
invented by Georges Leclanche, a French chemist.
A zinc-carbon dry cell, which is also called a Leclanche cell (Figure 3.8) is used in
devices like portable radios and flashlights. The cell consists of a zinc cup that serves
as the anode. The zinc cup is filled with a paste of manganese (IV) oxide, zinc
chloride, ammonium chloride and powdered carbon. A graphite rod, immersed in this
paste, serves as the cathode.
Figure 3.8 Zinc-carbon dry cell (Leclanche cell).
A zinc-carbon dry cell produces electricity as a result of a spontaneous redox
reaction. Oxidation occurs at the zinc cup.
Oxidation: Zn (s) Æ Zn2+ (aq) + 2e–
Reduction takes place at the graphite (carbon) electrode.
2MnO (s) + 2NH+(aq) + 2e– Æ Mn O (s) + 2NH (aq) + H O (l)
2 4 2 3 3 2
A build up of ammonia gas around the cathode may disrupt the current. However, this
is prevented by the reaction between Zn2+ and NH to form a complex ion,
3
[Zn(NH ) ]2+ which crystallizes as a chloride salt.
3 2
Zn2+ (aq) + 2NH (g) + 2Cl– (aq) Æ Zn(NH ) Cl (s)
3 3 2 2
174
ELECTROCHEMISTRY (UNIT 3)
The overall reaction occurring in a Leclanche cell is:
Zn (s) + 2MnO (s) + 2NH Cl (aq) Æ Zn(NH ) Cl (s) + Mn O (s) + H O (l)
2 4 3 2 2 2 3 2
There are other examples of dry cells, such as the alkaline dry cell, silver oxide cell,
and copper oxide cell.
Exercise 3.3
1. In a Daniell cell, copper and zinc are used as electrodes. Which metal serves
as an anode and which one as a cathode? Is the anode the positive or the
negative terminal in this cell?
2. Which electrode is negative and which one is positive in the Leclanche cell? Is
the polarity of the electrodes in Galvanic cells similar to that of the electrodes
in electrolytic cells?
3. Why do we refer to the redox reactions in electrolytic and voltaic cells as non-
spontaneous and spontaneous, respectively?
Experiment 3.3
Constructing Simple Galvanic Cells
Objectives: To design and construct a simple Galvanic cell.
Materials required: 1.0 M solutions of ZnSO , 1.0 M solutions of CuSO ,
4 4
concentrated KCl solution, zinc and copper strips, electric wires, beakers, a
salt bridge, a tomato or lemon, magnesium ribbon, zinc, iron and aluminium
metals.
Procedure:
1. Put about 150 mL of 1.0 M ZnSO solution in one beaker and the same
4
amount of 1.0 M CuSO solution in another beaker. Immerse a zinc strip in
4
the beaker containing the ZnSO solution, and immerse a copper strip in the
4
copper sulphate solution. Attach electric wires to the electrodes and a voltmeter
as shown in Figure 3.7. Connect the solutions in the two beakers by yarn
(thread used in kerosene stoves). Soak the yarn in concentrated KCl solution.
2. Insert a magnesium ribbon and a copper strip into a raw tomato or lemon.
The two metals should be at least 0.5 cm apart and should not touch each
other. Attach magnesium and copper strips to the negative and positive ends of
a voltmeter, respectively, using electric wires.
175
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
3. Repeat the same procedure using metals like Fe, Al, Zn in place of Magnesium
and see which of the metals gives the greatest voltage and which one the least.
Observations and Analysis:
A For the cell in procedure 1
1. What do you observe at each electrode in this cell?
2. What is the direction of electron flow in the external circuit?
3. Which metal serves as the a) anode b) cathode
4. At which electrode does a) oxidation b) reduction occur?
5. Write the a) anode b) cathode and c) cell reaction
B For the cell in procedure 2
1. Do you observe deflection of the pointer in the volt meter?
2. Which of the metals has the greatest voltage and which one the least when
coupled with copper?
3. Is there any relationship between the voltage produced and the reactivity of
the metals?
Write a laboratory report and submit to your teacher.
Secondary Cells
Unlike primary cells, secondary cells are rechargeable. The electrode reactions can be
reversed, and the original reactants can be regenerated. This can be achieved by passing
a direct current through the cell. The process is called charging or recharging.
A secondary cell needs to be recharged when it stops producing electricity. A lead
storage battery is an example of a secondary cell.
A lead Storage Battery is the common automobile battery that usually delivers either 6
or 12 volts, depending on the number of cells used in its construction. The inside of
the battery consists of galvanic cells connected in series. A fully-charged lead-acid cell
is made up of a stack of alternating lead and lead (IV) oxide plates isolated from each
other by porous separators. The individual cells contain a number of lead anodes
connected together, plus a number of cathodes composed of PbO , also joined
2
together. These electrodes are immersed in 35% sulphuric acid, which serves as an
electrolyte.
A single lead-storage cell delivers 2 volts. Therefore, a 12 V battery contains six cells
connected in series.
176
ELECTROCHEMISTRY (UNIT 3)
Figure 3.9 Lead - Storage Battery.
When a lead-storage battery is in operation (on discharge), the following reactions
occur at the electrodes:
Anode reactions: Pb (s) + SO2– (aq) Æ PbSO (s) + 2e–
4 4
Cathode reactions: PbO (s) + 4H+ (aq) + SO2– (aq) + 2e– Æ PbSO (s) + 2H O (l)
2 4 4 2
and the overall reaction is:
Pb (s) + PbO (s) + 4H+ (aq) 2SO2– (aq) Æ 2PbSO (s) + 2H O (l)
2 4 4 2
From the electrode reactions it can be noticed that PbSO is produced at both
4
electrodes.
Unlike primary cells a lead-storage battery is rechargeable when the battery runs
down. The electrode reactions can be reversed by placing a potential across the
electrodes that is slightly larger than that which the battery can deliver. The reaction
that takes place on recharging a lead storage battery is given by the following
equation.
2PbSO (s) + 2H O (l) Æ Pb (s) + PbO (s) + 2H SO (aq)
4 2 2 2 4
What are the differences between voltaic cells and electrolytic cells?
Activity 3.5
Compare and contrast between voltaic and electrolytic cells. List the differences between
voltaic cells and electrolytic cells, and discuss with your classmates.
177
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Exercise 3.4
1. Explain the differences between primary and secondary cells.
2. What substances are used as the anode, cathode and electrolyte in a lead
storage battery?
3. What happens to the concentration of sulphuric acid when a lead storage battery
is on discharge?
4. Write the overall reactions taking place in a lead storage battery when it is
discharging.
3.5 INDUSTRIAL APPLICATIONS OF ELECTROLYSIS
Competencies
After completing this section, you will be able to:
• describe selected industrial applications of electrolysis;
Activity 3.6
1. The copper used for the transmission of electric current is supposed to be 100% pure.
What happens if the copper is impure?
2. How many articles in your house are electroplated? Make a list. What is the purpose of
electroplating?
Discuss in groups and share your opinions with your classmates.
Each day, our lives are touched directly or indirectly by the products of electrolysis.
Electrolysis has important industrial applications. It is used for:
a) The production of chemicals like sodium hydroxide, from
electrolysis of brine (concentrated NaCl solution), using
inert electrodes.
The reactions that take place at the electrodes (when graphite electrodes are used)
are as follows:
Anode reaction: 2Cl– (aq) Æ Cl (g) + 2e–
2
Cathode reaction: 2H O (l) + 2e– Æ H (g) + 2OH– (aq)
2 2
The overall cell reaction is:
2NaCl (aq) + 2H O (l) Æ 2Na+ (aq) + 2OH– (aq) + Cl (g) + H (g)
2 2 2
178
ELECTROCHEMISTRY (UNIT 3)
b) For the production of metals and non-metals.
The non-metals like H , Cl , F etc are manufactured on an industrial scale by the
2 2 2
process called electrolysis. The metal aluminium is extracted industrially by the Hall
Process. This process involves the electrolysis of molten alumina (Al O ) mixed with
2 3
some amount of cryolite, Na AlF . The role of cryolite is to reduce the melting point
3 6
of alumina from 2000°C to 1000°C. The vessel holding the molten mixture
(Figure 3.8) is made up of iron lined with carbon, which serves as the cathode.
Carbon (graphite) rods that serve as the anode are inserted into the melt. When the
molten mixture is electrolyzed, pure aluminium is produced. The reactions at the
electrodes are:
Anode reaction: 6O2–(l) → 3O (g) + 12e–
2
Cathode reaction: 4Al3+(l) + 12e– → 4Al(l)
Overall reaction: 4Al3+(l) + 6O2–(l) → 3O (g) + 4Al(l)
2
Figure 3.10 Production of Aluminium by Hall Process.
c) For the Purification of Metals.
Activity 3.7
For electrolytic and voltaic cells, the cell reaction is the sum of anode and cathode half-
reactions. For electrolytic cell used to purify copper, there is no net (overall) reaction.
a Explain why this is so.
b Does this process mean wastage of time, labour and energy? Why? Discuss in groups
and present your opinion o the rest of the class.
179
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Another important application of electrolysis is the purification of metals like copper.
When first separated from its ore, copper metal is about 99% pure with nickel, silver,
gold and platinum as major impurities. In the refining process, the impure copper is
used as the anode, copper metal of high purity used as cathode, and copper sulphate,
CuSO solution and aqueous H SO as the electrolyte.
4 2 4
When electrolysis is carried out, copper and impurities that are more easily oxidized
than copper, such as nickel, will go into the solution. Copper passes through the
solution and deposits on the cathode, while the impurities remain in solution. Impurities
like silver and gold are less easily oxidized and do not dissolve but fall away from the
anode as ‘sludge’. The electrode reaction in the purification of copper is the following:
Anode reaction: Cu(s)→Cu2+(aq)+2e−
Cathode reaction: Cu2+(aq)+2e− → Cu(s)
During the process, the size of the impure copper anode decreases and that of the
pure copper cathode increases.
Figure 3.11 Purification of Copper by Electrolysis.
Always remember that, in the purification of metals by electrolysis, the impure metal
should be used as the anode, the pure form of the metal as the cathode and an
electrolyte should contain soluble salt (ions) of the metal to be purified. The process
of purifying metals by electrolysis is called electrorefining.
180
ELECTROCHEMISTRY (UNIT 3)
d) Electroplating
Activity 3.8
When zinc electrode is dipped in copper sulphate solution, part of the electrode in the
solution will be covered with a reddish brown layer of copper. Can this process be
considered as electroplating? Explain. Discuss in groups and present your opinion to the
class.
What is the purpose of electroplating?
Electroplating is a process of covering the surface of a metal (metal article) with a
thin layer of another metal. Using this process, metals that easily corrode can be
protected by a thin coating of another metal that resists corrosion. For example, tin
cans are steel cans with a thin coating of tin, and chrome-plated bumpers are used for
automobiles. Thus, the main objective of electroplating is to protect an article from
corrosion and to give articles a beautiful appearance. In the process of electroplating,
the pure plating metal should be used as the anode, the article (metal) to be plated
the as cathode and a solution containing ions of the plating metal as the electrolyte.
For example, to produce a silver-plated copper article, say, a medal, one should
use silver as the anode, the copper medal as the cathode and silver nitrate solution as
the electrolyte (Figure 3.12).
D.C.source
Silver(Anode) Coppermedal
(Cathode)
AgNO solution
3
Figure 3.12 Electroplating Copper medal with Silver.
The reactions that occur at the electrodes during electroplating are:
Anode reaction: Ag(s) → Ag + (aq) + 1e−
Cathode reaction: Ag+(aq) + 1e– → Ag (s)
181
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Check list
Key terms of the unit
• anode • electrolytic cell
• cathode • electroplating
• conductivity apparatus • electrorefining
• Daniel cell • half - cell
• electrical conductivity • half - reaction
• electrochemical cell • hall process
• electrochemistry • primary cell
• electrode • salt bridge
• electrolysis • secondary cell
• electrolyte • voltaic (galvanic) cell
Unit Summary
• Electrochemistry is a field of chemistry that studies how chemical reactions
produce electricity and how electricity is used to bring about chemical
reactions in electrochemical cells.
• Electrochemistry deals with the relationship that exists between chemical
energy and electrical energy.
• Electrochemical cells include electrolytic cells and Galvanic (voltaic) cells.
• Electrical conductivity is the ability of substances to conduct electricity.
• Metallic conductivity is the flow of electricity through metals, and the
conduction of electricity through metals is due to the presence of freely
moving (delocalized) valence electrons.
• Electrolytes are substances that conduct electricity, either in an aqueous
solution or in a molten state.
• The conduction of electricity through electrolytes is due to the movement
of anions and cations towards electrodes of opposite charge, and the charge-
carriers in electrolytic conduction are ions.
• Electrolysis is a process in which electricity is used to bring about an
oxidation- reduction reaction in an electrolytic cell.
• Electrolysis is also the process of decomposition of an electrolyte, using
electrical energy.
182
ELECTROCHEMISTRY (UNIT 3)
• Electrodes are either metal strips or graphite rods.
• An anode is the electrode attached to the positive terminal of a direct
current source, at which oxidation (loss of electrons) by anions occurs, and
electrons leave the cell.
• A cathode is the electrode attached to the negative terminal of a dc source,
the negative electrode at which reduction (gain of electrons) of cations
occurs and electrons enter the cell (electric current enters the electrolyte).
• During electrolysis, anions move to the anode and cations move to the
cathode.
• The reaction taking place at each electrode (cathode or anode) is said to
be a half-cell reaction.
• Cell reaction is the reaction that takes place in the entire cell.
• Voltaic (Galvanic) cells are electrochemical cells in which a spontaneous
redox reaction generates electricity. They convert chemical energy into
electrical energy.
• Primary cells are voltaic cells that are not rechargeable, and the reactions
taking place in them are irreversible.
• Secondary cells are voltaic cells that are rechargeable since the reactions
taking place in them are reversible.
• Unlike electrolytic cells, the anode is negative and the cathode is positive
in voltaic cells.
• Electrolysis has important industrial applications such as in the production
of chemicals like NaOH, in the production of non-metals like Cl and H ,
2 2
metals like Na, Al and in purification of metals and electroplating.
REVIEW EXERCISE ON UNIT3
Part I: Choose the correct answer from the suggested
options
1. Which one of the following solutions shows no current flow in an electrolytic
cell?
a water solution of table salt
b molten sodium chloride
c hydrochloric acid solution
d sugar solution
183
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
2. Which of the following is not correct about voltaic cells?
a the anode is negative
b the cathode is positive
c oxidation takes place at the cathode
d redox reactions produce electricity in the cell
3. Which of the following conditions is not used to electroplate a tray made of iron
with chromium?
a using chromium as the anode
b using an electrolyte containing iron (III) ions
c using the tray as the cathode
d using an electrolyte containing chromium ions
4. Electrolysis is not used for the:
a purification of metals
b production of metals
c electroplating of metals
d production of electricity
5. Which substance is not used in the Leclanche cell?
a H SO
2 4
b NH Cl
4
c MnO
2
d powdered carbon
6. Which one of the following is correct about automobile batteries?
a the electrodes in the battery are graphite electrodes
b each cell in the battery delivers 1.5 volts
c the electrolyte is aqueous H SO solution
2 4
d lead (IV) oxide is used as anode
7. Which of the following occurs during electrolysis of the molten binary salt of a
metal:
a the metal in the salt will deposit on the cathode
b reduction will take place at the anode
c oxidation will take place at the cathode
d no current will flow through the molten salt
8. Which substance does not conduct electricity?
a solid CaCl c dilute aqueous solution of HCl
2
b aqueous NaCl solution d molten PbBr
2
184
ELECTROCHEMISTRY (UNIT 3)
9. Two copper electrodes dipped in copper sulphate solution are connected to a
12 volt battery. The electrode connected to the end of the battery marked with
a “_” is:
a anion c anode
b cathode d cation
10. The charge-carriers in electrolytic conduction are:
a anions only c cations and anions
b cations only d delocalized electrons
11. When electric current is applied externally, which of the following produces a
redox reaction:
a wood c solid sugar
b electrolytic cells d diamond
12. During the electrolysis of fused sodium chloride, the anode half reaction involves:
a oxidation of sodium atoms to ions
b reduction of chlorine atoms to give chloride ions
c reduction of sodium ions to form free metal
d oxidation of chloride ions to elemental chlorine
13. Metals conduct electricity. This is because metals possess:
a freely moving ions
b all electrons held in fixed position
c delocalized electrons
d valence electrons that are strongly bound to the nucleus
14. Increasing the concentration of ions in an electrolyte solution:
a increases the extent of conduction of electricity through it
b decreases the extent of conduction of electricity through it
c has no effect on the conduction of electricity
d changes the direction of electron flow
15. Voltaic cells and electrolytic cells are similar in that:
a the anode is positive and cathode is negative in both types of cells
b oxidation half-reaction occurs at the cathode in both types of cells
c both types of cells contain two electrodes in contact with electrolytes
d reduction half-reaction occurs at the anode in both types of cells
16. The conduction of electricity through each of the following substances is caused
by the migration of ions except in one case; the exception is:
a fused lead bromide c molten KCl
b aqueous solution of NaCl d graphite
185
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
17. Four different solutions of equal volume (1 L) were prepared by dissolving one
mole of each of the following substances. The conduction of electricity is least
in the solution containing:
a HCl c HNO
3
b CH COOH d KCl
3
18. Strong electrolytes differ from weak electrolytes in that strong electrolytes:
a are poorer conductors than weak electrolytes
b ionize to a smaller extent than weak electrolytes
c produce greater numbers of ions in aqueous solution as compared to weak
electrolytes
d do not conduct electricity in aqueous solutions
19. Which of the following is a wet voltaic cell:
a Leclanche cell
b cells used in electronic wrist watches
c cells used in mobile telephones
d lead-storage cell
Part II: Write the missing words in your exercise book
20. The type of electrical conductivity caused by the flow of freely moving electrons
is known as_________________.
21. Consider the following galvanic cell:
Half-reaction: Cu(s) → Cu2+(aq) + 2e–
Half-reaction: Ag+(aq) + 1e– → Ag(s)
According to the information given in the above figure,
186
ELECTROCHEMISTRY (UNIT 3)
a The anode of the galvanic cell is _______________.
b The cathode of the galvanic cell is ______________.
c The negative electrode is _____________________.
d The positive electrode is ______________________.
e The overall cell reaction is ____________________.
22. ________________ means two metal strips or graphite rods through which
electrons enter and leave an electrolyte in electrolytic cells.
23. In an electrolytic cell, positive ions move to the ______________ and negative
ions move to the _____________ and electrons flow from the _____________
to the __________ in the external circuit during electrolysis.
24. The process of covering one metal with a thin layer of another metal, using
electricity, is known as ______________.
Part III: Give short answers to each of the following questions
25. Explain the differences between the following pairs of terms.
a Anode and cathode
b Metallic conduction and electrolytic conduction
c Inert and active electrodes
d Galvanic cell and electrolytic cell
e Cation and anion
f Wet cell and dry cell
g Primary and secondary voltaic cells
h Strong and weak electrolytes
26. Why are ionic compounds like NaCl, KCl, CaCl , PbBr , etc. non-conductors
2 2
in the solid state but conductors in aqueous solutions?
27. During electrolysis of fused CaCl ,
2
a Which ions are responsible for the conduction of electricity through the molten
salt?
b What half-cell reactions occur at the anode and cathode?
28. How can a salt bridge maintain electrical neutrality in the solutions of the two
half-cells of a galvanic cell?
29. A chemistry teacher in a chemistry laboratory asked two students, A and B, to
perform an experiment. The teacher told student A to refine impure silver and
told student B to produce a gold-plated medal from a medal made of copper.
How can these students accomplish the tasks given to them?
30. What is the purpose of a salt bridge in a voltaic cell?
187
4
TINU
Chemistry in Industry and
Environmental Pollution
Unit Outcomes
After completing this unit, you will be able to:
(cid:40) know the renewable and non-renewable natural resources and appreciate their
importance to industry as raw materials;
(cid:40) know the extraction, chemical properties and uses of aluminium, iron, copper,
nitrogen, phosphorus, oxygen, sulphur and chlorine;
(cid:40) know the production and chemical properties of nitrogen, phosphorus, oxygen,
sulphur and chlorine;
(cid:40) know some chemical and related industries in Ethiopia;
(cid:40) understand the important steps in the production of glass, ceramics, cement,
sugar, paper and pulp;
(cid:40) know how tanning is carried out and how food is packed and preserved;
(cid:40) know the three types of environmental pollution and the names of the pollutants;
(cid:40) understand the causes and effects of air, water and land pollution and know
the main methods to reduce them; and
(cid:40) demonstrate scientific inquiry skills such as observing, classifying, communicating,
asking questions, applying concepts and problem-solving.
CHEMISTRY IN INDUSTRY AND ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION (UNIT 4)
MAIN CONTENTS
4.1 Introduction
4.2 Natural Resources and Industry
4.3 Production of Some Important Metals and Non-metals
4.4 Some Industries in Ethiopia
4.5 Environmental Pollution
– Unit Summary
– Review Exercise
4.1 INTRODUCTION
Competencies
After completing this section, you will be able to:
• list general characteristics of chemical industries;
Activity 4.1
1. What do you understand by the statement that, “life would have been very much
harder without the chemical industry.”?
2. Name major raw materials used by chemical industries for the production of chemicals.
3. Prepare a list of many products which are manufactured by chemical industries?
Discuss in groups and give a presentation to the class.
A chemical industry is an institution involved in the production of chemical products. The
chemical industry involves the use of chemical processes such as chemical reactions and
refining methods to produce a wide variety of materials with desirable properties and
quality to satisfy social needs. Most of these products, in turn, can be used by other
chemical industries to manufacture other items or can be used directly by consumers.
Generally, chemical industries:
• use naturally-available raw materials to produce the desired products,
• involve chemical reactions to transform raw materials into finished and semi-finished
products,
• consume relatively large quantities of energy during the manufacturing process,
• use safe operation methods in their manufacturing processes, and
189
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
• test their products during and after manufacture in their quality control laboratories
to ensure that the products meet the required specifications.
4.2 NATURAL RESOURCES AND INDUSTRY
Competencies
After completing this section, you will be able to:
• define natural resources;
• list natural resources;
• classify natural resources as renewable and non-renewable;
• define the chemical industry as a firm that involves the taking of raw materials from
the environment and turning them into usable products by chemical means;
• describe the applications of minerals in industry.
Activity 4.2
1. Can fossil fuels be renewed?
2. How can animals and plants be replaced once they die?
3. What are natural resources?
4. Explain the importance of natural resources for chemical industries with examples.
Discuss in group and present your opinion to the class.
Natural resources can be classified as renewable and non-renewable resources. Renewable
resources are resources that can be replenished (replaced) by natural processes. These
resources can be renewed at the same rate at which they are used. Plants, animals, soil and
water are examples of renewable resources. Non-renewable resources are resources that
are found in a fixed amount in nature and cannot be replenished. These resources can be
completely used up within some decades and cannot be replaced easily. Examples of non-
renewable resources include natural gas, and coal. Generally, any chemical industry utilizes
either natural resource as starting materials, or other substances obtained from natural resources
after processing, as a raw material, for its manufacturing activity.
Exercise 4.1
Classify the following natural resources as renewable and non-renewable:
a petroleum b minerals c fire wood
d biomass e plants f coal
190
CHEMISTRY IN INDUSTRY AND ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION (UNIT 4)
4.3 PRODUCTION OF SOME IMPORTANT METALS AND
NON-METALS
Competencies
After completing this section, you will be able to:
• outline the extraction of aluminium by the Hall process;
• describe the main physical and chemical properties of aluminium;
• describe the uses of aluminium;
• outline the extraction of iron by the blast furnace;
• briefly describe the conversion of pig iron in steel;
• describe wrought iron;
• describe the main chemical properties of iron;
• describe the uses of iron;
• outline the extraction of copper;
• describe the main chemical properties of copper;
• describe the uses of copper;
• outline the production of nitrogen;
• describe the main chemical properties of nitrogen;
• outline the production of phosphorus;
• describe the main chemical properties of phosphorus;
• outline the production of oxygen;
• describe the main chemical properties of oxygen;
• outline the production of sulphur;
• describe the main chemical properties of sulphur;
• outline the production of chlorine; and
• describe the chemical properties of chlorine.
Activity 4.3
Discuss the following issues in groups:
Steel-cored aluminium cables are used for conducting high-voltage electricity over
1.
long distances.
i) Give two reasons why aluminium is used for these cables.
ii) What is the purpose of the steel core?
191
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
2. Can you mention materials, in your home or outside, that are made of aluminium?
What are their properties for example weight, rusting, shape etc?
Discuss in groups and give presentation to the class.
4.3.1 Production of Some Important Metals
A. Aluminium
Occurrence and extraction
Aluminium is the most abundant metal and the third most plentiful element after oxygen and
silicon in the earth’s crust. About seven percent of the earth’s crust is aluminium. It is the
second-most important metal, after iron, in terms of consumption. Aluminium does not
occur as a free metal in nature. Its principal ore is bauxite (Al O .2H O). Other minerals
2 3 2
containing aluminium are orthoclase (KAlSi O ), cryolite (Na AlF ), corundum (Al O),
3 8 3 6 2 3
beryl (Be Al Si O ) and china clay (Al Si O .2H O).
3 2 6 8 2 2 7 2
Aluminium is extracted industrially principally, from bauxite, Al O •2H O, by the Hall–
2 3 2
Héroult process or simply the Hall process. In this process, first the bauxite needs to be
purified since it is frequently contaminated with silica (SiO), iron oxides and titanium (IV)
2
oxide. To isolate pure Al O from bauxite, the powdered ore is first heated with sodium
2 3
hydroxide solution to convert silica into a soluble silicate.
SiO (s) + 2NaOH (aq) Æ Na SiO (aq) + H O (l)
2 2 3 2
At the same time aluminium oxide is converted to soluble sodium aluminate.
Al O (s) + 2NaOH (aq) Æ NaAlO (aq) + H O (l)
2 3 2 2
The impurities like iron oxides and titanium (IV) oxide remain unaffected by the base and
are filtered off. Why are they not affected?
Then the solution is treated with acid to precipitate aluminium hydroxide.
AlO – (aq) + H O+ (aq) Æ Al(OH) (s)
2 3 3
Aluminium hydroxide is collected by filtration, washed, dried, and then heated strongly in
a furnace to get Al O .
2 3
heat
2Al(OH) → Al O + 3H O
3 2 3 2
Pure aluminium oxide is mixed with some cryolite, NaAlF , and then melted. Cryolite is
3 6
added to Al O to reduce its melting point from 2045oC to 1000oC. The molten mixture is
2 3
then electrolyzed to obtain aluminium. The electrolytic cell, in which the molten mass is
electrolyzed, contains graphite electrodes as both anode and cathode.
192
CHEMISTRY IN INDUSTRY AND ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION (UNIT 4)
Activity 4.4
1. Write the balanced chemical equation for the dissociation of aluminium oxide in the
molten state.
2. Identify the ions that move to the cathode and the anode during the electrolysis of
molten aluminium oxide? Write the half-reactions at the anode, cathode and overall
cell reactions.
3. At which electrode will aluminium be produced during the process?
Discuss in groups and give a presentation to the class.
Graphiterods(Anodes)
Solidcharge
Moltenelectrolyte
Power
BubblesofCO
2
Graphitefurnace
lining(cathode)
MoltenAl
Figure 4.1 Electrolytic cell for aluminium production
Al O is converted to Al, by electrolysis. We do not use reducing agents for reduction
2 3
of aluminium from aluminium oxide; why?
Physical Properties: Aluminium is a soft silvery-white metal having a density of 2.7
g/cm3. It melts at 660°C. It can be shaped into wires, rolled, pressed or cast into different
.
shapes. It is a good conductor of heat and electricity.
Chemical Properties: Aluminium is a reactive metal, even though its reactions are not
vigorous in comparison with those of sodium, potassium, calcium and other metals of
group IA and IIA. It undergoes the following reactions:
a Reaction with Oxygen:
Aluminium has affinity for oxygen and reacts with atmospheric oxygen to form a thin
film of aluminium oxide on its surface.
4Al (s) + 3O (g) Æ 2Al O (s)
2 2 3
193
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
This thin film of oxide inhibits further reaction with oxygen. The thin film can be
removed by rubbing with mercury or mercury (II) chloride solution.
What type of oxide is Al O ?
2 3
b Reaction with dilute acids:
Aluminium reacts with dilute acids like HCl and HSO , forming salts and liberating
2 4
hydrogen gas.
2Al (s) + 3H SO (aq) Æ Al (SO ) (aq) + 3H (g)
2 4 2 4 3 2
2Al (s) + 6HCl (aq) Æ 2AlCl (s) + 3H (g)
3 2
Aluminium does not react with dilute or concentrated HNO due to the formation of
3
a protective oxide layer on its surface.
c Aluminium burns in chlorine gas to form aluminium chloride:
2Al (s) + 3Cl (g) Æ 2AlCl (s)
2 3
d Aluminium reacts with sodium hydroxide solution:
2Al (s) + 2NaOH (aq) + 6H O (l) Æ 2NaAl(OH) (aq) + 3H (g)
2 4 2
Uses: Aluminium is lightweight and corrosion resistant, so it is used to make light alloys
like duralumin (mixture of Al, Cu and Mg). Alloys of aluminium are extensively used in the
transport industry to make aircraft, ships and cars. It is used in the manufacture of household
cooking utensils due to its high thermal conductivity and resistance to corrosion. It is also
used to make door and window frames and roofing for buildings, as packaging material in
food industries, and for electrical transmission lines.
In the thermite welding process, powdered aluminium when mixed with iron (III) oxide
and ignited, produces a temperature of about 3000°C. This temperature is quite sufficient
for welding metals. The reaction in this process is as follows:
2Al (s) + Fe O (s) Æ 2Fe (l) + Al O (s)
2 3 2 3
The mixture of powdered aluminium and iron oxide is called thermite.
Research and writing
1. Make a list of materials made of aluminium you encounter at home, and in the city
or town where you live.
2. What property of aluminium makes it useful in the construction industries?
3. Regarding the manufacturing of aluminium by electrolysis, answer the following
questions.
a The electrolyte does not need heating to keep it in its molten state; why?
b The graphite anode gradually disappear during the electrolysis. What is it turning
into? (Think about the product that is given off at the anode).
Present your findings to the class.
194
CHEMISTRY IN INDUSTRY AND ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION (UNIT 4)
Activity 4.5
1. Iron is the cheapest among all metals. Give reasons for this.
2. What is the difference between stainless steel and iron?
3. What do you understand by the term alloy? Is stainless steel an alloy?
Discuss in groups and give a presentation to the class.
B. Iron
Occurrence and Extraction
Iron is the second-most abundant metal next to aluminium, in the earth’s crust and it is the
fourth most abundant element. It constitutes about 4.7% of the earth’s crust by weight. It
is never found as a free metal in nature. It occurs in nature only in the form of compounds,
such as oxides, carbonates and sulphides. The chief ores of iron are hematite (Fe O ),
2 3
limonite (Fe O .H O), magnetite (Fe O ), and siderite (FeCO ). It is also found in the
2 3 2 3 4 3
form of iron pyrites (FeS ) which is commonly called fool’s gold.
2
Iron is generally extracted from hematite (FeO), magnetite (FeO) and siderite (FeCO ).
2 3 3 4 3
The extraction of iron from its ores is carried out in a blast furnace. The raw materials for
the extraction of iron are iron ore, coke, limestone and hot air. The furnace is charged with
a mixture of iron ore, limestone and coke at the top and a blast of hot air is blown in at the
bottom. The coke burns to form carbon dioxide and the temperature approaches 2000°C
near the bottom. As the carbon dioxide rises up, the coke reduces it to carbon monoxide.
The carbon monoxide then reduces the iron oxide to iron metal. The overall reactions in
the blast furnace can be summarized as follows:
1. Oxidation of coke to carbon dioxide:
C (s) + O (g) Æ CO (g) + heat
2 2
2. Reduction of carbon dioxide to carbon monoxide:
CO (g) + C (s) Æ 2CO (g)
2
3. Reduction of iron oxides to metallic iron by carbon monoxide:
3Fe O (s) + CO (g) Æ 2Fe O (s) + CO (g)
2 3 3 4 2
Fe O (s) + CO (g) Æ 3FeO (s) + CO (g)
3 4 2
FeO (s) + CO (g) Æ Fe (l) + CO (g)
2
4. Decomposition of the limestone by heat in the blast furnace serves as a flux to
remove impurities:
195
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
heat
CaCO (s) → CaO (s) + CO (g)
3 2
5. Reaction of calcium oxide with impurities like silica (SiO ) to form calcium silicate
2
which is a glass-like material called slag.
CaO + SiO Æ CaSiO
2 3
The molten iron flows to the bottom of the blast furnace. The slag is less dense and floats
on the surface of the molten iron. Thus, the molten iron and the molten slag are tapped off
separately. The slag is used mostly for the manufacture of cement
Figure 4.2 Blast furnace.
196
CHEMISTRY IN INDUSTRY AND ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION (UNIT 4)
The iron obtained directly from the blast furnace is called pig iron. It is impure and contains
about 2% silicon, up to 1% phosphorus and manganese, and traces of sulphur. These
impurities make pig iron brittle. When pig iron is re-melted with scrap iron and cast into
moulds, it forms cast iron.
Wrought iron: is the purest form of commercial iron. It is obtained by removing most of
the impurities from pig iron. It is manufactured by heating impure iron with hematite and
limestone in a furnace. This increases the purity of the iron to 99.5%. Wrought iron is a
tough, malleable and ductile form of iron.
PROJECT 4.1
Form a group and construct a model of the blast furnace from locally available
materials.
Conversion of Pig Iron to Steel
The relatively high carbon-content of the iron recovered from the blast furnace (pig iron)
makes it very hard and brittle. The conversion of pig iron to steel is essentially a purification
process in which impurities are removed by oxidation. This purification process is carried
out in a furnace at high temperatures. In the conversion of pig iron to steel, three different
methods are used. These are the Bessemer Converter, Open-hearth Furnace and the
Basic Oxygen Process.
a The Bessemer Converter: In the process of converting pig iron to steel, molten
pig iron from the blast furnace is transferred to a cylindrical vessel containing a
refractory lining of MgCO and CaCO . A blast of hot air is blown through the
3 3
molten metal from a set of small holes at the bottom of the vessel. The oxygen
passing through the molten metal converts silicon, phosphorus and sulphur to their
oxides, which then react with the lining to form a slag. The carbon in the pig iron is
also oxidized to carbon monoxide, so its concentration is also reduced. The
conversion of the pig iron to steel by this process requires only 15 minutes. However,
the reaction is difficult to control and the quality of the steel produced can be quite
variable.
b The Open-hearth Furnace: It has a large, shallow hearth, which is usually lined
with a basic oxide refractory (MgO and CaO). The furnace is charged with a mixture
of pig iron, Fe O , scrap iron and limestone. A blast of hot air and burning fuel is
2 3
directed over the surface of the charge to maintain it in the molten state. Impurities in
the pig iron are oxidized by the Fe O and air. Carbon dioxide, and sulphur dioxide
2 3
formed by the oxidation of the carbon and sulphur, respectively, in the pig iron
bubble out of the mixture as waste gases.
197
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
The SiO and other acidic oxides like P O combine with CaO (from limestone) and the
2 4 10
refractory lining to form a slag.
The impurities in pig iron are oxidized in the following way:
C + O Æ CO
2 2
S + O Æ SO
2 2
12P + 10Fe O Æ 3P O + 20Fe
2 3 4 10
3Si + 2Fe O Æ 3SiO + 4Fe
2 3 2
Calcium oxide, formed by the decomposition of limestone, reacts with oxides of silicon
and phosphorus to form slag.
P O + 6CaO Æ 2Ca (PO )
4 10 3 4 2
SiO + CaO Æ CaSiO
2 3
This entire process takes 8 to 10 hours to complete and the quality of the steel is much
more easily controlled. A calculated amount of various elements can be added to the steel
to form steel alloys with desired properties.
a
b
Figure 4.3 a) Bessemer converter b) Open-hearth furnace.
198
CHEMISTRY IN INDUSTRY AND ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION (UNIT 4)
c Basic Oxygen Process: This newer procedure has largely replaced the open
hearth, because of its high speed. It involves forcing a mixture of powdered
calcium oxide, CaO, and oxygen gas directly into the surface of the molten
pig iron. The oxygen reacts exothermically with carbon, sulphur, silicon,
phosphorus and impurity metals. Carbon and sulphur are oxidized to CO and
2
SO ,respectively, and are released as exhaust gases. The oxides of silicon
2
(SiO ), phosphorus, (P O ) and impurity metals combine with lime (CaO),
2 4 10
forming slag. The charge in the converter is maintained in the molten state by
the energy released in these oxidation reactions. The converter is tilted to
remove the slag. After a second blow of oxygen, the converter is tilted once
again and the molten steel is poured out. This process takes only about 20
to 25 minutes.
Figure 4.4 The basic oxygen converter.
Activity 4.6
Prepare a list of materials which are made of steel and describe their uses. Discuss in
groups and give a presentation to the class.
199
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Physical Properties of Iron
Do you remember physical properties of iron? Can you mention some of them?
Iron is a grey, lustrous, malleable and ductile metal. It is a good conductor of heat and
electricity. It has a high melting point (1580°C) and a high density (7.87 g/cm3). It is a
ferromagnetic metal, which means it can be permanently magnetized.
Chemical Properties of Iron
Have you ever noticed the formation of a reddish thin film on the surface of an
iron object? Do you know the chemical nature of this thin film? From your
observations, what do you conclude about the reactivity of iron?
Iron is a reactive metal. Its reactivity is very slow, compared to group IA and IIA metals.
Iron rusts in the presence of air and moisture to form hydrated iron (III) oxide.
moisture
4Fe (s) + 3O (g) → 2Fe O .x H O(s) (rust)
2 2 3 2
Iron reacts with dilute acids, like HCl and H SO , forming iron (II) salts and liberating
2 4
hydrogen gas.
Fe (s) + 2HCl (aq) Æ FeCl (aq) + H (g)
2 2
Fe (s) + H SO (aq) Æ FeSO (aq) + H (g)
2 4 4 2
Like other transition metals, iron also exhibits different oxidation states. It commonly exists
as the ferrous (Fe2+) and ferric (Fe+3) ions. Iron (II) and iron (III) compounds are coloured.
Aqueous solutions of iron (II) compounds are pale-green and solutions of iron (III)
compounds are yellowish brown.
Aqueous solutions of some iron (II) compounds are rapidly oxidized to the corresponding
iron (III) compounds. For example, iron (II) hydroxide, Fe(OH) , on exposure to air,
2
oxidizes to iron (III) hydroxide.
4Fe(OH) (s) + O (g) + 2H O (l) Æ 4Fe(OH) (s)
2 2 2 3
Heated iron reacts with hydrogen chloride gas, forming iron (II) chloride and hydrogen gas.
Fe (s) + 2HCl (g) Æ FeCl (g) + H (g)
2 2
Heated iron reacts with chlorine and sulphur to form the chloride and sulphide, respectively.
2Fe (s) + 3Cl (g) Æ 2FeCl (s)
2 3
Fe (s) + S (s) Æ FeS (s)
200
CHEMISTRY IN INDUSTRY AND ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION (UNIT 4)
Iron has the ability to displace less active metals from solutions of their salts. For example,
when a piece of iron is placed in a solution of CuSO , it is oxidized to Fe2+ and a reddish
4
brown deposit of copper metal forms on the surface of the iron.
Fe (s) + Cu2+ (aq) Æ Fe2+ (aq) + Cu (s)
Uses of Iron
Iron is the most widely used metal and takes first position in worldwide consumption. It is
used as a structural metal in the construction of buildings and bridges. In the form of pig
iron, it is used to make domestic boilers, hot-water radiators, railings, water pipes, castings,
and mouldings. As wrought iron, it is used in making nails, sheets, horseshoes, ornamental
gates, door knockers, farm machinery etc. Iron is also used in the manufacture of alloys
such as carbon steels and alloy steels. Carbon steels can be classified as mild steel, medium
steel and high-carbon steel, based on the amount of carbon.
Mild Steel: contains up to 0.2% carbon and is used in making screws, motors, car batteries,
railway lines, ships, bridges, nuts and bolts.
Medium Steel: contains 0.3–0.6% carbon and is used to make springs and chains.
High-Carbon Steel: contains 0.6–1.5% carbon and is used to make drill bits, knives,
hammers and chisels.
Alloy Steel: contains iron and a relatively higher percentage of other metals. For example,
stainless steel contains chromium (14–18%) and nickel (7–9%). Tool steels include tungsten
steel and manganese steel. These metals give the alloy hardness, toughness and heat
resistance. They are used in rock drills, cutting edges and parts of machinery that are
subjected to heavy wear.
Activity 4.7
1. You have learned about the purification of metals, including copper in unit 3. Describe
the electrolytic process used for the purification copper metal.
2. Prepare a list of items made of copper.
3. In the refining process of copper, zinc does not deposit on the cathode. Why?
Discuss in your group and give a presentation to the class.
201
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
C. Copper
Occurrence and extraction
Copper is occasionally found as native copper. However, it is found mainly in compounds
such as sulphides, oxides and the carbonates. The most important sulphide ores are
chalcopyrite (CuFeS ), chalcocite (Cu S), covellite (CuS) and bornite (Cu FeS ). The
2 2 5 4
principal oxide ores are cuprite (Cu O) and tenorite (CuO). In the carbonate form, it
2
exists as malachite (CuCO .Cu(OH) ).
3 2
Copper is principally extracted from chalcopyrite. Since the amount of copper in the ore is
very small, the crushed and ground sulphide ore is first concentrated by froth flotation. This
treatment changes the concentration of the ore from 2 % copper to as high as 30% copper.
The concentrated ore is then roasted with a limited supply of air (oxygen).
2CuFeS (s) + 4O (g) Æ Cu S (s) + 2FeO (s) + 3SO (g)
2 2 2 2
The roasted mixture is smelted by adding limestone and sand to form a molten slag that
removes many of the impurities. FeO present in the roasted mixture can also be removed
as slag in the form of iron silicate (FeSiO), and silica in the form of calcium silicate (CaSiO).
3 3
CaCO (s) + SiO (s) Æ CaSiO (l) + CO (g)
3 2 3 2
FeO (s) + SiO (s) Æ FeSiO (l)
2 3
The CuS obtained by roasting chalcopyrite is then reduced by heating it in a limited supply
2
of oxygen.
Cu S (s) + O (g) Æ 2Cu (l) + SO (g)
2 2 2
The copper produced by the above process is called blister copper and it has 98.5 – 99.5
% purity. Blister copper contains iron, silver, gold and sometimes zinc as impurities. So it is
refined further by electrolysis as shown in Figure 4.5. Copper obtained by electrolytic
refining is 99.99% pure.
Figure 4.5 Electrolytic refining of copper.
202
CHEMISTRY IN INDUSTRY AND ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION (UNIT 4)
Physical Properties of Copper
Copper is a soft, ductile, malleable, reddish-brown metal with a density of 8.96 g/cm3. It
is second to silver in electrical conductivity. It melts at 1086°C and boils at 2310°C.
Chemical properties of copper
Copper is less reactive metal, that is why it is found in the native state. Although it is not
very reactive, it undergoes the following reactions:
Powdered copper, when heated in air forms a black powder of copper (II) oxide, CuO.
2Cu (s) + O (g) Æ 2CuO (s)
2
Copper does not react with dilute acids like HCl and H SO . It cannot displace hydrogen
2 4
from acids. However, it can be oxidized by oxidizing acids such as dilute and concentrated
nitric acid and hot concentrated sulphuric acid, H SO .
2 4
3Cu (s) + 8HNO (aq) dilute 3Cu(NO ) (aq) + 2NO (g) + 4H O (l)
→
3 3 2 2
Cu (s) + 4HNO (aq) concentrated Cu(NO ) (aq) + 2NO (g) + 2H O (l)
→
3 3 2 2 2
Cu (s) + 2H SO (aq) Hot and concentrated CuSO (aq) + 2SO (g) + 2H O (l)
→
2 4 4 2 2
Copper corrodes in moist air over a long period of time as a result of oxidation caused by
a mixture of water, oxygen and carbon dioxide. It turns green, due to the formation of
verdigris: a basic copper carbonate (CuCO .Cu(OH) ) or Cu (OH) CO .
3 2 2 2 3
2Cu (s) + H O (l) + O (g) + CO (g) Æ CuCO .Cu(OH)
2 2 2 3 2
Basic copper carbonate is responsible for the green layer that forms on the surface of
copper and bronze objects. This layer adheres to the surface and protects the metal from
further corrosion.
Copper is a transition metal and exhibits different oxidation states. It exists as cuprous
(Cu+) and cupric (Cu2+) ions. Compounds containing copper in the +1 oxidation state are
stable in insoluble compounds. Cu1+ is unstable and cannot exist in aqueous solution since
it reduces and oxidizes (disproportionates) itself as follows:
2Cu+ (aq) Æ Cu2+ (aq) + Cu (s)
Soluble compounds containing Cu+, such as CuCl, CuI and CuBr, are all colourless solids.
The most stable oxidation state of copper is +2. Aqueous solutions of many copper (II)
compounds are blue, thus copper forms coloured compounds in the oxidation state of +2.
For example, hydrated copper sulphate, CuSO .5H O, consists of blue crystals, and its
4 2
aqueous solution is also blue.
203
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Uses of Copper
Copper is used to manufacture alloys. For example, bronze is an alloy of copper and tin,
and it is used to make coins, medals, bells, machinery parts, etc. Brass is an alloy of
copper and zinc, and it is used for hardware tops, terminals and pipes. Copper is widely
used in the electrical industry in the form of electric wires, cables etc. Copper compounds,
such as copper chloride, copper carbonate and copper hydroxide, are used as pesticides.
Exercise 4.2
1. Describe the occurrence and extraction of the following metals; aluminium, iron,
and copper.
2. Which of the three metals, Al, Fe and Cu is produced by electrochemical reduction?
3. Explain how Al, Fe and Cu behave in dry air, moisture and acidic solutions.
4. Suggest the main chemical reactions involved in the conversion of pig iron to wrought
iron.
5. Discuss the main areas of applications of Al, Fe and Cu in home and industry.
4.3.2 Production of Some Important Non-metals
A. Nitrogen
Activity 4.8
1. Draw the structure of a nitrogen molecule. How many bonds are present in it? Why
does nitrogen form triple bond?
2. Which form of nitrogen is absorbed by green plants?
Discuss in group and give a presentation to the class.
Occurrence and Production
Nitrogen occurs in nature in the elemental form. It also exists in the form of compounds. In
the elemental state, it exists as a diatomic molecule, N , in atmospheric air. It constitutes
2
about 80% by volume of the atmosphere. In the form of compounds, it exists as sodium
nitrate (Chile salt peter, NaNO ) and potassium nitrate (KNO ) also called saltpetre. It is
3 3
also found in DNA molecules and proteins of all living things.
In the industrial production of nitrogen, the first step is to remove impurities like dust and
other particles from air. The air is then compressed under high pressure and low temperature
to remove carbon dioxide and water vapour since they solidify at a relatively high
204
CHEMISTRY IN INDUSTRY AND ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION (UNIT 4)
temperatures compared to nitrogen and oxygen. As the temperature continues to decrease,
the air containing mainly nitrogen and oxygen condenses to give a pale-blue liquid. Nitrogen
is thus separated on an industrial scale by fractional distillation of liquid air. When liquid air
is fractionally distilled, nitrogen is collected and stored in steel cylinders under pressure.
The second fraction consists of argon, which distils off the mixture at –186°C, leaving
behind a blue liquid of oxygen that boils at –183°C.
In the laboratory, nitrogen is prepared by warming an aqueous solution containing ammonium
chloride and sodium nitrite.
NH Cl (aq) + NaNO (aq) Æ NaCl (aq) + N (g) + 2H O (l)
4 2 2 2
Physical Properties of Nitrogen
Nitrogen is colourless, odourless and tasteless gas. It is inert under ordinary conditions, and
that is why it is found in atmospheric air as N. The inertness of nitrogen at low temperatures
2
is directly related to the strength of the triple bond, which requires high energy to break.
Chemical Properties of Nitrogen
Is nitrogen a reactive or unreactive non-metal? Can you suggest a proof for your
answer?
However, nitrogen reacts with metals of group IA and IIA as well as oxygen at higher
temperatures. When heated with reactive metals like lithium, calcium and magnesium, it
forms compounds, known as nitrides.
6Li (s) + N (g) Æ 2Li N (s)
2 3
3Ca (s) + N (g) Æ Ca N (s)
2 3 2
3Mg (s) + N (g) Æ Mg N (s)
2 3 2
Nitrogen combines with oxygen at elevated temperatures or in an electric arc to form
oxides.
N (g) + O (g) Æ 2NO (g)
2 2
N (g) + 2O (g) Æ 2NO (g)
2 2 2
Nitric oxide, also called nitrogen monoxide, NO, is a colourless and reactive gas. It forms
nitrogen dioxide (NO ), a reddish brown gas, when it comes into contact with oxygen.
2
2NO (g) + O (g) Æ 2NO (g)
2 2
This reddish brown gas dimerizes at low temperatures to give a colourless gas of dinitrogen
tetraoxide, N O .
2 4
2NO (g) Æ N O (g)
2 2 4
205
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Nitrogen also forms oxides, like dinitrogen monoxide, N O, (commonly called laughing
2
gas), dinitrogen trioxide (N O ) and dinitrogen pentoxide (N O ).
2 3 2 5
Nitrogen reacts directly with hydrogen in the Haber process to form ammonia. In this
process, a mixture of N and H gas, at a pressure of 200-300 atm and a temperature of
2 2
400-600°C, is passed over a catalyst of finely divided iron.
Fe/200–300atm
N (g) + 3H (g) ←             → 2NH (g)
2 2 400–600°C 3
The ammonia produced by this method is primarily used in the manufacture of fertilizers. It
is also used for the production of nitric acid (HNO ).
3
Uses of Nitrogen
Nitrogen is used in food packaging to prevent oxidation, and to create an inert atmosphere
in the production of semiconductors. Liquid nitrogen is used as a refrigerant to preserve
bulls’ semen and blood. Its major use is in the production of ammonia.
Activity 4.9
Have you ever observed glowing worms? Why do they glow? Anyone who has observed
them should explain to the class.
B. Phosphorus
Occurrence and Extraction
Does phosphorus exist in the pure form (elemental state) as does nitrogen? If not,
why? Phosphorus is a relatively abundant element, ranking 12th in the earth’s crust. It
exists naturally only in the combined state, such as in rock phosphate, Ca (PO ) ,
3 4 2
fluoroapatite, Ca (PO ) F or 3Ca (PO ) .CaF . It is also found in teeth, bones and
10 4 6 2 3 4 2 2
DNA.
What is allotropy? What are the two common allotropes of phosphorus?
Allotropes are different forms of the same element with the same physical state but with
different physical properties. This is due to the difference in the arrangement of atoms.
The two common allotropic forms of phosphorus are white phosphorus and red phosphorus.
White phosphorus is a very poisonous, white waxy-looking substance that melts at 44.1°C
and boils at 287°C. Its density is 1.8 g/cm3. It consists of individual tetra-atomic (P )
4
molecules and is an unstable form of phosphorus.
206
CHEMISTRY IN INDUSTRY AND ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION (UNIT 4)
Red phosphorus is denser (2.16 g/cm3) and is much less reactive than white phosphorus at
normal temperatures. It consists of P molecules linked together to form a polymer (large
4
molecule) as shown below.
Industrially, white phosphorus is manufactured by heating a mixture of crushed rock
phosphate, Ca (PO ) , silica, SiO , and coke in an electric furnace. The reaction in the
3 4 2 2
furnace is:
2Ca (PO ) (s) + 6SiO (s) + 10C (s) Æ 6CaSiO (l) + P (g) + 10CO (g)
3 4 2 2 3 4
The vaporized phosphorus (P ) is condensed, collected and stored under water. Red
4
phosphorus is prepared by heating white phosphorus in sunlight for several days. White
phosphorus is stored under water because it spontaneously ignites (bursts into flames) in
the presence of oxygen. Red phosphorus is much less reactive than white phosphorus and
does not need to be stored under water.
Physical Properties of Phosphorus
Activity 4.10
Use reference books available in your school library and write down the main properties
of white and red phosphorus.
Chemical Properties of Phosphorus
Phosphorus exhibits the following common chemical reactions. Phosphorus reacts with
limited and excess supplies of oxygen to form tetraphosphorus hexoxide (P O ) and
4 6
tetraphosphorus decoxide (P O ) respectively.
4 10
P (s) + 3O (g) Æ P O (s)
4 2 4 6
P (s) + 5O (g) Æ P O (s)
4 2 4 10
P O and P O dissolve in water to form phosphorous acid, H PO , an orthophsophoric
4 6 4 10 3 3
acid, H PO respectively.
3 4
P O (s) + 6H O (l) Æ 4H PO (aq)
4 6 2 3 3
P O (s) + 6H O (l) Æ 4H PO (aq)
4 10 2 3 4
207
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Phosphorus also reacts with limited and excess supplies of chlorine to form phosphorus
(III) chloride (PCl ) and phosphorus (V) chloride (PCl ) respectively.
3 5
P (s) + 6Cl (g) Æ 4PCl (s)
4 2 3
P (s) + 10Cl (g) Æ 4PCl (s)
4 2 5
Activity 4.11
1. Write the chemical reactions for photosynthesis and respiration. What are the products
formed in photosynthesis and respiration?
2. What are the uses of oxygen in hospitals?
3. How do astronauts breathe while in space?
Discuss all the above points in groups and give a presentation to the class.
C. Oxygen
Occurrence and Production
Oxygen is the most abundant element on earth. It constitutes about 46.6% by weight of the
earth’s crust in the form of compounds such as oxides, silicates, carbonates, phosphates
etc. It exists in nature in the elemental state in atmospheric air constituting about 20% by
volume. Oxygen is manufactured industrially by the fractional distillation of liquid air in a
way similar to that of nitrogen.
Chemical Properties of Oxygen
Oxygen is relatively reactive and combines directly with most elements to form oxides.
Oxygen combines with metal to form metal oxides (basic oxides). For example,
2Mg (s) + O (g) Æ 2MgO (s)
2
2Ca (s) + O (s) Æ 2CaO (s)
2
Oxygen combines with non-metals to form acidic oxides; for example:
S (s) + 8O (g) Æ 8SO (g)
8 2 2
P (s) + 5O (g) Æ P O (g)
4 2 4 10
Oxygen supports combustion and is necessary for the burning of substances like charcoal,
hydrocarbon fuel, etc.
208
CHEMISTRY IN INDUSTRY AND ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION (UNIT 4)
C (s) + O (g) Æ CO (g)
2 2
CH (g) + 2O (g) Æ CO (g) + 2H O (g)
4 2 2 2
Activity 4.12
Have you observed the colour of sulphur? What is the use of sulphur in your area?
D. Sulphur
Occurrence and Extraction
Sulphur is found in nature and in the form of compounds such as galena (PbS), pyrites
(FeS ) (fool’s gold ), cinnabar (HgS), sphalerite (ZnS), gypsum (CaSO .2H O), barite
2 4 2
(BaSO ), and as hydrogen sulphide (H S) in natural gas and crude oil.
4 2
Sulphur is extracted from underground deposits of elemental sulphur by the Frasch process
(Figure 4.6). In this process, three concentric pipes are sent down to the sulphur deposit.
Superheated water at about 170oC is pumped through the outermost pipes. Hot air is
compressed in the innermost tube. A froth of sulphur, air and water come out to the surface
of the earth forced by hot compressed air in the middle tube. The molten sulphur is then
cooled and solidified.
Figure 4.6 Frasch Process for the production of sulphur.
209
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Uses: Nearly one-half of the sulphur needed by chemical industries is obtained as a waste
product of other industrial processes. For example, sulphur can be obtained in the form of
hydrogen sulphide (H S) from natural gas and during the purification of crude oil. It can
2
also be obtained in the form of sulphur dioxide from the roasting of sulphide ores during the
manufacture of metals. The use of sulphur obtained from waste products of other industries
reduces the demand for the element from natural deposits. This also reduces the pollution
of atmospheric air and the formation of acid rain.
Sulphur exhibits allotropy. The most important allotropes of sulphur are rhombic and
monoclinic sulphur. Rhombic sulphur is the most stable form of sulphur consisting of S
8
molecules.
Chemical Properties of Sulphur
Sulphur is relatively stable and unreactive at room temperature. However, it reacts with
metals and non-metals when heated.
Sulphur combines with metals when heated to form sulphides.
8Fe (s) + S (s) Æ 8FeS (s)
8
Sulphur burns in oxygen to form oxides.
S (s) + 8O (g) Æ 8SO (g)
8 2 2
Sulphur is the raw material for the production of sulphuric acid (H SO ) by the Contact
2 4
Process. This process of sulphuric acid production involves the following steps.
Step 1: Sulphur is first oxidized to produce sulphur dioxide:
S (s) + 8O (g) Æ 8SO (g)
8 2 2
Step 2: Sulphur dioxide is converted to sulphur trioxide at high temperatures in the presence
of a catalyst:
VO
2SO (g) + O 25→ 2SO (g)
2 2 3
Step 3: Sulphur trioxide is absorbed into concentrated sulphuric acid to produce oleum
(H S O ).
2 2 7
SO (g) + H SO (l) Æ H S O (l)
3 2 4 2 2 7
Step 4: The oleum is then diluted with water to produce the desired concentration of
sulphuric acid. Commercially used concentrated sulphuric acid is 98% H SO .
2 4
H S O (l) + H O (l) Æ 2H SO (aq)
2 2 7 2 2 4
210
CHEMISTRY IN INDUSTRY AND ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION (UNIT 4)
E. Chlorine
Activity 4.13
1. When we turn on the water tap, the water coming out of the tap sometimes appears white
and turns normal after a few minutes. Many people say that the white colour we see is due
to chlorine. Do you agree? Discuss in group and present your opinion to the class.
2. What is the purpose of adding chlorine to drinking water?
Occurrence and Extraction
Chlorine belongs to group VIIA, known as the halogens. It is the most abundant element
among the halogens. It is found in nature in the form of compounds only. Chlorine is found
in nature chiefly in the form of chlorides of sodium, potassium, calcium and magnesium.
Sodium chloride is the chief source of chlorine, and it is obtained from seawater or as
deposits of rock salt.
Commercially, chlorine is manufactured by the electrolysis of a concentrated aqueous solution
of sodium chloride. During electrolysis of the concentrated solution, chlorine is formed at
the anode and the reduction of water occurs at the cathode, producing hydrogen gas and
hydroxide ions (OH–). The electrode and the overall cell reactions are as follows:
Oxidation at anode: 2Cl– (aq) Æ Cl (g) + 2e–
2
Reduction at cathode: 2H O (l) + 2e– Æ H (g) + 2OH– (aq)
2 2
Cell reaction: 2NaCl (aq) + 2H O (l) Æ 2NaOH (aq) + Cl (g) + H (g)
2 2 2
Although NaOH forms at the cathode compartment and Cl at the anode, the two substances
2
must be kept apart from one another. This is because, if they come into contact with each
other, they can react according to the following equation.
NaOH (aq) + Cl (g) Æ NaOCl (aq) + HCl (aq)
2
What is the oxidation number of chlorine in NaOCl?
Physical Properties of Chlorine
Activity 4.14
1. In urban area, tap water possesses a peculiar smell, which disappeares after a few minutes.
Many people say that the smell is due to chlorine. Do you agree? Discuss in group and
present your opinion to the class.
211
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Some of its physical properties are the following:
• Chlorine is a greenish-yellow gas at room temperature.
• It melts at –102°C and boils at –34°C.
• It is fairly soluble in water.
• It is extremely poisonous, causing inflammation of the lungs and mucous membranes
if inhaled, even in very small amounts. It is fatal if inhaled in higher amounts.
Chemical Properties of Chlorine
Chlorine is a highly reactive non-metal. It reacts directly with almost all elements except
the noble gases, carbon and nitrogen. It is a powerful oxidizing agent and oxidizes most of
the elements with which it reacts. The following are the main reactions of chlorine.
Chlorine reacts with heated metals to form chloride salts
2Fe (s) + 3Cl (g) Æ 2FeCl (s)
2 3
2Al (s) + 3Cl (g) Æ 2AlCl (s)
2 3
Chlorine reacts smoothly with hydrogen, in the presence of a charcoal as a catalyst, at
room temperature to form hydrogen chloride.
H (g) + Cl (g) Æ 2HCl (g)
2 2
Chlorine displaces less reactive halogens (Br and I ) from aqueous solutions of their
2 2
compounds.
Cl (g) + 2KBr (aq) Æ 2KCl (aq) + Br (l)
2 2
Cl (g) + 2Kl (aq) Æ 2KCl (aq) + l (aq)
2 2
Can bromine displace chlorine in a chemical reaction?
Chlorine dissolves in water and reacts with it, forming an acidic solution containing
hydrochloric acid (HCl) and hypochlorous acid (HOCl).
Cl (g) + H O (l) Æ HCl (aq) + HOCl (aq)
2 2
This type of reaction is called a disproportionation reaction, where chlorine is itself reduced
and oxidized.
Chlorine is commercially used as a bleaching agent and disinfectant (kills germs). As
elemental chlorine or as chlorine water, it is strong enough to oxidize dyes and to bleach
coloured materials. For example, it can be used to remove yellow or brown colours from
wood pulp, paper and cotton.
212
CHEMISTRY IN INDUSTRY AND ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION (UNIT 4)
Exercise 4.3
1. What are the main natural sources of N, P, O, S, and Cl?
2. Describe the main processes involved in the production (extraction) of N, P, O, S
and Cl.
3. How do N, P, and S behave when heated in air?
4. Write an equation for the reaction of chlorine with water.
5. Consult the books present in your library and describe with the aid of labelled
diagrams the laboratory preparation of following molecules:
a N b Cl
2 2
4.4 SOME INDUSTRIES IN ETHIOPIA
Competencies
After completing this section, you will be able to:
• define industry;
• list some industries in Ethiopia;
• describe the general characteristics of industries;
• outline the important steps in the productions of ceramics;
• mention some uses of ceramics;
• outline the important steps in the production of cement;
• outline the important steps in the production of sugar;
• outline the important steps in the production of pulp and paper;
• explain how tanning is carried out;
• describe the application of the chemical preservation of skin and hides;
• mention some uses of skin and hides;
• explain the process of food packing and preservation; and
• present a report to the class after visiting a nearby food factory.
Activity 4.15
1. Define industry.
2. What are the general characteristics of chemical industries?
3. List some common chemical industries in Ethiopia, mention products manufactured by
them in tabular form.
213
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
PROJECT 4.2
1. Have you ever wondered how glass retains different colours? Consult books
in your library and make list of the compounds added to impart colour to the
glass.
2. Can glass be recycled; how?
Submit your findings to your teacher.
Glass
Glass is an amorphous or non-crystalline solid material. Almost all glass contains silica as
the main component. Quartz glass is made by melting pure silica, SiO at a temperature of
2,
about 2300°C and then pouring the molten viscous liquid into moulds. It is of high strength,
low thermal expansion and highly transparent.
Soda-lime glass is ordinary glass which is a mixture of sodium silicate and calcium silicate.
It is made by heating a mixture of silica sand, sodium carbonate or sodium sulphate and
limestone. The reactions that take place in forming soda-lime glass are the following:
Na CO + SiO Æ Na SiO + CO
2 3 2 2 3 2
CaCO + SiO Æ CaSiO + CO
3 2 3 2
Soda-lime glass accounts for about 90% of manufactured glass. This type of glass is widely
used for window panes, bottles, dishes etc.
Borosilicate glass is commonly known as Pyrex. It is manufactured using boron (III)
oxide, BO, instead of limestone or calcium oxide. This glass has high resistance to chemical
2 3
corrosion and temperature changes and is widely used to make ovenware and laboratory
equipment such as flasks, beakers, and test tubes.
Steps in glass production
i) Batch preparation: refers to the preparation of the raw materials according to the
appropriate combinations. The raw materials are mixed in a proportion of 60%
sand, 21% sodium carbonate and 19% limestone.
ii) Glass melting: The raw materials and recycled glass (according to their colour)
are fed into a glass-melting furnace. The materials are then heated to a temperature
of about 1600°C to form a molten viscous liquid. Why are glasses is separated
according to the colour?
The furnace operates continuously, producing glass 24 hours a day. Substances that
give the glass different colours or improved chemical and physical properties such
as transparency, thermal and chemical stability and mechanical strength are added
during this process.
214
CHEMISTRY IN INDUSTRY AND ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION (UNIT 4)
iii) Glass forming: This is the stage in which the melted glass is made into a required
shape.
iv) Annealing: This is a process that involves the removal of internal stresses by reheating
the glass followed by a controlled slow-cooling cycle during which the stresses are
relieved.
v) Inspection: It involves testing of the glass product to check whether it fulfils desired
quality requirements or not.
vi) Packing and dispatching is the final stage before distribution.
Ceramics
Activity 4.16
1. Are you familiar with the pottery industry? Do you know any ceramic factories in
Ethiopia?
3. Prepare a list of ceramic products used in daily life.
Discuss in groups and give presentation to the class.
Ceramic is an inorganic, non-metallic solid prepared by the action of heat and subsequent
cooling. Traditional ceramics, such as porcelain, tiles and pottery are formed from minerals
such as clay, talc and feldspar. Most industrial ceramics, however, are formed from
extremely pure powders of specialty chemicals, such as silicon carbide, alumina, barium
titanate, and titanium carbide.
Manufacturing of ceramics
The minerals used to make ceramics are dug out of the earth and are then crushed and
ground into a fine powder. Manufacturers often purify this powder by mixing it in a solution
and allowing a chemical precipitate (a uniform solid that forms within a solution) to
form. The precipitate is then separated from the solution. The powder is heated to drive off
impurities including water.
The processes of manufacturing ceramics include:
A Moulding: After purification, small amounts of wax are often added to bind the ceramic
powder and make it more workable. Plastics may also be added to the powder to
give the desired pliability and softness. The powder can then be shaped into different
objects by various moulding processes.
B Densification: The process of densification uses intense heat to condense a ceramic
object into a strong, dense product. After being moulded, the ceramic object is
heated in an electric furnace to temperatures between 1000°C and 1700°C. As the
215
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
ceramic heats, the powder particles coalesce, much as water droplets join at room
temperature. As the ceramic particles merge, the object becomes increasingly dense,
shrinking by up to 20 percent of its original size. The goal of this heating process is
to maximize the strength of ceramic by obtaining an internal structure that is compact
and extremely dense.
In general, most ceramics are hard and wear-resistant, brittle, refractory, thermal and
electrical insulators, non-magnetic, oxidation-resistant, and chemically stable.
Due to the wide range of properties of ceramic materials, they are used for a multitude of
applications.
• Well-known uses of ceramics: They are commonly found in art sculptures, dishes,
platters and other kitchenware, kitchen tiles and bath room structures.
• Lesser-known uses for ceramics: They are used as electrical insulators,
computers parts, tools, dental replacements, engine parts, and tiles on space shuttles
and to replace bones such as the bones in hips, knees and shoulders.
• Future uses of ceramics: In future, the ceramics might be used to remove impurities
from the drinking water, and to replace diseased heart valves.
Cement
Activity 4.17
1. How many cement factories do you know in Ethiopia? Name the regions where they
are found and share these with your classmates.
2. Why are cement factories located in rural areas of Ethiopia? Give your reasons to the
class.
Cement is made by heating limestone (chalk), alumina (AlO) and silica-bearing materials
2 3
such as clay to 1450°C in a kiln using a process known as calcination. The resulting hard
substance called ‘clinker’ is then ground with a small amount of gypsum into a powder to
make “ordinary Portland cement” (OPC).
Cement mainly consists of calcium silicate (CaSiO), calcium aluminate (CaAlO), iron
3 2 4
(III) oxide (Fe O ) and magnesium oxide (MgO).
2 3
Portland cement is a very important building material, and was first discovered in England.
It received its name because, on setting, it hardens to a stone-like mass and was compared
to the famous Portland Rock of England. It is a mixture of calcium and aluminium silicates
with gypsum.
Raw Materials: Limestone and clay are the chief raw materials used in the
manufacture of Portland cement.
216
CHEMISTRY IN INDUSTRY AND ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION (UNIT 4)
Manufacturing Process: First, limestone and clay are crushed separately. They are
then mixed in the required quantities and finally mixed and ground together, which can
be done either by the dry or wet process. The wet process is suitable if the limestone
and clay are soft. If the raw materials are hard, the dry process is preferred. The dry
process is cost-effective because fuel consumption is less when the raw materials are
burnt in a rotary kiln.
Figure 4.7 Cement manufacturing process.
– Upper Part of the Kiln
∆
Raw material heated → complete elimination of moisture
– Middle Part of the Kiln
Limestone decomposes to calcium oxide.
∆
CaCO (s) → CaO(s) + CO (g)
3 2
– Lower End of the Kiln
In this part, the temperature reaches about 1600°C;the partly fused and sintered mixture
undergoes a series of chemical reactions to form calcium aluminates and silicates.
2CaO + 2SiO Æ 2CaO.SiO (di-calcium silicate)
2 2
217
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
3CaO + 3SiO Æ 3CaO.SiO (tri-calcium silicate)
2 2
3CaO + 3Al O Æ 3CaO.Al O (tri-calcium aluminate).
2 3 2 3
4CaO + 4Al O + 4Fe O Æ 4CaO.Al O .Fe O
2 3 2 3 2 3 2 3
(tetra-calcium aluminium ferrate)
MgO + SiO Æ MgSiO (magnesium silicate)
2 3
The resulting mixture of all these silicates and aluminates is called cement clinker. After
cooling, it is mixed with 2-3% gypsum (calcium sulphate) and ground to a fine powder.
Gypsum slows down the rate of setting of cement, so that the cement hardens adequately.
Table 4.3 The approximate composition of cement.
Component Percentage
Calcium oxide (CaO) 50-60 %
Silica (SiO ) 20-25 %
2
Alumina (Al O ) 5-10 %
2 3
Magnesium Oxide (MgO) 2-3 %
Ferric oxide (Fe O ) 1-2 %
2 3
Sulphur trioxide(SO ) 1-2 %
3
Setting of Cement
When mixed with water cement first forms a plastic mass that hardens after sometime. This
is due to the formation of three-dimensional cross-links between –Si–O–Si– and –Si–O–
Al– chains.
The first setting occurs within 24 hours, whereas, the subsequent hardening requires about
two weeks. In the hardening process of cement, the transition from plastic to solid state is
called setting.
PROJECT 4.3
Take a 0.5 kg of cement and mix it with correct proportion of sand and water. Mix
the compoment well till a palstic mass is formed. Take this plastic mass and construct
a model of any object. Start pouring water on the model starting from the second day
onwards. Report the changes to the class after 24 hours and after two weeks.
Sugar Manufacturing
Activity 4.18
1. Prepare a list of foods and drinks used at your home in which sugar is an ingredient.
2. Is sugar made only from sugar cane? If no, what are the other sources? Discuss in
group and give a presentation to the class.
218
CHEMISTRY IN INDUSTRY AND ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION (UNIT 4)
Sugarcane is a perennial herb belonging to the grass family. Native to tropical and subtropical
regions of the world, this tropical grass is about 3 metres tall.
Planting: Sugarcane is planted in fields by workers or mechanical planters. Typical cane
soil is made from the mixture of silts, clay particles and organic matter. Fertilizers are
applied from the time of planting up until the beginning of the ripening period, depending on
the region where the crop is planted. Cane seasons last from 8-22 months.
1. Collecting the Harvest: Mature canes are gathered by a combination of manual
and mechanical methods. The cane is cut at ground level, the leaves are removed,
the top is trimmed off (by cutting off the last mature joint) the canes and transported
to a sugar factory.
2. Cleansing and Grinding: The stalks are thoroughly washed and cut at the sugar
mill. After the cleaning process, a machine led by a series of rotating knives, shreds
the cane into pieces. This is known as “grinding”. During grinding, hot water is
sprayed onto the sugarcane to dissolve the remaining hard sugar. The shredded
cane is then spread out on a conveyer belt.
3. Juicing: The shredded sugarcane travels on the conveyor belt through a series of
heavy-duty rollers, which extract juice from the pulp. The pulp that remains, or “bagasse”,
is dried and used as a fuel. The raw juice moves on through the mill to be clarified.
4. Clarifying: Carbon dioxide and milk of lime are added to the liquid sugar mixture,
which is heated until boiling. The process of clarifying begins at this stage. As the
carbon dioxide moves through the liquid, it forms calcium carbonate, which attracts
non-sugar debris (fats, gums and waxes) from the juice, and pulls them away from
the sugar juice. The juice is then pushed through a series of filters to remove any
remaining impurities.
5. Evaporation: The clear juice that results from the clarifying process is put under a
vacuum, where the juice boils at a low temperature and the water in it begins to
evaporate. It is heated until it forms into thick, brown syrup.
6. Crystallization: Crystallization is the process of evaporating the water from the
sugar syrup. Pulverized sugar is fed into a sterilized vacuum pan. As the liquid
evaporates, crystals form. The remaining mixture is a thick mass of large crystals.
These crystals are sent to a centrifuge that spins and dries them. The dried product
is raw sugar, which is edible.
7. Refinery: Raw sugar is transported to a cane sugar refinery for the removal of
molasses, minerals and other non-sugars that contaminate it. This is known as the
purification process. Raw sugar is mixed with a solution of sugar and water to loosen
the molasses from the outside of the raw sugar crystals, producing a thick matter
known as “magma”. Large machines then spin the magma, separating the molasses
from the crystals. The crystals are promptly washed, dissolved and filtered to remove
impurities. The golden syrup that is produced is then sent through filters, and SO is
2
219
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
passed through it to remove the colour and water. The process of removing colour
is known as bleaching.What is left is concentrated, clear syrup which is again fed
into a vacuum pan for evaporation.
8. Separation and packaging: Once the final evaporation and drying process is done,
screens separate the different- sized sugar crystals. Large and small crystals are
packaged and labelled as white refined sugar.
Figure 4.8 Steps involved in sugar production.
220
CHEMISTRY IN INDUSTRY AND ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION (UNIT 4)
Paper and Pulp
Activity 4.19
Discuss the following issues in the group and give a presentation to your class:
1. Wasting paper is like chopping down trees. Comment.
2. Some papers are relatively cheap. The paper used for this grade 10 text book, for
example, is expensive. Are different types of paper manufactured by different
processes?
Wood is the raw material for making wood pulp and paper. Wood pulp is a dry fibrous
material used for making paper. The timber resources used to make wood pulp are referred
to as pulp wood. Wood pulp is made from soft-wood trees, such as spruce, pine, fir, larch
and hemlock, and from hard woods, such as eucalyptus, aspen and birch.
Wood is composed of cellulose, lignin, oils and resins. Lignin is used to bind fibres of
cellulose together. To provide wood pulp, the cellulose must be separated from the lignin.
Manufacturing of pulp and paper involves the following steps:
1. Harvesting trees involves the cutting down of trees from their growing areas and
transporting the timber to the paper and pulp industry.
2. Preparation for pulping is a step in which the bark of the tree is removed and then
the wood is chipped and screened to provide uniform sized chips (pieces).
3. Pulping is a step used to make wood pulp from the chipped wood pieces. This can
be accomplished by either mechanical or chemical means depending on the strength
and grade of paper to be manufactured.
a Mechanical pulping: It utilizes steam, pressure and high temperatures instead
of chemicals to tear the fibres. The fibre quality is greatly reduced because
mechanical pulping creates short, weak fibres that still contain the lignin that bonds
the fibres together. Paper used for newspapers are a typical product of
mechanical pulping.
b Chemical pulping: Chemical pulp is produced by combining wood chips and
chemicals in large vessels called digesters. Heat and the chemicals break down
the lignin which binds the cellulose fibres together without seriously degrading
the cellulose fibres. Chemical pulp is manufactured using the Kraft process or
the Sulphite Process.
i) The Kraft Process is the dominant chemical pulping method. It is the most
widely used method for making pulp from all types of trees. The process uses
221
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
aqueous sodium hydroxide and sodium sulphide as a digestion solution. After
digestion for about four hours at a temperature of 170oC, the pulp is separated
by filtration. This process uses a basic digestion medium.
ii) The Sulphite Process uses a cooking liquor (digestion) solution of sodium
bisulphate or magnesium bisulphate digester at pH of about 3 in a pulp.
The action of the hydrogen sulphide ions at 60oC over 6 to 12 hours dissolves
the lignin and separates it from the cellulose. After the process is complete,
the pulp is recovered by filtration.
The wood pulp achieved from the Sulphite or Kraft processes is washed to
remove chemicals and passed through a series of screens to remove foreign
materials.
4. Bleaching: It is the process of removing colouring matter from wood pulp and
increasing its brightness. The most common bleaching agents are strong oxidizing
agents such as chlorine, chlorine oxide, ozone and hydrogen peroxide.
5. Making paper from pulp: After bleaching, the pulp is processed into liquid stock
that can be transferred to a paper mill. The suspension is poured onto a continuously
moving screen belt and the liquor is allowed to seep away by gravity to produce
paper sheet. The continuous sheet then moves through additional rollers that compress
the fibres and remove the residual water to produce fine paper.
Tannery
Activity 4.20
1. The leather products of Ethiopia are durable and relatively cheaper than the same
products imported from outside. Why do people prefer to buy imported products?
What can you suggest to change this attitude? Discuss this matter in class in relation to
quality and availability of resources.
2. Why are leather products being replaced by synthetic products?
Discuss in groups and present to the class.
Tanning is a process of converting raw animal hides and skin to leather, using tannin. Leather
is a durable and flexible material created by the tanning of animal hides and skin. Tannin is
an acidic chemical that permanently alters the protein structure of a skin so that it can never
return to rawhide or skin again.
Leather production involves various preparatory stages, tanning, and crusting
1. Preparatory stages are those in which the hide or skin is prepared for tanning.
This stage includes curing, soaking, flesh removal, hair removal, scudding, and
deliming.
222
CHEMISTRY IN INDUSTRY AND ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION (UNIT 4)
a Curing: This process involves salting or drying the hide once it has been removed
from the animal. Curing is employed to prevent putrefaction of the protein
substance, collagen, from bacterial infection. Curing also removes excess water
from the hide and skin. Brine curing is the simplest and fastest method.
b Soaking: In this process, cured hides are soaked in water for several hours to
several days to remove salt, dirt, debris, blood and excess animal fat from the
skin.
c Flesh removal: In this process, animal hides are moved through a machine
that strips the flesh from the surface of the hide.
d Hair removal: In this step, the soaked hides and skins are transported to large
vats where they are immersed in a mixture of lime and water. This process is
called liming. It loosens the hair from the skin and makes hair-removal easier.
After 1–10 days soaking, the hair is mechanically removed from the hide by a
hair-removing machine.
e Scudding: This is the process in which hair and fat missed by the machines are
removed from the hide with a plastic tool or dull knife.
f Deliming: This process involves the removal of lime from the skin or hide in a
vat of acid. After this preparatory process, the skin or hide is ready for tanning.
2. Tanning is a process that converts the protein of the raw hide or skin into a stable
material. There are two main types of tanning:
a Vegetable or natural tanning: The skin is placed in a solution of tannin. Tannins
occur naturally in the barks and leaves of many plants. The primary barks used in
modern times are chestnut, oak, tanoak, hemlock, quebracho, mangrove,
wattle (acacia) and myrobalan. Naturally tanned hide is flexible and is used
for making shoes, luggage and furniture.
b Mineral tanning: In this process, the skin is placed in solutions of chemicals
such as chromium sulphate and other salts of chromium. Chrome tanning is faster
than natural (vegetable) tanning and requires only twenty four hours. The leather
is greenish-blue in colour derived from the chromium. This process produces
stretchable leather that is used for making garments and handbags.
3. Crusting: This is the final stage in leather manufacturing and includes dyeing, rolling
the leather to make it strong, stretching it in a heat-controlled room and performing
a process that involves covering the grain surface with chemical compounds such as
wax, oil, glazes etc. to make the leather very attractive.
223
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Food Processing and Preservation
Activity 4.21
1. The rate of spoilage of food is faster in open air in comparison to foods kept inside the
refrigerator. Explain. Discuss in group and present your findings to the class.
Food preservation is the process of treating and handling food to stop or greatly reduce
spoilage, loss of quality, edibility or nutritive value caused or accelerated by micro-
organisms.
Preservation usually involves preventing the growth of bacteria, fungi and other micro-
organisms, as well as reducing the oxidation of fats, which causes rancidity.
Activity 4.22
1. What are the traditional methods used to preserve food for a long time without
spoilage at your home?
2. What modern methods of food preserving and processing do we use in Ethiopia?
Discuss in groups and give a presentation to the class.
Modern methods of food preservation are:
a Freezing: This is one of the most commonly used processes, commercially and
domestically, for preserving a very wide range of foods such as potatoes, as well as
prepared foodstuffs that would not require freezing in their normal state.
b Freeze-drying: Water vapour has easier access through the cell structure of any
product compared to water-penetrating the product and evaporating from the surface
of the product as is the case of other drying methods. The gentle escape of water
vapour in the freeze-drying process leaves the product close to its original shape,
taste, and colour and there is no loss of aroma or flavour.
For example, liquids such as coffee, tea, juices and other extracts, vegetables,
segments of fish and meat products. Freeze-drying is a superior preservation method
for a variety of food products and food ingredients.
c Vacuum-packing: Stores food in a vacuum environment, usually in an air-tight bag
or bottle. The vacuum environment strips bacteria of the oxygen needed for survival,
slowing down the rate of spoiling. Vacuum-packing is commonly used for storing
nuts to reduce loss of flavour from oxidation.
224
CHEMISTRY IN INDUSTRY AND ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION (UNIT 4)
Exercise 4.4
1. What is the basic difference in the composition of glass and cement?
2. What is ceramics?
3. Write the main chemical equations involved in the production of cement.
4. Describe the refinery processes involved in sugar production.
5. Explain the difference between chemical and mechanical pulping.
6. How does natural tanning differ from mineral tanning?
7. Point out the modern methods of food preservation.
4.5 ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION
Competencies
After completing this section, you will be able to:
• define pollution;
• list the three types of pollution;
• list the names of common air pollutants;
• describe the effects of air pollutants;
• describe some of the main methods used to reduce air pollution;
• describe the different types of industrial water pollutants;
• explain some of the factors involved in water pollution and their effects;
• describe some of the methods used to reduce water pollution;
• explain some of the factors involved in land pollution;
• describe some of the main methods used to reduce land pollution; and
• carry out a project on the effects(s) of an industry on environment.
Activity 4.23
1. The Copenhagen summit was a popular international climate change summit. What
was the role played by Ethiopia? What were the major issues of the summit?
2. Mention any activity in your area to bring awareness of air pollution and global
warming.
Discuss in your group and present to the class.
225
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Pollution is any discharge of a solid, liquid or gaseous substance or radiation (energy) into
an environment that causes unwanted changes. Pollution causes short-term or long-term
harm that affects the earth’s ecological balance and lowers the quality of life in the
environment. A pollutant is any substance that changes air, water or any other natural
resource in a way that impairs the use of the resource.
Pollutants are discharged into the environment as a result of natural events (like a volcanic
eruption) and as a result of human activities (such as the operation of chemical industries,
agriculture, etc.). Pollutants can be classified by the type of pollution they cause: air pollution,
water pollution, and land pollution.
Air Pollution
Activity 4.24
1. Based on the situation of your locality, discuss the following issues in groups and
present the findings to the class:
a List some human activities which contribute to air pollution.
b How these activities contribute to air pollution?
c What solutions do you recommend to overcome these problems?
d What could be your contribution to reduce air pollutions?
2. Give your suggestions on the statement, ‘Air pollution any where is a potential threat
elsewhere.’
Air pollution is caused by the presence of contaminant gaseous substances in the air that
affect the lives of plants and animals on earth. Some common air pollutants are sulphur
dioxide, nitrogen oxides, carbon monoxide, ozone, hydrocarbons, particulates,
chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), and lead compounds.
Sulphur dioxide (SO ): This enters the atmospheric air from the combustion of coal and
2
petroleum, and during extraction of metals from their sulphide ores. It causes coughing,
chest pains and shortness of breath. It is thought to be a cause for bronchitis and lung
diseases. It slowly oxidizes to SO by reacting with the oxygen in the air.
3
Oxides of nitrogen: These can be formed in the atmosphere by natural processes like
thunderstorms. Combustion of fossil fuel containing nitrogen compounds as impurities and
exhaust gases from furnaces and engines increase the amount of nitric oxide, NO, and
nitrogen dioxide, NO , in the atmosphere. Nitric oxide, NO, catalyzes the decomposition
2
of ozone in the upper layer of the atmosphere to oxygen, thus decreasing the ozone layer.
NO
2O (g) → 3O (g)
3 2
226
CHEMISTRY IN INDUSTRY AND ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION (UNIT 4)
Nitric oxide is oxidized by oxygen to nitrogen dioxide in the presence of ultraviolet light.
2NO (g) + O (g) Æ 2NO (g)
2 2
SO , SO and NO react with rainwater and form sulphurous acid (H SO ), sulphuric
2 3 2 2 3
acid (HSO) and nitric acid (HNO), respectively and cause acid rain. Acid rain accelerates
2 4 3
corrosion and the deterioration of metals, buildings, statues and also causes tree defoliation,
release of heavy metal ions from soil into water courses and drop in the pH of water in
rivers and lakes.
Hydrocarbons and ozone are responsible for photochemical smog. It is characterized by
a reddish-brown haze containing substances irritating to the eye, nose, and lungs, and
causes extensive damage to vegetation. Considerable amounts of hydrocarbons are released
into the atmosphere by the evaporation of gasoline as unburnt hydrocarbons in auto exhaust.
These substances react with ozone to give compounds that contribute to the oxidizing
nature of photochemical smog.
Carbon monoxide: Most of the carbon monoxide escapes into the atmosphere due to
the incomplete combustion of fuel. Prolonged exposure to carbon monoxide impairs vision,
produces headaches, and exerts strain on the heart. It also reduces the oxygen-carrying
capacity of the blood by reacting with haemoglobin.
Particulates: Dust storms, forest fires, volcanic eruptions and human activities such as
mining and burning coal and oil increase the amount of solid particles in the air. Industrial
areas contain particles of limestone, fertilizers, coal, stones, cement and silica. These
particulates irritate the lungs and deleteriously affect breathing.
Chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs): Chlorofluorocarbons are used as refrigerants, solvents
and plastic foam-blowing agents. When entering the atmosphere, they penetrate into the
upper layers and interact with ultraviolet radiation as follows.
UV
CF Cl → CF Cl. + .Cl
2 2 2
The free chlorine, Cl, reacts with ozone to form chlorine monoxide and oxygen.
.Cl + O Æ ClO. + O
3 2
These reactions result in the conversion of ozone to molecular oxygen and contribute to
depletion of the ozone layer. This situation in the upper atmosphere allows dangerous
ultraviolet radiation to reach the earth’s surface. This radiation causes skin cancer in human beings.
Excess carbon dioxide: The combustion of coal and petroleum to generate electricity,
move our vehicles, heat our homes and supply power to our industrial machinery causes a
significant increase in the concentration of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. Combustion
of these fuels releases about 20 billion tonnes of CO annually. The increase in the
2
concentration of CO in the atmosphere has resulted in a rise in the average global
2
temperature, owing to the greenhouse effect. Carbon dioxide and water vapour absorb
infrared radiation, re-radiated from the earth, behaving like the glass in a green house.
Since CO and water vapour absorb heat they are called green-house gases. Due to the
2
227
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
absorption of heat by the green house gases in the atmosphere, the overall effect is global
warming (an increase in the average temperature of our planet). This rise in global
temperature causes melting of polar ice and thus additional water flowing into the oceans.
This situation, in turn, results in the rising of the levels of seas and oceans, flooding of
coastlines and lowland areas, which can submerge these areas.
Heavy metals: Lead contamination in the atmosphere is a result of vehicle engines that
use fuels containing tetraethyl lead which is added to the fuel to reduce engine knocking.
The use of lead paints also contributes towards lead contamination. High levels of lead
cause damage to the brain, kidneys and liver.
What are the potential air pollutants in and around your home?
Methods of Reducing Air Pollution:
Activity 4.25
1. Name the major air pollutants.
2. What methods do you recommend to reduce air pollution? Discuss in groups and
present your idea s to the class.
Research and writing
Investigating the effects of air pollution on the environment by:
a consulting experts working on environmental protection, and
b referring materials available in you school library. Write a report about your findings
and give a presentation to the class.
Water Pollution
Activity 4.26
1. In your community,
a What are the major sources of drinking water?
b What are the principal sources of contamination of surface water and ground water?
c What could be done to reduce these problems?
Discuss in groups and present to the class.
228
CHEMISTRY IN INDUSTRY AND ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION (UNIT 4)
Water pollution is the degradation of the quality of water brought about by the discharge
into it of untreated sewage, industrial and agricultural waste, and oil spillage. In general,
water is said to be polluted if it contains matter that affects the health of living things or
causes damage to property. The major water pollutants are nitrate and phosphate fertilisers
washed out of the soil, phosphate detergents, untreated sewage, insecticides and herbicides,
and the heavy metal ion, acidic and/or basic residues released by industrial processes.
Phosphate and nitrate fertilisers washed out of the soil and phosphate detergents from
untreated water, enter natural water systems, such as streams, rivers, lakes, and seas.
These dissolved minerals are valuable nutrients for plants, and their discharge into the
water systems accelerates the growth of surface-water plants, such as algae. As a result,
less light reaches the bottom-living plants, which reduces the photosynthesis they need to
live, and they die. When these aquatic plants die, they rot under the action of bacteria
which multiply greatly and consume the oxygen dissolved in the water at a rate faster than
natural aeration or photosynthesis can replenish. Thus, the amount of oxygen in the water
decreases. This depletion of oxygen kills aquatic animals like fish. This sequence of events
is called eutrophication.
Insecticides (pesticides) and herbicides applied in agriculture may also be washed into
lakes, rivers, streams and seas. Some of the insecticides and herbicides do not decompose
easily and are persistent in the environment. Residues of these insecticides and herbicides
may enter the food chains and accumulate in an organism that is consumed by the next
organism. The increasing amount of insecticide and herbicide residue in the bodies of
animals causes health and behavioural problems.
The release of heavy metal ions, acidic and/or basic residues from industrial processes into
natural water systems, such as lakes and rivers, causes pH changes in the water. Water
organisms need specific ranges of water pH to survive, so these changes in pH can kill
them. In the same way, increasing concentrations of toxic metal ions kills some aquatic
organisms.
The release of untreated sewage to natural water systems can spread water-borne diseases
such as cholera, typhoid, hepatitis, and polio.
Methods of Reducing Water Pollution:
1. Treatment of water before discharge into rivers and lakes.
2. To avoid unnatural temperature changes in natural water systems, industries should
not discharge heat-ladened water into them.
3. Recycling industrial and agricultural wastes.
4. Using moderate amounts of agricultural chemicals and increasing the use of organic
fertilizers and biological methods to control pests.
229
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
PROJECT 4.4
Develop a water conservation plan for your school and submit it to your teacher.
Land Pollution
Activity 4.27
Discuss the following issues and present your answer to your class.
1. Do you observe any pollution of land in your environment?
2. What are the causes of land pollution?
3. Do you observe soil erosion in your area? What three major things do you believe
elected officials should take to decrease soil erosion in the region you live?
4. What should be your responsibility in solving the land pollution problems?
Land pollution is caused by things we put into it. It results from the spillage of oil,
leaching of harmful chemicals and heavy metal ions, and dumping of non-
biodegradable wastes such as plastics.
Factors involved in land pollution include:
• Spillages of oil from leaking pipelines.
• Harmful heavy metal ions from buried waste leaching into water systems.
• Leaching of harmful chemicals from corroded metal drums which have been buried
underground.
• Dumping of non-biodegradable (do not decompose by the action of bacteria)
wastes like plastics which remain unchanged in the soil for decades or hundreds of
years. Their accumulation in the soil hinders air and water movement and affects the
growth of plants.
• Excessive use of synthetic fertilisers in agricultural activities also contributes towards
land pollution.
What are the contributions of commercial inorganic fertilizers to land pollution?
Methods of Reducing Land Pollution:
Activity 4.28
What methods should be practiced globally to reduce land pollution? Discuss in groups
and present your opinion to the class.
230
CHEMISTRY IN INDUSTRY AND ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION (UNIT 4)
Research and writing
Investigating the effects of an industry on the environment
This project work will develop your skills in identifying problems that an industry can
cause in your environment and help you to seek solutions to overcome the problem.
Select an industry close to your school or home. Try to identify the following
1. What are the products manufactured by the industry?
2. What are the raw materials used by the industry?
3. What is the manufacturing process involved?
4. What are the waste products generated?
5. What happens to the waste products? (How does the industry discharge wastes)
6. How is the environment affected by the industrial waste product?
7. How could the environmental impact of waste product be reduced?
Write a report in groups and give a presentation to the class.
Exercise 4.5
1. Describe the main agents of:
a air pollution b water pollution c land pollution
2. What are the main methods of reducing:
a air pollution b water pollution c land pollution
Check list
Key terms of the unit
• allotrope • chemical industry
• alloy • Chile salt peter
• Basic – oxygen process • chlorine
• bauxite cryolite • Contact process
• Bessmer converter • flotation
• blast furnace • fluoroapatite
• blister copper • flux
• ceramics • food preservation
231
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
• fractional distillation
• pollution
• Frasch process
• redphosphorus
• glass
• rock phosphate
• Haber process
• slag
• Hall process
• steel
• nitrogen
• sugar
• Occurrence
• sulphur
• Open – hearth fumace
• tanning
• ore
• thermite process
• paper and pulp
• verdigris
• pollutants
• white phosphorus
Unit Summary
• A chemical industry is any institution involved in the production of chemicals.
• A chemical industry is characterized by using raw materials available in nature
and transforming them into desired products by chemical means.
• Most of the materials used by the industries are present in nature.
• Natural resources are classified as renewable and non-renewable.
• Aluminium is the most abundant metal in the earth’s crust. It is manufactured
by the electrolysis of molten aluminium oxide mixed with cryolite using the
Hall process.
• Aluminium is used to make light-weight alloys that can be used for aircraft
and similar constructions.
• Aluminium resists corrosion due to the formation of a thin film of an oxide on
its surface.
• Iron is the second-most abundant metal in the earth’s crust.
• Iron is extracted in a blast furnace. The furnace is charged with iron ore, coke
and limestone, and hot air is blown up from the bottom.
• Limestone is used in the blast furnace to remove impurities like sand (silica) in
the form of slag.
• The type of iron obtained directly from the blast furnace is called pig iron and
it is impure.
• Wrought iron is the purest form of iron obtained from pig-iron by removing
most of the impurities.
232
CHEMISTRY IN INDUSTRY AND ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION (UNIT 4)
• Steel is an alloy of iron containing definite amounts of carbon and other metals
like chromium, nickel, tungsten, vanadium, manganese etc.
• Steel is manufactured by the Bessemer Converter, Open-Hearth Furnace and
Basic Oxygen Processes.
• Copper is extracted by roasting chalcopyrites (CuFeS ).
2
• Copper that is obtained by roasting chalcopyrites is called blister copper. It is
impure, and it is refined further by electrolysis.
• Copper is malleable and ductile, a good conductor of heat and electricity and
is used to make electric wires and in the manufacture of alloys.
• Nitrogen constitutes about 80% by volume of atmospheric air.
• Nitrogen is manufactured by the fractional distillation of liquefied air.
• Nitrogen is relatively inert. However, its reactivity increases when heated and
combined with metals of group IA and IIA to form nitrides and with oxygen to
form oxides like NO and NO .
2
• Phosphorus is manufactured by heating a mixture of rock phosphate, coke
(carbon) and silica in an electric furnace.
• Phosphorus has two common allotropes, white and red phosphorus. White
phosphorus is highly reactive, while red phosphorous is relatively stable.
• White phosphorus is stored under water.
• Phosphorus reacts with oxygen and chlorine.
• Oxygen makes up about 20% by volume of air. It is manufactured by the
fractional distillation of liquid air.
• Oxygen is the most abundant element in the earth’s crust.
• Sulphur exists in the elemental state in underground deposits from which it is
extracted by the Frasch process.
• Sulphur reacts with oxygen to form sulphur dioxide and sulphur trioxide.
• Sulphur is used for the manufacture of sulphuric acid by the Contact Process.
• Chlorine is manufactured by the electrolysis of brine.
• Chlorine is a powerful oxidizing agent and reacts with heated metals to form
chlorides.
• Chlorine and chlorine water are used to bleach coloured materials and as
disinfectant.
• Glass is a mixture of two or more silicates.
• Pyrex is a glass containing boron. It resists high temperatures.
233
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
• Ceramics are materials that are baked or fired at very high temperatures.
• Cement is made by heating a ground mixture of sand and clay. It contains calcium
oxide, silicon dioxide, aluminium oxide, iron (III) oxide, and magnesium oxide.
• Sugar is manufactured from sugarcane in a series of steps.
• Paper and pulp are manufactured from trees in a series of steps. Bleaching
agents such as chlorine, chlorine oxide, ozone or hydrogen peroxide are used
in paper and pulp production.
• Tanning is a process of converting skin to leather.
• The methods used in food processing and preservation are salting, pickling,
sugaring, smoking, drying, canning etc.
• Pollution is the discharge of harmful waste material into the environment.
• The three types of pollution are air, land and water pollution.
• Air pollution is caused by the release of sulphur dioxide, oxides of nitrogen,
carbon monoxide, hydrocarbons, particulates, CFCs, and lead compounds
etc. into the atmosphere.
• Water pollution is caused by the discharge of untreated sewage, industrial and
agricultural waste and oil spillage.
• Land pollution results from the spillage of oil, leaching of harmful chemicals
and heavy metal ions, and dumping of non-biodegradable wastes such as
plastics.
REVIEW EXERCISE ON UNIT 4
Part I: Write the missing words in your exercise book
air blast coke haematite oxide reduces
1. We extract iron from iron ore in a furnace. The commonest ore of iron is b. The
other raw materials used are c , limestone and d . Inside the blast furnace,
carbon monoxide e the iron (III) f to iron.
234
CHEMISTRY IN INDUSTRY AND ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION (UNIT 4)
Part II: Multiple choices type questions
2. Which of the statements about the extraction of iron in the blast furnace is true?
a limestone is added to combine with excess carbon dioxide
b a slag of iron oxide forms at the bottom of the furnace
c hot air is blown in at the top of the furnace
d carbon monoxide reduces iron (III) oxide to iron
3. Calcium oxide is added to a steel making furnace to:
a oxidize basic oxides
b oxidize carbon to carbon dioxide
c react with acid impurities
d react with silicon to form silicon dioxide
4. Which of the following statements about fertilizers is true?
a ammonium nitrate can be used as a fertilizer
b fertilizers contain nitrogen, sulphur and iron
c fertilizers are added to the soil to make it more alkaline
d fertilizers are made by combining calcium with oxygen
5. The chemical name for quicklime is:
a calcium carbonate c calcium hydroxide
b calcium sulphate d calcium oxide
6. Ordinary glass is chiefly composed of:
a Al SiO (OH) and SiO c Na SiO and CaSiO
2 6 2 2 3 3
b Al O and K SiO d Na CO and SiO
2 3 2 3 2 3 2
7. The purpose of using brine in the process of tanning is to:
a remove unwanted flesh from the skin
b dehydrate the skin and kill bacteria
c remove hair from the skin
d make the skin soft
8. In the sugar industry, sulphur dioxide is used as:
a a disinfectant c a preservative
b a bleaching agent d an oxidizing agent
235
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
9. In the tanning process, the purpose of putting the skin into slaked lime solution is to:
a facilitate the removal of unwanted flesh
b dehydrate the skin
c facilitate the removal of hair
d soften the skin
10. Which of the following is the purpose of treating the crude bauxite ore with hot
aqueous sodium hydroxide in the extraction of aluminium?
a to lower the melting point of crude bauxite
b to dissolve impurities like iron oxides
c to decrease the solubility of crude bauxite
d to obtain pure aluminium oxide
11. Which of the following is not a raw material in the manufacture of ordinary glass?
a boron oxide c silica sand
b limestone d soda ash
12. Of the following, a light metal is:
a Au c Hg
b Ag d Al
13. Aluminium metal has the following properties with the exception that:
a it occurs in nature in the combined form as bauxite
b it is a conductor of heat and electricity
c it is ductile and malleable
d it is a heavy metal
14. Aluminium is used for:
a kitchen utensils c making alloys
b electric wires d all of the above
15. Which of the following is the purest form of iron?
a cast iron c wrought iron
b pig iron d limonite
16. Which of the following is used for the extraction of copper?
a haematite c cryolite
b chalcopyrite d siderite
17. The highest quality steel is produced by using:
a Contact Process c Basic Oxygen Process
b Open-hearth Process d Bessemer Process
236
CHEMISTRY IN INDUSTRY AND ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION (UNIT 4)
18. Which of the following elements possess allotropes?
a carbon c phosphorus
b sulphur d all
19. The product obtained by combining a material rich in lime, CaO with other materials
such as clay, which contains silica, SiO , along with oxides of aluminium, iron and
2
magnesium is:
a glass c cement
b steel d fertilizer
20. Which of the following is not a specific characteristic of chemical industries:
a using naturally available raw materials
b providing transport services to customers
c involving chemical reactions
d consuming energy
21. Which of the following is a non-renewable resource:
a soil c petroleum
b water d plants
22. Which of the following elements does not react with nitrogen:
a Li c Fe
b Ca d Mg
23. Which of the following is not a use of nitrogen:
a making matches c production of ammonia
b making fertilizers d as a refrigerant
24. The most abundant element in the earth’s crust is:
a silicon c iron
b oxygen d aluminium
25. Which of the following elements is not found as a free element in nature:
a sulphur c oxygen
b copper d chlorine
Part III: Match the following items
26. sulphur dioxide and nitrogen oxides a destroy the ozone layer
27. hydrocarbons and ozone b poisonous substances
28. particulates c acid rain
29. CFC’s d smog
30. excess carbon dioxide e green house effect
31. lead compounds and carbon monoxide f irritate the lungs
237
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
Part IV: Answer the following questions
32. Why is it important to ban the use of CFC’s as refrigerants?
33. Mention three pollutants that can be released from the exhausts of motor vehicles.
34. What is the difference between carbon monoxide and carbon dioxide in polluting
the environment?
35. What is the impact of using fertilizers and pesticides on the pollution of water?
36. What is the green-house effect? And what is its relationship to global warming?
37. What is the effect of heavy metals like Pb, Cd, and Hg on the body?
38. Mention three diseases that are caused by drinking water polluted by untreated
sewage.
39. Mention two methods of converting potentially dangerous waste into harmless
substances.
40. Explain at least two factors involved in land pollution.
41. What are the important properties of aluminium that make it useful in transport and
construction?
42. Aluminium is one of the most reactive metals. How could it be corrosion resistant?
43. Iron is extracted in a blast furnace as shown below:
F
E
D
C
B
A
a Name the four raw materials used in the extraction of iron from its ore.
b Which letter in the diagram of blast furnace indicates:
i) The region where solid raw materials are put into the furnace.
ii) The hottest region of the furnace.
iii) The region where slag is collected.
44. Write balanced chemical equations for the given reactions, which take place in the
blast furnace during the extraction of iron:
a The reaction of iron (III) oxide with carbon monoxide.
b The reaction of calcium oxide with silicon (IV) oxide.
45. Why is limestone added to the blast furnace?
46. Explain why aluminium is used to make cooking utensils.
47. Describe the advantages of using steel alloys instead of pure iron.
238
Organic Chemistry
A
UNIT 1 CONTENTS
t this moment, you are walking,
CHAPTER 1
sitting, or standing in an “organic”
Classifying Organic Compounds
body. Your skin, hair, muscles, heart,
CHAPTER 2 and lungs are all made from organic
Reactions of Organic Compounds compounds. In fact, the only parts of
your body that are notmostly organic
UNIT 1 ISSUE
are your teeth and bones! When you
Current Issues Related to
study organic chemistry, you are
Organic Chemistry
studying the substances that make
up your body and much of the world
UNIT 1 OVERALL EXPECTATIONS around you. Medicines, clothing,
carpets, curtains, and wood and
How do the structures of
plastic furniture are all manufactured
various organic compounds
differ? What chemical from organic chemicals. If you look
reactions are typical of these out a window, the grass, trees, squir-
compounds? rels, and insects you may see are also
How can you name different composed of organic compounds.
organic compounds and Are you having a sandwich for
represent their structures? lunch? Bread, butter, meat, and lettuce
What do you need to know in are made from organic compounds.
order to predict the products
Will you have dessert? Sugar, flour,
of organic reactions?
vanilla, and chocolate are also organic.
How do organic compounds What about a drink? Milk and juice
affect your life? How do they
are solutions of water in which
affect the environment?
organic compounds are dissolved.
In this unit, you will study a
variety of organic compounds. You
Unit Issue Prep
will learn how to name them and how
Before beginning Unit 1, read to draw their structures. You will also
pages 110 to 111 to find out about learn how these compounds react, and
the unit issue. In the unit issue, you
you will use your knowledge to pre-
will analyze an issue that involves
dict the products of organic reactions.
chemistry and society. You can
In addition, you will discover the
start planning your research as you
amazing variety of organic compounds
go through this unit. Which topics
interest you the most? How does in your body and in your life.
society influence developments in
science and technology?
2
Classifying
Organic Compounds
A
Chapter Preview s you wander through the supermarket, some advertising claims catch
your eye. “Certified organic” and “all natural” are stamped on the labels
1.1 Bonding and the Shape
of some foods. Other labels claim that the foods are “chemical free.” As a
of Organic Molecules
chemistry student, you are aware that these labels may be misleading. Are
1.2 Hydrocarbons
all “chemicals” harmful in food, as some of the current advertising suggests?
1.3 Single-Bonded Many terms are used inaccurately in everyday life. The word “natural”
Functional Groups is often used in a manner suggesting that all natural compounds are safe
1.4 Functional Groups and healthy. Similarly, the word “chemical” is commonly used to refer to
With the C(cid:2)O bond artificial compounds only. The food industry uses “organic” to indicate
foods that have been grown without the use of pesticides, herbicides,
fertilizers, hormones, and other synthetic chemicals. The original meaning
of the word “organic” refers to anything that is or has been alive. In this
sense, all vegetables are organic, no matter how they are grown.
Organic chemistry is the study of compounds that are based on
carbon. Natural gas, rubbing alcohol, aspirin, and the compounds that
give fragrance to a rose, are all organic compounds. In this chapter, you
will learn how to identify and name molecules from the basic families of
organic compounds. You will be introduced to the shape, structure, and
Prerequisite
Concepts and Skills properties of different types of organic compounds.
Before you begin this chapter,
review the following concepts What is the word “organic” intended to mean here?
and skills: How is this meaning different from the scientific
(cid:2) drawing Lewis structures meaning of the word?
(Concepts and Skills
Review)
(cid:2) writing molecular formulas
and expanded molecular
formulas (Concepts and
Skills Review)
(cid:2) drawing complete, con-
densed, and line structural
diagrams (Concepts and
Skills Review)
(cid:2) identifying structural
isomers (Concepts and
Skills Review)
4 MHR • Unit 1 Organic Chemistry
Bonding and the 1.1
Shape of Organic Molecules
Early scientists defined organic compounds as compounds that originate Section Preview/
from living things. In 1828, however, the German chemist Friedrich Wohler Specific Expectations
(1800–1882) made an organic compound called urea, CO(NH 2 ) 2 , out of an In this section, you will
inorganic compound called ammonium cyanate, NH CN. Urea is found in
4 (cid:2) discussthe use of the
the urine of mammals. This was the first time in history that a compound terms organic, natural, and
normally made only by living things was made from a non-living sub- chemicalin advertising
stance. Since Wohler had discovered that organic compounds can be made
(cid:2) demonstratean under-
without the involvement of a life process, a new definition was required. standing of the three types
Organic compoundsare now defined as compounds that are based on of carbon-carbon bonding
carbon. They usually contain carbon-carbon and carbon-hydrogen bonds. and the shape of a molecule
around each type of bond
The Carbon Atom (cid:2) communicateyour under-
standing of the following
There are several million organic compounds, but only about a quarter
terms: organic chemistry,
of a million inorganic compounds (compounds that are not based on organic compounds,
carbon). Why are there so many organic compounds? The answer lies in tetrahedral, trigonal
the bonding properties of carbon. planar,linear,bent,
As shown in Figure 1.1, each carbon atom usually forms a total of electronegativity,bond
dipole, polar, molecular
four covalent bonds. Thus, a carbon atom can connect to as many as four
polarity
other atoms. Carbon can bond to many other types of atoms, including
hydrogen, oxygen, and nitrogen.
H
• •• Web LINK
+ →
C • 4H • H • C • H
• • •
www.mcgrawhill.ca/links/
• ••
H chemistry12
In the chapter opener, you
Figure 1.1 This Lewis structure shows methane, the simplest organic compound. The
considered how the terms
carbon atom has four valence electrons, and it obtains four more electrons by forming four
“natural” and “chemical” are
covalent bonds with the four hydrogen atoms.
used inaccurately. A natural
substance is a substance that
In addition, carbon atoms can form strong single, double, or triple bonds occurs in nature and is not
with other carbon atoms. In a single carbon-carbon bond, one pair of artificial. A chemicalis any
electrons is shared between two carbon atoms. In a double bond, two substance that has been made
pairs of electrons are shared between two atoms. In a triple bond, three using chemical processes in
a laboratory. A chemical can
pairs of electrons are shared between two atoms.
also be defined as any sub-
Molecules that contain only single carbon-carbon bonds are saturated.
stance that is composed of
In other words, all carbon atoms are bonded to the maximum number of
atoms. This definition covers
other atoms: four. No more bonding can occur. Molecules that contain
most things on Earth. Go to the
double or triple carbon-carbon bonds are unsaturated. The carbon atoms web site above, and click on
on either side of the double or triple bond are bonded to less than four Web Linksto find out where
atoms each. There is potential for more atoms to bond to each of these to go next. Look up some
carbon atoms. naturalpoisons, pesticides,
and antibiotics that are
Carbon’s unique bonding properties allow the formation of a
produced by animals, plants,
variety of structures, including chains and rings of many shapes and
and bacteria. Then look up
sizes. Figure 1.2 on the next page illustrates some of the many shapes
some beneficial chemicals
that can be formed from a backbone of carbon atoms. This figure includes
that have been synthesized
examples of three types of structural diagrams that are used to depict by humans. Make a poster to
organic molecules. (The Concepts and Skills Review contains a further illustrate your findings.
review of these types of structural diagrams.)
Chapter 1 Classifying Organic Compounds • MHR 5
CHEM A H B C
FACT
H C H
A few carbon compounds are
considered to be inorganic.
H C H
These include carbon dioxide, C C CH C CH
3
CO , and and carbon com-
2
pounds containing complex C C
H C H
negative ions (for example,
CO2−, HCO−, and OCN−).
3 3 H C H
H
Figure 1.2 (A) This complete structural diagram shows all the bonds in the molecule.
(B) This condensed structural diagram shows only carbon-carbon bonds. (C) This line
structural diagram uses lines to depict carbon-carbon bonds.
Carbon compounds in which carbon forms only single bonds have a
different shape than compounds in which carbon forms double or triple
bonds. In the following ExpressLab, you will see how each type of bond
affects the shape of a molecule.
ExpressLab Molecular Shapes
The type of bonding affects the shape and 4. Examine the shape of the molecule around
movement of a molecule. In this ExpressLab, each carbon atom. Draw diagrams to show your
you will build several molecules to examine the observations.
shape and character of their bonds.
Analysis
Procedure
1. Which bond or bonds allow rotation to occur?
1. Build a model for each of the following com- Which bond or bonds are fixed in space?
pounds. Use a molecular model kit or a chemical
2.(a) Describe the shape of the molecule around a
modelling computer program.
carbon atom with only single bonds.
CH CH CH CH H C CH CH CH (b) Describe the shape of the molecule around a
3 2 2 3 2 2 3
carbon atom with one double bond and two
butane 1–butene
single bonds.
(c) Describe the shape of the molecule around a
H C CH CH CH H C C C CH
2 2 3 3
carbon atom with a triple bond and a single
1,3–butadiene 2–butyne bond.
(d) Predict the shape of a molecule around
a carbon atom with two double bonds.
2. Identify the different types of bonds in each
3. Molecular model kits are a good representation
molecule.
of real atomic geometry. Are you able to make a
3. Try to rotate each molecule. Which bonds
quadruple bond between two atoms with your
allow rotation around the bond? Which bonds
model kit? What does this tell you about real
prevent rotation?
carbon bonding?
As you observed in the ExpressLab, the shape of a molecule depends on
the type of bond. Table 1.1 describes some shapes that you must know for
your study of organic chemistry. In Unit 2, you will learn more about why
different shapes and angles form around an atom.
6 MHR • Unit 1 Organic Chemistry
Table 1.1 Common Molecular Shapes in Organic Molecules
Central atom Shape Diagram
carbon with four The shape around this carbon atom is tetrahedral. H
single bonds That is, the carbon atom is at the centre of an
invisible tetrahedron, with the other four atoms at
the vertices of the tetrahedron. This shape results 109.5˚
because the electrons in the four bonds repel each C
H
other. In the tetrahedral position, the four bonded H
atoms and the bonding electrons are as far apart
from each other as possible. H
carbon with one The shape around this carbon atom is trigonal O
H CH
double bond and planar. The molecule lies flat in one plane around 3
two single bonds the central carbon atom, with the three bonded 120˚ C C C
atoms spread out, as if to touch the corners of a
H 120˚ CH H C CH
triangle. 3 3 120˚ 3
carbon with two The shape around this carbon atom is linear. The
double bonds or two atoms bonded to the carbon atom are stretched 180˚
one triple bond and out to either side to form a straight line. H C C CH 3
one single bond
oxygen with two A single-bonded oxygen atom forms two bonds.
single bonds An oxygen atom also has two pairs of non-bonding lone
pairs
electrons, called lone pairs. Since there are a total
of four electron pairs around a single-bonded
oxygen atom, the shape around this oxygen atom
O
is a variation of the tetrahedral shape. Because
H
there are only two bonds, however, the shape
104.5˚
around a single-bonded oxygen atom is usually H
referred to as bent.
Three-Dimensional Structural Diagrams
Two-dimensional structural diagrams of organic compounds, such as
condensed structural diagrams and line structural diagrams, work well
for flat molecules. As shown in the table above, however, molecules
containing single-bonded carbon atoms are not flat.
You can use a three-dimensional structural diagram to draw the tetra-
hedral shape around a single-bonded carbon atom. In a three-dimensional
diagram, wedges are used to give the impression that an atom or group is
coming forward, out of the page. Dashed or dotted lines are used to show
that an atom or group is receding, or being pushed back into the page. In
Figure 1.3, the Cl atom is coming forward, and the Br atom is behind. The
two H atoms are flat against the surface of the page. The following diagram shows
1-bromoethanol. (You will learn
the rules for naming molecules
A B
such as this later in the chap-
ter.) Which atom or group is
H
coming forward, out of the
page? Which atom or group is
C
receding back, into the page?
Br H
Cl CH 3
C
Br H
HO
Figure 1.3 (A) Three-dimensional structural diagram of the
bromochloromethane molecule, BrClCH (B) Ball-and-stick model
2
Chapter 1 Classifying Organic Compounds • MHR 7
Molecular Shape and Polarity
The three-dimensional shape of a molecule is particularly important when
the molecule contains polar covalent bonds. As you may recall from your
previous chemistry course, a polar covalent bond is a covalent bond
between two atoms with different electronegativities.
Electronegativity is a measure of how strongly an atom attracts
electrons in a chemical bond. The electrons in a polar covalent bond are
attracted more strongly to the atom with the higher electronegativity. This
atom has a partial negative charge, while the other atom has a partial posi-
tive charge. Thus, every polar bond has a bond dipole: a partial negative
charge and a partial positive charge, separated by the length of the bond.
Figure 1.4 illustrates the polarity of a double carbon-oxygen bond. Oxygen
has a higher electronegativity than carbon. Therefore, the oxygen atom in
a carbon-oxygen bond has a partial negative charge, and the carbon atom
has a partial positive charge.
partial positive charge partial negative charge
δ+ δ−
C O
dipole vector points
from positive charge
to negative charge
In this unit, you will encounter Figure 1.4 Dipoles are often represented using vectors. Vectors are arrows that have
the following polar bonds: direction and location in space.
C(cid:3)I, C(cid:3)F, C(cid:3)O, O(cid:3)H,
N(cid:3)H, and C(cid:3)N. Use the Other examples of polar covalent bonds include C(cid:3)O, O(cid:3)H,
electronegativities in the and N(cid:3)H. Carbon and hydrogen attract electrons to almost the same
periodic table to discover
degree. Therefore, when carbon is bonded to another carbon atom or
which atom in each bond has
to a hydrogen atom, the bond is not usually considered to be polar. For
a partial negative charge, and
example, C(cid:3)C bonds are considered to be non-polar.
which has a partial positive
charge.
Predicting Molecular Polarity
A molecule is considered to be polar, or to have a molecular polarity,
when the molecule has an overall imbalance of charge. That is, the
molecule has a region with a partial positive charge, and a region with a
partial negative charge. Surprisingly, not all molecules with polar bonds
are polar molecules. For example, a carbon dioxide molecule has two
polar C(cid:2)O bonds, but it is not a polar molecule. On the other hand, a
water molecule has two polar O(cid:3)H bonds, and it is a polar molecule.
How do you predict whether or not a molecule that contains polar bonds
has an overall molecular polarity? To determine molecular polarity, you
must consider the shape of the molecule and the bond dipoles within the
molecule.
If equal bond dipoles act in opposite directions in three-dimensional
space, they counteract each other. A molecule with identical polar bonds
that point in opposite directions is not polar. Figure 1.5 shows two
examples, carbon dioxide and carbon tetrachloride. Carbon dioxide, CO ,
2
has two polar C(cid:2)O bonds acting in opposite directions, so the molecule
is non-polar. Carbon tetrachloride, CCl , has four polar C(cid:3)Cl bonds in
4
a tetrahedral shape. You can prove mathematically that four identical
dipoles, pointing toward the vertices of a tetrahedron, counteract each
other exactly. (Note that this mathematical proof only applies if all four
bonds are identical.) Therefore, carbon tetrachloride is also non-polar.
8 MHR • Unit 1 Organic Chemistry
The red colour indicates a region of negative charge, and the blue colour
indicates a region of positive charge. In non-polar molecules, such as carbon dioxide (A) and
carbon tetrachloride (B), the charges are distributed evenly around the molecule.
If the bond dipoles in a molecule do not counteract each other exactly, the
molecule is polar. Two examples are water, H O, and chloroform, CHCl ,
2 3
shown in Figure 1.6. Although each molecule has polar bonds, the bond
dipoles do not act in exactly opposite directions. The bond dipoles do not
counteract each other, so these two molecules are polar.
A B
O
••
H H
Figure 1.6 In polar molecules, such as water (A) and chloroform (B), the charges are
distributed unevenly around the molecule. One part of the molecule has an overall negative
charge, and another part has an overall positive charge.
The steps below summarize how to predict whether or not a molecule
is polar. The Sample Problem that follows gives three examples.
Note: For the purpose of predicting molecular polarity, you can assume
that C(cid:3)H bonds are non-polar. In fact, they have a very low polarity.
Step 1 Does the molecule have polar bonds? If your answer is no, see
below. If your answer is yes, go to step 2.
If a molecule has no polar bonds, it is non-polar.
Examples: CH CH CH , CH (cid:2)CH
3 2 3 2 2
Step 2 Is there more than one polar bond? If your answer is no, see below.
If your answer is yes, go to step 3.
If a molecule contains only one polar bond, it is polar.
Examples: CH Cl, CH CH CH Cl
3 3 2 2
Step 3 Do the bond dipoles act in opposite directions and counteract each
other? Use your knowledge of three-dimensional molecular shapes
to help you answer this question. If in doubt, use a molecular model
to help you visualize the shape of the molecule.
If a molecule contains bond dipoles that do not counteract each
other, the molecule is polar.
Examples: H O, CHCl
2 3
If the molecule contains dipoles that counteract each other, the
molecule is non-polar.
Examples: CO , CCl
2 4
Chapter 1 Classifying Organic Compounds • MHR 9
••
A B
Cl
•• ••
O C O C
•• ••
Cl Cl
Cl
Figure 1.5
H
C
Cl Cl
Cl
CHEM Sample Problem
FACT
Molecular Polarity
The polarity of a molecule
determines its solubility. Polar
molecules attract each other, Problem
so polar molecules usually Use your knowledge of molecular shape and polar bonds to predict
dissolve in polar solvents,
whether each molecule has an overall molecular polarity.
such as water. Non-polar
(a) CH CH
molecules do not attract 3 3
polar molecules enough to (b) CH CH O H
3 2
compete against the strong
attraction between polar
H Cl
molecules. Therefore, non-
(c) C C
polar molecules are not
Cl H
usually soluble in water.
Instead, they dissolve in
Solution
non-polar solvents, such
as benzene. (a) Step 1 Does the molecule have polar bonds? H(cid:3)C and C(cid:3)C
bonds are usually considered to be non-polar. Thus, this molecule
is non-polar.
(b) Steps 1 and 2 Does the molecule have polar bonds? Is there more
than one polar bond? The C(cid:3)O and O(cid:3)H bonds are polar.
Step 3 Do the bond dipoles counteract each other? The shape around
oxygen is bent, and the dipoles are unequal. Therefore, these dipoles
do not counteract each other. The molecule has an overall polarity.
(c) Steps 1 and 2 Does the molecule have polar bonds? Is there more
than one polar bond? The C(cid:3)Cl bonds are polar.
Step 3 Do the bond dipoles counteract each other? If you make a
model of this molecule, you can see that the C(cid:3)Cl dipoles act in
opposite directions. They counteract each other. Thus, this molecule
is non-polar.
Practice Problems
1. Predict and sketch the three-dimensional shape around each
single-bonded atom.
(a) C and O in CH OH
3
(b) C in CH
4
2. Predict and sketch the three-dimensional shape of each
multiple-bonded molecule.
(a) HC(cid:4)CH
(b) H C (cid:2)O
2
3. Identify any polar bonds that are present in each molecule in
questions 1 and 2.
4. For each molecule in questions 1 and 2, predict whether the molecule
as a whole is polar or non-polar.
10 MHR • Unit 1 Organic Chemistry
Section Summary
In this section, you studied carbon bonding and the three-dimensional
shapes of organic molecules. You learned that you can determine the
polarity of a molecule by considering its shape and the polarity of its
bonds. In Unit 2, you will learn more about molecular shapes and
molecular polarity. In the next section, you will review the most basic
type of organic compound: hydrocarbons.
Section Review
1 MC How are the following statements misleading? Explain your
reasoning.
(a) “You should eat only organic food.”
(b) “All-natural ingredients make our product the healthier choice.”
(c) “Chemicals are harmful.”
2 K/U Classify each bond as polar or non-polar.
(a) C(cid:3)O (c) C(cid:3)N (e) C(cid:2)O
(b) C(cid:3)C (d) C(cid:2)C
3 K/U Describe the shape of the molecule around the carbon atom
that is highlighted.
H H H O H H
(a) H C C H (b) H C C C C H
H H H H H
4 K/U Identify each molecule in question 3 as either polar or non-polar.
Explain your reasoning.
5 I Identify the errors in the following structural diagrams.
(a) HC CH CH 2 CH 3 (b)
6 C Use your own words to explain why so many organic
compounds exist.
Chapter 1 Classifying Organic Compounds • MHR 11
1.2 Hydrocarbons
In this section, you will review the structure and names of hydrocarbons.
Section Preview/
Specific Expectations As you may recall from your previous chemistry studies, hydrocarbons
are the simplest type of organic compound. Hydrocarbons are composed
In this section, you will
entirely of carbon and hydrogen atoms, and are widely used as fuels.
(cid:2) distinguishamong the
Gasoline, propane, and natural gas are common examples of hydrocarbons.
following classes of organic
compounds: alkanes, Because they contain only carbon and hydrogen atoms, hydrocarbons are
alkenes, alkynes, and non-polar compounds.
aromatic compounds Scientists classify hydrocarbons as either aliphatic or aromatic. An
(cid:2) drawand namehydro- aliphatic hydrocarbon contains carbon atoms that are bonded in one or
carbons using the IUPAC more chains and rings. The carbon atoms have single, double, or triple
system bonds. Aliphatic hydrocarbons include straight chain and cyclic alkanes,
(cid:2) communicateyour under- alkenes, and alkynes. An aromatic hydrocarbon is a hydrocarbon based
standing of the following on the aromatic benzene group. You will encouter this group later in
terms: hydrocarbons, the section. Benzene is the simplest aromatic compound. Its bonding
aliphatic hydrocarbon,
arrangement results in special molecular stability.
aromatic hydrocarbon,
alkane, cycloalkane, alkene,
Alkanes, Alkenes, and Alkynes
functional group, alkyne,
alkyl group An alkaneis a hydrocarbon that has only single bonds. Alkanes that do not
contain rings have the formula C n H 2n+2 .An alkane in the shape of a ring is
called a cycloalkane. Cycloalkanes have the formula C H . An alkeneis a
n 2n
compound that has at least one double bond. Straight-chain alkenes with
one double bond have the same formula as cycloalkanes, C H .
n 2n
A double bond involves two pairs of electrons. In a double bond, one
pair of electrons forms a single bond and the other pair forms an addition-
al, weaker bond. The electrons in the additional, weaker bond react faster
than the electrons in the single bond. Thus, carbon-carbon double bonds
The molecular formula of are more reactive than carbon-carbon single bonds. When an alkene
benzene is CH . Remember
6 6 reacts, the reaction almost always occurs at the site of the double bond.
that each carbon atom must
A functional group is a reactive group of bonded atoms that appears
form a total of four bonds. A
in all the members of a chemical family. Each functional group reacts in a
single bond counts as one
characteristic way. Thus, functional groups help to determine the physical
bond, a double bond counts
as two bonds, and a triple and chemical properties of compounds. For example, the reactive double
bond counts as three bonds. bond is the functional group for an alkene. In this course, you will
Hydrogen can form only encounter many different functional groups.
one bond. Draw a possible An alkyne is a compound that has at least one triple bond. A straight-
structure for benzene.
chain alkyne with one triple bond has the formula C n H 2n−2 . Triple bonds
are even more reactive than double bonds. The functional group for an
alkyne is the triple bond.
Figure 1.7 gives examples of an alkane, a cycloalkane, an alkene, and
an alkyne.
H H
CH CH CH CH H C C C H CH C C CH CH CH
3 2 2 3 3 2 2 3
cyclopentane, C H butane, C H 2-hexyne, C H
5 10 4 10 H H 6 10
propene, C H
3 6
Figure 1.7 Identify each compound as an alkane, a cycloalkane, an alkene, or an alkyne.
12 MHR • Unit 1 Organic Chemistry
General Rules for Naming Organic Compounds
The International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) has set
standard rules for naming organic compounds. The systematic (or IUPAC)
names of alkanes and most other organic compounds follow the same
pattern, shown below.
+ +
prefix root suffix
The Root: How Long Is the Main Chain?
The root of a compound’s name indicates the number of carbon atoms in
the main (parent) chain or ring. Table 1.2 gives the roots for hydrocarbon
chains that are up to ten carbons long. To determine which root to use,
count the carbons in the main chain, or main ring, of the compound. If the
compound is an alkene or alkyne, the main chain or ring must include the
multiple bond.
Table 1.2 Root Names
Number of
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
carbon atoms
Root -meth- -eth- -prop- -but- -pent- -hex- -hept- -oct- -non- -dec-
Figure 1.8 shows some hydrocarbons, with the main chain or ring
highlighted.
CH CH
3 3
HC CH CH CH CH
2 3
H C CH
2 2
H C C
3
H C CH
2 2
CH
3
A B
Figure 1.8 (A) There are six carbons in the main chain. The root is -hex-. (B) There are five
carbons in the main ring. The root is -pent-.
The Suffix: What Family Does the Compound Belong To?
The suffix indicates the type of compound, according to the functional
groups present. (See Table 1.4 on page 22.) As you progress through this
chapter, you will learn the suffixes for different chemical families. In your
previous chemistry course, you learned the suffixes -ane for alkanes, -ene
for alkenes, and -yne for alkynes. Thus, an alkane composed of six carbon
atoms in a chain is called hexane. An alkene with three carbons is called
propene.
Chapter 1 Classifying Organic Compounds • MHR 13
The Prefix: What Is Attached to the Main Chain?
The prefix indicates the name and location of each branch and functional
group on the main carbon chain. Most organic compounds have branches,
called alkyl groups, attached to the main chain. An alkyl groupis obtained
by removing one hydrogen atom from an alkane. To name an alkyl group,
change the -ane suffix to -yl. For example, (cid:3)CH is the alkyl group that is
3
derived from methane, CH . It is called the methylgroup, taken from the
4
root meth-. Table 1.3 gives the names of the most common alkyl groups.
Table 1.3 Common Alkyl Groups
methyl ethyl propyl isopropyl
CH
3
CH CH CH CH CH CH CH
3 2 3 2 2 3
CH
3
butyl sec-butyl iso-butyl tert-butyl
CH
CH CH 3
3 3
CH CH CH CH CH CH CH C CH
2 2 2 3 2 3
CH CH CH
2 3 3 CH
3
Read the steps below to review how to name hydrocarbons. Then examine
the two Sample Problems that follow.
How to Name Hydrocarbons
Step 1 Find the root: Identify the longest chain or ring in the hydrocarbon.
If the hydrocarbon is an alkene or an alkyne, make sure that you
include any multiple bonds in the main chain. Remember that the
chain does not have to be in a straight line. Count the number of
carbon atoms in the main chain to obtain the root. If it is a cyclic
compound, add the prefix -cyclo- before the root.
Step 2 Find the suffix: If the hydrocarbon is an alkane, use the suffix -ane.
Use -ene if the hydrocarbon is an alkene. Use -yne if the hydrocarbon
is an alkyne. If more than one double or triple bond is present, use
the prefix di- (2) or tri- (3) before the suffix to indicate the number
of multiple bonds.
Step 3 Give a position number to every carbon atom in the main chain.
Start from the end that gives you the lowest possible position
number for the double or triple bond, if there is one. If there is no
double or triple bond, number the compound so that the branches
have the lowest possible position numbers.
Step 4 Find the prefix: Name each branch as an alkyl group, and give it
a position number. If more than one branch is present, write the
names of the branches in alphabetical order. Put the position
number of any double or triple bonds after the position numbers
and names of the branches, just before the root. This is the prefix.
Note: Use the carbon atom with the lowest position number to give
the location of a double or triple bond.
Step 5 Put the name together: prefix + root + suffix.
14 MHR • Unit 1 Organic Chemistry
Sample Problem
Naming Alkanes
Problem
Name the following alkanes. 4
5 3
(a) CH CH CH (b)
3 3
3 2 1 1 2
PROBLEM TIPS
CH CH CH
3 2 3 • Use hyphens to separate
words from numbers.
Solution
Use commas to separate
(a) Step 1 Find the root: The longest chain has three carbon atoms, so the numbers.
root is -prop-.
• If there is a ring, it is
Step 2 Find the suffix: The suffix is -ane. usually taken as the main
Steps 3 and 4 Find the prefix: A methyl group is attached to carbon chain. Follow the same
number 2. The prefix is 2-methyl. rules to name cyclic
compounds that have
Step 5 The full name is 2-methylpropane.
branches attached.
(b) Steps 1 and 2 Find the root and suffix: The main ring has five carbon Include the prefix -cyclo-
atoms, so the root is -pent-. Add the prefix -cyclo-. The suffix is -ane. after the names and
Steps 3 and 4 Find the prefix: Start numbering at the ethyl branch. The position numbers of the
prefix is 1-ethyl, or just ethyl. branches, directly before
the root: for example,
Step 5 The full name is 1-ethylcyclopentane.
2-methyl-1-cyclohexene.
Sample Problem
Naming an Alkene
Problem
Name the following alkene.
CH
3
CH C C CH CH CH CH
3 2 2 3
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
CH CH CH
3 2 3
Solution
Step 1 Find the root: The longest chain in the molecule has seven carbon
atoms. The root is -hept-.
Step 2 Find the suffix: The suffix is -ene. The root and suffix together are
-heptene.
Step 3 Numbering the chain from the left, in this case, gives the smallest
position number for the double bond.
Step 4 Find the prefix: Two methyl groups are attached to carbon number
2. One ethyl group is attached to carbon number 3. There is a
double bond at position 3. The prefix is 3-ethyl-2,2-dimethyl-3-.
Step 5 The full name is 3-ethyl-2,2-dimethyl-3-heptene.
Chapter 1 Classifying Organic Compounds • MHR 15
To draw a condensed structural diagram of a hydrocarbon, follow the
steps below. Then examine the Sample Problem that follows.
How to Draw Hydrocarbons
Step 1 Draw the carbon atoms of the main chain. Leave space after each
carbon atom for bonds and hydrogen atoms to be added later.
Number the carbon atoms.
Step 2 Draw any single, double, or triple bonds between the carbon atoms.
Step 3 Add the branches to the appropriate carbon atoms of the main chain.
Step 4 Add hydrogen atoms so that each carbon atom forms a total of
4 bonds. Remember that double bonds count as 2 bonds and triple
bonds count as 3 bonds.
Sample Problem
Drawing an Alkane
Problem
Draw a condensed structural diagram for 3-ethyl-2-methylhexane.
Solution
Step 1 The main chain is hexane. Therefore, there are six carbon atoms.
Step 2 This compound is an alkane, so all carbon-carbon bonds are single.
Step 3 The ethyl group is attached to carbon number 3. The methyl group
is attached to carbon number 2.
Step 4 Add hydrogen atoms so that each carbon atom forms 4 bonds.
CH CH
2 3
CH CH CH CH CH CH
3 2 2 3
1 2 3 4 5 6
CH
3
Practice Problems
5. Name each hydrocarbon.
Electronic Learning Partner
(a) H C CH (e)
3 3
The Chemistry 12 Electronic
Learning Partner has a video
that compares models of
H 2 C CH CH 3
hydrocarbons.
CH
(b) H 2 C CH (f) 3
CH
3
(c) CH C CH CH CH (g)
3 2 3
(d)
16 MHR • Unit 1 Organic Chemistry
6. Draw a condensed structural diagram for each hydrocarbon.
(a) propane (c) 3-methyl-2,4,6-octatriene
(b) 4-ethyl-3-methylheptane
7. Identify any errors in the name of each hydrocarbon.
(a) 2,2,3-dimethylbutane (c) 3-methyl-4,5-diethyl-2-nonyne
(b) 2,4-diethyloctane
8. Correct any errors so that each name matches the structure beside it.
(a) 4-hexyne CH 3 CH 2 CH CH CH 2 CH 3
(b) 2,5-hexene CH C C C C CH
3 3
9. Use each incorrectname to draw the corresponding hydrocarbon.
Examine your drawing, and rename the hydrocarbon correctly.
(a) 3-propyl-2-butene (c) 4-methylpentane
(b) 1,3-dimethyl-4-hexene
Careers in Chemistry
The Art and Science of Perfumery companies usually train perfumers in-house.
The training takes five to ten years to complete.
Since 1932, The Quiggs have manufactured perfume
Although inventors are trying to develop
compounds for cosmetics, toiletries, soaps, air fresh-
electronic and artificial noses to detect odours, they
eners, candles, detergents, and industrial cleaning
have not yet been able to duplicate the sensitive
products.
nose of a skilled, trained, and talented perfumer.
Jeff Quigg says the mixing of a perfume is “a
trial and error process.” An experienced perfumer
Making Career Connections
must memorize a vast library of hundreds or even
1. Perfume schools exist, but admission is very
thousands of individual scents and combinations of
competitive. One of these schools is the Institut
scents. Perfume ingredients can be divided into
Supérieur International du Parfum, de la
natural essential oils(derived directly from plants)
Cosmétique et de l’Aromatique Alimentaire
and aromatic chemicals(synthetically produced
(ISIPCA, or International High Institute of
fragrance components).
Perfume, Cosmetic and Food Flavouring). The
Essential oils are organic compounds derived
ISIPCA is located in Versailles, France. You can
from flowers, seeds, leaves, roots, resins, and citrus
find out more about the ISIPCA by logging onto
fruits. The structures of many fragrant compounds
www.mcgrawhill.ca/links/chemistry12and
have been studied, and processes for making these
clicking on Web Links. Use the Internet or a
valuable compounds in a laboratory have been
library to find out more about perfume schools
developed. There are now approximately 5000
and training for perfumers.
synthetically produced chemicals that are available
to a perfumer. These chemicals include vanillin, 2. The fragrance industry is closely linked to the
rose oxides, and the damascones, or rose ketones. flavour industry. Many of the skills required of a
An aspiring perfumer must have a discrimi- perfumer are also required of a flavourist. Find
nating sense of smell. As well, a perfumist should out more about the flavour industry. Contact the
obtain at least a bachelor of science degree in chemistry department of a university to find out
chemistry, or a degree in chemical engineering. more about flavour chemistry.
There are few formal schools for perfumers, so
Chapter 1 Classifying Organic Compounds • MHR 17
Aromatic Compounds
If you completed the Concept Check activity on page 12, you drew a
possible structure for benzene. For many years, scientists could not
determine the structure of benzene. From its molecular formula, C H ,
6 6
scientists reasoned that it should contain two double bonds and one triple
bond, or even two triple bonds. Benzene, however, does not undergo the
same reactions as other compounds with double or triple bonds.
A B We know today that benzene is a cyclic compound with the equivalent
of three double bonds and three single bonds, as shown in Figure 1.9(A).
However, the electrons that form the double bonds in benzene are spread
out and shared over the whole molecule. Thus, benzene actually has six
identical bonds, each one half-way between a single and a double bond.
Figure 1.9 Two representations These bonds are much more stable than ordinary double bonds and do
of the benzene molecule. not react in the same way. Figure 1.9(B) shows a more accurate way to
represent the bonding in benzene. Molecules with this type of special
electron sharing are called aromatic compounds. As mentioned earlier,
benzene is the simplest aromatic compound.
Figure 1.10 illustrates some common aromatic compounds. To name
an aromatic compound, follow the steps below. Figure 1.11 gives an
example.
CH HC CH NO
3 2 2
NO NO
2 2
CH
3
PROBLEM TIP
methylbenzene phenylethene 2,4,6-trinitromethylbenzene
Often an organic compound (toluene) (styrene) (trinitrotoluene, TNT)
has more than one type of
Figure 1.10 The common name for methylbenzene is toluene. Toluene is used to produce
branch. When possible, num-
explosives, such as trinitrotoluene (TNT). Phenylethene, with the common name styrene, is an
ber the main chain or ring of
important ingredient in the production of plastics and rubber.
the compound to give the most
important branches the lowest
possible position numbers. Naming an Aromatic Hydrocarbon
The table below ranks some
Step 1 Number the carbons in the benzene ring. If more than one type of
branches (and other groups)
branch is attached to the ring, start numbering at the carbon with
you will encounter in this
the highest priority (or most complex) group. (See the Problem Tip.)
chapter, from the highest
priority to the lowest priority. Step 2 Name any branches that are attached to the benzene ring. Give
these branches position numbers. If only one branch is attached to
The Priority of Branches
a benzene ring, you do not need to include a position number.
Highest (cid:3)OH
Step 3 Place the branch numbers and names as a prefix before the root,
priority
(cid:3)NH
2 benzene.
(cid:3)F, (cid:3)Cl, 6
5
(cid:3)Br, (cid:3)I 1
(cid:3)CH 2 CH 2 CH 3 4 3 2
(cid:3)CH CH
Lowest 2 3
priority (cid:3)CH
3 Figure 1.11 Two ethyl groups are present. They have the position numbers 1 and 3. The
name of this compound is 1,3-diethylbenzene.
18 MHR • Unit 1 Organic Chemistry
Chemists do not always use position numbers to describe the branches CHEM
that are attached to a benzene ring. When a benzene ring has only two FACT
branches, the prefixes ortho-, meta-, and para- are sometimes used instead
Kathleen Yardley Lonsdale
of numbers. (1903–1971) used X-ray crystal-
lography to prove that benzene
CH CH CH
3 3 3
is a flat molecule. All six
CH
3 carbon atoms lie in one plane,
forming a regular hexagonal
shape. The bonds are all
CH
3 exactly the same length.
CH 3 The bond angles are all 120˚.
1,2-dimethylbenzene 1,3-dimethylbenzene 1,4-dimethylbenzene
ortho-dimethylbenzene meta-dimethylbenzene para-dimethylbenzene
(common name: (common name: (common name:
ortho-xylene) meta-xylene) para-xylene)
Practice Problems
10. Name the following aromatic compound.
CH
3
H C CH
3 3
11. Draw a structural diagram for each aromatic compound.
(a) 1-ethyl-3-methylbenzene
(b) 2-ethyl-1,4-dimethylbenzene
(c) para-dichlorobenzene (Hint:Chlororefers to the chlorine atom, Cl.)
12. Give another name for the compound in question 11(a).
13. Draw and name three aromatic isomers with the molecular formula
C H . (Isomersare compounds that have the same molecular
10 14
formula, but different structures. See the Concepts and Skills Review
for a review of structural isomers.)
Section Summary
In this section, you reviewed how to name and draw alkanes, alkenes,
and alkynes. You also learned how to name aromatic hydrocarbons. The
names of all the other organic compounds you will encounter in this unit
are based on the names of hydrocarbons. In the next section, you will
learn about organic compounds that have single bonds to halogen atoms,
oxygen atoms, and nitrogen atoms.
Chapter 1 Classifying Organic Compounds • MHR 19
Section Review
1 K/U Name each hydrocarbon.
(a) CH CH CH CH CH CH CH
3 2 2 2 2 2 3
(b)
(c) CH CH CH CH CH
3 2 2
CH
3
(d) CH CH
2 3
2 C Draw a condensed structural diagram for each hydrocarbon.
(a) cyclopentane
(b) 2-methyl-2-butene
(c) 1,4-dimethylbenzene (common name: para-xylene)
(d) 3-ethyl-2,3,4-trimethylnonane
3 C Draw and name all the isomers that have the molecular
formula C H .
4 10
4 C Draw a line structural diagram for each hydrocarbon.
(See the Concepts and Skills Review for a review of structural
diagrams and cis-trans isomers.)
(a) pentane
(b) 2-methylpropane
(c) 1-ethyl-3-methylcyclohexane
(d) trans-2,5-dimethyl-3-heptene
5 C Draw and name twelve possible isomers that have the molecular
formula C H .
6 10
6 I Use a molecular model set to build a model of the benzene ring.
Examine your model. Does your model give an accurate representation
of benzene’s bonding system? Explain your answer.
7 C Draw and name all the isomers that have the molecular formula
C H . Include any cis-trans isomers and cyclic compounds.
5 10
8 C Draw two different but correct structures for the benzene molecule.
Explain why one structure is more accurate than the other.
20 MHR • Unit 1 Organic Chemistry
Single-Bonded Functional Groups 1.3
When you cut yourself, it is often a good idea to swab the cut with
Section Preview/
rubbing alcohol to disinfect it. Most rubbing alcohols that are sold in Specific Expectations
drugstores are based on 2-propanol (common name: isopropanol), C H O.
3 8 In this section, you will
You can also swab a cut with a rubbing alcohol based on ethanol, C H O.
2 6 (cid:2) distinguishamong the
Often it is hard to tell the difference between these two compounds. Both
following classes of organic
have a sharp smell, and both evaporate quickly. Both are effective at compounds: alkyl halides,
killing bacteria and disinfecting wounds. What is the connection between alcohols, ethers, and amines
these compounds? Why is their behaviour so similar?
(cid:2) describethe effects of
intermolecular forces on
Functional Groups the physical properties of
alcohols, ethers, and amines
Both 2-propanol and ethanol contain the same functional group, an
(cid:3)OH (hydroxyl) group, as shown in Figure 1.12. Because ethanol and (cid:2) drawand namealkyl
halides, alcohols, ethers,
2-propanol have the same OH functional group, their behaviour is similar.
and amines using the
IUPAC system
CH CH CH CH CH OH
3 3 3 2
(cid:2) identifythe common names
OH of some organic compounds
(cid:2) communicateyour under-
2-propanol ethanol
standing of the following
terms: (cid:3)OH (hydroxyl)
Figure 1.12 Ethanol and 2-propanol both belong to the alcohol family.
group, general formula,
intermolecular forces
The general formula for a family of simple organic compounds is hydrogen bonding,
R + functionalgroup. The letter R stands for any alkyl group. (If more dipole-dipole interactions,
than one alkyl group is present, R′ and R′′ are also used.) For example, dispersion forces, alcohol,
the general formula R(cid:3)OH refers to any of the following compounds: parent alkane, alkyl halide
(haloalkane), ether, alkoxy
CH OH, CH CH OH, CH CH CH OH, CH CH CH CH OH, etc.
3 3 2 3 2 2 3 2 2 2 group, amine
Organic compounds are named according to their functional group.
Generally, the suffix of a compound’s name indicates the most important
functional group in the molecule. For example, the suffix -ene indicates
the presence of a double bond, and the suffix -ol indicates the presence
Each organic family follows a
of a hydroxyl group.
set pattern. You have just seen
Functional groups are a useful way to classify organic compounds, that you can represent the
for two reasons: hydrocarbon part of a
functional family by the letter
1. Compounds with the same functional group often have similar
R. All the structures below
physical properties. In the next two sections, you will learn to
belong to the primary amine
recognize various functional groups. You will use functional groups family. What is the functional
to help you predict the physical properties of compounds. group for this family? Write the
general formula for an amine.
2. Compounds with the same functional group react chemically in very
similar ways. In Chapter 2, you will learn how compounds with each CH 3 NH 2
functional group react.
CH CH NH
3 2 2
Table 1.4, on the next page, lists some of the most common
functional groups.
CH CH CH NH
3 2 2 2
Chapter 1 Classifying Organic Compounds • MHR 21
Table 1.4 Common Functional Groups
Type of compound Suffix Functional group Example
alkane -ane none propane
alkene -ene C C propene
alkyne -yne C C propyne
alcohol -ol C OH propanol
amine -amine C N propanamine
O
aldehyde -al propanal
C H
O
ketone -one propanone
C
O
carboxylic acid -oic acid propanoic acid
C OH
O
ester -oate methyl propanoate
C O
O
amide -amide propanamide
C N
Physical Properties and Forces Between Molecules
Organic compounds that have the same functional group often have
similar physical properties, such as boiling points, melting points, and
solubilities. Physical properties are largely determined by intermolecular
forces, the forces of attraction and repulsion between particles. Three
types of intermolecular forces are introduced below. You will examine
these forces further in Chapter 4.
• Hydrogen bonding is a strong intermolecular attraction between the
hydrogen atom from an N(cid:3)H, O(cid:3)H, or F(cid:3)H group on one molecule,
and a nitrogen, oxygen, or fluorine atom on another molecule.
• The attractive forces between polar molecules are called dipole-dipole
interactions. These forces cause polar molecules to cling to each other.
• Dispersion forces are attractive forces that occur between all covalent
molecules. These forces are usually very weak for small molecules, but
they strengthen as the size of the molecule increases.
The process that is outlined on the next page will help you to predict the
physical properties of organic compounds by examining the intermolecular
forces between molecules. As you progress through the chapter, referring
back to this process will enable you to understand the reasons behind
trends in physical properties.
22 MHR • Unit 1 Organic Chemistry
Intermolecular Forces and Physical Properties
Draw two or three molecules of the same organic compound close
together on a page. If you are considering the solubility of one com-
pound in another, sketch the two different molecules close together.
Ask the following questions about the intermolecular interactions
between the molecules of each compound:
1. Can the molecules form hydrogen bonds?
If the molecules have O(cid:3)H, N(cid:3)H, or
H(cid:3)F bonds, they can form hydrogen O O
bonds with themselves and with water. H H H H
The diagram to the right illustrates
O
hydrogen bonding between water
H H
molecules. If the molecules contain
O, N, or F atoms that are not bonded
to hydrogen atoms, they may accept hydrogen bonds from water,
even though they cannot form hydrogen bonds with themselves.
Molecules that can form hydrogen bonds with themselves have
a higher boiling point than similar molecules that cannot form
hydrogen bonds with themselves. For example, alcohols can form
hydrogen bonds, but alkanes cannot. Therefore, alcohols have
higher boiling points than alkanes.
Molecules that can form hydrogen bonds with water, or can
accept hydrogen bonds from water, are usually soluble in water.
For example, many alcohols are soluble in water because they can
form hydrogen bonds with water.
2. Are the molecules polar?
The molecules are polar if they have polar bonds, and if these
bonds do not act in opposite directions and counteract each other.
Polar molecules are attracted to each other by dipole-dipole forces.
Polar molecules usually have a higher boiling point than
similar non-polar molecules. Also, polar molecules that can form
hydrogen bonds have an even higher boiling point than polar
molecules that cannot form hydrogen bonds. For example, ethanol,
CH CH OH, is polar. Its molecules can form hydrogen bonds.
3 2
Methoxymethane, CH OCH , is an isomer of ethanol. It is also
3 3
polar, but its molecules cannot form hydrogen bonds. Thus,
ethanol has a higher boiling point than methoxymethane. Both of
these compounds have a higher boiling point than the non-polar
molecule ethane, CH CH .
3 3
Polar molecules with a large non-polar hydrocarbon part are
less polar than polar molecules with a smaller non-polar hydrocar-
bon part. For example, octanol,CH CH CH CH CH CH CH CH OH,
3 2 2 2 2 2 2 2
is less polar than ethanol, CH CH OH.
3 2
Polar molecules with a large hydrocarbon part are less soluble
in water than polar molecules with a smaller hydrocarbon part.
For example, octanol, CH CH CH CH CH CH CH CH OH, is less
3 2 2 2 2 2 2 2
soluble in water than ethanol, CH CH OH.
3 2
continued on the next page
Chapter 1 Classifying Organic Compounds • MHR 23
3. How strong are the dispersion forces?
Dispersion forces are weak intermolecular forces. They are stronger,
however, when the hydrocarbon part of a molecule is very large.
Thus, a large molecule has stronger dispersion interactions than a
smaller molecule.
A molecule with a greater number of carbon atoms usually has
a higher boiling point than the same type of molecule with fewer
carbon atoms. For example, hexane, CH CH CH CH CH CH has a
3 2 2 2 2 3
higher boiling point than ethane, CH CH .
3 3
The melting points of organic compounds follow approximately
the same trend as their boiling points. There are some anomalies,
however, due to more complex forces of bonding in solids.
In the following ThoughtLab you will use the process in the box above to
predict and compare the physical properties of some organic compounds.
ThoughtLab Comparing Intermolecular Forces
Intermolecular forces affect the physical properties (a) Which compound is more polar? Explain your
of compounds. In this ThoughtLab, you will com- answer.
pare the intermolecular forces of different organic (b) Which compound is more soluble in water?
compounds. Explain your answer.
Procedure Analysis
1. Draw three molecules of each compound below. 1. Which compound has a higher solubility in
(a) propane, CH 3 CH 2 CH 3 water?
(b) heptane, CH 3 CH 2 CH 2 CH 2 CH 2 CH 2 CH 3 (a) a polar compound or a non-polar compound
(c) 1-propanol, CH 3 CH 2 CH 2 OH (b) a compound that forms hydrogen bonds with
(d) 1-heptanol, CH 3 CH 2 CH 2 CH 2 CH 2 CH 2 CH 2 OH water, or a compound that does not form
2. For each compound, consider whether or not hydrogen bonds with water
hydrogen bonding can occur between its mole- (c) CH CH CH OH or CH CH CH CH CH OH
3 2 2 3 2 2 2 2
cules. Use a dashed line to show any hydrogen
2. Which compound has stronger attractions
bonding.
between molecules?
3. For each compound, consider whether or not (a) a polar compound or a non-polar compound
any polar bonds are present. (b) a compound without O(cid:3)H or N(cid:3)H bonds,
(a) Use a different-coloured pen to identify any or
polar bonds. a compound with O(cid:3)H or N(cid:3)H bonds
(b) Which compounds are polar? Which 3. Which compound is likely to have a higher
compounds are non-polar? Explain your
boiling point?
reasoning. (a) a polar compound without O(cid:3)H or N(cid:3)H
4. Compare your drawings of propane and heptane. bonds, or a polar compound with O(cid:3)H or
(a) Which compound has stronger dispersion N(cid:3)H bonds
forces? Explain your answer. (b) CH CH CH OH or CH CH CH CH CH OH
3 2 2 3 2 2 2 2
(b) Which compound has a higher boiling point? 4. Compare boiling points and solubilities in
Explain your answer.
water for each pair of compounds. Explain
5. Compare your drawings of 1-propanol and your reasoning.
1-heptanol. (a) ammonia, NH , and methane, CH
3 4
(b) pentanol, C H OH, and pentane, C H
5 11 5 12
24 MHR • Unit 1 Organic Chemistry
Compounds With Single-Bonded Functional Groups
Alcohols, alkyl halides, ethers, and amines all have functional groups
with single bonds. These compounds have many interesting uses in
daily life. As you learn how to identify and name these compounds, think
about how the intermolecular forces between their molecules affect their
properties and uses.
Alcohols
An alcohol is an organic compound that contains the (cid:3)OH functional
group. Depending on the position of the hydroxyl group, an alcohol
can be primary, secondary, or tertiary. Figure 1.13 gives some examples
of alcohols.
primary alcohol secondary alcohol tertiary alcohol
OH CH
3
HO CH CH CH CH CH CH CH CH CH C CH
2 2 2 3 3 2 3 3 3
OH
The hydroxyl group is bonded The hydroxyl group is bonded
to a carbon that is bonded to to a carbon that is bonded to The hydroxyl group is bonded
only one other carbon atom. two other carbon atoms. to a carbon that is bonded to
three other carbon atoms.
Figure 1.13
Table 1.5 lists some common alcohols and their uses. Alcohols are very
widely used, and can be found in drug stores, hardware stores, liquor
stores, and as a component in many manufactured products.
Table 1.5 Common Alcohols and Their Uses
Name Common name(s) Structure Boiling point Use(s)
methanol wood alcohol, • solvent in many chemical
methyl alcohol processes
CH 3 OH 64.6˚C • component of automobile
antifreeze
ethanol grain alcohol, • solvent in many chemical
ethyl alcohol processes
CH 3 CH 2 OH 78.2˚C • component of alcoholic
beverages
• antiseptic liquid
2-propanol isopropanol, CH • antiseptic liquid
3
isopropyl alcohol,
CH OH 82.4˚C
rubbing alcohol
CH
3
1,2-ethanediol ethylene glycol • main component of
HO CH CH OH 197.6˚C
2 2 automobile antifreeze
Alcohols are named from the parent alkane: the alkane with the same
basic carbon structure. Follow the steps on the next page to name an
alcohol. The Sample Problem that follows gives an example.
Chapter 1 Classifying Organic Compounds • MHR 25
How to Name an Alcohol
Web LINK
Step 1 Locate the longest chain that contains an (cid:3)OH group attached to
www.mcgrawhill.ca/links/
one of the carbon atoms. Name the parent alkane.
chemistry12
Step 2 Replace the -e at the end of the name of the parent alkane with -ol.
Methanol and ethanol are
produced industrially from Step 3 Add a position number before the root of the name to indicate the
natural, renewable resources. location of the (cid:3)OH group. (Remember to number the main chain
Go to the web site above, and
of the hydrocarbon so that the hydroxyl group has the lowest possi-
click on Web Linksto find out ble position number.) If there is more than one (cid:3)OH group, leave
where to go next. Research the
the -e in the name of the parent alkane, and put the appropriate
processes that produce these
prefix (di-, tri-, or tetra-) before the suffix -ol.
important chemicals. From
where do they obtain their raw Step 4 Name and number any other branches on the main chain. Add the
materials? name of these branches to the prefix.
Step 5 Put the name together: prefix + root + suffix.
Sample Problem
Naming an Alcohol
Problem
Name the following alcohol. Identify it as primary, secondary,
PROBLEM TIP
or tertiary.
If an organic compound is
complex, with many side CH 2 CH 2 CH 3
branches, the main chain may
HO CH CH CH CH
not be obvious. Sketch the 2 2 3
compound in your notebook
Solution
or on scrap paper. Circle or
highlight the main chain. Step 1 The main chain has six carbon atoms. The name of the parent
alkane is hexane.
Step 2 Replacing -e with -ol gives hexanol.
Step 3 Add a position number for the (cid:3)OH group, to obtain 1-hexanol.
Step 4 A methyl group is present at the third carbon. The prefix
is 3-methyl.
Step 5 The full name is 3-methyl-1-hexanol. This is a primary alcohol.
Practice Problems
14. Name each alcohol. Identify it as primary, secondary, or tertiary.
OH
(a) CH CH CH OH (d) CH CH CH CH CH
3 2 2 3 2 3
OH
OH
OH
(b) (e)
OH
(c)
26 MHR • Unit 1 Organic Chemistry
15. Draw each alcohol.
(a) methanol (d) 3-ethyl-4-methyl-1-octanol
(b) 2-propanol (e) 2,4-dimethyl-1-cyclopentanol
(c) 2,2-butanediol
16. Identify any errors in each name. Give the correct name for
the alcohol.
(a) 1,3-heptanol
OH
HO CH CH CH CH CH
2 2 2 3
(b) 3-ethyl-4-ethyl-1-decanol
OH
(c) 1,2-dimethyl-3-butanol
CH
3
CH CH CH CH
2 3
CH OH
3
17. Sketch a three-dimensional diagram of methanol. Hint:Recall that
the shape around an oxygen atom is bent.
Table 1.6 lists some common physical properties of alcohols. As
you learned earlier in this chapter, alcohols are polar molecules that
experience hydrogen bonding. The physical properties of alcohols
depend on these characteristics.
Table 1.6 Physical Properties of Alcohols
Polarity of functional group The O(cid:3)H bond is very polar. As the number of carbon
atoms in an alcohol becomes larger, the alkyl group’s
non-polar nature becomes more important than the polar
O(cid:3)H bond. Therefore small alcohols are more polar
than alcohols with large hydrocarbon portions.
Hydrogen bonding Alcohols experience hydrogen bonding with other
alcohol molecules and with water.
Solubility in water The capacity of alcohols for hydrogen bonding makes
them extremely soluble in water. Methanol and ethanol
are miscible (infinitely soluble) with water. The
solubility of an alcohol decreases as the number of
carbon atoms increases.
Melting and boiling points Due to the strength of the hydrogen bonding, most
alcohols have higher melting and boiling points than
alkanes with the same number of carbon atoms. Most
alcohols are liquids at room temperature.
Additional Characteristics of Alcohols
• Alcohols are extremely flammable, and should be treated with caution.
• Most alcohols are poisonous. Methanol can cause blindness or death
when consumed. Ethanol is consumed widely in moderate quantities,
but it causes impairment and/or death when consumed in excess.
Chapter 1 Classifying Organic Compounds • MHR 27
Alkyl Halides
An alkyl halide (also known as a haloalkane) is an alkane in which one
or more hydrogen atoms have been replaced with halogen atoms, such
as F, Cl, Br, or I. The functional group of alkyl halides is R(cid:3)X, where X
represents a halogen atom. Alkyl halides are similar in structure, polarity,
and reactivity to alcohols. To name an alkyl halide, first name the parent
hydrocarbon. Then use the prefix fluoro-, chloro-, bromo-, or iodo-, with a
position number, to indicate the presence of a fluorine atom, chlorine
atom, bromine atom, or iodine atom. The following Sample Problem
shows how to name an alkyl halide.
Sample Problem
Naming an Alkyl Halide
Problem
Name the following compound.
Br
1
6 2
5
3
4 Br
CH
3
Solution
The parent hydrocarbon of this compound is cyclohexane. There are two
bromine atoms attached at position numbers 1 and 3. Therefore, part
of the prefix is 1,3-dibromo-. There is also a methyl group at position
number 4. Because the groups are put in alphabetical order, the full
prefix is 1,3-dibromo-4-methyl-. (The ring is numbered so that the
two bromine atoms have the lowest possible position numbers. See
the Problem Tip on page 18.) The full name of the compound is
1,3-dibromo-4-methylcyclohexane.
Practice Problems
18. Draw a condensed structural diagram for each alkyl halide.
(a) bromoethane
(b) 2,3,4-triiodo-3-methylheptane
F
19. Name the alkyl halide at the right.
Then draw a condensed structural
diagram to represent it. F
20. Draw and name an alkyl halide that has three carbon atoms and one
iodine atom.
21. Draw and name a second, different alkyl halide that matches the
description in the previous question.
28 MHR • Unit 1 Organic Chemistry
Ethers
Suppose that you removed the H atom from the (cid:3)OH group of an
alcohol. This would leave space for another alkyl group to attach to the
oxygen atom.
CH CH(cid:3)OH → CH CH (cid:3)O(cid:3)→ CH CH (cid:3)O(cid:3)CH
3 2 3 2 3 2 3
The compound you have just made is called an ether. An ether is an
organic compound that has two alkyl groups joined by an oxygen atom.
The general formula of an ether is R(cid:3)O(cid:3)R. You can think of alcohols
and ethers as derivatives of the water molecule, as shown in Figure 1.14.
Figure 1.15 gives two examples of ethers.
→ →
O O O
H H R H R R′
water alcohol ether
Figure 1.14 An alcohol is equivalent to a water molecule with one hydrogen atom
replaced by an alkyl group. Similarly, an ether is equivalent to a water molecule with
both hydrogen atoms replaced by alkyl groups.
O O
CH CH CH CH CH CH CH CH
3 2 2 3 3 2 2 3
ethoxyethane 1-methoxypropane
(common name: (common name:
diethyl ether) methyl propyl ether)
Figure 1.15 Until fairly recently, ethoxyethane was widely used as an anaesthetic. It had
side effects, such as nausea, however. Compounds such as 1-methoxypropane are now used
instead.
To name an ether, follow the steps below. The Sample Problem then shows
how to use these steps to give an ether its IUPAC name and its common
name.
How to Name an Ether
IUPAC Name
Step 1 Choose the longest alkyl group as the parent alkane. Give it an
alkane name.
Step 2 Treat the second alkyl group, along with the oxygen atom, as an
alkoxy group attached to the parent alkane. Name it by replacing
the -yl ending of the corresponding alkyl group’s name with -oxy.
Give it a position number.
Step 3 Put the prefix and suffix together: alkoxy group + parent alkane.
Common Name
Step 1 List the alkyl groups that are attached to the oxygen atom, in
alphabetical order.
Step 2 Place the suffix -ether at the end of the name.
Chapter 1 Classifying Organic Compounds • MHR 29
Sample Problem
Naming an Ether
Problem
Give the IUPAC name and the common name of the following ether.
CH CH O CH CH CH
3 2 2 2 3
Solution
IUPAC Name
Step 1 The longest alkyl group is based on propane.
CH CH O CH CH CH
3 2 2 2 3
Step 2 The alkoxy group is based on ethane (the ethyl group). It is
located at the first carbon atom of the propane part. Therefore, the
prefix is 1-ethoxy-.
Step 3 The full name is 1-ethoxypropane.
Common Name
Step 1 The two alkyl groups are ethyl and propyl.
Step 2 The full name is ethyl propyl ether.
Practice Problems
22. Use the IUPAC system to name each ether.
(a) H C O CH (c) CH CH CH CH O CH
3 3 3 2 2 2 3
CH
3
(b) H C O CH
3
CH
3
23. Give the common name for each ether.
(a) H C O CH CH (b) H C O CH
3 2 3 3 3
24. Draw each ether.
(a) 1-methoxypropane (c) tert-butyl methyl ether
(b) 3-ethoxy-4-methylheptane
25. Sketch diagrams of an ether and an alcohol with the same number of
carbon atoms. Generally speaking, would you expect an ether or an
alcohol to be more soluble in water? Explain your reasoning.
Table 1.7 describes some physical properties of ethers. Like alcohols,
ethers are polar molecules. Ethers, however, cannot form hydrogen bonds
with themselves. The physical properties of ethers depend on these
characteristics.
30 MHR • Unit 1 Organic Chemistry
Table 1.7 Physical Properties of Ethers
Polarity of functional group The bent shape around the oxygen atom in an ether
means that the two C(cid:3)O dipoles do not counteract each
other. Because a C(cid:3)O bond is less polar than an O(cid:3)H
bond, an ether is less polar than an alcohol.
Hydrogen bonding Because there is no O(cid:3)H bond in an ether, hydrogen
bonding does not occur between ether molecules. Ethers
can accept hydrogen bonding from water molecules.
Solubility in water Ethers are usually soluble in water. The solubility of an
ether decreases as the size of the alkyl groups increases.
Melting and boiling points The boiling points of ethers are much lower than the
boiling points of alcohols with the same number of
carbon atoms.
Additional Characteristics of Ethers
• Like alcohols, ethers are extremely flammable and should be used
with caution.
Amines
An organic compound with the functional group (cid:3)NH , (cid:3)NHR, or
2
(cid:3)NR is called an amine. The letter N refers to the nitrogen atom. The
2
letter R refers to an alkyl group attached to the nitrogen. The general
formula of an amine is R(cid:3)NR′ . Amines can be thought of as derivatives
2
of the ammonia molecule, NH . They are classified as primary, secondary,
3
or tertiary, depending on how many alkyl groups are attached to the
nitrogen atom. Note that the meanings of “primary,” “seconday,” and
“tertiary” are slightly different from their meanings for alcohols.
Figure 1.16 gives some examples of amines.
primary amine secondary amine tertiary amine
CH CH
3 3
CH CH NH CH CH NH CH CH N CH CH
3 2 2 3 2 3 2 2 3
A primary amine has one alkyl A secondary amine has A tertiary amine has three alkyl
group and two hydrogen atoms two alkyl groups and one groups attached to the nitrogen atom.
attached to the nitrogen. hydrogen atom attached
to the nitrogen.
Figure 1.16
To name an amine, follow the steps below. The Sample Problem
illustrates how to use these steps to name a secondary amine.
How to Name an Amine
Step 1 Identify the largest hydrocarbon group attached to the nitrogen atom
as the parent alkane.
Step 2 Replace the -e at the end of the name of the parent alkane with
the new ending -amine. Include a position number, if necessary, to
show the location of the functional group on the hydrocarbon chain.
Step 3 Name the other alkyl group(s) attached to the nitrogen atom. Instead
of position numbers, use the letter N- to locate the group(s). (If two
identical alkyl groups are attached to the nitrogen atom, use N,N-.)
This is the prefix.
Step 4 Put the name together: prefix + root + suffix.
Chapter 1 Classifying Organic Compounds • MHR 31
Sample Problem
Naming a Secondary Amine
Problem
Name the following secondary amine.
CH
3
H C NH CH
3
CH
3
Solution
CHEM
FACT Step 1 The propyl group is the largest of the two hydrocarbon groups
attached to the nitrogen atom. Therefore, the parent alkane is
It is also common and correct
to name amines with each propane.
alkyl branch listed as an Step 2 Replacing the -e with -amine gives propanamine. The position
attachment before the suffix
number of the functional group in the propane chain is 2.
-amine. In this system of
nomenclature, the molecules 1CH
3
in Figure 1.16 are ethylamine,
2
methyl ethyl amine, and methyl H 3 C NH CH
diethyl amine. Several other
methods of naming amines
3CH
3
exist, but they will not be
Step 3 A methyl group is also attached to the nitrogen atom.
covered in this course.
The corresponding prefix is N-methyl-.
Step 4 The full name is N-methyl-2-propanamine.
Practice Problems
26. Name each amine.
(a) CH NH (c) CH CH CH CH
3 2 3 2 3
NH
2
CH
3
(b) C(CH ) CH N CH CH (d) N CH
3 3 2 2 3 3
H
27. Draw a condensed structural diagram for each amine.
(a) 2-pentanamine (c) N-methyl-1-butanamine
(b) cyclohexanamine (d) N,N-diethyl-3-heptanamine
28. Classify each amine in the previous question as primary, secondary,
or tertiary.
29. Draw and name all the isomers with the molecular formula C H N.
4 11
32 MHR • Unit 1 Organic Chemistry
Amines are polar compounds. Primary and secondary amines can form
hydrogen bonds, but tertiary amines cannot. Table 1.8 lists some common
physical properties of amines.
Table 1.8 Physical Properties of Amines
Polarity of functional group C(cid:3)N and N(cid:3)H bonds are polar. Thus, amines are
usually polar.
Hydrogen bonding The presence of one or more N(cid:3)H bonds allows
hydrogen bonding to take place.
Solubility in water Because of hydrogen bonding, amines with low
molecular masses (four or less carbon atoms) are
completely miscible with water. The solubility
of an amine decreases as the number of carbon
atoms increases.
Melting and boiling points The boiling points of primary and secondary amines
(which contain N(cid:3)H bonds) are higher than the boiling
points of tertiary amines (which do not contain an N(cid:3)H
bond). The higher boiling points are due to hydrogen
bonding between amine molecules.
Additional Characteristics of Amines
• Amines are found widely in nature. They are often toxic. Many
amines that are produced by plants have medicinal properties.
(See Figure 1.17.)
• Amines with low molecular masses have a distinctive fishy smell.
Also, many offensive odours of decay and decomposition are caused
by amines. For example, cadavarine, H NCH CH CH CH CH NH ,
2 2 2 2 2 2 2
contributes to the odour of decaying flesh. This compound gets its Figure 1.17 (A) Aniline is an
aromatic amine that is useful for
common name from the word “cadaver,” meaning “dead body.”
preparing dyes. (B) Adrenaline is
• Like ammonia, amines act as weak bases. Since amines are bases,
a hormone that is produced by the
adding an acid to an amine produces a salt. This explains why
human body when under stress.
vinegar and lemon juice (both acids) can be used to neutralize the (C) Quinine is an effective drug
fishy smell of seafood, which is caused by basic amines. against malarial fever.
A B C
OH CH CH 2
OH
NH CH
2
N
HO CH CH 2 NH CH 3 H 3 CO
HO N
aniline (primary amine) adrenaline (secondary amine) quinine (tertiary amine)
Section Summary
In this section, you learned how to recognize, name, and draw members
of the alcohol, alkyl halide, ether, and amine families. You also learned
how to recognize some of the physical properties of these compounds. In
the next section, you will learn about families of organic compounds with
functional groups that contain the C(cid:2)O bond.
Chapter 1 Classifying Organic Compounds • MHR 33
Section Review
1 K/U Name each compound.
(a) NH (c)
2 OH
H C CH
3 3
CH
3
(b) CH CH O CHCH CH
3 2 2 3
Unit Issue Prep 2 K/U Write the IUPAC name for each compound.
Organic compounds are (a) CH 3 CH 2 CH 2 CH 2 CH 2 CH 2 CH 2 OH
used in a wide variety of
(b) CH CH(OH)CH CH
3 2 3
applications all around you. If
(c) CH CH NH
you want to prepare for your 3 2 2
Unit 1 Issue, research the use (d) (CH ) NH
3 2
of organic compounds as fuel,
(e) CH CH OCH
medicines, and food additives. 3 2 3
(f) CH CH(Cl)CH
3 3
3 C Draw a condensed structural diagram for each compound.
(a) 3-heptanol
(b) N-ethyl-2-hexanamine
(c) 3-methoxypentane
4 C Draw and name three isomers that have the molecular formula
C H O.
5 12
5 I Name the following compounds. Then rank them, from highest to
lowest boiling point. Explain your reasoning.
(a) H 3 C CH 3 H 3 C O CH 3 CH 3 CH 2 OH
CH
3
(b) CH CH CH CH CH CH NH CH N CH
3 2 3 3 2 2 2 3 3
6 C Draw cyclohexanol and cyclohexane. Which compound do you
expect to be more soluble in water? Explain your reasoning.
7 I Name the following compounds. Which compound do you expect
to be more soluble in benzene? Explain your reasoning.
OH
8 I Name these compounds. Then rank them, from highest to lowest
molecular polarity. Explain your reasoning.
CH CH CH CH
3 2 2 3
HO CH CH CH CH
2 2 2 3
CH CH O CH CH
3 2 2 3
34 MHR • Unit 1 Organic Chemistry
Functional Groups 1.4
(cid:2)
With the C O Bond
Some of the most interesting and useful organic compounds belong to Section Preview/
families you are about to encounter. For example, the sweet taste of Specific Expectations
vanilla and the spicy scent of cinnamon have something in common: In this section, you will
a carbonyl group. A carbonyl group is composed of a carbon atom double-
(cid:2) distinguishamong the
bonded to an oxygen atom. In this section, you will study the structures following classes of organic
and properties of organic compounds that have the C(cid:2)O group. compounds: aldehydes,
ketones, carboxylic acids,
Aldehydes and Ketones esters, and amides
(cid:2) describephysical properties
Aldehydes and ketones both have the carbonyl functional group. An
of aldehydes, ketones,
aldehyde is an organic compound that has a double-bonded oxygen on
carboxylic acids, esters, and
the last carbon of a carbon chain. The functional group for an aldehyde is
amides
O (cid:2) drawand namealdehydes,
ketones, carboxylic acids,
CH
esters, and amides using the
The general formula for an aldehyde is R(cid:3)CHO, where R is any alkyl IUPAC system
group. Figure 1.18 shows the first two aldehydes.
(cid:2) identifythe common names
of some organic compounds
O O
(cid:2) buildmolecular models
HCH H 3 C CH of organic compounds
methanal ethanal (cid:2) communicateyour under-
(common name: (common name: standing of the following
formaldehyde) acetaldehyde) terms: carbonyl group,
Figure 1.18 Methanal is made from methanol. It is used to preserve animal tissues and aldehyde, ketone, carboxylic
to manufacture plastics. Ethanal is also used as a preservative, and in the manufacture of acid, carboxyl group,
resins and dyes. derivative, ester, amide
When the carbonyl group occurs within a hydrocarbon chain, the
compound is a ketone. A ketone is an organic compound that has a
double-bonded oxygen on any carbon within the carbon chain. The
functional group of a ketone is
O
C
The general formula for a ketone is RCOR′, where R and R′ are alkyl
groups. Figure 1.19 shows the simplest ketone, propanone.
Like the other organic compounds you have encountered, the names
of aldehydes and ketones are based on the names of the parent alkanes.
To name an aldehyde, follow the steps below.
O
How to Name an Aldehyde
CH C CH
Step 1 Name the parent alkane. Always give the carbon atom of the 3 3
carbonyl group the position number 1. propanone
(common name: acetone)
Step 2 Replace the -e at the end of the name of the parent alkane with -al.
The carbonyl group is always given position number 1. Therefore,
Figure 1.19 Propanone is the
you do not need to include a position number for it.
main component of most nail polish
To name a ketone, follow the steps on the next page. The Sample Problem removers. It is used as a solvent,
that follows gives examples for naming both aldehydes and ketones. and in the manufacture of plastics.
Chapter 1 Classifying Organic Compounds • MHR 35
How to Name a Ketone
Step 1 Name the parent alkane. Remember that the main chain must
contain the C(cid:2)O group.
Step 2 If there is one ketone group, replace the -e at the end of the name of
the parent alkane with -one. If there is more than one ketone group,
keep the -e suffix and add a suffix such as -dione or -trione.
Step 3 For carbon chains that have more than four carbons, a position
number is needed for the carbonyl group. Number the carbon chain
so that the carbonyl group has the lowest possible number.
Sample Problem
Drawing and Naming Aldehydes and Ketones
Problem
Draw and name seven isomers with the molecular formula C H O.
5 10
Solution
O O O O
2-pentanone 3-pentanone pentanal 3-methylbutanal
O O O
3-methyl-2-butanone 2,2-dimethylpropanal 2-methylbutanal
Practice Problems
30. Name each aldehyde or ketone.
O O
(a) HC CH 2 CH 2 CH 3 (d) CH 3 CH 2 CH CH
CH CH
2 3
O O
(b) (e)
O
(c) CH 3 CH C CH 2 CH 2 CH 3
CH
3
31. Draw a condensed structural diagram for each aldehyde or ketone.
(a) 2-propylpentanal (c) 4-ethyl-3,5-dimethyloctanal
(b) cyclohexanone
32. Is a compound with a C(cid:2)O bond andthe molecular formula C H O
2 4
an aldehyde or a ketone? Explain.
33. Draw and name five ketones and aldehydes with the molecular
formula C H O.
6 12
36 MHR • Unit 1 Organic Chemistry
Table 1.9 Physical Properties of Aldehydes and Ketones
Polarity of The C(cid:2)O bond is polar, so aldehydes and ketones are
functional group usually polar.
Hydrogen bonding Hydrogen bonding cannot
O O
occur between molecules
H H H H
of these compounds, since
there is no O(cid:3)H bond.
O
The oxygen atom, however,
can accept hydrogen bonds
from water, as shown here.
Solubility in water Aldehydes and ketones with low molecular masses are very
soluble in water. Aldehydes and ketones with a large non-polar
hydrocarbon part are less soluble in water.
Melting and The boiling points of aldehydes and ketones are lower
boiling points than the boiling points of the corresponding alcohols. They are
higher than the boiling points of the corresponding alkanes.
Additional Characteristics of Aldehydes and Ketones
• In general, aldehydes have a strong pungent smell, while ketones
smell sweet. Aldehydes with higher molecular masses have a pleasant
smell. For example, cinnamaldehyde gives cinnamon its spicy smell.
(See Figure 1.20.) Aldehydes and ketones are often used to make
perfumes. The rose ketones (shown in Figure 1.21) provide up to 90%
of the characteristic rose odour. Perfumers mix organic compounds,
such as the rose ketones, to obtain distinctive and attractive scents.
• Since aldehydes and ketones are polar, they can act as polar solvents.
Because of the non-polar hydrocarbon part of their molecules, aldehydes
and ketones can also act as solvents for non-polar compounds. For
example, 2-propanone (common name: acetone) is an important organic
solvent in the chemical industry.
• Table 1.10 compares the boiling points of an alkane, an alcohol, and an
aldehyde with the same number of carbon atoms. You can see that the O
boiling point of an alcohol is much greater than the boiling point of an
alkane or an aldehyde. HC CH C H
Table 1.10 Comparing Boiling Points
Compound Structure Boiling point
propane CH CH CH 42.1˚C cinnamaldehyde
3 2 3
1-propanol CH CH CH OH 97.4˚C
3 2 2
Figure 1.20 Cinnemaldehyde
propanal CH CH CHO 48.8˚C
3 2 gives cinnamon its spicy smell.
O O
beta-ionone damascenone
O
Figure 1.21 The rose ketones
beta-damascone
provide the sweet smell of a rose.
Chapter 1 Classifying Organic Compounds • MHR 37
Tools & Techniques
Infrared Spectroscopy spectrum is formed for a molecule. The spectrum is
as specific to a certain molecule as your fingerprint
How do researchers know when they have produced
is to you. The table below shows some typical loca-
or discovered a new compound? How do they
tions for peaks on an infrared spectrum.
analyze the structure of a molecule?
A technique called infrared (IR) spectroscopy Table 1.11
is valuable in the study of organic compounds. This Bond or functional group Wavelength (µm)
technique allows researchers to determine the kinds O(cid:3)H 2.8–3.1
of bonds and functional groups that are present N(cid:3)H 2.9–3.0
in a molecule. Using a more advanced analysis, C(cid:3)H 3.4–3.5
researchers are even able to determine other groups carboxylic acid group 2.8–4.0 and 5.8–5.9
and bonds that are nearby. This information, paired aldehyde 3.4–3.7 and 5.7–5.8
with the molecular formula of a compound, helps ketone 5.8–5.9
ester 5.7–5.8 and 7.7–8.5
researchers puzzle out the precise structure of an
alkene 5.9–6.2
unknown molecule.
alkyne 4.5–4.8
An infrared spectrometer works by shining
haloalkane 13.4–20
infrared light through a sample of a compound.
Organic molecules absorb light at certain frequencies The shape of the peak for each functional group is
in the range of 450 nm to 4000 nm. A sensor on the affected by other groups and atoms in the vicinity.
other side of the sample detects the amount of light Examine the spectrum for 2-pentanone, shown
that is absorbed by the sample at each wavelength. below. This compound has many C(cid:3)H bonds, and
When a molecule absorbs light at a certain one C(cid:2)O bond. The jagged peak in the range of 3.4
frequency, it means that a specific bond is stretch- µm to 3.5 µm is caused by the various C(cid:3)H bonds
ing, bending, or vibrating. The frequency where in the molecule absorbing light and stretching. The
each bond absorbs light energy to stretch, bend, peak between 5.8 µm and 5.9 µm is caused by the
or vibrate is very specific. The absorption results in C(cid:2)O bond stretching.The peaks between 6.7 µm
a decrease in intensity of the light transmitted, as and 7.7 µm represent the C(cid:3)H bonds bending.
measured by the sensor. This is how an infrared
Wavelength, (µm)
2.2 2.3 2.4 2.5 2.62.72.82.9 3 3.5 4 4.5 5 5.5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17
100 0.0
0.5
80 0.1
0.2
60
0.3
40 0.4
0.5
20 0.7
1.0
0 2.0
4600 4200 3800 3400 3000 2600 2200 2000 1800 1600 1400 1200 1000 800 600
WAVENUMBERS (cm–1)
38 MHR • Unit 1 Organic Chemistry
Carboxylic Acids
You are already familiar with one carboxylic acid. In fact, you may
sprinkle it over your French fries or your salad, as shown in Figure 1.22.
Vinegar is a 5% solution of acetic acid in water. The IUPAC name for
acetic acid is ethanoic acid, CH COOH.
3
A carboxylic acid is an organic compound with the following
functional group:
O
C OH
This (cid:3)COOH group is called the carboxyl group. The general formula
for a carboxylic acid is R(cid:3)COOH. Figure 1.23 shows some common
carboxylic acids.
O O
HC OH CH C OH
3 Figure 1.22 Many salad
methanoic acid ethanoic acid dressings contain vinegar.
(common name: (common name:
formic acid) acetic acid)
O O
C OH O C OH O
HO C CH C CCHH C OH
2 22
OH
benzoic acid citric acid
Figure 1.23 Common carboxylic acids
To name a simple carboxylic acid, follow the steps below. Figure 1.24
gives some examples of carboxylic acid names.
How to Name a Carboxylic Acid
Step 1 Name the parent alkane.
Step 2 Replace the -e at the end of the name of the parent alkane with
COURSE
-oic acid. CHALLENGE
Step 3 The carbon atom of the carboxyl group is always given position In the Course Challenge at
number 1. Name and number the branches that are attached to the the end of this book, you will
compound. practise recognizing organic
compounds. Prepare a list
O O CH 3 of tips to help you recognize
each type of organic com-
CH CH CH C OH HO C CH CH CH CH
3 2 2 2 2 3 pound you have encountered.
4 3 2 1 1 2 3 4 5
butanoic acid 3-methylpentanoic acid
Figure 1.24 Examples of carboxylic acid names
Chapter 1 Classifying Organic Compounds • MHR 39
Practice Problems
Organic compounds that have
one or two carbon atoms are 34. Name each carboxylic acid.
usually known by their com-
O
mon names. These common
names are based on the Latin
(a) HO C CH CH
2 3
words formica(ant) and
acetum(vinegar). Give the
CH O
IUPAC names for 3
formaldehyde, formic acid,
(b) CH CH C C OH
3 2
acetaldehyde, and acetic acid.
CH
3
O
(c)
OH
35. Draw a condensed structural diagram for each carboxylic acid.
(a) hexanoic acid
(b) 3-propyloctanoic acid
(c) 3,4-diethyl-2,3,5-trimethylheptanoic acid
36. Draw a line structural diagram for each compound in question 35.
37. Draw and name two carboxylic acids with the molecular formula
C H O .
4 8 2
Table 1.12 lists some of the physical properties of carboxylic acids. Notice
that carboxylic acids have even stronger hydrogen bonding than alcohols.
Table 1.12 Physical Properties of Carboxylic Acids
Polarity of functional group Due to the presence of the polar O(cid:3)H and C(cid:2)O bonds,
carboxylic acids are polar compounds.
Hydrogen bonding The hydrogen bonding O CH
3
between carboxylic acid
H C
molecules is strong, as
shown here: O
O
Hydrogen bonding also
occurs between carboxylic
C H
acid molecules and
CH O
water molecules. 3
Solubility in water Carboxylic acids with low molecular masses are very
soluble in water. The first four simple carboxylic acids
(methanoic acid, ethanoic acid, propanoic acid, and
butanoic acid) are miscible with water.
Like alcohols, ketones, and aldehydes, the solubility
of carboxylic acids in water decreases as the number of
carbon atoms increases.
Melting and boiling points Because of the strong hydrogen bonds between
molecules, the melting and boiling points of carboxylic
acids are very high.
40 MHR • Unit 1 Organic Chemistry
Additional Characteristics of Carboxylic Acids
• Carboxylic acids often have unpleasant odours. For example, butanoic
acid has the odour of stale sweat.
• The (cid:3)OH group in a carboxylic acid does not behave like the basic
−
hydroxide ion, OH . Oxygen has a high electronegativity (attraction
to electrons) and there are two oxygen atoms in the carboxylic acid
functional group. These electronegative oxygen atoms help to carry the
extra negative charge that is caused when a positive hydrogen atom
dissociates. This is why the hydrogen atom in a carboxylic acid is able
to dissociate, and the carboxylic acid behaves like an acid.
O
R C O − + H O +
3
O H O
2
correct
R C OH
O
H O
2 R C + + OH − + H O
2
incorrect
• Figure 1.25 compares the melting and boiling points of a carboxylic
acid with the melting and boiling points of other organic compounds.
As you can see, the melting and boiling points of the carboxylic acid
are much higher than the melting and boiling points of the other
compounds. This is due to the exceptionally strong hydrogen bonding
between carboxylic acid molecules.
O O O
< < <
CH CH CH CH CH CH CH CH / CH CH CCH CH CH CH CH OH CH CH CH COH
3 2 2 3 3 2 2 3 2 3 3 2 2 2 3 2 2
b.p. −0.5˚C b.p. 75.7˚C b.p. 79.6˚C b.p. 117.2˚C b.p. 165.5˚C
m.p. −138.4˚C m.p. −99˚C m.p. −86.3˚C m.p. −89.5˚C m.p. −4.5˚C
alkane aldehyde/ketone alcohol carboxylic acid
Figure 1.25
Derivatives of Carboxylic Acids
Exchanging the hydroxyl group of a carboxylic acid with a different group
produces a carboxylic acid derivative. In the following investigation, you
will react two carboxylic acids with primary alcohols to produce different
organic compounds.
Chapter 1 Classifying Organic Compounds • MHR 41
S K I L L F O C U S
MICROSCALE Predicting
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
Preparing a Carboxylic
Acid Derivative
The reaction between a carboxylic acid and an distilled water
alcohol produces an organic compound that 6 mol/L sulfuric acid
you have not yet seen. In this investigation, you ethanoic acid (glacial acetic acid)
will prepare this new type of compound and butanoic acid
observe one of its properties. ethanol
1-propanol
Questions ice
What kind of compound will form in the reaction
Procedure
of a carboxylic acid with an alcohol? What
observable properties will the new compounds 1. Before starting the investigation, read through
have? the Procedure. Then prepare your equipment
as follows.
Safety Precautions (a) Make sure that all the glassware is very
clean and dry.
(b) Prepare a hot-water bath. Heat about
• The products of these reactions are very
125 mL of tap water in a 250 mL beaker
flammable. Before starting, make sure that
on the hot plate to 60˚C. Adjust the hot
there is no open flame in the laboratory. Use
plate so the temperature remains between
a hot plate, not a Bunsen burner.
50˚C and 60˚C.
• Carry out all procedures in a well-ventilated
(c) Prepare a cold-water bath. Place about
area. Use a fume hood for steps involving
125 mL of a mixture of water and ice
butanoic acid.
chips in the second 250 mL beaker.
• Concentrated sulfuric acid, ethanoic acid, and
As long as there are ice chips in the
butanoic acid are all extremely corrosive. Wear
water, the temperature of the cold-water
goggles, gloves, and an apron while performing
bath will remain around 0˚C.
this investigation. Treat the acids with
(d) Place about 5 mL of distilled water in a
extreme care. If you spill any acid on your
small beaker (or graduated cylinder). You
skin, wash it with plenty of cold water and
will use this in step 8.
notify your teacher.
(e) Set up the retort stand beside the hot-water
bath. Use one clamp to hold the thermo-
Materials
meter in the hot-water bath. Make sure that
retort stand with two clamps
the thermometer is not touching the walls
thermometer
or the bottom of the beaker. Use a stopper
hot plate
or wrap a piece of paper towel around the
2 small beakers (50 or 100 mL)
thermometer to hold the thermometer in
100 mL beaker
place carefully but firmly. You will use the
2 large beakers (250 mL)
other clamp to steady the micropipettes
4 plastic micropipettes
after you fill them with reaction mixture
2 graduated cylinders (10 mL)
and place them in the hot-water bath.
medicine dropper
stopper or paper towel
42 MHR • Unit 1 Organic Chemistry
(f) Label three pipettes according to each trial: 7. After 10 to 15 min in the hot-water bath, place
• ethanoic acid + ethanol the pipette in the cold-water bath. Allow it to
• ethanoic acid + 1-propanol cool for about 5 min.
• butanoic acid + ethanol
8. Carefully squeeze a few drops of the product
(g) Cut off the bulb of one of the micropip- onto a watch glass. Mix it with a few drops
pettes, halfway along the wide part of the of distilled water. To smell the odour of the
bulb (see the diagram below.) You will use compound, take a deep breath. Use your hand
the bulb as a cap to prevent vapours from to wave the aroma toward your nose as you
escaping during the reactions. breathe out. Record your observations of
the aroma.
2. Use the graduated cylinder to measure 1.0 mL
of ethanol into the 100 mL beaker. As you do 9. Repeat the procedure for the other two trials.
so, you will get a whiff of the odour of the ( CAUTION Butanoic acid has a strong odour.
alcohol. ( CAUTION Do not inhale the alcohol Do not attempt to smell it.)
vapour directly.) Record your observations. Note:While the first reaction mixture is being
heated, you may wish to prepare the other
3. Use the graduated cylinder to add 1.0 mL
mixtures and put them in the hot-water bath.
of ethanoic acid to the ethanol. As you do so,
Working carefully, you should be able to
you will get a whiff of the odour of the acid.
stabilize more than one micropipette with
( CAUTION Do not inhale the acid directly.)
the clamp. If you choose to do this, make sure
Record your observations.
that your materials are clearly labelled. Also
4. Your teacher will carefully add 4 drops of remember to keep a record of the time at which
sulfuric acid to the alcohol/acid mixture. each micropipette was introduced to the
hot-water bath.
5. Suction the mixture up into the appropriately
labelled micropipette. Invert the micropipette. 10. Dispose of all materials as your teacher directs.
Place it, bulb down, in the hot-water bath. Clean all glassware thoroughly with soap
(See the diagram below.) Place the cap over and water.
the tip of the pipette. Use a clamp to hold the
pipette in place. Analysis
thermometer
1. Make up a table to organize your data.
cap
What physical property did you observe?
micropipette 2. How do you know that a new product
clamp
was formed in each reaction? Explain.
Conclusion
beaker retort stand
3. Describe the odour of each product that was
water
hot plate formed. Compare the odours to familiar
odours (such as the odours of plants, flowers,
fruits, and animals) to help you describe them.
Application
4. Research the organic compounds that are
6. Leave the pipette in the hot water for about
responsible for the smell and taste of oranges,
10 min to 15 min. Use the thermometer to
pineapples, pears, oil of wintergreen, and
monitor the temperature of the hot water.
apples. Find and record the chemical
The temperature should stay between 50˚C
structure of each compound.
and 60˚C.
Chapter 1 Classifying Organic Compounds • MHR 43
Carboxylic Acid Derivatives
The strong-smelling compounds you prepared in Investigation 1-A do not
fit into any of the organic families you have studied so far. According to
their molecular formulas, however, they are isomers of carboxylic acids.
They are esters. Because an ester is obtained by replacing the (cid:3)OH
group of a carboxylic acid with a different group, it is called a derivative
of a carboxylic acid. Carboxylic acids have several important derivatives.
In this section, you will study two of these derivatives: esters and amides.
Esters
An ester is an organic compound that has the following functional group:
PROBEWARE
O
If you have access to
probeware, do Probeware R C O R′
Investigation 1-A, or a similar
The general formula for an ester is RCOOR′, where R is a hydrogen atom
investigation from a
or a hydrocarbon, and R′ is a hydrocarbon. You can think of an ester as
probeware company.
the product of a reaction between a carboxylic acid and an alcohol, as
shown in Figure 1.26.
O O
CH CH CH C OH + HO CH CH → CH CH CH C O CH CH + H O
3 2 2 2 3 3 2 2 2 3 2
carboxylic acid alcohol ester water
Figure 1.26 When heated, butanoic acid reacts with ethanol to produce an ester called
ethyl butanoate.
To name an ester, you must recognize that an ester can be thought of as
having two distinct parts. The main part of the ester contains the (cid:3)COO
group. This part comes from the parent acid. When numbering the main
chain of a carboxylic acid, the carbon atom in the carboxyl group is always
given position number 1. The second part of an ester is the alkyl group.
To name an ester, follow the steps below.
How to Name an Ester
Step 1 Identify the main part of the ester, which contains the C(cid:2)O group.
This part comes from the parent acid. Begin by naming the parent
acid.
Step 2 Replace the -oic acid ending of the name of the parent acid with
-oate.
Step 3 The second part of an ester is the alkyl group that is attached to the
oxygen atom. Name this as you would name any other alkyl group.
Step 4 Put the two names together. Note that esters are named as two
words. (See Figure 1.27.)
O
CH CH CH C O CH CH
3 2 2 2 3
parent acid alkyl group
Figure 1.27 The main part of this molecule is based on butanoic acid. The other part of the
ester is an ethyl group. The full name is ethyl-+-butanoate → ethyl butanoate
44 MHR • Unit 1 Organic Chemistry
Sample Problem
Naming and Drawing Esters
Problem
Name and draw three esters that have the molecular formula C H O .
4 8 2
Solution
O O
CH CH C O CH CH C O CH CH
3 2 3 3 2 3
methyl propanoate ethyl ethanoate
O
H C O CH CH CH
2 2 3
propyl methanoate
Practice Problems
38. Name each ester.
O
(a) CH 3 CH 2 O CH
O
(b) CH 3 CH 2 CH 2 C O CH 3
O
(c) CH CH CH CH C O CH CH CH CH CH
3 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 3
39. For each ester in the previous question, name the carboxylic acid and
the alcohol that are needed to synthesize it.
40. Draw each ester.
(a) methyl pentanoate
(b) heptyl methanoate
(c) butyl ethanoate
(d) propyl octanoate
(e) ethyl 3,3-dimethylbutanoate
41. Write the molecular formula of each ester in the previous question.
Which esters are isomers of each other?
42. Draw and name five ester isomers that have the molecular formula
C H O .
5 10 2
Table 1.13, on the next page, describes some of the physical properties
of esters. As you will see, esters have different physical properties than
carboxylic acids, even though esters and carboxylic acids are isomers of
each other.
Chapter 1 Classifying Organic Compounds • MHR 45
Table 1.13 Physical Properties of Esters
Polarity of functional group Like carboxylic acids, esters are usually polar molecules.
Hydrogen bonding Esters do not have an O(cid:3)H bond. Therefore, they cannot
form hydrogen bonds with other ester molecules.
Solubility in water Esters can accept hydrogen bonds from water. Therefore,
esters with very low molecular masses are soluble in
water. Esters with carbon chains that are longer than
three or four carbons are not soluble in water.
Melting and boiling points Because esters cannot form hydrogen bonds, they have
low boiling points. They are usually volatile liquids at
room temperature.
Additional Characteristics of Esters
• Esters often have pleasant odours and tastes, so they are used to
produce perfumes and artificial flavours. In fact, the characteristic tastes
and smells of many fruits come from esters. (See Figure 1.28.)
Amides
An ester can be thought of as the combination of a carboxylic acid and
an alcohol. Similarly, you can think of an amide as the combination of
a carboxylic acid and ammonia or an amine. An amide is an organic
compound that has a carbon atom double-bonded to an oxygen atom and
single-bonded to a nitrogen atom.
Amides have the functional group below:
O
C N
The general formula for an amide is R(cid:3)CO(cid:3)NR . R can stand for a
O 2
hydrogen atom or an alkyl group. Figure 1.29 gives some examples
of amides.
O
O O
HC NH CH C NH
Figure 1.28 Octyl ethanoate is 2 3 2
found in oranges.
methanamide ethanamide
O O
CH CH C NH CH CH C NH CH
3 2 2 3 2 3
propanamide N-methylpropanamide
Figure 1.29 Examples of amides
To name an amide, follow the steps on the next page. The Sample
Problem that follows illustrates how to use these steps. Later, Table 1.14
describes some physical properties of amides.
4466 MMHHRR •• UUnniitt 11 OOrrggaanniicc CChheemmiissttrryy
How to Name an Amide
Step 1 Locate the part of the amide that contains the C(cid:2)O group. Name
the parent carboxylic acid that this part derives from. Note: The
carbon in the C(cid:2)O group is always given position number 1.
Step 2 Replace the -oic acid ending of the name of the parent acid with the
suffix -amide.
Step 3 Decide whether the compound is a primary, secondary, or tertiary
amide:
• If there are two hydrogen atoms (and no alkyl groups) attached
to the nitrogen atom, the compound is a primary amide and
needs no other prefixes.
• If there is one alkyl group attached to the nitrogen atom, the
compound is a secondary amide. Name the alkyl group, and
give it location letter N- to indicate that it is bonded to the
nitrogen atom.
• If there are two alkyl groups, the compound is a tertiary amide.
Place the alkyl groups in alphabetical order. Use location letter
N- before each group to indicate that it is bonded to the nitrogen
atom. If the two groups are identical, use N,N-.
Step 4 Put the name together: prefix + root + suffix.
Sample Problem
Naming a Secondary Amide
Problem
Name the following compound.
O
CH CH C NH CH CH CH
3 2 2 3
CH
3
Solution
Step 1 The parent acid is 2-methylpropanoic acid.
O
CH CH C NH CH CH CH
3 2 2 3
CH
3
Step 2 The base name for this compound is 2-methylpropanamide.
(The root is -propan-, and the suffix is -amide.)
Step 3 A propyl group is attached to the nitrogen atom. Thus, the
compound’s prefix is N-propyl-.
Step 4 The full name of the compound is N-propyl-2-methylpropanamide.
Chapter 1 Classifying Organic Compounds • MHR 47
Practice Problems
43. Name each amide.
O
N
(a) CH CH CH C NH (c)
3 2 2 2
O
O
(b) H 3 C NH CCH 2 CH 2 CH 2 CH 2 CH 3
44. Draw each amide.
(a) nonanamide (c) N-ethyl-N-propylpropanamide
(b) N-methyloctanamide (d) N-ethyl-2,4,6-trimethyldecanamide
45. Name each amide.
(a) CH CONH (c) (CH ) CHCON(CH )
3 2 3 2 3 2
(b) CH CH CH CH CH CH CONHCH
3 2 2 2 2 2 3
46. Draw a line structural diagram for each amide in the previous question.
Table 1.14 Physical Properties of Amides
Polarity of functional group Because the nitrogen atom attracts electrons more
strongly than carbon or hydrogen atoms, the C(cid:3)N and
N(cid:3)H bonds are polar. As a result, the physical
properties of amides are similar to the physical
properties of carboxylic acids.
Hydrogen bonding Because primary amides have two N(cid:3)H bonds, they have
even stronger hydrogen bonds than carboxylic acids.
Secondary amides also experience hydrogen bonding.
Solubility in water Amides are soluble in water. Their solubility decreases
as the non-polar hydrocarbon part of the molecule
increases in size.
Melting and boiling points Primary amides have much higher melting and boiling
points than carboxylic acids. Many simple amides are
solid at room temperature.
Additional Characteristics of Amides
O
• An amide called acetaminophen is a main component of many
NH C CH painkillers.
3
• Urea, another common example of an amide, is made from the reaction
between carbon dioxide gas, CO , and ammonia, NH . Urea was the first
2 3
organic compound to be synthesized in a laboratory. It is found in the
urine of many mammals, including humans, and it is used as a fertilizer.
OH
acetaminophen Comparing Physical Properties
In this chapter, you have learned how to recognize many different types
of organic compounds. In the first section, you learned how to use polar
O
bonds and the shape of a molecule to determine its molecular polarity.
The following investigation allows you to apply what you have learned
H 2 N NH 2 to predict and compare the physical properties of various organic
urea compounds.
48 MHR • Unit 1 Organic Chemistry
S K I L L F O C U S
Predicting
Performing and recording
Comparing Physical Properties
In this investigation, you will examine the 2. Compare the alcohol you made with an
differences between molecules that contain alcohol that has a different number of carbon
different functional groups. As you have learned, atoms, made by a classmate. Which alcohol
the polarity and hydrogen bonding abilities of is more soluble in water, yours or your
each functional group affect how these molecules classmate’s? Which alcohol is more polar?
interact among themselves and with other Explain your reasoning.
molecules. You will examine the shape of each
3. Choose two of your compounds at random.
molecule and the effects of intermolecular forces
Which compound do you think has the higher
in detail to make predictions about properties.
melting point? Explain your reasoning.
Prediction 4. Consider all the compounds you made. Which
compound do you think is the most soluble in
How can you predict the physical properties of
water? Explain your reasoning.
an organic compound by examining its structure?
5. Which compound do you think is the most
Materials soluble in benzene? Explain your reasoning.
molecular model kit 6. Where possible, predict the odour of each
organic compound you made.
Procedure
Conclusions
1. Choose a parent alkane that has four to ten
carbon atoms (butane to decane). 7. Look up the boiling point, melting point,
and solubility of each compound in a refer-
2. By adding functional groups to your parent
ence book, such as The CRC Handbook
alkane, build a model of a molecule from each
of Chemistry and Physics. Compare your
class of organic compounds:
findings with the predictions you made in
• aromatic hydrocarbons (section 1.2) the Analysis.
• alcohols, ethers, amines (section 1.3)
8. Challenge a classmate to name each com-
• aldehydes, ketones, carboxylic acids, esters, pound you made and identify its functional
amides (section 1.4)
group.
3. Draw a condensed structural diagram and a line
structural diagram of each compound. Include Application
the IUPAC name of the compound. 9. Use reference books and the Internet to
discover any useful applications of the
Analysis compounds you made. Prepare a short report
1. Look at your aromatic hydrocarbon, your for your class, explaining how you think each
alcohol, your ether, and your carboxylic acid. compound’s physical properties may affect its
Rank these compounds from usefulness in real life.
• least polar to most polar
• lowest to highest boiling point
Record your rankings, and explain them.
Chapter 1 Classifying Organic Compounds • MHR 49
Section Summary
In this chapter, you learned how to recognize, name, and predict the
physical properties of organic compounds that belong to the alcohol,
ether, amine, aldehyde, ketone, carboxylic acid, ester, and amide families.
You discovered many important uses for organic compounds. You know
that 2-propanol (isopropyl alcohol) is used as an antiseptic. Acetone
Electronic Learning Partner (a ketone) is the main component of nail polish remover. Esters give many
fruits and processed foods their distinctive odours and tastes. In the next
The Chemistry 12 Electronic
chapter, you will learn about different chemical reactions that are typical
Learning Partner has a review
of each functional family. You will take a detailed look at some common
activity to practise naming
organic compounds in your life, and learn about some of the benefits and
functional groups.
risks of using organic compounds.
Section Review
1 K/U Write the IUPAC name for each compound.
O
(a) CH 3 OH (e) HCH
O
(b) CH 3 CH 2 OH (f) CH 3 C OH
OH CH
3
(c) CH CHCH (g)
3 3
O
(d) CH CCH
3 3
2 K/U Write the common name for each compound in question 1.
3 K/U Name each compound.
(a) O
O CH CH
2 3
(b) HO C CH CH CH CH CH
2 2 3
CH CH
2 3
O
(c) CH 3 CH 2 C NH CH 2 CH 3
O
(d) H C O C CH CH CH CH CH CH CH
3 2 2 2 2 2 2 3
50 MHR • Unit 1 Organic Chemistry
4 I Identify the family that each organic compound belongs to.
(a) CH CH CONH (c) CH CH C(CH ) CH CHO
3 2 2 3 2 3 2 2
(b) CH CH CH(CH )CH CH COOH (d) CH COOCH
3 2 3 2 2 3 3
5 K/U Name each organic compound in question 4.
6 C Draw and name one carboxylic acid and one ester with the
molecular formula C H O .
6 12 2
7 C Draw and name one primary amide, one secondary amide, and
one tertiary amide with the molecular formula C H ON.
6 13
8 I Identify the functional groups in each molecule.
(a) vanillin, a flavouring agent
OH
O CH
3
O CH
(b) DEET, an insect repellant
CH
3
O
C N CH CH
2 3
CH CH
2 3
(c) penicillin V, an antibiotic (This compound also contains a
functional group that is unfamiliar to you. Identify the atom(s)
in the unfamiliar functional group as part of your answer.)
NH S
O
O N
O
C
O OH
9 K/U Consider the compounds CH CH COH, CH CH COOH, and
3 2 3 2
CH COOCH . Which compound has the highest boiling point?
3 3
Use diagrams to explain your reasoning.
10 K/U How could you use your sense of smell to distinguish an amine
from a ketone?
Chapter 1 Classifying Organic Compounds • MHR 51
Review
Reflecting on Chapter 1 (a) Predict the shape around the central
carbon atom in each molecule.
Summarize this chapter in the format of your
(b) Identify any polar bonds that are present
choice. Here are a few ideas to use as guidelines:
• Explain the appropriate use of the terms in each molecule.
(c) Describe each molecule as polar or
“natural,” “organic,” and “chemical.”
• Explain how the polarity of a molecule depends non-polar.
on its shape and on any polar bonds that are 3. Classify each molecule as polar or non-polar.
present. (a) CH 3 OH (c) CH 3 NH 2 (e) H 2 C(cid:2)O
• Describe the shape and structure of a benzene (b) CH 3 CH 3 (d) H 2 C(cid:2)CH 2
molecule. 4. Describe, in words, the functional group for
• Draw and name an example of an alcohol, each type of organic compound.
an alkyl halide, an ether, and an amine. (a) alkene (c) amine (e) carboxylicacid
• Draw and name an example of an aldehyde, (b) alcohol (d) ketone
a ketone, a carboxylic acid, an ester, and an
5. Give the general formula for each type of
amide.
organic compound.
(a) alcohol (c) ester
Reviewing Key Terms
(b) amine (d) amide
For each of the following terms, write a sentence
6. What is the difference between each two
that shows your understanding of its meaning.
organic compounds?
organic chemistry organic compounds
(a) alcohol and ether
tetrahedral trigonal planar
(b) amine and amide
linear bent
(c) carboxylic acid and ester
bond dipole polar
(d) cyclic alkene and benzene
molecular polarity hydrocarbons
7. What is the difference between a saturated
aliphatic hydrocarbon aromatic hydrocarbon
compound and an unsaturated compound?
alkane cycloalkane
alkene functional group 8. Use the suffix to name the functional family
alkyne alkyl group of each type of organic compound.
(cid:3)OH (hydroxyl) group general formula (a) ethanamine
intermolecular forces hydrogen bonding (b) 2,3-dimethyloctane
dipole-dipole dispersion forces (c) cyclohexanol
interactions (d) methyl propanoate
alcohol parent alkane (e) N-methylpentanamide
alkyl halide (haloalkane) ether (f) 3-ethyl heptanoic acid
alkoxy group amine 9. Identify the functional group(s) in each
carbonyl group aldehyde molecule.
ketone carboxylic acid OH NH
2
carboxyl group derivative
ester amide (a) CH 3 CH 2 CHCH 2 CH 3 (b)
Knowledge/Understanding (c) CH 3 CH CH CH CH 3
1. What is an organic compound? CH
2
2. Examine the following molecules. Then answer
O C
the questions below.
O O CH 3
O
CH CH C CH CH CH CH
4 3 3 3 2
(d) HCC C CH 2 C CH 2 CH 2 O CH 3
52 MHR • Unit 1 Organic Chemistry
O 13.(a) Suppose that you have an alcohol and a
ketone with the same molecular mass.
(e)
Which compound has a higher boiling point?
NH
(b) Use your understanding of hydrogen
bonding to explain your answer to part (a).
Cl
14.(a) Benzene is a non-polar solvent. Is an alcohol
COOH
or an alkane more soluble in benzene?
(b) Use molecular polarity to explain your
(f) CH CH CHCH CH CHO
3 2 2 2
answer to part (a).
10. Classify each type of organic compound.
15. Give the IUPAC name for each compound.
(a) CH 3 NH 2 OH
Br
(b) CH CH CHCH
3 2 3
(a) CH CH CH (b)
CH CH 3 3
2 3
O
O
(c) HO C CH 2 CH 2 CH 2 CH 3
(c) CH 3 CH 2 CH
O
O
(d) CH 3 CH 2 C O CH 2 CH 3
(d) CH O C CH CH CH
3 2 3 CH CH O
3 3
CH
3 (e) CH CH C CH C CH CH
3 2 2 3
O CH CH
2 3
CH CH
2 3
(e) HO C CH CH CH
2 3
16. Name each compound. Then identify the
family of organic compounds that it belongs to.
O
CH CH
3 3
(f) CH 3 CH(CH 3 )CH 2 CCH 3
(a) (c)
11. Identify each alcohol as primary, secondary,
or tertiary. CH
3
OH CH
3 CH CH
2 3
OH
(a) CH CH CH (c)
3 3
CH (b) (d) OH
3 OH
(b) CH 3 CH 2 C OH (d) OH O
CH
CH CH 3
2 3
12. Identify each amine as primary, secondary, (e) CH 3 CH 2 CH 2 CH 2 N CH 2 CH 3
or tertiary.
O
CH CH
3 3
N
(f) CH 3 CH 2 C NH CH 2 CH 2 CH 2 CH 3
(a) NH 2 (c)CH 3 CH 2 CH CH 3
(b) CH NH CH (d)
3 3
N
CH
3
Chapter 1 Classifying Organic Compounds • MHR 53
17. Give the common name for each compound. 20. Draw a structural diagram for each compound.
(a) 3,4-dimethylheptanoic acid
(b) 3-ethyl-3-methyl-1-pentyne
(a) (d) (c) N-ethyl-2,2-dimethyl-3-octanamine
(d) N-ethyl-N-methylhexanamide
(e) 1,3-dibromo-5-chlorobenzene
(b) (e) 21. Draw a structural diagram for each compound.
Then identify the family of organic compounds
that it belongs to.
(a) 4-ethylnonane
(c) (f) (b) 4-propylheptanal
(c) 3,3-dimethyl-2-hexanamine
Inquiry (d) 2-methoxypentane
18. Suppose that you are working with five (e) para-dimethylbenzene
unknown compounds in a chemistry laboratory. 22. Identify the error in each name. Then correct
Your teacher tells you that these compounds the name.
are ethane, ethanol, methoxymethane, (a) 2-pentanal
ethanamine, and ethanoic acid. (b) 1,3-dimethylpropane
(a) Use the following table of physical proper- (c) 2,2-dimethylbenzene
ties to identify each unknown compound. (d) N,N-diethyl-N-methylpentanamide
(e) 1-methylpropanoic acid
23. Draw and name all the isomers that have the
Solubility
in water molecular formula C 4 H 10 O.
infinitely strong 17˚C fishy polar 24. Draw and name six isomers that have the
A
soluble molecular formula C H O .
4 8 2
not none −89˚C odourless non-polar
B
soluble
Making Connections
soluble accepts hydrogen −25˚C sweet polar
bonds from water, 25. List at least three common organic compounds.
but cannot form
C Describe how these compounds are used in
hydrogen bonds
between its everyday life.
molecules
26. The terms “organic,” “chemical,” and “natural”
infinitely very strong 78˚C sharp, very polar have slightly different meanings in science
D soluble antiseptic
smell than they do in everyday life.
infinitely extremely strong 118˚C sharp, very polar (a) Compare the use of the term “organic” in the
E soluble vinegar phrases “organic vegetables” and “organic
smell
compound.” Where might each phrase be
(b) Draw a complete structural diagram for each used?
compound. (b) Are chemicals harmful when added to food?
In your answer, consider the true meaning of
Communication
the word “chemical.”
19. Draw a condensed structural diagram for each (c) Are natural compounds always safer and
compound. more healthy than artificial compounds?
(a) 1-propanamine (g) 1,1-dibromobutane Give reasons for your answer.
(b) 3-ethylpentane (h) 2-methyl-3-octanone
(c) 4-heptanol (i) hexanal
(d) propanoic acid (j) N-ethylpropanamide
(e) cyclobutanol (k) methyl butanoate
(f) methoxyethane
54 MHR • Unit 1 Organic Chemistry
dnuopmoC
O
OH
C
H CH CH CH 3 3
Boiling Molecular
Hydrogen bonding point Odour polarity
H
O
CH 3 CH 2 OH CH 3 C OH
O
CH OH CH C CH 3 3 3
Answers to Practice Problems and 2,3-dimethycyclobutene, 1-ethylcyclobutene,
Short Answers to Section Review Questions: 3-ethylcyclobutene 7.1-pentene, cyclopentane,
Practice Problems: 3.C (cid:3) O, O (cid:3) H, C (cid:2) O 4.polar, trans-2-pentene, cis-2-pentene, 2-methyl-2-butene,
non-polar, non-polar, polar 5.(a)ethane (b)cyclobutene 2-methyl-1-butene, 3-methyl-1-butene, methylcyclobutane,
(c)2-methyl-2-pentene (d)3-methylhexane ethylcyclopropane, 1,1-dimethylcyclopropane,
(e)3-ethyl-2-methyl-2-heptene (f)1,2-dimethylcyclohexane 1,2-dimethylcyclopropane 1.3:1.(a)1-butanamine
(g)2-pentyne 7.(a)2,2,3-trimethylbutane (b)2-ethoxybutane (c)2,3-dimethylcyclopentanol
(b)5-ethyl-3-methylnonane 2.(a)1-heptanol (b)2-butanol (c)ethanamine
(c)3-methyl-4,5-diethyl-2-nonene 8.(a)3-hexene (d)N-methylmethanamine (e)methoxyethane
(b)2,4-hexadiyne 9.(a)3-methyl-2-hexene (f)2-chloropropane 4.1-butanol, 2-butanol, 2-methyl-2-
(b)4-methyl-2-heptene (c)2-methylpentane propanol, methoxypropane, ethoxyethane 5.(a)ethanol >
10.1,3,5-trimethylbenzene 12.(a) meta-ethylmethylbenzene methoxymethane > ethane (b)1-propanamine > N,N-
13.some isomers include ortho-, meta-, and para-diethyl- dimethylmethanamine > propane 6.cyclohexanol
benzene; 1,2,3,4-tetramethylbenzene; and 7.propane, 2-propanol; propane
1-methyl-2-propylbenzene 14.(a)1-propanol; primary 8.1-butanol > ethoxyethane > butane 1.4:1.(a)methanol
(b)2-butanol; secondary (c)cyclobutanol; secondary (b)ethanol (c)2-propanol (d)2-propanone (e)methanal
(d)2,3-pentanediol; secondary (e)2,4-dimethyl-1-heptanol; (f)ethanoic acid (g)methylbenzene 2.(a)wood alcohol
primary 16.(a)1,3-pentanediol (b)3,4-diethyl-1-decanol, (b)grain alcohol (c)rubbing alcohol (d)acetone
(c)3-methyl-2-pentanol 19.1,2-difluorocyclohexane (e)formaldehyde (f)acetic acid (g)toluene 3.(a)pentanal
20.1-iodopropane 21.2-iodopropane 22.(a)methoxymethane (b)2,3-diethylhexanoic acid (c)N-ethylpropanamide
(b)2-methoxypropane (c)1-methoxybutane 23.(a)ethyl (d)methyl octanoate 4.(a)amide (b)carboxylic acid
methyl ether (b)dimethyl ether 25.alcohol (c)aldehyde (d)ester 5.(a)propanamide (b)4-methylhexanoic
26.(a)methanamine (b)N-ethyl-2,2-dimethyl-1-propanamine acid (c)3,3-dimethylpentanal (d)methyl ethanoate
(c)2-butanamine (d)N,N-dimethylcyclopentanamine 6.hexanoic acid, propyl propanoate
28.(a)primary (b)primary (c)secondary (d)tertiary 7.hexanamide, N-methylpentanamide,
29.1-butanamine, 2-butanamine, 2-methyl-1-propanamine, N,N-dimethylbutanamide 8.(a)benzene ring, methoxy
N-methyl-1-propanamine, N-methyl-2-propanamine, group, aldehyde group, hydroxyl group (b)benzene ring,
N-ethylethanamine, N,N-dimethylethanamine, amide group (c)benzene ring, ether linkage, two amide
2-methyl-2-propanamine 30.(a)butanal (b)3-octanone groups, acid group, sulfur atom 9.CH 3 CH 2 COOH
(c)2-methyl-3-hexanone (d)2-ethylbutanal 10.An amine has a distinctive “fishy” smell. A ketone
(e)4-ethyl-3-methyl-2-heptanone 32.aldehyde 33.hexanal, smells sweet.
2-hexanone, 3-hexanone, 3-methyl-2-pentanone,
3,3-dimethylbutanal; many other isomers are possible
34.(a)propanoic acid (b)2,2-dimethylbutanoic acid
(c)2-ethyl-4,5-dimethylhexanoic acid 37.butanoic acid,
2-methylpropanoic acid 38.(a)ethyl methanoate (b)methyl
butanoate (c)pentyl pentanoate 41.(a)and (c); (b) and (e)
42.methyl butanoate, ethyl propanoate, propyl ethanoate,
butyl methanoate, methyl 2-methylpropanoate; other iso-
mers exist 43.(a)butanamide (b)N-methylhexanamide
(c)N,N-diethyl-3-methylheptanamide 45.(a)ethanamide
(b)N-methyheptanamide
(c)N,N-dimethyl-2-methylpropanamide
Section Review: 1.1: 2.(a) polar (b)non-polar (c)polar
(d)non-polar (e)polar 3.(a)tetrahedral (b)trigonal planar
4.(a)non-polar (b)polar 1.2: 1.(a)heptane
(b)3,4-diethyloctane (c)4-methyl-1-pentene,
(d)ethylbenzene 3.butane, 2-methylpropane 5.1-hexyne,
2-hexyne, 3-hexyne, cyclohexene, 1-methylcyclopentene,
3-methylcyclopentene, 4-methylcyclopentene,
1,2-dimethylcyclobutene, 1,3-dimethylcyclobutene,
Chapter 1 Classifying Organic Compounds • MHR 55
Reactions of Organic
Compounds
C
Chapter Preview ancer is one of the leading causes of death in Canada. It is a disease in
which cells mutate and grow at uncontrolled rates, disrupting the body’s
2.1 The Main Types of normal functions. TAXOL, shown at the bottom of the page, is an organic
Organic Reactions
compound that is found in the bark of the Pacific yew tree. After many tests
2.2 Reactions of and reviews, TAXOLwas approved for use in treating ovarian cancer.
Functional Groups The bark of a large yew tree yields only enough TAXOL for a single
2.3 Molecules on a treatment. However, cancer patients require repeated treatments over a
Larger Scale:
long period of time. Working in a laboratory, chemists found the first
Polymers and
solution to this problem. They developed several different methods to
Biomolecules
make, or synthesize, TAXOL, from simple, widely available chemicals.
2.4 Organic Compounds
Unfortunately, these methods are expensive and time-consuming.
and Everyday Life
When studying the Pacific yew’s close relative, the European yew,
chemists made an exciting discovery that led to the second solution.
The needles and twigs of the European yew contain 10-deacetylbaccatin
Prerequisite III, shown at the bottom of the page. A few reaction steps can transform
Concepts and Skills 10-deacetylbaccatin III into TAXOL. Instead of destroying an entire
Before you begin this chapter, Pacific yew tree for a single treatment of TAXOL, scientists can now
review the following concepts use the needles from a European yew. The parent tree is not harmed.
and skills: As you have already learned, the study of organic chemistry is really
(cid:2) identifying functional the study of functional groups. Each functional group undergoes specific,
groups (Chapter 1, predictable reactions. Chemists used their knowledge of functional groups
sections 1.3 and 1.4) to design the reactions that convert 10-deacetylbaccatin III into TAXOL.
(cid:2) naming and drawing In this chapter, you will learn how to predict the products of various
organic compounds organic reactions, such as addition, substitution, and elimination reactions.
(Chapter 1, sections 1.3
and 1.4)
O
CH3 O
HO O OH
O O OH
NH O HO
O
O HO O O O
OH O
OHO O O O C CH3
O C CH3
10-deacetylbaccatin III
TAXOL™
56 MHR • Unit 1 Organic Chemistry
The Main Types 2.1
of Organic Reactions
Figure 2.1(A) shows raw fruit. The crisp, sharp-tasting fruit becomes soft Section Preview/
and sweet when it is cooked. Figure 2.1(B) shows a chemist accelerating Specific Expectations
the tranformation of ethanol into ethanoic acid, by adding potassium In this section, you will
dichromate and sulfuric acid.
(cid:2) describedifferent types of
What do these reactions have in common? They are both examples of organic reactions, including
organic reactions. In this section, you will take a quick look at the main addition, substitution,
types of organic reactions. You will concentrate on simply recognizing elimination, oxidation, and
these types of organic reactions. In the next section, you will examine the reduction
reactions of specific functional groups and learn how to predict the prod- (cid:2) predictthe products of
ucts of organic reactions. organic reactions, including
addition, substitution,
elimination, oxidation, and
reduction
(cid:2) communicateyour under-
standing of the following
terms: addition reaction,
substitution reaction,
elimination reaction,
oxidation, reduction,
condensation reaction,
hydrolysis reaction
A B
Figure 2.1 Organic reactions take place all around you, not only in a science lab.
Addition, Substitution, and Elimination Reactions
Addition reactions, substitution reactions, and elimination reactions are
the three main types of organic reactions. Most organic reactions can be
classified as one of these three types.
Addition Reactions
In an addition reaction, atoms are added to a double or triple bond. One
bond of the multiple bond breaks so that two new bonds can form. To
recognize an addition reaction, remember that two compounds usually
react to form one major product. (Sometimes two isomers are formed.)
The product has more atoms bonded to carbon atoms than the organic
reactant did. A general example of addition to an alkene is given below.
X Y
CH CH + XY → CH CH
Addition reactions are common for alkenes and alkynes. Addition
reactions can also occur at a C(cid:2)O bond. Some examples of addition
reactions are shown on the next page.
Chapter 2 Reactions of Organic Compounds • MHR 57
Example 1
Br H
H H
+ →
C C HBr H C C H
H H
H H
ethene hydrobromic acid bromoethane
Example 2 Br Br
H C C CH CH + Br → H C C CH CH
2 3 2 2 3
butyne bromine 1,2-dibromobutene
Substitution Reactions
In a substitution reaction, a hydrogen atom or a functional group is
replaced by a different functional group. To help you recognize this
You can express an addition
type of reaction, remember that two compounds usually react to form
reaction algebraically, using
the equation a + b → ab. two different products. The organic reactant(s) and the organic product(s)
Come up with similar have the same number of atoms bonded to carbon.
equations for substitution
and elimination reactions.
C X + AY → C Y + AX
Alcohols, alkyl halides, and aromatic compounds commonly undergo
substitution reactions, as shown in these examples.
Example 1
CH CH OH + HI → CH CH I + HOH
3 2 3 2
ethanol hydroiodic acid iodoethane water
Example 2
Br NH
2
CH CH CH CH + NH → CH CH CH CH + HBr
3 2 3 3 3 2 3
2-bromobutane ammonia 2-butanamine hydrobromic
acid
Example 3
H NO
2
H H H H
+ HNO → + HOH
2
H H H H
H H
benzene nitrous acid nitrobenzene water
58 MHR • Unit 1 Organic Chemistry
Elimination Reactions
In an elimination reaction, atoms are removed from a molecule to form a
double bond. This type of reaction is the reverse of an addition reaction.
One reactant usually breaks up to give two products. The organic product
typically has fewer atoms bonded to carbon atoms than the organic
reactant did.
X Y
C C → C C + XY
Alcohols often undergo elimination reactions when they are heated in
the presence of strong acids, such as sulfuric acid, H SO , which acts
2 4
as a catalyst. (See the first example below.) Alkyl halides also undergo
elimination reactions to produce alkenes. (See the second example.)
Example 1
H In the first example of an
H OH H elimination reaction, the strong
H C H acid, HSO, does not count
H SO 2 4
H C C C H 2 4 + HOH as a reactant. It is not directly
C C
H involved in the reaction. It is
H H H H H a catalyst: a compound that
speeds up a reaction but is not
2-propanol propene water
consumed by it.
Example 2
H Br
H H
H C C H → C C + HBr
H H
H H
bromoethane ethene hydrobromic acid
Oxidation and Reduction
An important type of organic reaction occurs when there is a change in
the number of hydrogen or oxygen atoms that are bonded to carbon. In
Unit 5, you will take a close look at oxidation-reduction reactions in terms
of the transfer of electrons. As you will learn, oxidation and reduction
always occur together. One reactant is oxidized while the other reactant
is reduced. In this unit, however, you will focus on the organic reactant
only. Therefore, you will deal with oxidation and reduction separately, as
they apply to organic compounds. In organic chemistry, oxidation and
reduction are defined by the changes of the bonds to carbon atoms in the
organic reactant.
Chapter 2 Reactions of Organic Compounds • MHR 59
Oxidation
In organic chemistry, oxidation is defined as a reaction in which a carbon
atom forms more bonds to oxygen, O, or less bonds to hydrogen, H. An
oxidation that involves the formation of double C(cid:2)O bonds may also be
classified as an elimination reaction.
For example, alcohols can be oxidized to produce aldehydes and
ketones. Oxidation occurs when an organic compound reacts with an
oxidizing agent. Common oxidizing agents include acidified potassium
permanganate, KMnO , acidified potassium dichromate, K Cr O , and
4 2 2 7
ozone, O . The symbol [O] is used to symbolize an oxidizing agent, as
3
shown below. Note that equations for the oxidation of organic compounds
are often left unbalanced. The purpose of the equation is to show the
changes in the organic reactant only.
OH O
C H + [O] → C
alcohol oxidizing agent aldehyde or ketone
O O
C + [O] → C
H OH
aldehyde oxidizing agent carboxylic acid
To identify an oxidation, count and compare the number of C(cid:3)H
and C(cid:3)O bonds in both the reactant and product. Try it for the
following example.
H OH H O
H C C H + [O] → H C C H
H H H
ethanol ethanal
Reduction
In organic chemistry, reduction is defined as a reaction in which a
carbon atom forms fewer bonds to oxygen, O, or more bonds to hydrogen,
H. Often, a C(cid:2)O bond or C(cid:2)C bond is reduced to a single bond by
reduction. A reduction that transforms double C(cid:2)C or C(cid:2)O bonds to
single bonds may also be classified as an addition reaction. Aldehydes,
ketones, and carboxylic acids can be reduced to become alcohols. Alkenes
and alkynes can be reduced by the addition of H to become alkanes.
2
Reduction occurs when an organic compound reacts with a reducing
agent. Common reducing agents are lithium aluminum hydride, LiAlH ,
4
and hydrogen gas over a platinum catalyst, H /Pt. The symbol [H] is used
2
to symbolize a reducing agent. As is the case for oxidation, equations
showing the reduction of organic compounds are often left unbalanced.
60 MHR • Unit 1 Organic Chemistry
O OH
C + [H] → C H
aldehyde or ketone reducing agent alcohol
H H
+ →
C C [H] C C
alkene reducing agent alkane
To identify a reduction, count and compare the number of C(cid:3)H and
C(cid:3)O bonds in both the reactant and the product. Try it for the following
example.
O OH
H C C CH + [H] → H C C CH
3 3 3 3
H
propanone 2-propanol
CHEM
FACT
Other Important Organic Reactions
When you see two arrows
In this chapter, you will also encounter the following classes of organic that point in opposite directions
reactions: condensation reactions and hydrolysis reactions. Condensation in a chemical equation, the
and hydrolysis reactions are both types of substitution reactions. reaction can proceed in both
directions. This type of reaction
Condensation Reactions is called an equilibrium
reaction. You will learn more
In a condensation reaction, two organic molecules combine to form a
about equilibrium reactions
single organic molecule. A small molecule, usually water, is produced
in Unit 4.
during the reaction. For example, a carboxylic acid and an alcohol can
condense to form an ester.
O CH O CH
3 3
H SO
H C C OH + HO CH CH CH CH 2 4 H C C O CH CH CH CH + H O
3 2 2 3 3 2 2 3 2
carboxylic acid alcohol ester water
Hydrolysis Reactions
In a hydrolysis reaction, water adds to a bond, splitting it in two. This
reaction is the reverse of a condensation reaction. For example, water
can add to an ester or amide bond. A carboxylic acid and an alcohol are
produced if an ester bond is hydrolyzed, as shown in the example below.
A carboxylic acid and an amine are produced if an amide bond
is hydrolyzed.
O CH O CH
3 3
H SO
2 4
H C C O CH CH CH CH + H O H C C OH + HO CH CH CH CH
3 2 2 3 2 3 2 2 3
ester water carboxylic acid alcohol
The following Sample Problems show how to identify different types of
organic reactions.
Chapter 2 Reactions of Organic Compounds • MHR 61
Sample Problem
Identifying Addition, Substitution, and Elimination Reactions
Problem
Identify each reaction as an addition, substitution, or elimination reaction.
(a) HO(cid:3)CH CH CH → CH (cid:2)CHCH + H O
2 2 3 2 3 2
(b) H C(cid:2)CHCH CH + H → CH CH CH CH
2 2 3 2 3 2 2 3
(c) CH CH(CH )CH CH Br + NaOH →CH CH(CH )CH CH OH + NaBr
3 3 2 2 3 3 2 2
Solution
(a) A double bond is formed. One reactant becomes two products.
The organic product has fewer atoms bonded to carbon. Thus,
this reaction is an elimination reaction.
(b) A double bond becomes a single bond. Two reactants become one
product. The organic product has more atoms bonded to carbon.
Thus, this reaction is an addition reaction.
(c) No double bond is broken or formed. Two reactants form two
products. An atom in the organic reactant (Br) is replaced by a
different group of atoms (OH). Thus, this is a substitution reaction.
Sample Problem
Identifying Oxidation and Reduction
Problem
Identify each reaction as an oxidation or a reduction. (The oxidizing and
reducing agents are not shown.)
O OH OH O
(a) CH CH CH CH → CH CH CH CH (b)
3 2 2 3 2 2 2 →
Solution
(a) Count the number of C(cid:3)H bonds and C(cid:3)O bonds in the reactant
and in the product.
Reactant: 8 C(cid:3)H bonds, 2 C(cid:3)O bonds (or 1 C(cid:2)O bond)
Product: 9 C(cid:3)H bonds, 1 C(cid:3)O bond
The product has gaineda C(cid:3)H bond and losta C(cid:3)O bond. Thus,
this is a reduction.
(b) Count the number of C(cid:3)H bonds and C(cid:3)O bonds in the reactant
and in the product. Although the C(cid:3)H bonds are not shown, you
know that a carbon atom forms a total of four bonds.
Reactant: 11 C(cid:3)H bonds, 1 C(cid:3)O bond
Product: 10 C(cid:3)H bonds, 2 C(cid:3)O bonds (or 1 C(cid:2)O bond)
The product has losta C(cid:3)H bondand gaineda C(cid:3)O bond.
Thus, this is an oxidation.
62 MHR • Unit 1 Organic Chemistry
Practice Problems
1. Identify each reaction as an addition, substitution, or elimination
reaction.
OH Br
(a) CH CH CH CH + HBr → CH CH CH CH + HOH
3 2 3 3 2 3
(b) CH Cl Cl CH
3 3
CH CH CH CH CH + Cl → CH CH CH CH CH
3 3 2 3 3
Cl
(c) → + HCl
2. Identify each reaction as an oxidation or a reduction. The oxidizing
and reducing agents are not shown.
(a) CH O CH O
3 3
CH CH CH CH CH → CH CH CH CH C OH
3 2 3 2
CH CH CH CH
2 3 2 3
CH
CH CH CH 3
3 2 3
(b) C C → CH CH CH CHCH
3 2 2 3
H CH
3
O OH
→
(c)
O OH
3. Classify each reaction in two different ways: for example, as
oxidation andas an elimination reaction.
CH H
3
(a) C C + H → CH CH CH CH CH
2 3 2 2 2 3
H CH CH
2 3
O O
(b) CH C OH + HO CH CH C O CH + HOH
3 3 3 3
4. Identify the type of reaction.
OH
(a) CH CH CH + HOH → CH CH CH
3 2 3 3
OH O
(b) CH CH CH CH CH → CH CH C CH CH
3 2 2 3 3 2 2 3
Chapter 2 Reactions of Organic Compounds • MHR 63
Section Summary
In this section, you were introduced to some of the main types of organic
reactions: addition, substitution, and elimination reactions; oxidation and
reduction; and condensation and hydrolysis reactions. In the next section,
you will take a close look at each type of reaction. You will find out how
organic compounds, such as alcohols and carboxylic acids, can react in
several different ways.
Section Review
1 K/U Identify each reaction as an addition, substitution, or
elimination reaction.
Br Br
(a) H C CH + Br → H C CH
2 2 2 2 2
OH
(b) CH CH CHCH → CH CH CHCH + H O
3 2 3 3 3 2
FeBr
(c) + Cl 3 + HCl
2
Cl
(d) CH CH CH Br + H NCH CH → CH CH CH NHCH CH + HBr
3 2 2 2 2 3 3 2 2 2 3
2 K/U Identify each reaction as an oxidation or a reduction.
(Oxidizing and reducing agents are not shown.)
O
(a) CH CH CH OH → CH CH CH
3 2 2 3 2
O OH
(b) CH CH CCH → CH CH CHCH
3 2 3 3 2 3
(c) H C CHCH → CH CH CH
2 3 3 2 3
O O
(d) H → OH
(e) CH C CCH → CH CH CH CH
3 3 3 2 2 3
3 (a) K/U Draw a complete structural diagram for each compound that
is involved in the following reaction.
N-ethylpentanamide+ water → pentanoicacid + ethanamine
(b) K/U Is this reaction a condensation reaction or a hydrolysis
reaction? Explain your reasoning.
4 C In your own words, describe each type of organic reaction.
Include an example for each type.
(a) addition (b) substitution (c) elimination
5 C The following reaction can be classified as an addition reaction.
It can also be classified as a reduction. Explain why this reaction fits
into both classes.
CH CH CHCH + H → CH CH CH CH
3 3 2 3 2 2 3
64 MHR • Unit 1 Organic Chemistry
Reactions of Functional Groups 2.2
In the past, mirrors were rare and valuable, made from sheets of polished Section Preview/
copper or silver. Although they were expensive, they usually produced Specific Expectations
only warped and dim images. Modern mirrors are everywhere. They are In this section, you will
cheaply made of glass, with a very thin layer of silver over the back of the
(cid:2) describevarious addition,
glass. Because the surface of the glass and the layer of silver are so substitution, elimination,
smooth, the image is almost perfect. One method for depositing a thin oxidation, reduction,
layer of silver over glass is shown in Figure 2.2. condensation, and
hydrolysis reactions
(cid:2) predict, draw, and namethe
products of various organic
reactions
(cid:2) investigatethe oxidation of
alcohols
(cid:2) communicateyour under-
standing of the following
terms: Markovnikov’s rule,
esterification reaction
Figure 2.2 The “silver mirror test” is used to distinguish an aldehyde from a ketone.
Tollen’s reagent, Ag(NH)OH, acts as an oxidizing agent. When it is mixed with an aldehyde,
32
the aldehyde oxidizes to the salt of a carboxylic acid. The silver ions in Tollen’s reagent are
reduced to silver atoms, and coat the glass of the reaction container with solid silver metal.
In this section, you will learn how to predict the reactions of different
functional groups. You studied the most common reaction of alkanes,
combustion, in your previous chemistry course. For this reason, the
reactions of alkanes will not be considered here. The reactions of amines
and ethers will be left for a later chemistry course.
Reactions of Alkenes and Alkynes
Because alkenes and alkynes have reactive double or triple bonds, they
undergo addition reactions. Some common atoms and groups of atoms
that can be added to a double or triple bond include
• H and OH (from H O)
2
• H and X (from HX), where X = Cl, Br, or I
• X and X (from X ), where X = Cl, Br, or I
2
• H and H (from H )
2
Depending on which atoms are added to the multiple bond, the product
may be an alcohol, alkyl halide, alkane, or alkene (if atoms are added to a
triple bond).
Chapter 2 Reactions of Organic Compounds • MHR 65
Addition to Alkenes
The product of an addition reaction depends on the symmetry of the
reactants. A symmetrical alkene has identical groups on either side of the
double bond. Ethene, CH (cid:2)CH , is an example of a symmetrical alkene.
2 2
An alkene that has different groups on either side of the double bond is
called an asymmetrical alkene. Propene, CH CH(cid:2)CH , is an example of
3 2
an asymmetrical alkene.
The molecules that are added to a multiple bond can also be classified
as symmetrical or asymmetrical. For example, chlorine, Cl , breaks into
2
two identical parts when it adds to a multiple bond. Therefore, it is a
symmetrical reactant. Water, HOH, breaks into two different groups (H and
OH) when it adds to a multiple bond, so it is an asymmetrical reactant.
In Figures 2.3 and 2.4, at least one of the reactants is symmetrical.
When one or more reactants in an addition reaction are symmetrical, only
one product is possible.
OH H
CH CH CHCH + HOH → CH CH CHCH
3 3 3 3
2-butene water 2-butanol
(symmetrical) (asymmetrical)
Figure 2.3 The addition of water to 2-butene
Cl Cl
+ →
H C CHCH CH Cl H C CHCH CH
2 2 3 2 2 2 3
1-butene chlorine 1,2-dichlorobutane
(asymmetrical) (symmetrical)
Figure 2.4 The addition of chlorine to 1-butene
When both reactants are asymmetrical, however, more than one product
is possible. This is shown in Figure 2.5. The two possible products are
isomers of each other.
H Br Br H
H C CHCH CH + HBr → H C CHCH CH + H C CHCH CH
2 2 3 2 2 3 2 2 3
1-butene hydrobromic acid 2-bromobutane 1-bromobutane
(asymmetrical) (asymmetrical)
Figure 2.5 The addition of hydrobromic acid to 1-butene
Although both products are possible, 2-bromobutane is the observed
product. This observation is explained by Markovnikov’s rule.
Markovnikov’s rulestates that the halogen atom or OH group in an addition
reaction is usually added to the more substituted carbon atom—the carbon
atom that is bonded to the largest number of other carbon atoms. Think of
the phrase “the rich get richer.” The carbon with the most hydrogen atoms
receives even more hydrogen atoms in an addition reaction. According
to Markovnikov’s rule, the addition of two asymmetrical reactants forms
primarily one product. Only a small amount of the other isomer is formed.
The following Sample Problem shows how to use Markovnikov’s rule to
predict the products of addition reactions.
66 MHR • Unit 1 Organic Chemistry
Sample Problem
Using Markovnikov’s Rule
Problem
Draw the reactants and products of the following incomplete reaction.
2-methyl-2-pentene+hydrochloricacid→?
Use Markovnikov’s rule to predict which of the two isomeric products
will form in a greater amount.
Solution
According to Markovnikov’s rule, the hydrogen atom will go to the
double-bonded carbon with the larger number of hydrogen atoms.
Thus, the chlorine atom will go to the other carbon, which has the larger
number of C(cid:3)C bonds. The product 2-chloro-2-methylpentane will
form in the greater amount. Small amounts of 3-chloro-2-methylpentane
will also form.
CH
3
CH C CH CH CH + HCl →
3 2 3
2-methyl-2-pentene hydrochloric acid
CH CH
3 3
CH C CH CH CH + CH CH CH CH CH
3 2 2 3 3 2 3
Cl Cl
2-chloro-2-methylpentane 3-chloro-2-methylpentane
(major product) (minor product)
Practice Problems
5. Draw the reactants and products of the following reaction.
3-ethyl-2-heptene+HOH→3-ethyl-3-heptanol+3-ethyl-2-heptanol
Use Markovnikov’s rule to predict which of the two products will
form in the greater amount.
6. Name the reactants and products of each reaction. Use Markovnikov’s
rule to predict which of the two products will form in the greater
amount.
(a) CH CHCH CH CH CH + HBr →
2 2 2 2 3
Br
CH CHCH CH CH CH + Br CH CH CH CH CH CH
3 2 2 2 3 2 2 2 2 2 3
Continued ...
Chapter 2 Reactions of Organic Compounds • MHR 67
Continued ...
CHEM
FACT CH
3
Addition reactions form the
(b) CH C CH CH CH + HOH →
basis for tests that distinguish 3 2 3
alkenes and alkynes from alka- CH CH
3 3
nes. Bromine, Br , has a deep
2
reddish-brown colour. When CH 3 C CH 2 CH 2 CH 3 + CH 3 CH CH CH 2 CH 3
bromine is added to an alkene
OH OH
or alkyne, an addition reaction
takes place. As the bromine is 7. Draw the major product of each reaction.
used up, the brown colour of (a) CH CH (cid:2) CH +Br → (c) CH (cid:2) CHCH CH +HBr→
3 2 2 2 2 3
the bromine disappears. Since
(b) CH (cid:2) CH +HOH→ (d) (CH ) C (cid:2) CHCH CH CH +HCl→
alkanes cannot undergo addi- 2 2 3 2 2 2 3
tion reactions, no reaction 8. For each reaction, name and draw the reactants that are needed to
takes place when bromine is produce the given product.
added to an alkane.
(a) ?+?→CH CH(Cl)CH
3 3
(b) ?+?→Br (cid:3) CH CH (cid:3)Br
2 2
OH
(c) ?+HOH→ CH CH CCH CH
3 2 2 3
CH
3
(d) CH (cid:2) CHCH +?→CH CH CH
2 3 3 2 3
Addition to Alkynes
Since alkynes have triple bonds, two addition reactions can take place in
Electronic Learning Partner
a row. If one mole of a reactant, such as HCl, Br , or H O, is added to one
2 2
Go to the Chemistry 12 mole of an alkyne, the result is a substituted alkene.
Electronic Learning Partner for
Br
more information about the
bonding in ethyne. H C C CH + Br → H C C CH
3 2 3
Br
propyne bromine 1,2-dibromopropene
(1 mol) (1 mol)
If two moles of the reactant are added to one mole of an alkyne, the
reaction continues one step further. A second addition reaction takes
place, producing an alkane.
Br Br
H C C CH + 2Br → H C C CH
3 2 3
Br Br
propyne bromine 1,1,2,2-tetrabromopropane
(1 mol) (2 mol)
Like alkenes, asymmetrical alkynes follow Markovnikov’s rule when an
asymmetrical molecule, such as H O or HBr, is added to the triple bond.
2
An example is given below.
Br Br
H C C CH CH + HBr → H C C CH CH + HC CH CH CH
2 3 2 2 3 2 3
1-butyne hydrobromic acid 2-bromo-1-butene 1-bromo-1-butene
(1 mol) (1 mol) (major product) (minor product)
68 MHR • Unit 1 Organic Chemistry
Canadians in Chemistry
to recover and recycle halogenated hydrocarbons,
such as chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) and other
ozone-depleting substances (ODS), from damaged
or unused residential refrigerators and automotive
air conditioners.
Using adsorption, the binding of molecules or
particles to a surface, Blue BottleTMtechnology acts
as a selective molecular sieve to capture refrigerant
gases so that they can be safely stored and re-used.
A non-pressurized Blue BottleTMcylinder, packed
with an adsorbent, synthetic zeolite called
HaloziteTM, is connected to the back of a refrigera-
tion or air-conditioning unit. Zeolites are porous
aluminosilicate minerals that commonly contain
sodium and calcium as major cations (positively
charged ions) and are capable of ion exchange.
(Zeolites contain water molecules that allow
Dusanka Filipovic reversible dehydration, and they are often used
as water softeners.) The HaloziteTMadsorbs the
When Dusanka Filipovic was a teenager, she liked
refrigerants that are released from the unit at
hiking, playing volleyball, and working as a camp
ambient temperatures, under atmospheric pressure.
counsellor. Now she is a successful chemical
Once the adsorbent is saturated, the Blue
engineer who develops and markets technology
BottleTMcylinder is sent to a central reclamation
that helps the environment. What do her early
facility, where the refrigerants are reclaimed and
pursuits have to do with her engineering career?
stored. The Blue BottleTMcylinders can be re-used
“Both require creativity, persistence, and an ability
after the refrigerants have been collected.
to work under pressure,” says Filipovic.
Reclaimed halogenated hydrocarbons can be used
Filipovic was born and grew up in Belgrade, in
as refrigerants, solvents, cleaners, fumigants, and
the former Yugoslavia. She attended the University
fire retardants.
of Belgrade, and graduated with a degree in
In 1991, Filipovic formed her own company to
chemical engineering. Attracted by Canada’s
commercialize Blue BottleTMtechnology. In 1999,
technical advances, she came here after winning
she founded a new company, which uses a process
a scholarship to study at McMaster University in
similar to Blue BottleTMtechnology to capture and
Hamilton, Ontario. Canada has become her home.
convert greenhouse gas emissions from hospital
Filipovic has worked hard to break down barriers
operating rooms. These emissions had previously
for women in the fields of engineering and business.
been discharged into the atmosphere.
In 1974, she became the first female professional
Filipovic has this advice for aspiring engineers
engineer employed by a major chemical producing
and scientists: “Once you recognize what it is you
company. The National Museum of Science and
want to pursue, make sure you take advantage of
Technology in Ottawa, Ontario, has featured her
every training opportunity offered to you. I became
work as part of an exhibit on women inventors.
an engineer because I wanted to be able to create
Since the 1980s, Filipovic has concentrated on
something new, and monitor and enjoy the results
developing environmentally friendly technologies.
of my work . . . I am working to make a significant
She is the co-inventor of a patented process known
contribution that will live on after me.”
as Blue Bottle™ technology. This process is used
Chapter 2 Reactions of Organic Compounds • MHR 69
Reactions of Aromatic Compounds
As you learned in Chapter 1, aromatic compounds do not react in the
same way that compounds with double or triple bonds do. Benzene’s
stable ring does not usually accept the addition of other atoms. Instead,
aromatic compounds undergo substitution reactions. A hydrogen atom
or a functional group that is attached to the benzene ring may be replaced
by a different functional group. Figure 2.6 shows two possible reactions
for benzene. Notice that iron(III) bromide, FeBr , is used as a catalyst in
3
the substitution reaction. An addition reaction does not occur because the
product of this reaction would be less stable than benzene.
Electronic Learning Partner Br
hydrobromic acid
Go to the Chemistry 12 + Br FeBr 3 + HBr and
2 bromobenzene
Electronic Learning Partner
(actual product)
for more information about
benzene bromine
aspects of material covered Br
in this section of the chapter. 5,6-dibromo-1,3-cyclohexadiene
(does not form)
Br
Figure 2.6 The bromine does not add to benzene in an addition reaction. Instead, one of the
H atoms on the benzene ring is replaced with a Br atom in a substitution reaction.
Reactions of Alcohols
Alcohols can react in several ways, depending on the reactants and on the
conditions of the reaction. For example, alcohols can undergo substitution
with halogen acids, elimination to form alkenes, and oxidation to form
aldehydes, ketones, or carboxylic acids.
Substitution Reactions of Alcohols
When a halogen acid, such as HCl, HBr, or HI, reacts with an alcohol,
the halogen atom is substituted for the OH group of the alcohol. This is
shown in Figure 2.7(A). The reverse reaction takes place when an alkyl
−
halide reacts with OH in a basic solution. See Figure 2.7(B).
A CH CH OH + HCl → CH CH Cl + H O
3 2 3 2 2
B CH CH Cl + OH − → CH CH OH + Cl −
3 2 3 2
Figure 2.7 (A) Ethanol reacts with hydrochloric acid to produce chloroethane. (B) In a
basic solution, the reverse reaction takes place. A hydroxide ion reacts with chloroethane
to produce ethanol.
Elimination Reactions of Alcohols
When an alcohol is heated in the presence of the strong acid and
dehydrating agent, H SO , an elimination reaction takes place. This type
2 4
of reaction is shown in Figure 2.8, on the next page. The OH group and
one H atom leave the molecule, and water is produced. As a result, the
molecule forms a double bond. Because water is produced, this type of
reaction is also called a dehydration (meaning “loss of water”) reaction.
70 MHR • Unit 1 Organic Chemistry
H OH
H H
H SO
H C C H 2 4 C C + H O
2
∆
H H
H H
ethanol ethene water
Figure 2.8 The ∆symbol is used in chemistry to represent heat added to a reaction.
Oxidation of Alcohols
In the presence of an oxidizing agent, an alcohol is oxidized to form an
aldehyde or a ketone.
• A primary alcohol is oxidized to an aldehyde. If the aldehyde is
oxidized further, it becomes a carboxylic acid.
OH O O
+ → + →
R C H [O] C [O] C
R H R OH
H
primary alcohol aldehyde carboxylic acid
• A secondary alcohol is oxidized to a ketone. All the carbon bonding
sites are now occupied with bonds to carbon and oxygen, so no further
oxidation is possible.
OH O
R C H + [O] → C + [O] → no reaction
R R
R
secondary alcohol ketone
• A tertiary alcohol cannot be oxidized. Carbon can form up to four
bonds, but all possible bonding sites are already occupied. C(cid:3)H bonds
can be broken by an oxidizing agent. On the carbon atom of a tertiary
alcohol, however, there is no hydrogen atom available to be removed.
C(cid:3)C bonds are too strong to be broken by an oxidizing agent.
OH
R C R + [O] → no reaction
R
tertiary alcohol
The following Sample Problem shows how to predict the products of
reactions of alcohols.
Chapter 2 Reactions of Organic Compounds • MHR 71
Sample Problem
Predicting the Reaction of an Alcohol
Problem
Name each type of reaction. Then predict and name the products.
OH
(a) CH CH CH CH + [O] →
3 2 3
OH
H SO
2 4
(b) CH CH CH
3 3 ∆
OH
(c) CH CH CH + HBr →
3 3
Solution
(a) The reactant is a secondary alcohol, and an oxidizing agent is present.
Therefore, this must be oxidation. You know that a secondary alcohol
is oxidized to a ketone. The ketone must have the same carbon-carbon
bonds, and the same number of carbon atoms, as the reacting alcohol.
Therefore, the ketone must be 2-butanone.
OH O
CH CH CH CH + [O] → CH CH C CH
3 2 3 3 2 3
2-butanol oxidizing 2-butanone
agent
PROBLEM TIP (b) This reaction takes place in the presence of heat and sulfuric acid,
H SO . It is an elimination reaction. The product is an alkene, with
2 4
In many elimination reactions,
the same number of carbon atoms as the reacting alcohol. Since this
water is produced. The forma-
reaction is an elimination reaction, a small molecule (in this case,
tion of water is a strong driving
water) must be eliminated as the second product. The organic
force for many reactions.
product is propene.
OH
H SO
CH CH CH 2 4 CH CH CH + H O
3 3 ∆ 3 3 2
2-propanol propene water
(c) In this reaction, an alcohol reacts with hydrobromic acid, HBr. This is
a substitution reaction. The product is an alkyl halide, with the same
carbon-carbon bonds, and the same number of carbon atoms, as the
reacting alcohol. The alkyl halide is 2-bromopropane. The second
product is water.
OH Br
CH CH CH + HBr → CH CH CH + H O
3 3 3 3 2
2-propanol hydrobromic 2-bromopropane water
acid
72 MHR • Unit 1 Organic Chemistry
Practice Problems
9. Name each type of reaction.
(a) 1-propanol+ HCl → 1-chloropropane+ H O
2
(b) 1-butanol+ [O] → butanal
(c) CH CH CH Cl + NaOH → CH CH CH OH + NaCl
3 2 2 3 2 2
OH
H SO
2 4
(d) CH CH CH CH CH
3 2 2 3 ∆
CH CH CH CH CH + H O
3 2 3 2
10. Draw the structures of the reactants and products in parts (a) and (b)
of question 9.
11. Name each type of reaction.
H SO
2 4
(a) CH CH CH CH OH
3 2 2 2 ∆
(b) CH CH CH CH CH OH + [O] →
3 2 2 2 2
(i) + [O] → (ii)
OH
(c) CH CH CH CH + HBr →
3 3
CH
3
CH
3
(d) CH CH CH Br + NaOH →
3 2
OH
(e) CH CH CH CH + [O] →
3 2 3
OH
(f) + HCl →
12. Draw and name the products of each reaction in question 11.
13.Is the following reaction possible? Why or why not?
CH
3
CH CH CH C OH + [O] →
3 2 2
CH
3
In the following investigation, you will carry out the oxidation of different
alcohols.
Chapter 2 Reactions of Organic Compounds • MHR 73
S K I L L F O C U S
Predicting
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
Oxidizing Alcohols
Acidified potassium permanganate solution, 2. Prepare each of the following mixtures, one
KMnO , acts as an oxidizing agent when at a time.
4(aq)
it comes in contact with alcohols. In this • Test tube 1: 3 mL KMnO , 3 mL
4
investigation, you will discover how potassium
2-propanol, 2 mL acid
permanganate reacts with a primary, a secondary,
• Test tube 2: 3 mL KMnO , 3 mL 1-butanol,
4
and a tertiary alcohol.
2 mL acid
• Test tube 3: 3 mL KMnO , 3 mL
Questions 4
2-methyl-2-propanol, 2 mL acid
How do primary, secondary, and tertiary alcohols
3. Place a stopper in each test tube, and shake
react with an oxidizing agent?
the test tube gently to mix the contents.
Record the reaction time for each mixture.
Prediction
Use the change in the colour to determine
Predict which of the following alcohols will if a reaction has taken place.
react with an oxidizing agent. Draw and name
4. Dispose of your mixtures as directed by your
the product you expect for each reaction.
teacher.
• 2-propanol
• 1-butanol
Analysis
• 2-methyl-2-propanol
1. Draw the structure of each alcohol you used.
Label each alcohol as primary, secondary, or
Safety Precautions
tertiary.
2.(a) Which alcohol(s) reacted with the potassium
Handle the sulfuric acid solution with care. It permanganate? How did you know?
is corrosive. Wipe up any spills with copious (b) Which alcohol(s) did not react with the
amounts of water, and inform your teacher. potassium permanganate? Explain your
observations.
Materials
3. Which alcohol(s) reacted the most quickly?
2-propanol, 1-butanol, 2-methyl-2-propanol Which reacted slowly? Make a general
0.01 mol/L KMnO 4 solution statement that summarizes your observations.
1 mol/L H SO
2 4
4. Write a chemical equation for each reaction.
distilled water
5 test tubes with stoppers
dropper Conclusions
stopwatch or clock 5. Which alcohol reacted the fastest: primary,
secondary, or tertiary?
Procedure
6. Were there any sources of experimental error?
1. Place 3 mL KMnO 4 , 3 mL water, and 2 mL What could you improve if you did this
acid in a test tube. This mixture should not investigation again?
oxidize quickly. You will use it as a standard
to compare the colour of the other test tubes.
74 MHR • Unit 1 Organic Chemistry
Reactions of Aldehydes and Ketones
As you observed in the investigation, different alcohols react differently
with an oxidizing agent. In the same way, aldehydes and ketones react
differently with oxidizing and reducing agents, even though aldehydes
and ketones have similar structures.
Oxidation of Aldehydes
In the presence of an oxidizing agent, an aldehyde is oxidized to produce
a carboxylic acid. The hydrogen atom that is bonded to the carbon atom
of the C(cid:2)O bond is replaced with an OH group.
O O
C + [O] → C
H OH
aldehyde carboxylic acid
Ketones do not usually undergo oxidation. Like tertiary alcohols,
ketones do not have a hydrogen atom that is available to be removed.
Carbon-carbon bonds are too strong to be broken by an oxidizing agent.
O
C + [O] → no reaction
ketone
Reduction of Aldehydes and Ketones
You learned earlier that primary alcohols are oxidized to aldehydes, and Explain why the transformation
secondary alcohols are oxidized to ketones. You can think of the reduc- of an aldehyde into an alcohol
tion of aldehydes and ketones as the reverse of these reactions. Aldehydes is a reduction not an oxidation.
can be reduced to produce primary alcohols. Ketones can be reduced to
produce secondary alcohols.
O OH
C + [H] → R C H
R H
H
aldehyde primary alcohol
O OH
C + [H] → R C H
R R
R
ketone secondary alcohol
Chapter 2 Reactions of Organic Compounds • MHR 75
Reactions of Carboxylic Acids
Like other acids, a carboxylic acid reacts with a base to produce a salt
and water.
O O
CH CH CH CH C OH + NaOH CH CH CH CH C O − Na + + H O
3 2 2 2 3 2 2 2 2
pentanoic acid sodium sodium pentanoate water
(acid) hydroxide (base) (salt)
As you learned earlier, a carboxylic acid reacts with an alcohol to produce
an ester. Water is the second product of this reaction. A strong acid, such
as H SO , is used to catalyze (speed up) the reaction. The reverse reaction
2 4
can also occur. (See “Reactions of Esters and Amides,” below.)
O O
H SO
R C OH + HO R´ 2 4 R C O R´ + H O
2
carboxylic acid alcohol ester water
The reaction of a carboxylic acid with an alcohol to form an ester is
called an esterification reaction. An esterification reaction is one type of
condensation reaction. In a similar type of condensation reaction, an
amide can be formed from a carboxylic acid and an amine, but this
process is slightly longer and will not be discussed here.
Carboxylic acids can be reduced to form aldehydes and alcohols.
Reactions of Esters and Amides
Both esters and amides undergo hydrolysis reactions. In a hydrolysis
reaction, the ester or amide bond is cleaved, or split in two, to form two
products. As mentioned earlier, the hydrolysis of an ester produces a
carboxylic acid and an alcohol. The hydrolysis of an amide produces a
carboxylic acid and an amine. There are two methods of hydrolysis: acidic
hydrolysis and basic hydrolysis. Both methods are shown in Figure 2.9.
Hydrolysis usually requires heat. In acidic hydrolysis, the ester or amide
reacts with water in the presence of an acid, such as H SO . In basic
2 4
−
hydrolysis, the ester or amide reacts with the OH ion, from NaOH or
water, in the presence of a base. Soap is made by the basic hydrolysis of
ester bonds in vegetable oils or animal fats.
O O
H SO
A CH 3 CH 2 C NH CH 3 + H 2 O 2 4 CH 3 CH 2 C OH + H 2 N CH 3
∆
N-methylpropanamide water propanoic acid methanamine
(amide) (carboxylic acid) (amine)
O O
B CH 3 CH 2 CH 2 C O CH 2 CH 3 + NaOH ∆ CH 3 CH 2 CH 2 C O − Na + + CH 3 CH 2 OH
ethyl butanoate sodium butanoate ethanol
(ester) (salt of a carboxylic acid) (alcohol)
Figure 2.9 (A) The acid hydrolysis of an amide produces a carboxylic acid and an amine.
(B) The basic hydrolysis of an ester produces the salt of a carboxylic acid and an alcohol.
76 MHR • Unit 1 Organic Chemistry
Sample Problem
Predicting the Products of More Organic Reactions
Problem
Identify each type of reaction. Then predict and name the product(s).
O
(a) C + [O] →
H H
O
(b) C + [H] →
H C CH
3 3
O
(c) CH COH + CH CH OH (cid:2)(cid:3)
3 3 2
Solution
(a) This reaction involves an aldehyde and an oxidizing agent. Thus, it is
an oxidation. (If the reactant were a ketone, no reaction would occur.)
The product of this reaction is a carboxylic acid called methanoic acid.
O O
C + [O] → C
H H H OH
methanal oxidizing agent methanoic acid
(b) This reaction involves a ketone and a reducing agent. Thus, it is a
reduction. The product of this reaction is an alcohol called 2-propanol.
O OH
C + [H] → H C C CH
3 3
H C CH
3 3 H
propanone reducing agent 2-propanol
(c) This reaction occurs between a carboxylic acid and an alcohol. It is
an esterification, or condensation, reaction. The product of this
reaction is an ester called ethyl ethanoate.
O O
CH COH + CH CH OH (cid:2)(cid:3) CH COCH CH
3 3 2 3 2 3
ethanoic acid ethanol ethyl ethanoate
Chapter 2 Reactions of Organic Compounds • MHR 77
Practice Problems
14. Identify each type of reaction. (Oxidizing and reducing agents are
not shown.)
O OH
→
(a)
O OH
(b) (CH ) C C C(CH ) → (CH ) C CH C(CH )
3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3
(c) 2-pentanone→ 2-pentanol
(d) hexanoic acid +ethanol (cid:2)(cid:3) ethyl hexanoate +water
(e) butyl methanoate +water H2SO4 methanoic acid +1-butanol
∆
15.(a) Name the reactants and products of the first two reactions in
question 14.
(b) Draw the reactants and products of the last three reactions in
question 14.
16. Name and draw the product(s) of each reaction.
(a) hexanal + [O] →
(b) octanal + [H] →
(c) propanoic acid +methanol (cid:2)(cid:3)
(d) propyl ethanoate +water H2SO4
∆
(e) 3-hexanone+ [H] →
(f) 2-propanol +3-methylpentanoic acid (cid:2)(cid:3)
17. Name and draw the reactant(s) in each reaction.
(a) ? + [H] → CH CH CH(CH )CH OH
3 2 3 2
(b) ? + [O] →? + [O] → CH CH CH CH COOH
3 2 2 2
(c) ?+? → O
O
Concept Organizer Organic Reactions
alkyl halide
addition of HX or X 2
eli
mi
n ati o n s u b s titu
tio
n
s u b s titu
tio
n aldehyde
carboxylic
acid
elimination oxidation oxidation
reduction alkene alcohol
alkane
alkyne
addition of HO reduction
2 ketone
condensation hydrolysis
ester
78 MHR • Unit 1 Organic Chemistry
Section Summary
In this section, you learned about the reactions of alkenes, alkynes,
aromatic compounds, alcohols, aldehydes, ketones, carboxylic acids,
amides, and esters. You learned how to use Markovnikov’s rule to predict
the major product of an elimination reaction. You also learned how to
predict the products of other types of reactions. In the next section,
you will encounter a special branch of organic chemistry, which deals
with much larger molecules.
Section Review
1 K/U Identify each reaction as one of the following types of reactions:
addition, substitution, elimination, oxidation, reduction, condensation,
or hydrolysis.
H SO
(a) HO CH CH CH CH 2 4 CH CH CH CH + H O
2 2 3 ∆ 2 3 2
CH CH
3 3
Cl Cl
(b) CH CH CH + Cl → CH CH CH
2 3 2 2 3
O
(c) CH OH + [O] → C
3
H H
O OH
(d) CH C CH + H → CH C CH
3 3 2 3 3
H
Cl
FeBr
(e) + Cl 2 3
Br OH
(f) CH CH CH CH CH + OH − → CH CH CH CH CH + Br −
3 2 3 3 2 3
CH CH
3 3
O O
H SO
(g) CH CH CH C OH + CH OH 2 4 CH CH CH C O CH + H O
3 2 2 3 3 2 2 3 2
2 I Draw and name the product(s) of each addition or elimination
reaction.
(a) CH CH(cid:2)CHCH + Br →
3 3 2
(b) CH (cid:2)CHCH CH + HCl →
2 2 3
H SO
(c) CH CH CH CH CH CH OH 2 4
3 2 2 2 2 2 ∆
CH Br
3
H SO
(d) CH C CH CH 2 4
3 3 ∆
CH
3
Chapter 2 Reactions of Organic Compounds • MHR 79
3 I Draw and name the products of each substitution reaction.
FeBr
(a) benzene + bromine 3
(b) CH CH CH CH CH OH + HBr →
3 2 2 2 2
4 I Draw and name the product of each oxidation or reduction.
(a) 2-pentanol + [O] →
(b) propanal + [O] →
(c) 2,3-dimethyl-1-butanol+ [O] →
(d) CH (cid:2)CH + [H] →
2 2
(e) 3-pentanone + [H] →
(f) CH CH C(cid:4)CH + [H] → (i) + [H] → (ii)
3 2
(g) 2-ethyl-3,4-dimethyloctanal+ [H] →
5 I Name and draw the reactant(s) in each reaction.
(a) ? + H O → (CH ) CHOH + CH CH COOH
2 3 2 3 2
(b) ? + [H] →
(c) ?+? → 2-butylmethanoate
O
(d) ? + [O] →
(e) ? + H O → ethanamine + heptanoicacid
2
6 (a) K/U State Markovnikov’s rule. Under what circumstances is this
rule important?
(b) K/U Which product of the following reaction is formed in the
greater amount?
CH Br CH Br CH
3 3 3
CH CHCH CHCH + HBr → CH CH CH CHCH + CH CHCH CHCH
2 2 3 2 2 2 3 3 2 3
7 I At least one of the following reactions is not possible. Identify the
impossible reaction(s), and explain your reasoning.
O
(a) CH 3 CH 2 CCH 3 + [O]
O
(b) CH 3 CH 2 OH + [O] CH 3 C OH
Cl
(c) + Cl 2
Cl
OH
(d) CH 3 C CH 2 CH 3 + [O] →
CH
3
8 C Copy the Concept Organizer into your notebook. Then make
it more complete by giving an example of each type of reaction.
80 MHR • Unit 1 Organic Chemistry
Molecules on a Larger Scale: 2.3
Polymers and Biomolecules
Try to imagine a day without plastics. From simple plastic bags to furni- Section Preview/
ture and computer equipment, plastics are an intergral part of our homes, Specific Expectations
schools, and work places. So far in this unit, you have encountered fairly In this section, you will
small organic molecules. Many of the organic molecules that are used
(cid:2) communicateyour under-
industrially, such as plastics, and many of the essential molecules in your standing of addition and
body, are much larger in size. condensation polymerization
A polymer is a very long molecule that is made by linking together
(cid:2) synthesizea polymer
many smaller molecules called monomers. To picture a polymer, imagine
(cid:2) describesome organic com-
taking a handful of paper clips and joining them into a long chain. Each
pounds in living organisms,
paper clip represents a monomer. The long chain of repeating paper clips
and explaintheir function
represents a polymer. Many polymers are made of just one type of
(cid:2) describethe variety and
monomer. Other polymers are made from a combination of two or more
importance of polymers and
different monomers. Figure 2.10 shows an example of joined monomers in other plastics in your life
a polymer structure.
(cid:2) analyzesome risks and
benefits of the production
and use of polymers
O O O
(cid:2) communicateyour
O O O
understanding of the
O O O
following terms: polymer,
O O O
monomers, plastics, addition
polymerization, condensa-
tion polymerization, nylons,
one unit, or
”paper clip“ polyamides, polyesters,
biochemistry, protein,
amino acids, carbohydrate,
small segment of polyethylene saccharide, monosaccha-
terephthalate (PET) polymer ride, disaccharide,
polysaccharide, starch,
DNA (2-deoxyribonucleic
Figure 2.10 Polyethylene terephthalate (PET) is the plastic that is used to make
acid), nucleotides, RNA
soft drink bottles.
(ribonucleic acid), lipids,
fats, oils, waxes
Polymers that can be heated and moulded into specific shapes and forms
are commonly known as plastics. All plastics are synthetic (artificially
made) polymers. For example, polyethene is a common synthetic polymer
that is used to make plastic bags. Ethene, CH (cid:2)CH , is the monomer for
2 2
polyethene. Adhesives, rubber, chewing gum, and Styrofoam™ are other
important materials that are made from synthetic polymers.
Natural polymers are found in living things. For example, glucose,
C H O , is the monomer for the natural polymer starch. You will learn
6 12 6
more about natural polymers later in this section.
Some polymers, both synthetic and natural, can be spun into long,
thin fibres. These fibres are woven into natural fabrics (such as cotton,
linen, and wool) or synthetic fabrics (such as rayon, nylon, and polyester).
Figure 2.11, on the next page, shows some polymer products.
Chapter 2 Reactions of Organic Compounds • MHR 81
Web LINK
www.mcgrawhill.ca/links/
chemistry12
There are two main types of
plastics: thermoplasticsand
thermosets. What is the differ-
ence between them? What is
each type of plastic used for?
Polyethylene terephthalate
(PET) can be recycled
successfully into new and
interesting materials.Research
the trade name Ecospun™
on the Internet. What is this
material, what is it made from,
and what is it used for?
To answer these questions, go
to the web site above and click Figure 2.11 Both synthetic and natural polymers are used to make clothing.
on Web Links.
Making Synthetic Polymers:
Addition and Condensation Polymerization
Synthetic polymers are extremely useful and valuable. Many polymers
and their manufacturing processes have been patented as corporate
technology. Polymers form by two of the reactions you have already
learned: addition reactions and condensation reactions.
The name of a polymer is usually written with the prefix poly-
Why does “polyethene” end
(meaning “many”) before the name of the monomer. Often the common
with the suffix -ene, if it does
not contain any double bonds? name of the monomer is used, rather than the IUPAC name. For example,
the common name of ethene is ethylene. Polyethene, the polymer
that is made from ethene, is often called polyethylene. Similarly,
the polymer that is made from chloroethene (common name: vinyl
chloride) is named polyvinylchloride (PVC). The polymer that is made
from propene monomers (common name: propylene) is commonly called
polypropylene, instead of polypropene.
Addition polymerization is a reaction in which monomers with
double bonds are joined together through multiple addition reactions
to form a polymer. Figure 2.12 illustrates the addition polymerization
reaction of ethene to form polyethene. Table 2.1, on the next page, gives
the names, structures, and uses of some common polymers that are
formed by addition polymerization.
H H H H
H C CH
H C CH + H C CH → C C C C 2 2
2 2 2 2
H H H H
H H H H H H
H C CH
2 2
C C C C C C etc.
H H H H H H
Figure 2.12 The formation of polyethene from ethene
82 MHR • Unit 1 Organic Chemistry
Table 2.1 Examples of Addition Polymers
Name Structure of monomer Structure of polymer Uses
polyethene H H H H H H •plastic bags
•plastic milk, juice,
H C CH … C C C C C C … and water bottles
2 2
•toys
H H H H H H
ethene polyethene
polystyrene H C CH … CH CH CH CH … •styrene and
2 2 2 Styrofoam™ cups
•insulation
•packaging
styrene polystyrene
polyvinylchloride •building and
Cl … CH CH CH CH …
(PVC, vinyl) 2 2 construction
materials
H C CH Cl Cl
2 •sewage pipes
vinyl chloride polyvinylchloride (PVC) •medical
equipment
polyacrylonitrile H H H H •paints
•yarns, knit fabrics,
H C CH CN … C C C C … carpets, and wigs
2
H CN H CN
acrylonitrile polyacrylonitrile
Condensation polymerization is a reaction in which monomers are joined
together by the formation of ester or amide bonds. A second smaller
product, usually water, is produced by this reaction. For condensation
polymerization to occur, each monomer must have two functional groups
(usually one at each end of the molecule).
Nylon-66 is made by the condensation polymerization of the
Electronic Learning Partner
dicarboxylic acid adipic acid, and 1,6-diaminohexane, an amine. (The
number 66 comes from the fact that each of the two reactants contains six Go to the Chemistry 12
carbon atoms.) This reaction results in the formation of amide bonds Electronic Learning Partner
for more information about
between monomers, as shown in Figure 2.13. Condensation polymers
Nylon-66.
that contain amide bonds are called nylons or polyamides. Condensation
polymers that contain ester bonds are called polyesters. Polyesters result
from the esterification of diacids and dialcohols.
H H O O H H
H N (CH ) N H HO C (CH ) C OH H N (CH ) N H
2 6 2 4 2 6
1,6-diaminohexane adipic acid 1,6-diaminohexane
O O
… NH (CH ) NH C (CH ) C NH (CH ) NH … + H O
2 6 2 4 2 6 2
amide bond amide bond water
Figure 2.13 Nylon-66 is made from adipic acid and 1,6-diaminohexane.
Chapter 2 Reactions of Organic Compounds • MHR 83
Table 2.2 shows two common polymers that are formed by condensation.
Notice that Dacron™, a polyester, contains ester linkages betweenmonomers.
Nylon-6, a polyamide, contains amide linkages between monomers.
Table 2.2 Examples of Condensation Polymers
Name Structure Uses
Dacron™ •synthetic
(a polyester) fibres used
O O O O to make
fabric for
… C C O CH 2 CH 2 O C C O CH 2 CH 2 O … clothing
and surgery
Nylon-6 •tires
(a polyamide) •synthetic
O O O fibres used
to make rope
… NH (CH 2 ) 5 C NH (CH 2 ) 5 C NH (CH 2 ) 5 C … and articles
of clothing,
such as
stockings
The following Sample Problem shows how to classify a polymerization
reaction.
Sample Problem
Classifying a Polymerization Reaction
Problem
Tetrafluoroethene polymerizes to form the slippery polymer that is
commonly known as Teflon™. Teflon™ is used as a non-stick coating
in frying pans, among other uses. Classify the following polymerization
reaction, and name the product. (The letter nindicates that many
monomers are involved in the reaction.)
F F F F F F
nF C CF → … C C C C C C …
2 2
F F F F F F
Solution
The monomer reactant of this polymerization reaction contains a double
bond. The product polymer has no double bond, so an addition reaction
must have occurred. Thus, this reaction is an addition polymerization
reaction. Since the monomer’s name is tetrafluoroethene, the product’s
name is polytetrafluoroethene.
Practice Problems
18. A monomer called methylmethacrylate polymerizes to form an
addition polymer that is used to make bowling balls. What is the
name of this polymer?
84 MHR • Unit 1 Organic Chemistry
Electronic Learning Partner
19. Classify each polymerization reaction as an addition or condensation
Go to the Chemistry 12
polymerization reaction.
Electronic Learning Partner
(a) O O
for more information about
nHO C C OH + nHO CH CH OH → aspects of material covered
2 2
in this section of the chapter.
O O
… C C O CH CH O …
2 2
CN CN CN
(b) nCH CH → … CH CH CH CH …
2 2 2
O O O
(c) nHO CH C OH → … O CH C O CH C …
2 2 2
20. Draw the product of each polymerization reaction. Include at least
two linkages for each product.
O O
(a) nHO CH CH CH OH + nHO C CH C OH →
2 2 2 2
CH
3
(b) nH C CH →
2
O O
(c) nH NCH CH NH + nHO C(CH ) C OH →
2 2 2 2 2 6
21. Classify each polymer as an addition polymer(formed by addition
polymerization) or a condensation polymer(formed by condensation
polymerization). Then classify each condensation polymer as either a
polyester or a nylon (polyamide).
(a) … CH CH CH CH …
2 2
Br Br
O O
(b) … NH CH NH C CH CH C NH CH NH …
2 2 2 2
O O O
(c) … O CH CH C O CH CH C O CH CH C …
2 2 2 2 2 2
O O O O
(d) … O O CCH C O O CCH C …
2 2
22. Draw the structure of the repeating unit for each polymer in question
21. Then draw the structure of the monomer(s) used to prepare each
polymer.
In the following investigation, you will examine three polymers and
synthesize a cross-linked addition polymer.
Chapter 2 Reactions of Organic Compounds • MHR 85
S K I L L F O C U S
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
Synthesis of a Polymer
In this investigation, you will examine three Prediction
different polymers. First, you will examine the
How can you tell if polymerization has occurred?
addition polymer sodium polyacrylate. This
List one or more changes you would expect to
polymer contains sodium ions trapped inside
see in a liquid solution as polymerization takes
the three-dimensional structure of the polymer.
place.
When placed in distilled water, the concentration
of sodium ions inside the polymer is much
Materials
greater than the concentration of sodium
ions outside the polymer. The concentration Part 1
imbalance causes water molecules to move about 0.5 g sodium polyacrylate powder
by diffusion into the polymer. As a result, the distilled water
polymer absorbs many times its own mass in 500 mL beaker
distilled water. 100 mL graduated cylinder
sodium chloride
… CH CH CH CH …
2 2 balance
C OO C O
Part 2
O − Na + O − Na + 10 mL graduated cylinder
50 mL beaker
sodium polyacrylate 20 cm × 20 cm piece of a polyvinyl alcohol bag
You will also examine polyvinyl alcohol, another (Alternative: Your teacher will prepare a
addition polymer. Polyvinyl alcohol is made by solution of 40 g polyvinyl alcohol powder in
the polymerization of hydroxyethene, also 1 L of water. You will be given 20 mL of this
known as vinyl alcohol. solution.)
25 mL hot tap water
… CH CH CH CH …
2 2 stirring rod
food colouring
OH OH
5 mL of 4% borax solution (sodium tetraborate
polyvinyl alcohol decahydrate)
Using an aqueous solution of polyvinyl alcohol,
you will prepare a cross-linked polymer, Safety Precautions
commonly known as “Slime.”
• Wear an apron, safety glasses, and gloves while
Questions
completing this investigation.
How much water can sodium polyacrylate
• Wash your hands thoroughly after this
absorb? What properties do polymers have in
investigation.
common? How do polymers differ?
• Sodium polyacrylate is irritating to eyes and
nasal membranes. Use only a small amount,
and avoid inhaling the powder.
86 MHR • Unit 1 Organic Chemistry
Procedure Analysis
Part 1 Examination of a Water-Absorbent 1. Calculate the mass of water that was
Polymer absorbed by the sodium polyacrylate polymer.
1. Examine the sodium polyacrylate powder. (Note: 1 mL of water = 1 g)
Record your observations. 2. Use the mass of the sodium polyacrylate
2. Record the mass of a dry, empty 500 mL polymer and the mass of the water it
beaker. Place about 0.5 g of the powder in absorbed to calculate the mass/mass ratio
the bottom of the beaker. Record the mass of the polymer to water.
of the beaker again, to find the exact mass 3. What practical applications might the sodium
of the powder. polyacrylate polymer be used for?
3. Use a graduated cylinder to measure 100 mL 4. What happened when you added the salt?
of distilled water. Very slowly, add the water Come up with an explanation for what you
to the beaker. Stop frequently to observe what observed. Search for a discussion of sodium
happens. Keep track of how much water you polyacrylate on the Internet to check your
add, and stop when no more water can be explanation.
absorbed. (You may need to add less or more
than 100 mL.) Record the volume of water at
Conclusions
which the powder becomes saturated and will
5. How do you think a plastic bag made of
no longer absorb water.
polyvinyl alcohol might be useful?
4. Add a small amount of sodium chloride to the
6. What change(s) alerted you to the fact that
beaker. Record your observations. Continue
polymerization was occurring when you
adding sodium chloride until no more
added borax to the dissolved solution of
changes occur. Record your observations.
polyvinyl alcohol? Explain your observations.
5. Dispose of excess powder and the gelled
7. Compare the properties of the three polymers
material as directed by your teacher. Do not
you observed in this investigation. Were there
put the powder or gel down the sink!
any similarities? How were they different?
Part 2 Synthesis of a Cross-Linked Addition
Polymer Applications
1. Before starting, examine the polyvinyl alcohol 8. Sodium polyacrylate absorbs less tap water
bag. Record your observations. than distilled water. Design and carry out
an investigation to compare the mass of tap
2. Place 25 mL of hot tap water into a small
water absorbed to the mass of distilled water
beaker.
absorbed by the same mass of powder.
3. Add the piece of polyvinyl alcohol bag to the
9. Research the use of polyvinyl alcohol (PVA)
hot water. Stir the mixture until the polymer
bags in hospitals.
has dissolved.
4. Add a few drops of food colouring to the
mixture, and stir again.
5. Add 5 mL of the borax solution, and stir.
6. Examine the “Slime” you have produced.
Record your observations.
Chapter 2 Reactions of Organic Compounds • MHR 87
Risks of the Polymer Industry
In the 1970s, workers at an American plastics manufacturing plant
began to experience serious illnesses. Several workers died of liver
cancer before the problem was traced to its source: prolonged exposure
to vinyl chloride. Vinyl chloride (or chloroethene, C H Cl) is used to
2 3
make polyvinylchloride (PVC). Unfortunately, vinyl chloride is a
powerful carcinogen. Government regulations have now restricted
workers’ exposure to vinyl chloride. Trace amounts of this dangerous
chemical are still present, however, as pollution in the environment.
The manufacture and disposal of PVC creates another serious
problem. Dioxin, shown in Figure 2.14, is a highly toxic chemical. It is
produced during the manufacture and burning of PVC plastics.
Cl O Cl
Cl O Cl
Figure 2.14 Dioxin has been shown to be extremely carcinogenic to some animals. As
well, it is suspected of disrupting hormone activity in the body, leading to reduced fertility
and birth defects.
Many synthetic polymers, including most plastics, do not degrade in the
environment. What can be done with plastic and other polymer waste?
One solution may be the development and use of degradable plastics.
These are polymers that break down over time when exposed to
environmental conditions, such as light and bacteria. The Chemistry
Bulletin on the next page gives more information about degradable plastics.
Natural Polymers
Much of our technology has been developed by observing and imitating
the natural world. Synthetic polymers, such as those you just encoun-
tered, were developed by imitating natural polymers. For example, the
natural polymer cellulose provides most of the structure of plants. Wood,
paper, cotton, and flax, are all composed of cellulose fibres. Figure 2.15
shows part of a cellulose polymer.
CH OH OH CH OH
2 2
O O
O HO O
HO O HO O
O
OH CH OH OH
2
cellulose
Figure 2.15 Like other polymers, cellulose is made of repeating units. It is the main
structural fibre in plants, and it makes up the fibre in your diet.
Biochemistry is the study of the organic compounds and reactions
that occur in living things. Proteins, starches, and nucleic acids are
important biological polymers. Some biological monomers, like amino
acids and sugars, are biologically important all on their own. You will
also encounter lipids, a class of large biological molecules that are
not polymers.
88 MHR • Unit 1 Organic Chemistry
Chemistry Bulletin
Degradable Plastics: at the bottom of a landfill, it is ideally suited to
Garbage That Takes Itself Out the marine environment. Plastics that are discarded
in oceans and lakes usually float at the surface,
Did you know that the first plastics were consid-
and thus are exposed to light. The rings that
ered too valuable to be thrown out? Today, many
are used to package canned drinks can strangle
plastics are considered disposable. Plastics now
marine wildlife. These rings are now made with
take up nearly one third of all landfill space, and
photodegradable technology in many countries.
society’s use of plastics is on the rise. Recycling
initiatives are helping to reduce plastic waste.
Another solution to this problem may involve the
technology of degradable plastics.
All plastics are polymers, long molecules
made of repeating units. Because polymers
are extremely stable, they resist reaction. Most
conventional plastics require hundreds or even
thousands of years to break down.
Degradableplastics are an important step
forward in technology. These new plastics can
break down in a relatively short time—within six
months to a year. There are two main kinds of
degradable plastics: biodegradable plastics and
photodegradable plastics. Biodegradable plastics
are susceptible to decay processes that are similar
to the decay processes of natural objects, such as
Several nations are conducting further research
plants. Photodegradable plasticsdisintegrate when
into other marine uses for this technology.
they are exposed to certain wavelengths of light.
The ability of a degradable plastic to decay Making Connections
depends on the structure of its polymer chain.
1. When a degradable plastic decays, the starch or
Biodegradable plastics are often manufactured
cellulose backbone may break down completely
from natural polymers, such as cornstarch and
into carbon dioxide, water, and organic matter.
wheat gluten. Micro-organisms in the soil can
What do you think happens to F, Cl, or other
break down these natural polymers. Ideally,
heteroatom groups on the polymer chain as
a biodegradable plastic would break down com-
the backbone decays? Why might this be a
pletely into carbon dioxide, water, and biomass
problem?
within six months, just like a natural material.
2. Several notable scientists have cautioned
Photodegradable plastic is a Canadian
against the use of biodegradable and photo-
contribution to the environmental health of the
degradable plastics in landfills. The bottom
planet. It was developed in Canada more than 25
of a landfill has no light, or oxygen for the
years ago by Dr. James Guillet, of the University of
metabolism of bacteria. Why is this a problem?
Toronto. This plastic incorporates light-absorbing,
What changes must be made to landfill design,
or chromomorphic, molecular groups as part of its
if biodegradable and photodegradable plastics
backbone chain. The chromomorphic groups
are going to be included in landfills?
change their structure when they are exposed to
particular frequencies of light (usually ultraviolet). 3. Do degradable plastics disappear as soon as
The structural changes in these groups cause they are discarded? What are the dangers
the backbone to break apart. Although the of public confidence in the degradability of
photodegradable process is not very effective plastics?
Chapter 2 Reactions of Organic Compounds • MHR 89
Amino Acids and Proteins
A protein is a natural polymer that is composed of monomers called
amino acids. Proteins are found in meat, milk, eggs, and legumes.
Wool, leather, and silk are natural materials that are made of proteins.
Your fingernails, hair, and skin are composed of different proteins.
Proteins carry out many important functions in your body, such as
speeding up chemical reactions (enzymes), transporting oxygen in your
blood (hemoglobin), and regulating your body responses (hormones).
There are 20 common amino acids in the human body. All amino
acids contain a carboxylic acid group and an amino group. Amino acids
can be linked by amide bonds to form proteins. Each amino acid has a
different side chain, which is attached to the centre carbon atom. Figure
2.16, below, shows the structure of an amino acid. The letter G represents
the side chain of the amino acid. Examples of side chains include (cid:3)CH
3
(for the amino acid alanine), (cid:3)CH CH CONH (for glutamine), and
2 2 2
(cid:3)CH OH (for serine).
2
H O
H N C C OH
2
G
Figure 2.16 The structure of an amino acid
The shape and biological function of a protein depends on its sequence of
Biology LINK
amino acids. A typical protein, such as insulin, contains at least 50 amino
Studies have shown that honey
acid groups. Depending on the sequence of these amino acids, an infinite
has the same quick absorption
number of different proteins are possible. Each species of animal has its
and long-lasting energy-burst
own distinct proteins. The DNA in your body contains the blueprints for
effect that many sports drinks
making specific proteins for your body’s structure and function.
do. This is because honey is
high in fructose, a simple fruit
Carbohydrates
sugar that has been found to
be the best sugar for athletes. A carbohydrate (also called a saccharide) is a biological molecule that
Unpasteurized honey also
contains either an aldehyde or ketone group, along with two or more
contains hydrogen peroxide hydroxyl groups. The C(cid:2)O group at one end of a simple saccharide
and enzymes, which aid in
reacts with an OH group at the other end to produce the most common
digestion.
formation, a ring. Figure 2.17 shows the ring forms of some of the
simplest carbohydrates.
glucose fructose sucrose water
O
HOCH OH
CH OH 2 CH OH
2 2
O O
HO HO
+ HO CH OH → + H O
2 2
HO HO
OH OH
OH OH
O
O
HOCH
2
HO CH OH
2
Figure 2.17 Glucose is the simplest carbohydrate. It is found in grapes
and corn syrup. Fructose gives fruit its sweet taste. A condensation reaction
between glucose and fructose produces sucrose, commonly called table
OH
sugar. Sucrose is found in sugar cane and sugar beets.
90 MHR • Unit 1 Organic Chemistry
Carbohydrates are found in foods such as bread, pasta, potatoes, and
fruits. They are the primary source of energy for the body. In a process
called cellular respiration, carbohydrates combine with inhaled oxygen
and are oxidized to produce carbon dioxide and water, plus energy. As
shown in Figure 2.18, carbon dioxide and water vapour from cellular
respiration are expelled in your breath.
Figure 2.18 On a cold day, the water vapour in your breath condenses on contact
with the air, forming a visible cloud.
A monosaccharideis composed of one saccharide unit. Thus, it is the
COURSE
smallest molecule possible for a carbohydrate. A monosaccharide is often CHALLENGE
called a simple carbohydrate, or simple sugar. Glucose, seen in Figure 2.17,
How can you use your
on the previous page, is one example of a monosaccharide. Other mono-
knowledge of organic
saccharides include fructose, galactose, and mannose. chemistry to identify reactions
Sucrose (shown in Figure 2.17) is a disaccharide, containing two between biological molecules?
saccharide monomers. To produce a disaccharide, an (cid:3)OH group on You will apply your learning
one monomer reacts with an (cid:3)OH group on another monomer to form later on, in the Chemistry
an ether (cid:3)O(cid:3) linkage (also shown in Figure 2.17). This reaction is a Course Challenge.
condensation, because two molecules combine and produce a molecule
of water. During digestion, carbohydrates undergo hydrolysis reactions,
which break the ether bonds between the monomers.
Polysaccharides are polymers that contain many saccharide units.
The most important polysaccharides are those in which glucose is the
monomer. Plants use the glucose polysaccharide cellulose as a structural
material. (See Figure 2.15 for the structure of cellulose.) They store
energy in the starches amylose and amylopectin. A starch is a glucose
polysaccharide that is used by plants to store energy. Humans can digest
starches. Animals store energy in the glucose polysaccharide glycogen,
illustrated in Figure 2.19
glucose
unit
Figure 2.19 Glycogen is the major storage
polysaccharide in animals. This tiny portion of a
tangled glycogen granule shows the highly
branched polymer, made of glucose units.
Chapter 2 Reactions of Organic Compounds • MHR 91
Nucleotides and Nucleic Acids
Humans and cats both begin life as fertilized eggs, which look fairly
similar. Why does a fertilized cat egg develop into a kitten, while a
fertilized human egg develops into a child (Figure 2.20)? A very special
type of polymer, located in the cell nucleus, directs the formation of the
proteins from which an organism develops.
(C) A SIMILARLY-SIZED
CAT FACE
109(02)1496
Figure 2.20 DNA in the cells of your body direct the production of proteins. Since your
bones, muscles, and organs are built from proteins that are specific to humans, your body
is different from the body of a cat.
DNA (short for 2-deoxyribonucleic acid) is the biological molecule that
determines the shape and structure of all organisms. It is found mostly
in the nuclei of cells. Each strand of DNA is a polymer that is composed
of repeating units, called nucleotides. A single strand of DNA may have
more than one million nucleotides. Each nucleotide consists of three
parts: a sugar, a phosphate group, and a base.
DNA is one type of nucleic acid. The other type of nucleic acid is
called RNA (short for ribonucleic acid). RNA is present throughout a cell.
It works closely with DNA to produce the proteins in the body. Table 2.3,
on the next page, shows the structures of RNA and DNA.
92 MHR • Unit 1 Organic Chemistry
Table 2.3 Structures of DNA and RNA
…
base
phosphate
polymerization
sugar
…
single nucleotide nucleotide chain (DNA or RNA)
The main structure of a nucleotide is based on a simple saccharide, or sugar. The sugar
that is used to make DNA is 2-deoxyribose. The sugar that is used to make RNA is ribose.
O OH O OH
HO HO
sugar
HO HO OH
2-deoxyribose ribose
Each sugar unit is attached to a phosphate group. The phosphate group on one nucleotide
bonds with a hydroxyl group on the sugar of another nucleotide to form a sugar-phosphate
chain.
O
O P OH
phosphate
OH
phosphate group
There are five possible bases, shown below. DNA is made using the bases adenine,
thymine, guanine, and cytosine. RNA is made using the bases adenine, uracil, guanine,
and cytosine. The specific sequence of the bases in a strand of DNA makes up a specific
code. The code contains all the information that is needed to make a particular organism.
NH O O O NH
2 2
base N CH 3 N
N HN HN HN N
N N O N O N H N N N O N
H H H 2 H H
adenine (A) thymine (T) uracil (U) guanine (G) cytosine (C)
Chapter 2 Reactions of Organic Compounds • MHR 93
A complete molecule of DNA consists of two complementary strands.
P
P These strands are held together by hydrogen bonds between the bases
P S
P S P S on the nucleotide units, as shown in Figure 2.21.
S S
DNA has two main functions in the body:
S P S
P P S P S • It replicates itself exactly whenever a cell divides. Thus, every cell in
P S
S P an organism contains the same information.
S P S P • It contains codes that allow each type of protein that is needed by the
S S body to be made by the body’s cells. RNA assists in this process.
P P
S S
Lipids
P P S
S P S P The last biological molecules that you will examine in this course are
P S not polymers. They are, however, very large in size. Lipids are defined
S P as biological molecules that are not soluble in water, but are soluble in
P S non-polar solvents, such as benzene and hexanes.
H P From your previous studies of solubility, you might hypothesize
O HN
S
N H N S that lipid molecules must have large hydrocarbon parts, since they are
O CH2
O−
P O O soluble in hydrocarbon solvents. Your hypothesis would be correct.
O H O P O− Lipids contain large hydrocarbon chains, or other large hydrocarbon
CH2 N H O O
structures.
N H N
S S Several types of lipids may be familiar to you. Fats, oils, and some
O H N
H waxes are examples of lipids. Fats are lipids that contain a glycerol
molecule, bonded by ester linkages to three long-chain carboxylic acids.
Figure 2.21 Two strands of DNA
Oils have the same structure as fats, but are classified as being liquid at
are held together by hydrogen bonds
room temperature, while fats are solids at room temperature. Waxes are
to form a double-helix molecule.
esters of long-chain alcohols and long-chain carboxylic acids.
Other lipids include steroids, such as cholesterol, and terpenes,
which are plant oils such as oil of turpentine, or oil of cedar. Figure 2.22
shows the lipid glyceryl trioleate, which is present in olive oil.
H O
Figure 2.22 A fat or an oil is H C O C (CH ) CH CH (CH ) CH
2 7 2 7 3
produced when three long-chain
O
carboxylic acids, called fatty acids,
bond with a glycerol unit to form
H C O C (CH ) CH CH (CH ) CH
2 7 2 7 3
three ester bonds. (Note that the
three fatty acids are not always O
identical.) A hydrolysis reaction
H C O C (CH ) CH CH (CH ) CH
can split these three ester bonds to 2 7 2 7 3
produce glycerol and a combina-
H
tion of the salts of fatty acids, better
known as soap. glycerol 3 fatty acids
glyceryl trioleate
Lipids carry out many important functions in the body. Their most
important function is the long-term storage of energy. One gram of fat con-
tains two-and-a-quarter times more energy than a gram of carbohydrate or
protein. When an animal consumes more carbohydrates than are needed
at the time, the body converts the excess carbohydrates to fat. Later, when
insufficient carbohydrates are available for energy, the body may break
down some of these fats to use for energy. Carbohydrates are still needed
in your diet, however, for the proper functioning of your cells.
94 MHR • Unit 1 Organic Chemistry
In addition to storing energy, lipids have other vital functions:
• Cell membranes are made of a double layer of phospholipids. These
are lipids that are polar at one end and non-polar at the other end.
• Lipids such as cholesterol and testosterone act as hormones to regulate
body functions. (Not all hormones are lipids. Some hormones are
proteins. Other hormones are neither lipids nor proteins.)
• Several vitamins (such as vitamins A, D, and E) are lipids. These
vitamins are known as fat-soluble.
• The fatty tissues in your body are made from lipids. They act like
protective “packaging” around fragile organs, such as the heart. They
insulate the body from excessive heat or cold, and they act as padding
to reduce impact from collisions.
Section Summary
In this section, you learned how to recognize addition and condensation
polymerization reactions. You examined the structures and functions of
several important biological molecules, such as proteins, amino acids,
carbohydrates, DNA, and lipids. In the next section, you will examine the
risks and benefits of manufacturing and using organic compounds.
Section Review
1 K/U In this section, you learned about biological polymers. Unit Issue Prep
(a) Name three types of biological polymers. Before you research your
issue on organic chemistry,
(b) Give an example of each type of biological polymer.
think about the importance of
(c) Name the monomer unit for each type of biological polymer. organic compounds in every-
day life. How are polymers
2 K/U Classify each polymerization reaction as an addition reaction
important in medicine? How
or a condensation reaction.
are they important in industry?
F F F
(a) nH C CH → … CH CH CH CH …
2 2 2
O O
(b) nHO OH + nHO C (CH ) C OH →
2 4
O O
… O O C (CH ) C O O …
2 4
3 I Draw the product of each polymerization reaction, and classify the
reaction. Then circle and identify any amide or ester bonds in the
product.
(a) nH
2
C CH
2
→
O O
(b) nHO CH OH + nHO C C OH →
2
O O
(c) nHO C (CH
2
)
3
C OH + nH
2
N CH NH
2
→
CH
3
Chapter 2 Reactions of Organic Compounds • MHR 95
4 C What function does each type of biological molecule perform
in living organisms?
(a) carbohydrate (c) DNA
(b) protein (d) lipid
5 I Identify each type of biological molecule. Copy the structure into
your notebook, and circle the functional group(s).
O O
(a) H N CH C OH (d) H C O C (CH ) CH
2 2 2 14 3
O
CH
3
HC O C (CH ) CH
2 12 3
O OH
HO
O
(b) OH
H C O C (CH ) CH
CH OH 2 2 16 3
2
OH CH OH
2
O
HO
O
(c) H N CH C OH (e) HO
2
OH
CH
2
O O
HO
OH
CH OH
2
OH
6 MC Gore-tex™ is a popular fabric that provides protection from rain
while allowing perspiration to escape. What polymer coating is used to
make Gore-tex™ fabric? What special properties does this polymer
have? What else is this polymer used for? Research the answers to
these questions.
96 MHR • Unit 1 Organic Chemistry
Organic Compounds and 2.4
Everyday Life
You are already aware that organic compounds are an inescapable part of Section Preview/
your daily life. As you know, much of your body is composed of organic Specific Expectations
compounds. The food you eat is made from organic compounds, as are the In this section, you will
clothes you wear. The fuel that heats your home and powers buses and
(cid:2) discussthe variety and
cars is also organic. When you are sick or injured, you may use organic importance of organic
compounds to fight infection or to reduce pain and swelling. Modern compounds in your life
processed foods include many flavourings and colourings—another use
(cid:2) analyzethe risks and bene-
of organic compounds. (See Figure 2.23.) fits of the production and
use of organic compounds
(cid:2) explainhow organic chem-
CH 3 istry has helped to solve
problems related to human
health and the environment
OH
H C CH
3
CH
3
menthol
Figure 2.23 In Chapter 1, you learned about esters that are used as flavourings. Not all
flavourings belong to the ester family. Menthol is an organic compound that is found in the
mint plant. It is used as a flavouring in many substances, including toothpaste, chewing gum,
and cough syrups. What functional group is present in menthol? How might you guess this
from the name?
In this section, you will examine the uses of some common organic
compounds. You will also carry out an analysis of some of the risks and
benefits that are involved in making and using organic compounds.
Risk-Benefit Analysis
How can you make the most informed decision possible when analyzing
the risks or benefits of a product or issue? The following steps are one
way to carry out a risk-benefit analysis for the manufacture and use of an
organic compound.
Step 1 Identify possible risks and benefits of the organic product. Ask
questions such as these:
• What are the direct uses of this product? (For example, is it used
as a pharmaceutical drug for a specific disease or condition? Is it
an insecticide for a specific insect “pest”?)
• What are the indirect uses of this product? (For example, is it used
in the manufacture of a different organic or inorganic product?)
• What are the direct risks of making or using this product?
(For example, is the product an environmental pollutant, or does
it contain compounds that may be harmful to the environment?
Can the workers who manufacture this product be harmed by
exposure to it?)
Chapter 2 Reactions of Organic Compounds • MHR 97
• What are the indirect risks of making or using this product? (For
example, are harmful by-products produced in the manufacture
of this product? How much energy does the manufacture of this
product require, and where does the energy come from? What, if
any, side effects does this product cause?)
Step 2 Research the answers to your questions from step 1. Ensure that
your information comes from reliable sources. If there is controversy
on the risks and benefits of the product, find information that covers
both sides of the issue.
Step 3 Decide on your own point of view. In your opinion, are the benefits
greater than the risks? Do the risks outweigh the benefits?
Step 4 Consider possible alternatives that may lessen the risks. Ask
questions such as the following:
• Does a similar, less harmful, product exist?
• Is there a better way to manufacture or dispose of this product?
• What safety precautions can be taken to reduce the risks?
Risks and Benefits of Organic Compounds
The next four tables outline common uses of various organic compounds,
as well as possible complications resulting from each use. The
ThoughtLab that follows provides an opportunity for you to work with
and extend the information in the tables. Of course, the compounds listed
are only a few of the many useful organic compounds that are available to
society.
Table 2.4 Uses and Possible Complications of Selected Pharmaceutical Drugs
Organic compound Source Common uses Side effects and/or concerns
salbutalmol • developed from ephedrine, • used as asthma medication • possible side effects
(Ventolin®) a compound that occurs include tremors, nausea,
naturally in the ma huang heart palpitations,
(ephedra) plant headaches, and
nervousness
lidocaine • developed from cocaine, a • used as a local anaesthetic, • possible side effects
compound that occurs in throat sprays and include skin rash or
naturally in the coca leaf sunburn sprays swelling
morphine • occurs naturally in the • one of the strongest • highly addictive
opium poppy plant, which pain-killers known • possible side effects
is still the simplest and include dizziness,
cheapest source of drowsiness, and breathing
morphine difficulty
acetylsalicylic acid • developed from salicin, • reduces fever, • possible side effects
(A.S.A., Aspirin®) found in the bark of the inflammation, and pain include stomach upset
willow tree • used to prevent heart • more rare side effects
attacks by thinning blood include stomach bleeding
and Reye’s syndrome
acetaminophen • developed from acetyl • reduces fever and pain • possible side effects
(Tylenol™) salicylic acid include stomach upset
• can cause liver damage in
high doses
98 MHR • Unit 1 Organic Chemistry
Table 2.5 Uses and Possible Complications of Selected Pesticides
Pesticide Common uses Side effects and/or concerns
parathion • insecticide • one of the most toxic
• kills insects by disrupting organophosphate pesticides
their nerve impulses • highly toxic to humans,
birds, aquatic invertebrates,
and honeybees
carbaryl • insecticide • more expensive than
• similar to parathion, but parathion
safer for humans • generally low toxicity to
humans and most other
mammals
• highly toxic to fish, aquatic
invertebrates, and honey
bees
endrin • insecticide • persists in soil up to
• also controls rodents, such 12 years
as mice • highly toxic to fish
• banned in some countries
and restricted use in many
others
pyrethrin • natural pesticide • irritating to skin, eyes,
• breaks down quickly in the respiratory system
environment • highly toxic
• can be dangerous to
humans and pets within
range of the pesticide
application
• very toxic to aquatic life
resmethrin • synthetic pyrethroid • low toxicity to humans and
pesticide other mammals (causing
• 75 times less toxic to skin, eye, and respiratory
humans and pets than system irritation)
pyrethrin • irritating to skin, eyes, and
respiratory system
• highly toxic to fish and
honey bees
Table 2.6 Uses and Possible Complications of Selected Food Additives
Organic Compound Common uses Side effects and/or concerns
aspartame • artificial sweetener • significant controversy over
possible health risks
menthol • flavouring in many • may cause allergic reaction
substances, including
toothpaste, chewing gum,
and cough syrups
MSG • flavour enhancer for foods • may cause allergic reaction
(monosodium- known as MSG symptom
glutamate) complex, with symptoms
such as nausea and
headache
• may worsen already severe
asthma
Red #40 • food colouring • may cause allergic reaction
Chapter 2 Reactions of Organic Compounds • MHR 99
Table 2.7 Uses and Possible Complications
of Selected Common Organic Compounds
Organic compound Common uses Side effects and/or concerns
tetrachloroethene • solvent used to dry-clean • toxic
(Perc™) clothing • may damage central
nervous system, kidneys,
and liver
ethylene glycol • automobile antifreeze • toxic, especially to small
pets and wildlife
• may damage central
nervous system, kidneys,
and heart
acetone • nail polish remover • highly flammable
• industrial solvent • irritating to throat, nose,
and eyes
ThoughtLab Risk-Benefit Analyses of Organic Products
As you know, organic products provide many of the 1. What are the practical purposes of this organic
necessities and comforts of your life. They are also compound?
responsible for a great deal of damage, including
2.(a) What alternative compounds (if any) can be
environmental pollution and harm to human health.
used for the same purpose?
In this Thought Lab, you will perform risk-benefit
(b) What are the benefits of using your particular
analyses on three organic compounds.
compound, instead of using the alternatives
in part (a)?
Procedure
3.(a) What are the direct risks of using this
1. Choose three of the organic compounds listed in
compound?
Tables 2.4 through 2.7. Research and record the
(b) What are the indirect risks of using this
chemical structure of each compound.
compound?
2. Follow the four steps for a risk-benefit analysis,
4. In your opinion, should this compound continue
given at the beginning of this section. You will
to be used? Give reasons for your answer.
need to carry out additional research on the
5. What safety precautions could help to reduce
compounds of your choice.
possible harm—to people as well as to the
environment—resulting from this compound?
Analysis
For each compound, answer the following
questions.
Problem Solving With Organic Compounds
Many chemicals and products have been developed as solutions to health,
safety, and environmental problems. Sometimes, however, a solution to
one problem can introduce a different problem. Read the three articles on
the next few pages. Then complete the ThoughtLab that follows.
100 MHR • Unit 1 Organic Chemistry
Replacing CFCs—At What Cost?
At the beginning of the twentieth Earth from the Sun’s ultraviolet
century, refrigeration was a radiation, this decrease in ozone
relatively new technology. Early has led to increases in skin cancer,
refrigerators depended on the as well as damage to plants and
use of toxic gases, such as animals. In addition, CFCs are
ammonia and methyl chloride. potent greenhouse gases and con-
Unfortunately, these gases some- tribute to global warming. Through
times leaked from refrigerators, the Montréal Protocol, and later
leading to fatal accidents. In 1928, “Earth Summit” gatherings, many
a new, “miracle” compound was countries—including Canada—
developed to replace these toxic have banned CFC production.
gases. Dichlorodifluoromethane, Substitutes for CFCs are
commonly known as Freon®,was a available, but none provide a
safe,non-toxic alternative. Freon® completely satisfactory alternative.
and other chlorofluorocarbon Hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs) are
compounds, commonly referred to organic compounds that behave
as CFCs, were also used for like CFCs, but do not harm
numerous other products and the ozone layer. For example,
applications. They were largely 1,1,1,2-tetrafluoroethane and
responsible for the development of 1,1-difluoroethane are HFCs that
many conveniences, such as air- can be used to replace CFCs in
conditioning,that we now take for refrigerators and air conditioners.
granted. Unfortunately, HFCs are also
Today we know that CFCs greenhouse gases.
break up when they reach the Simple hydrocarbons can also
ozone layer, releasing chlorine be used as CFC substitutes.
atoms. The chlorine atoms destroy Hydrocarbons such as propane,
ozone molecules faster than the 2-methylpropane (common name:
ozone can regenerate from oxygen isobutane),and butane are efficient
gas. Studies in the past ten years aerosol propellants. These hydro-
have shown dramatic drops in carbons are stable and inexpensive,
ozone concentration at specific but they are extremely flammable.
locations. Since ozone protects
H C CH CH CH CH CH CH CH CH CH
3 3 3 2 3 3 2 2 3
CH
3
isobutane propane butane
H F F H
F C C F F C C H
H F H H
1,1,1,2-tetrafluoroethane 1,1-difluoroethane
CChhaapptteerr 22 RReeaaccttiioonnss ooff OOrrggaanniicc CCoommppoouunnddss •• MMHHRR 110011
Revisiting DDT: Why Did it Happen?
Dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane, to feed. Crop damage and low Later, however, tests revealed that
better known as DDT, is a well- crop yield are significant problems DDT does not readily decompose
known pesticide that has caused for countries undergoing food in the environment. Instead, DDT
significant environmental damage. shortages and famines. remains present in the soil for
It is easy to point fingers, blaming DDT was one of the first decades after use. The hydrocarbon
scientists and manufacturers for pesticides that was developed. part of this molecule makes it solu-
having “unleashed” this organic For many years, it was used suc- ble in the fatty tissues of animals.
compound on an unsuspecting cessfully to protect crops and fight As it passes through the food
world. It is more difficult,however, disease epidemics. Paul Mueller, chain, DDT accumulates. Animals
to understand why this environ- the scientist who discovered that are higher in the food chain,
mental disaster took place. DDT’s use as a pesticide, was such as large birds and fish,contain
Insects consume more than awarded the Nobel Prize in 1948. dangerous concentrations of this
one third of the world’s crops each chemical in their tissues. A high
Cl
year. In addition, insects such as DDT concentration in birds causes
Cl
mosquitoes spread life-threatening them to lay eggs with very thin
diseases, including malaria and shells, which are easily destroyed.
CH C Cl
encephalitis. Weeds reduce crop Today DDT is no longer produced
yields by taking over space, using or used in Canada. It is still used,
Cl
up nutrients,and blocking sunlight. however, in many developing
Cl
Some weeds even poison the countries.
DDT
animals that the crops are intended
Knocking on the Car Door
Automobile fuels are graded using increase the efficiency of the these compounds help to reduce
octane numbers, which measure hydrocarbon combustion reaction. engine knocking. In addition,burn-
the combustibility of a fuel. A high Henry Ford believed that ethanol, ing ethanol and methanol produces
octane number means that a fuel another catalyst, should be used fewer pollutants than burning
requires a higher temperature instead of tetra-ethyl lead. Ethanol hydrocarbon fuels, which contain
and/or higher pressure to ignite. could be produced easily from contaminants. Since they can be
Racing cars with high-compression locally grown crops. As we now made from crops, these alcohols
engines usually run on pure know, ethanol is also much better are a renewable resource.
methanol, which has an octane for the environment.
number of 120. Tetra-ethyl lead became the
CH
3
Gasoline with too low chosen fuel additive. Over many
an octane number can cause decades, lead emissions from car H C O C CH
3 3
“knocking” in the engine of a car, exhausts accumulated in urban
when the fuel ignites too easily and ponds and water systems. Many CH 3
burns in an uncontrolled manner. waterfowl that live in urban areas 2-methoxy-2-methyl propane
Knocking lowers fuel efficiency, experience lead poisoning. Lead is (methyl tert-butyl ether)
and it can damage the engine. also dangerous to human health.
As early as 1925, two of the Leaded fuels are now banned
CH
3
first automobile engineers became across Canada. In unleaded gaso-
aware of the need to improve the line, simple organic compounds HO C CH
3
octane number of fuels. Charles are added instead of lead com-
Kettering advocated the use of a pounds. These octane-enhancing CH 3
newly developed compound called compounds include methyl-t-butyl
1,1-dimethyl ethanol
tetra-ethyl lead, Pb(C 2 H 5 ) 4 . This ether, t-butyl alcohol, methanol, (tert-butyl alcohol)
compound acts as a catalyst to and ethanol. Like lead catalysts,
102 MHR • Unit 1 Organic Chemistry
ThoughtLab Problem Solving with Organic Compounds
In this ThoughtLab, you will consider several (d) Have these additional problems been
situations in which organic compounds were used resolved? If so, how have they been resolved?
to help solve a health, safety, or environmental (e) Do you foresee any new problems arising
problem. from the solutions in part (d)? Explain why
or why not.
Procedure
Analysis
1. Choose two of the situations that are discussed
in the three newspaper articles. Come up with a 1. Use your knowledge of organic chemistry to
third situation, involving organic compounds, describe how organic chemistry has helped
that you have heard or read about recently. For to provide a solution to
the three situations you have chosen, answer (a) a human health problem
the following questions. (b) a safety problem
(a) What was the original problem? (c) an environmental problem
(b) How was this problem resolved? What part 2. In your opinion, is it worth coming up with
did organic compounds play in the solution? solutions to problems, if the solutions carry
(c) What further problems (if any) were the possibility of more problems? Explain
introduced by the solution in part (b)? your answer.
Section Summary
In this section, you encountered some of the ways that organic compounds
make our lives easier. As well, you learned about some of the risks
involved in using organic compounds. You carried out risk-benefit analyses
on several organic compounds. Finally, you examined some situations in
which organic chemistry has helped to solve problems related to human
health, safety, and the environment.
Section Review
1 MC Think about the risks and benefits of organic compounds. Unit Issue Prep
(a) Describe five specific benefits you obtain from organic compounds. Before researching your issue
(b) Describe two risks from organic compounds, and explain how these at the end of Unit 1, decide
how you will use the informa-
risks may affect you.
tion and skills you learned in
2 C Prepare a brochure, booklet, or web page explaining the practical this section. What are some
uses of organic compounds to a younger age group. Your booklet possible direct and indirect
should include the following information: risks and benefits involved in
the issue you have chosen?
• a simple explanation of what an organic compound is
• a description of some benefits of organic compounds
• specific examples of at least three different organic compounds that
you studied in this chapter, plus their uses
• specific examples of at least three different organic compounds that
you did not study in this chapter, plus their uses
Chapter 2 Reactions of Organic Compounds • MHR 103
3 C Research persistent organic pollutants (POPs) on the Internet. Use
your research to prepare a poster about POPs for your community.
Include the following information:
• examples of three POPs, with descriptions of their negative effects
on the environment and/or human health
• a description of what the Canadian government has done to address
the problem of POPs
• suggestions for ways that your community can avoid or reduce harm
from organic pollutants
4 MC In section 2.3, you learned about some of the risks and benefits
of polymers. Choose a synthetic polymer from section 2.3. Carry out
a risk-benefit analysis of this polymer.
5 C Scientists and horticulturalists who work with and sell the
synthetic pesticide pyrethroid are concerned about public perception.
Many people buy the natural pesticide pyrethrin, even though it is
more toxic than pyrethroid. Why do you think this happens? Do you
think this happens for other products that have natural and synthetic
alternatives? Write a brief editorial outlining your opinions and advice
to consumers, to help them make informed product choices.
104 MHR • Unit 1 Organic Chemistry
Review
Reflecting on Chapter 2 2. What is the connection between a condensation
reaction and an esterification reaction?
Summarize this chapter in the format of your
choice. Here are a few ideas to use as guidelines: 3. How is an addition reaction related to an
• Describe the different types of organic reactions, elimination reaction?
and give an example of each type. 4.(a) In your own words, define an esterification
• Compare addition polymerization reactions with reaction and a hydrolysis reaction. Give two
condensation polymerization reactions. examples of each type of reaction.
• List the biomolecules you learned about in this (b) Explain the connection between these two
chapter, and give an example of each. types of reactions.
• List some benefits of the use of organic
5. Identify each reaction as an addition reaction,
compounds.
a substitution reaction, or an elimination
• List some risks from the use of organic
reaction.
compounds. (a) CH (cid:2)CH + H → CH CH
2 2 2 3 3
I
Reviewing Key Terms
For each of the following terms, write a sentence FeBr
(b) + I 3 + HI
that shows your understanding of its meaning. 2
addition reaction substitution reaction
(c) CH CH CH OH → CH CH(cid:2)CH + H O
elimination reaction oxidation 3 2 2 3 2 2
(d) CH CH CH OH + HCl →
reduction condensation reaction 3 2 2
CH CH CH Cl + H O
hydrolysis reaction esterification reaction 3 2 2 2
(e) CH CH(CH )CH(cid:2)CH + HBr →
Markovnikov’s rule monomers 3 3 2
CH CH(CH )CH(Br)CH
polymer addition polymerization 3 3 3
(f) CH CH CH(cid:2)CHCH CH + H O →
plastics nylons 3 2 2 3 2
CH CH CH(OH)CH CH CH
condensation polyamides 3 2 2 2 3
(g) CH CH Br + NH → CH CH NH + HBr
polymerization biochemistry 3 2 3 3 2 2
polyesters amino acids 6. Identify each reaction as an oxidation or a
protein saccharide reduction. (Oxidizing and reducing agents
carbohydrate disaccharide are not shown.)
monosaccharide starch O O
polysaccharide nucleotides
(a) CH CH CHCH → CH CH CHCOH
DNA (2-deoxyribonucleic lipids 3 2 3 2
acid) oils
CH CH
3 3
RNA (ribonucleic acid) fats
O OH
waxes
→
(b)
Knowledge/Understanding
1. Describe each type of organic (c) O
reaction, and give an example.
(a) addition HO CH 2 CH 2 CH CH 3 → HC CH 2 CH CH 3
(b) substitution
CH HC O
(c) elimination 2
(d) oxidation
OH
(e) reduction
(f) condensation
(g) hydrolysis
Chapter 2 Reactions of Organic Compounds • MHR 105
7. Describe each type of polymerization, and give 17.(a) What is the generic monomer of a
an example. polysaccharide polymer?
(a) addition polymerization (b) What is the monomer of cellulose?
(b) condensation polymerization
Inquiry
8. What is the difference between a nylon and a
polyester? How are they similar? 18. Draw and name the product(s) of each incom-
plete reaction. (Hint: Do not forget to include
9. How can the following reaction be an example
any second products, such as H O or HBr.)
of both an addition reaction and a reduction? 2
CH (cid:2)CH + H → CH CH (a) CH 3 CH(cid:2)CHCH 3 + Br 2 →
2 2 2 3 3 (b) HO(cid:3)CH CH CH CH CH + HBr →
2 2 2 2 3
10.(a) What is Markovnikov’s rule? Why does it
O
apply to the following reaction?
CH 3 CH(cid:2)CH 2 + HBr →? (c) CH 3 CH 2 CH + [O]→
(b) Name and draw the two isomeric products of
H SO
this reaction. (d) HO CH 2 CH 2 CH 3 2 ∆ 4
(c) Which product is formed in the greater
OH
amount?
11. Classify the following oxidation as an addition, (e) + [O] →
substitution, or elimination reaction. Explain
your reasoning. O
CH 3 CH 2 OH + [O] → CH 3 CHO (f) CH CH COH + HOCH H 2 SO 4
3 2 3
12. Consider the reaction of an aldehyde with
(g) CH CH(cid:2)CHCH CH + H →
3 2 3 2
lithium aluminum hydride, LiAlH , to produce
4 O
an alcohol. Why is this reaction a reduction,
H SO
not an oxidation? (h) CH C O CH CH + H O 2 4
3 2 3 2 ∆
13. A short section of the polymer polypropene is
19. Draw the product(s) of each incomplete reac-
shown below.
…(cid:3)CH (cid:3)CH(CH )(cid:3)CH(cid:3)CH(CH )(cid:3)… tion. Hint: Do not forget to include the second
2 3 2 3
product, such as H O or HBr, for a substitution
(a) Draw and name the monomer that is used 2
reaction.
to make this polymer.
O
(b) What type of polymer is polypropene?
Explain your reasoning. (a) CH CH C OH + CH CH CH OH →
3 2 3 2 2
(c) What is the common name of this polymer? (b) CH CH C(cid:4)CH + Cl → (i) + Cl → (ii)
3 2 2 2
14.(a) What is the difference between a protein and OH
an amino acid?
(c) H SO
(b) How are proteins important to living 2 4
∆
organisms?
O
15.(a) Define the term “lipid.”
(b) Give three different examples of lipids. H SO
(d) O + H O 2 4
(c) List four foods you eat that contain lipids. 2 ∆
(d) How are lipids important to your body?
O
16.(a) Distinguish between monosaccharides,
(e) CH C CH CH + [H] →
disaccharides, and polysaccharides. 3 3
(b) Draw and name an example of each.
CH
3
(c) How are carbohydrates important to
living organisms?
106 MHR • Unit 1 Organic Chemistry
(f) H 2 C(cid:2)CHCH 2 CH(CH 3 ) 2 + HOH → polymerization
(i)(majorproduct) + (ii)(minorproduct) (i) ?
(g) CH 3 CH 2 CH 2 CH 2 CH 2 (cid:3)OH + [O] → … CH 2 CH CH 2 CH …
(i) + [O] → (ii)
CH CH CH CH
2 3 2 3
FeBr
(h) + Cl 3
2 21. Identify each type of reaction in questions 18,
19, and 20.
(i) CH CH CH(Br)CH + OH − →
3 2 3
22.(a) Write a brief procedure that you could use
O
to carry out the following reactions in a
(j) HO CH CH CH CH + HC OH → laboratory.
2 2 2 3
polymerization • oxidation of 1-pentanol
(k) nCH 2 CH • oxidation of 2-pentanol
• oxidation of 2-methyl-2-butanol
OH
(b) Describe the results you would expect.
O O
(c) Write a chemical equation for each reaction.
polymerization
(l) nHO(CH ) OH + nHOCCH COH Show the products, if any.
2 7 2
20. Draw and name the reactant(s) in each reaction. 23. In Investigation 1-A in Chapter 1, you carried
Cl Cl out a condensation reaction to produce an ester
called ethyl ethanoate. In this chapter, you
(a) ? + Cl 2 → H C C H learned about the reverse reaction: hydrolysis.
(a) Write a balanced chemical equation,
H H
showing the reactants and the products
O
of the hydrolysis of ethyl ethanoate.
(b) ? + [O] → HCCH CH (b) Write a step-by-step procedure to carry out
2 3
the acid hydrolysis of ethyl ethanoate.
Br Br
(c) List the materials and equipment you would
(c) HC C CH + ? → C C need to carry out this reaction.
3
H CH 24. At the beginning of section 2.2, you learned
3
about Tollen’s reagent. Tollen’s reagent oxidizes
OH
aldehydes to produce the salt of a carboxylic
(d) ? + [H] → CH CH CH CH acid. How does this reagent work as a test to
3 3
distinguish between aldehydes and ketones?
CH
3
25. One type of condensation reaction (which
O
you did not study in this chapter) takes place
(e) ? + ? → CH CH COCH CH CH CH when an acid, usually H 2 SO 4 , is added to an
3 2 2 2 2 3
alcohol at temperatures that are lower than the
(f) ? + [H] →
OH temperatures for an elimination reaction. In
O this type of condensation reaction, two alcohol
molecules combine to form an ether. A water
(g) ?? ++ [[OO]] →→ ? + [O] →→ molecule is eliminated as a second product of
OH
the reaction.
H SO (a) Write a chemical equation to show the
(h) ? 2 ∆ 4 + H 2 O condensation reaction of ethanol to produce
ethoxyethane.
Chapter 2 Reactions of Organic Compounds • MHR 107
(b) Classify this condensation reaction as an (b) What are some common examples of
addition reaction, a substitution reaction, steroids? How are steroids used in medicine?
or an elimination reaction. Explain your (c) How are steroids misused in sports?
answer. 33. Muscle-building athletes sometimes drink
(c) A different reaction occurs if the acid HCl is beverages that contain amino acids.
used instead of H 2 SO 4 . Name this type of (a) Why might this type of drink help to
reaction, and write the equation for it. build muscles?
(b) Research the benefits and risks of this type
Communication
of drink.
26. Use a molecular model kit to build an example
34. Early settlers in Canada often made their own
of a DNA nucleotide monomer. Join your
soap using animal fats and lye.
nucleotide to your classmates’ nucleotides
(a) What type of chemical would you expect lye
to build a short strand of DNA.
to be? Explain your reasoning.
27. Make a list of five materials or substances you (b) Use a reference book or dictionary to find the
use every day that are made from organic com- chemical name for lye.
pounds. Write a paragraph that describes how (c) Look through books about early pioneer life
your life would be different without these five to find an early recipe for making soap.
materials or substances. (d) Use the recipe you found to write a full
28. How has organic chemistry helped to solve the laboratory procedure for making soap
problems caused by the use of the following like the early settlers did. Include a list
substances? of materials and a diagram, if necessary.
(a) leaded gasoline (b) CFCs
Answers to Practice Problems and Short Answers to
Section Review Questions
Making Connections
Practice Problems:1.(a)substitution (b)addition
29. Suppose that the Canadian government (c)elimination 2.(a)oxidation (b)reduction (c)reduction
proposed a $3 million grant to scientists who 3.(a)addition/reduction (b)condensation/substitution
are working on the development of synthetic 4.(a)addition (b)oxidation 5.3-ethyl-3-heptanol
6.(a)1-bromohexane (minor), 2-bromohexane (major)
pesticides. Would you support this grant?
(b)2-methyl-2-pentanol (major), 2-methyl-3-pentanol
Write a brief paragraph that explains your
(minor) 8.(a)propene + hydrochloric acid
point of view.
(b)ethene + bromine (c)3-methyl-2-pentene,
30. Styrofoam™ “clamshells” were used for 2-ethyl-1-butene (d)hydrogen gas 9.(a)substitution
packaging fast food until a few years ago. (b)oxidation (c)substitution (d)elimination 11.(a)elimination
Today, large fast food corporations use paper (b)oxidation (c)substitution (d)substitution (e)oxidation
packaging instead. Why has Styrofoam™ (f)substitution 12.(a)1-butene + water (b)pentanal,
use been reduced? What problems does this pentanoic acid (c)2-bromo-3-methylbutane +water
product cause? Research Styrofoam™ (made (d)2-methyl-1-propanol +NaBr (e)butanone
(f)chlorocyclohexane +water 13.no, because tertiary
from a polymer called polystyrene) to answer
alcohols cannot be oxidized. 14.(a)reduction (b)reduction
these questions.
(c)reduction (d)esterification (e)hydrolysis
31. Do you think Canada should cut back on the 15.(a)cyclobutanone, cyclobutanol; 2,2,4,4-tetramethyl-3-
manufacture and use of synthetic polymers? pentanone, 2,2,4,4-tetramethyl-3-pentanol 16.(a)hexanoic
Write a brief paragraph that explains your point acid (b)1-octanol (c)methyl propanoate +water
of view. Include at least three good reasons to (d)1-propanol + ethanoic acid (e)3-hexanol (f)2-propyl
back up your point of view. If necessary, (or isopropyl) 3-methylpentanoate 17.(a)2-methylbutanal
research the information you need. (b)1-pentanol, pentanal (c)1-propanol, 3-methylhexanoic
acid 18.polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA)
32. Steroids are one type of lipid. Research
19.(a)condensation (b)addition (c)condensation
answers to the following questions.
21.(a)addition (b)condensation; nylon
(a) What is the structure of a steroid?
(c) condensation; polyester (d)condensation; polyester
108 MHR • Unit 1 Organic Chemistry
Section Review: 2.1:1.(a)addition (b)elimination
(c)substitution (d)substitution 2.(a)oxidation (b)reduction
(c)reduction (d)oxidation (e)reduction 3.(b)hydrolysis
2.2:1.(a)elimination (b)addition (c)oxidation
(d)reduction or addition (e)substitution (f)substitution
(g)condensation 2.(a)2,3-dibromobutane
(b)1-chlorobutane (minor) + 2-chlorobutane (major)
(c)1-hexene + water (d)3,3-dimethyl-1-butene + HBr
3.(a)bromobenzene (b)1-bromopentane + water
4.(a)2-pentanone (b)propanoic acid (c)2,3-dimethylbutanal
(d)ethane (e)3-pentanol (f)1-butene, butane (g)2-ethyl-3,4-
dimethyl-1-octanol 5.(a)2-propyl propanoate (b)cyclopen-
tene (c)methanoic acid, 2-butanol (d)cyclohexanol
(e)N-ethyl heptanamide 6.(b)2-bromo-4-methylpentane
7.(a), (c), and (d) 2.3:1.(a)protein, starch, nucleic acid
(b)insulin, amylose, DNA (c)amino acid, monosaccharide
(glucose), nucleotide 2.(a)addition (b)condensation
3.(a)addition polymerization (b)condensation polymeriza-
tion (c)condensation polymerization 5.(a)amino acid
(b)monosaccharide (c) amino acid (d)lipid (e)disaccharide
Chapter 2 Reactions of Organic Compounds • MHR 109
An Issue to Analyze
UNIT 1
Current Issues
Related to Organic
Chemistry
Background
Have you ever heard the saying “necessity is the
mother of invention”? Almost all new products are
developed to meet a need. As you have seen in this
unit, however, new products carry risks as well as
benefits. Often, the development of a new product is
opposed by groups of people who are concerned • Should all plastics that are made in the future
with possible risks. be biodegradable?Biopolymers, such as pro-
There may be several points of view about any teins and starches, are used to produce one type
scientific development. These points of view are of biodegradable plastic. Find out more about
influenced by various factors such as the economy, biodegradable plastics. How are they made, and
society, and politics. how do they break down? What are the risks
In this unit issue, you will explore the develop- and benefits?
ment of new products through organic chemistry. • Are food additives necessary? Should they be
You will choose one issue from the list below, and regulated more closely? Almost all processed
research the different points of view. Then you will foods contain food additives. Choose three
present your findings, and your own point of view, or more food additives, not including any
to your class. compounds that you may have researched in
• Can biofuel be used to replace petroleum-based Chapter 2. Research the uses, structures, and
fuels?Biofuel can be made from biological purposes of the food additives you have chosen.
materials, such as plants and animal fats. • Decide on a different current issue to research
Biodiesel and ethanol are the two most common and analyze. If you want to research a different
biological fuels. As part of your research, find issue, have your teacher approve your plan
out what biofuel is used for. Think about factors before you begin.
that may be holding back the sale of biofuel on
the Canadian market. Plan and Present
• Are Canadian processes for approving new phar-
1 Choose an issue to research.
maceutical drugs adequate, too extensive, or not
extensive enough?Some Canadians complain 2 Who is involved in the issue? Research and
about the long waiting period for a new foreign report on the different points of view of action
drug to be approved in Canada. Why is there a groups, corporations, and government groups.
long waiting period? What testing processes are Ensure that your research covers a wide range of
needed for approval of a new drug in Canada? sources and resources. Some possible contacts
• Why are some drugs so expensive?The are given below:
Canadian government recently increased its drug • environmental groups, which often provide
patents from 17 years to 20 years. This should one strong point of view on an issue
help drug companies make sufficient profits to • research scientists at universities, who may
cover the enormous costs of developing and test- present information on the development of
ing new drugs. Find out about the costs and pro- a technology
cedures that are involved in developing and test- • Environment Canada and other Canadian
ing new drugs. Who finances drug research? Is it government agencies, which can usually
fair for drug companies to hold patents? What provide scientifically sound information on
happens when these patents are not honoured? a range of topics
110 MHR • Unit 1 Organic Chemistry
Assessment
After you have explored this issue, answer the following
questions to assess your work.
(cid:2) Was your analysis scientifically accurate? Was it
complete? Was it objective?
3 Find out general public opinion on the issue by (cid:2) Was your explanation of the related science clear
taking a survey in your community. and concise?
4 Decide on your own point of view, and provide (cid:2) Did you use at least three primary research
sources? Did you reference these sources in your
information to back up your opinion.
presentation or report?
5 When researching, consider the following
(cid:2) Did you include interesting or unusual information?
question: Does everyone who is involved in the
issue have a good understanding of the related (cid:2) Did you consider all points of view in your
presentation?
science? If your answer is no, provide specific
proof to back up your opinion. For example, (cid:2) Did your research influence the opinions of others
include quotations from your sources, where in your class?
applicable. Could the issue be resolved by
providing factual information? Explain.
6 Prepare a presentation for your class. Your
presentation can take the form of a pamphlet,
an illustrated research report, a poster, an
oral or multimedia presentation, a video,
a web page, or another creative method that
has been approved by your teacher. Include the
following information:
• a description of the factors or needs that led
to the development of the process, technology,
or product you are analyzing
• structures and equations for any specific organic
compounds and reactions that relate to the issue
• a list of the benefits and risks that are
involved in the issue
• a description of the various points of view on
the issue, along with your own point of view
• a list of groups or people who might benefit
from the process, technology, or product
• a list of groups or people who might benefit if
the process, technology, or product was
stopped or changed
• a list of government and/or industry influences
(Who financed the research? Have any laws or
bills been passed to regulate the development
of the process, technology, or product?)
Evaluate the Results
1 Take notes on the presentations of other mem-
bers of your class. If you have a class debate,
take notes on the various points of view.
2 What did you learn? Has your point of view on Web LINK
any issue changed? If so, how?
www.mcgrawhill.ca/links/chemistry12
Go to the web site above, and click on Web Linksto find
appropriate sites related to this unit issue.
Unit 1 An Issue to Analyze • MHR 111
Review
Knowledge/Understanding 7. The compound CH CH(CH )CH CH OH has the
3 3 2 2
IUPAC name
Multiple Choice (a) 1-pentanol
In your notebook, write the letter for the best (b) 1-butanol
answer to each question. (c) 2-methyl-4-butanol
1. Carbon atoms can bond with each other to form (d) 3-methyl-1-butanol
(a) single bonds only (e) 3-methyl-1-pentanol
(b) double bonds only 8. The compound CH CH CH C(O)CH CH has
3 2 2 2 3
(c) single and double bonds the IUPAC name
(d) single, double, and triple bonds (a) ethoxypentane
(e) single, double, triple, and quadruple bonds (b) ethoxypropane
2. The three-dimensional shape around a single- (c) ethyl butanoate
bonded carbon atom is (d) 3-pentanone
(a) linear (e) 3-hexanone
(b) trigonal planar 9. CH CH C(CH ) CH CH CH COOH has the
3 2 3 2 2 2 2
(c) tetrahedral IUPAC name
(d) pyramidal (a) 5,5-dimethylheptanoic acid
(e) bent (b) 3,3-dimethylheptanoic acid
3. The length of a carbon-carbon bond in a (c) 4,4-dimethylheptanoic acid
benzene molecule is (d) 2,2-dimethylheptanoic acid
(a) halfway between a single bond and a (e) 3,3-dimethyl heptanoate
double bond 10. The oxidation of pentanal produces
(b) halfway between a double bond and a (a) pentanol
triple bond (b) pentanal
(c) the same as a single bond (c) pentanoic acid
(d) the same as a double bond (d) pentanamine
(e) the same as a triple bond (e) pentanamide
4. The functional group of an alcohol is 11. The esterification of methanol and butanoic
(a) (cid:2)OH acid produces
(b) (cid:2)C(cid:3)C(cid:2) (a) 1-methyl butanoic acid
(c) (cid:2)NR 2 (b) 4-methyl butanoic acid
(d) (cid:2)C(O)NR 2 (c) butyl methanoate
(e) (cid:2)OR (d) methyl butanoate
5. The functional group of an amide is (e) butanol and methanoic acid
(a) (cid:2)OH 12. The polymerization of propene, CH CH(cid:3)CH ,
3 2
(b) (cid:2)C(cid:3)C(cid:2) can be classified as
(c) (cid:2)NR 2 (a) a hydrolysis reaction
(d) (cid:2)C(O)NR 2 (b) an elimination reaction
(e) (cid:2)OR (c) a substitution reaction
6. The compound NH CH CH CH has the IUPAC (d) a condensation reaction
2 2 2 3
name (e) an addition reaction
(a) methanamine 13. Ketones are reduced to produce
(b) ethanamine (a) primary alcohols
(c) propanamine (b) secondary alcohols
(d) butanamine (c) tertiary alcohols
(e) butanamide (d) aldehydes
(e) carboxylic acids
112 MHR • Unit 1 Organic Chemistry
14. Choose the most correct definition. 20. Are the boiling points of carboxylic acids higher
(a) Organic compounds are based on carbon, or lower than the boiling points of alcohols?
and they usually contain carbon-nitrogen Explain your answer.
and carbon-silicon bonds. 21. A primary amine can form intermolecular
(b) Organic compounds are based on nitrogen, hydrogen bonds, but a tertiary amine cannot.
and they usually contain carbon-nitrogen Explain this statement.
and carbon-hydrogen bonds. 22. What happens when an oxidizing agent, such as
(c) Organic compounds are based on carbon, potassium permanganate, is added to a tertiary
and they usually contain carbon-hydrogen alcohol? Explain.
and carbon-carbon bonds.
23. What happens when an oxidizing agent is
(d) Organic compounds are based on hydrogen,
added to a secondary alcohol? Explain.
and they usually contain carbon-hydrogen
24. What is the common name for ethanol?
and carbon-oxygen bonds.
(e) Organic compounds are based on oxygen, 25. What is the IUPAC name for acetic acid?
and they usually contain carbon-oxygen and 26. The aldehyde CH CH CHO is named propanal,
3 2
carbon-carbon bonds. rather than 1-propanal. Why is the position
15. Which statement is not correct? number unnecessary?
(a) A C(cid:2)O bond is polar. 27. Name and draw the product of the oxidation
(b) An N(cid:2)H bond is polar. of 3-ethyl-4-methyl-1-hexanol. If this product
(c) An O(cid:2)H bond is polar. is oxidized further, what second product will
(d) A C(cid:2)C bond is polar. be formed?
(e) A C(cid:2)Cl bond is polar.
Inquiry
16. Which description of an addition reaction
is accurate? 28. Write the IUPAC name for each compound.
(a) Two molecules are combined, and a small (a) CH CH CH COOH
3 2 2
molecule, such as water, is produced as a (b) CH OH
3
second product. (c) CH CH CH CH COOCH
3 2 2 2 3
(b) A hydrogen atom or functional group is (d) CH CH C(O)CH
3 2 3
replaced with a different functional group. (e) CH CH NHCH
3 2 3
(c) Atoms are added to a double or triple (f) CH CH CH(CH )CH(CH )CH CH CHO
3 2 3 3 2 2
carbon-carbon bond.
29. Give a common name for each compound.
(d) A double carbon-carbon bond is formed
(a) methanol
when atoms are removed from a molecule.
(b) 2-propanol
(e) Carbon atoms form more bonds to oxygen or
(c) ethoxyethane
less bonds to hydrogen.
30. Write the IUPAC name for each compound.
CH CH
Short Answer 2 3
In your notebook, write a sentence or a short (a) CH 3 CH 2 CH CH CH CH 2
paragraph to answer each question.
CH
17. Is it accurate to say that most healthy foods are 3
chemical-free? Explain your answer. (b) CH 3 O CH 2 CH 2 CH 3
18. What is the difference between an amide and
(c) H 2 N CH 2 CH 2 CH CH 3
an amine? Use examples to explain your
answer. CH CH
2 3
OH
19. Do hydrocarbons have functional groups? Use (d)
examples to explain your answer.
Unit 1 Review • MHR 113
(e) O 32. What is wrong with the following names? Use
each incorrect name to draw a structure. Then
CH 3 CH 2 C O CH 2 CH 2 CH 2 CH 3 correctly rename the structure you have drawn.
(a) 2-propyl-4-pentanone
31. Name each compound.
(b) 3,3-trimethylhexane
O
(c) 2,5-octanol
(a) OH 33. Imagine that you dip one finger into a beaker
of rubbing alcohol and another finger into a
beaker of water. When you take your fingers out
(b) CH 3 CH 2 NH CH 2 CH 2 CH 2 CH 3 of the beakers, you observe that one finger feels
colder than the other. Which finger feels colder,
(c) and why?
34. You are given two beakers. One contains
O 1-pentanol, and the other contains pentanoic
acid. Describe the materials you would need
(d) CH 3 CH 2 CH 2 C NH 2 to distinguish between the two liquids, in a
laboratory investigation.
35. You are given three test tubes that contain
(e) colourless liquids. One test tube contains
benzene, another contains ethanol, and the
third contains 2,4-hexadiene. Design a
O procedure that will tell you the contents
of each test tube. Describe your expected
OH
observations. CAUTION Do not try your
(f)
procedure in a lab. Benzene is carcinogenic.
CH CH
2 3
36. Predict the product(s) of each reaction.
CH 3 (a) CH CH CH(cid:3)CHCH (cid:4) I →
3 2 3 2
O CH 3 CH 3 (b) CH 3 CH 2 CH 2 OH (cid:4) HCl →
(c) CH CH(CH )CHO (cid:4) [O] →
3 3
(g) H C CH 2 CH 2 C CH 2 C CH 3 (d) 1-propanol (cid:4) methanoic acid →
H SO
2 4
CH 3 CH 3 (e) 1-heptanol ∆
CH 3 37. Predict the product(s) of each reaction.
(a) CH (cid:3)CHCH + H O →
2 3 2
CH CH
3 2 (b) propyl decanoate (cid:4) water →
(h)
(c) CH CH(CH )CH CH Br(cid:4) H O →
3 3 2 2 2
(d) CH CH(OH)CH (cid:4) KMnO →
CH 3 3 4
3
(e) CH (cid:3)CHCH CH OH (cid:4) 2HCI →
2 2 2
O
38. Draw and name the missing reactant(s) in each
reaction.
(i) CH 3 N C CH 3 (a) ? (cid:4) HBr → CH (cid:3)CHBr
2
CH CH (b) ? + H O → CH CH CH CH(CH )CH OH +
2 3 2 3 2 2 3 2
HCl
CH 3 CH 3 (c) ?+? → butylheptanoate (cid:4) H 2 O
(d) ? + [H] → 2-methylpropanal
(j) (e) ? + [O] → 3-ethyl-4,4-dimethyl-2-pentanone
CH
3
O
114 MHR • Unit 1 Organic Chemistry
Communication 45. Choose one of the biological molecules
described in Chapter 2. Research this molecule
39. Draw a structural diagram for each compound.
until you discover three interesting facts about
(a) methanamine
it, which you did not know before. Share your
(b) 2-octanol
findings with your class.
(c) 1,2-dichlorobutane
(d) pentanamide
Making Connections
(e) methoxynonane
46. When was plastic cling wrap first invented?
40. Draw a structural diagram for each compound.
What problem was it created to solve? Use the
(a) propyl propanoate
Internet or other resources to find the answers
(b) 2,2,4,5-tetramethylheptanal
to these questions.
(c) 2-methylpropanoic acid
(d) N-ethyl-N-methyl butanamide 47. Organic pollutants can build up in living things
(e) 4-ethyl-3,3-dimethyl-2-heptanone by a process called bioaccumulation.
(a) Use the Internet to research bioaccumulation.
41. Prepare a poster that describes condensation
Where do most organic pollutants accumulate
polymerization to students who do not take
in the body of an animal?
science. Use the polymerization of Nylon-6
(b) Explain your answer to the previous
as an example. Include information on the
question, using your knowledge of the
practical uses of Nylon-6. What natural product
solubility of organic compounds.
was nylon designed to replace? When nylon
was first invented in the 1930s, what consumer 48. Most dyes are organic compounds. Before
products were made from it? What part did artificial dyes were invented, people prepared
nylon play in World War II? natural dyes from roots, berries, leaves, and
insects.
42. Draw a concept web that summarizes what you
(a) Research some dyes used in the past and in
have learned about organic chemistry. Include
the present. Find the chemical structure of
the following topics:
each dye. Identify the functional group(s) in
•functional groups
each dye.
•physical properties of organic compounds
(b) How do artificial dyes differ from natural
•reactivity of organic compounds
dyes? How have artificial dyes affected the
•polymers, both natural and synthetic
fashion industry?
•biological molecules and their functions
•practical applications of organic chemistry
•risks and benefits of organic chemistry
43. In your opinion, are the risks of manufacturing
and using pesticides greater or less than the
benefits? Write a short (half-page) essay that
explains your point of view. Include specific COURSE
CHALLENGE
examples to back up your argument. (You may
want to carry out further research on pesticides, The Chemistry of Human Health
and the effects of pesticides, before writing Think about these questions as you plan for your
your essay.) Chemistry Course Challenge.
• How can you identify the family to which an
44. How are organic compounds important to your
organic compound belongs?
health and lifestyle? Write a short paragraph
• What reactions do each functional group
that describes any benefits you obtain from
commonly undergo?
organic compounds.
Unit 1 Review • MHR 115
Structure and
Properties
I
UNIT 2 CONTENTS
n 1958, an astonished television
CHAPTER 3
audience watched as Dr. Harry
Atoms, Electrons, and Periodic
Coover used a tiny drop of a
Trends
substance called cyanoacrylate to
CHAPTER 4 lift a game show host off the ground.
Structure and Properties Cyanoacrylate is an amazingly
of Substances powerful adhesive. This stunt
helped launch the commercial
career of superglue, now used for
UNIT 2 OVERALL EXPECTATIONS
everything from building circuit
What is the quantum
boards to sealing human tissue in
mechanical model of the atom,
surgery.
and how does a understanding
Superglue is just one example
of atomic structure enable
of an astounding variety of com-
chemists to explain the
properties of substances and pounds with useful properties.
their chemical bonding? Whether synthesized by design or
discovered by trial and error, each
How do the properties of
liquids and solids compare, new compound does more than
and how can you use bonding provide a potentially useful product.
theory to predict the shape of It also contributes to scientists’
simple molecules? understanding of the relationship
Which technologies have between structure at the molecular
advanced our understanding level and properties at the
of atomic and molecular
macroscopic level.
theory, and how have those
In this unit, you will investigate
theories contributed to
the structure and properties of
the development of other
atoms, ions, and molecules, and the
technologies and products?
natural and synthetic products that
result from their interactions.
Unit Project Prep
Look ahead to the project at the
end of Unit 2. Plan in advance for
the challenge by making a list of
skills and information you will need
as you progress through the unit.
116
Atoms, Electrons, and
Periodic Trends
T
Chapter Preview he northern lights, also called the aurora borealis, are a fleeting feature
of the night sky in northern parts of the world. For centuries, people who
3.1 The Nuclear Atomic
saw the shimmering, dancing sheets of coloured lights were awed by the
Model
phenomenon, and tried to explain it. Inuit that lived near Hudson’s Bay
3.2 The Quantum
told that the lights were caused by torches held by spirits to lead souls of
Mechanical Model
the dead to the afterlife. In Greenland and Labrador, people thought the
of the Atom
lights could help predict the weather. In Europe in the Middle Ages, their
3.3 Electron
appearance was an omen of impending war or plague.
Configurations and
Today, scientists explain the northern lights as resulting from streams
Periodic Trends
of protons and electrons—plasma—emanating from the Sun. When the
electrons from the plasma interact with gaseous atoms in Earth’s upper
atmosphere, the atoms emit coloured light.
Nineteenth-century atomic theory could not explain why the aurora
exhibits a limited range of specific wavelengths, rather than the full
visible spectrum. Early in the twentieth century, however, scientists
developed a revolutionary new model of the atom. This model, and the
theory that supports it, helped to account for many puzzling phenomena
that the existing atomic theory had failed to explain. Among these
Prerequisite
Concepts and Skills phenomena are the characteristic colours of the northern lights.
In this chapter, you will learn about the developments that led to the
Before you begin this chapter,
modern model of the atom. You will also learn about the model itself and
review the following concepts
how it relates to periodic trends and the periodic table.
and skills:
(cid:2) identifying subatomic
particles and their The green colours in the northern lights come
properties (from previous from the interaction of accelerated electrons
studies) with oxygen atoms. The red colours usually
(cid:2) describing the structure come from nitrogen atoms. How do these
and organization of the interactions lead to atoms of different elements
periodic table (from emitting light with characteristic wavelengths?
previous studies)
(cid:2) explaining periodic trends
for properties such as
atomic radius, first
ionization energy, and
electron affinity (from
previous studies)
118 MHR • Unit 2 Structure and Properties
The Nuclear Atomic Model 3.1
Toward the close of the nineteenth century, chemists had two invaluable
Section Preview/
conceptual tools to aid them in their understanding of matter. The first Specific Expectations
was John Dalton’s atomic theory, which you have studied intensively in
In this section, you will
previous chemistry courses. Dalton’s atomic theory, first published in
(cid:2) describeand explainthe
1809, provided chemists with a framework for describing and explaining
experimental observations
the behaviour of matter during chemical reactions. As you can see in that led to Rutherford’s
Figure 3.1, the model of the atom that resulted from this theory was nuclear model of the atom
very simple.
(cid:2) describeand explainthe
The second conceptual tool was Dmitri Mendeleev’s periodic table, modifications that Niels Bohr
which listed the known elements in order of increasing atomic mass. The made to the nuclear model
resulting organizational chart arranged elements so that those with similar of the atom
chemical properties were grouped together in the same column. (cid:2) distinguishbetween a
As you know, Dalton’s atomic theory no longer applies in its original quantized model of the atom
form, and Mendeleev’s periodic table has undergone many changes. For and the model proposed by
Rutherford
example, scientists later discovered that atoms are not the most basic unit
of matter because they are divisible. As well, the modern periodic table (cid:2) communicateyour under-
lists the elements in order of their atomic number, not their atomic mass. standing of the following
terms: nuclear model, emis-
Of course, it also includes elements that had not been discovered in
sion spectrum, absorption
Mendeleev’s time. Even so, in modified form, both of these inventions are
spectrum, quantum, photons
still studied and used today in every chemistry course around the world.
When Mendeleev invented the periodic table, he was well-acquainted
with Dalton’s atomic theory. He knew nothing, however, about subatomic
In your notebook, list the
particles, and especially the electron, which is the foundation for the
main ideas in Dalton’s atomic
modern periodic table’s distinctive shape. Because the original periodic
theory. Explain how this theory
table developed out of experimental observations, chemists did not need
enabled chemists to explain
an understanding of atomic structure to develop it. (As you will see in the three mass laws: the law
section 3.3, however, the periodic table easily accommodates details about of conservation of mass,
atomic structure. In fact, you will learn that the modern periodic table’s the law of definite proportions,
distinctive design is a natural consequence of atomic structure.) and the law of multiple
proportions.
The First Step Toward the Modern Atomic Model
Chemists needed Dalton’s atomic theory to advance their understanding
of matter and its behaviour during chemical reactions. His atomic model,
however, was inadequate for explaining the behaviour of substances.
For example, Dalton designed a system of symbols to show how atoms
combine to form other substances. Figure 3.2 on the next page shows
several of these symbols. As you will no doubt notice, Dalton correctly
predicted the formulas for carbon dioxide and sulfur trioxide, but ran into
serious trouble with water, ammonia, and methane. Dalton’s attempt at
molecular modelling highlights a crucial limitation with his atomic
model. Chemists could not use it to explain why atoms of elements
Figure 3.1 The model of the
combine in the ratios in which they do. This inability did not prevent
atom in 1809. The atom, as Dalton
chemists from pursuing their studies. It did, however, suggest the need pictured it, was a tiny, solid,
for a more comprehensive atomic model. indestructible sphere.
Chapter 3 Atoms, Electrons, and Periodic Trends • MHR 119
hydrogen sulfur carbon dioxide
nitrogen water
sulfur trioxide
carbon ammonia
oxygen methane
Figure 3.2 Examples of Dalton’s system of symbols for atoms and molecules
The Discovery of the Electron Requires a New Atomic Model
In 1897, Dalton’s idea of an indivisible atom was shattered with a startling
announcement. A British scientist, Joseph John Thomson, had discovered
1
the existence of a negatively charged particle with mass less than
1000
that of a hydrogen atom. This particle was, of course, the electron.
1
(Later calculations showed that the mass of an electron is that
1837
of a hydrogen atom.) It took several years for chemists to consider the
consequences of this discovery. They realized that if atoms contain
electrons, atoms must also contain a positive charge of some kind to
balance the negative charge. The atomic model that Thomson eventually
proposed is shown in Figure 3.3. Keep in mind that scientists had not
yet discovered the proton. Therefore, in this model, the entire sphere
carries a uniform, positive charge.
electrons
CHEM
FACT
positively charged sphere
Scientists initially described
radioactivity solely in terms
of radiation. The idea of
radioactive particlesfirst
appeared around the turn of
the twentieth century. In 1909, Figure 3.3 The atomic model in 1903. Thomson viewed the atom as a positively
Ernest Rutherford reported charged sphere embedded with sufficient numbers of electrons to balance (neutralize)
confidently that the alpha the total charge.
particle was, in fact, a helium
nucleus, 4He, with a 2+ Rutherford’s Nuclear Model of the Atom
2
charge. Scientists still had
In the last four years of the nineteenth century, scientists in France—
not discovered the proton
by this time, so the nature of notably Henri Becquerel and Marie and Pierre Curie—discovered that
the helium nucleus (or any certain elements are radioactive. That is, their atoms naturally emit
other atomic nucleus) was positively charged particles (alpha particles), negatively charged particles
still unknown. In 1919, the (beta particles), and energy (gamma radiation).
existence of the proton was
Working in his laboratory at Montreal’s McGill University, Ernest
confirmed experimentally
Rutherford studied the chemistry of radioactive elements intensively from
by, appropriately enough,
1898 to 1907. His efforts would lead to a Nobel Prize in Chemistry in
Rutherford himself.
1908. Greater achievements lay ahead, however.
120 MHR • Unit 2 Structure and Properties
In 1909, two of Rutherford’s students reported observations that cast
doubts on Thomson’s atomic model. As part of ongoing investigations into
the nature and properties of radioactive emissions, they aimed alpha (α)
particles at extremely thin metal foils. A small number of the alpha parti-
cles, about one in every 8000, were deflected significantly by the atoms
that made up the metal foils. These observations were inconsistent with
Thomson’s atomic model. The researchers expected the alpha particles
1
to pass through the metal atoms with, at most, deflections averaging
200
of a degree. Therefore, deflections of 90˚ and more strained the credibility
of Thomson’s model. Rutherford encouraged further investigation. Either
the observations and data were flawed, or Thomson’s atomic model was.
As you may recall from earlier studies, the flaw lay in Thomson’s
model. In 1911, Rutherford published the results of the now-famous
gold-foil experiment, shown in Figure 3.4. On the basis of this experi-
ment, Rutherford suggested that the deflections he and his students
observed were caused by an encounter between an alpha particle and
an intense electric field at the centre of the atom.
A Hypoth esis: Expected result B Experiment C Actual Result
based on Thomson’s model
incoming incoming
α particles 1 R be a a d m io a o c f t i α v e p a s r a t m icl p e l s e emits α particles
2 Beam of α particles
meets gold foil
major
little or no deflection
minor
deflection
deflection
cross-section of gold foil cross-section of gold foil
showing Thomson’s atoms composed of atoms with
tiny, massive nucleus
gold foil
5 Major deflections 3 Flashes of light observed when α
are observed rarely particles strike screen show that
most are transmited with little
4 Minor deflections (exaggerated here) or no deflection
are observed occasionally
Figure 3.4 The hypothesis, experiment, and results of Rutherford’s gold foil experiment.
The experimental hypothesis and design owed much to the contributions of Rutherford’s
students, Hans Geiger (of Geiger-counter fame) and Ernest Marsden.
Rutherford performed several calculations that led him to an inescapable
conclusion: the atom is made up mainly of empty space, with a small,
massive region of concentrated charge at the centre. Soon afterward, the
charge on this central region was determined to be positive, and was
named the atomic nucleus. Because Rutherford’s atomic model, shown
in Figure 3.5 on the next page, pictures electrons in motion around an
atomic nucleus, chemists often call this the nuclear model of the atom.
You may also see it referred to as a planetary model because the electrons
resemble the planets in motion around a central body.
Chapter 3 Atoms, Electrons, and Periodic Trends • MHR 121
CHEM nucleus (later determined electrons around nucleus
to be positively charged)
FACT
Contrary to common belief,
Rutherford’s 1911 paper on the
discovery of the nucleus does
notassociate the nucleus with
a positive charge. In fact,
Rutherford acknowledged that
the results of his experiment
were independent of the sign
of the charge. He suggested
that the charge of the nucleus,
as well as other questions
raised by his paper, were sub-
jects for later investigation.
Sometime between 1911 and
1913, someone identified the
charge on the nucleus as
positive. Whether or not this
person was Rutherford is
Figure 3.5 The atomic model in 1911. A Japanese scientist, Hantaro Nagaoka, proposed a
not clear.
similar, disk-shaped model with electrons orbiting a positively charged nucleus, in 1904.
Rutherford notes in his 1911 paper that his results would be the same if Nagaoka’s model
were correct.
Prelude to a New Atomic Model
Rutherford’s atomic model solved problems inherent in Thomson’s
atomic model, but it also raised others. For example, an atomic nucleus
composed entirely of positive charges should fly apart due to electrostatic
forces of repulsion. Furthermore, Rutherford’s nuclear atom could not
Technology LINK adequately explain the total mass of an atom. The discovery of the
neutron, in 1932, eventually helped to settle these questions.
Chemists used spectral
There was a more significant problem, however. Rutherford’s atomic
analysis during the nineteenth
model seemed to contradict the laws of nineteenth-century physics.
century to analyze substances
According to these assumptions, an electron in motion around a central
and, sometimes, to discover
new elements. Another body must continuously give off radiation. Consequently, one should be
common technique for analyz- able to observe a continuous spectrum (a “rainbow”) of light energy as the
ing substances, often used in electron gives off its radiation.
conjunction with spectral Because the electron should also lose energy as a result of this
analysis is a flame test. One of
radiation, the radius of its orbit should continuously decrease in size
the foremost practitioners of
until it spirals into the nucleus. This predicted annihilation of the atom
this technique was a chemist
would occur in a fraction of a second. However, atoms were not seen to
named Robert Bunsen. Find
out why he invented his destabilize as predicted by this model.
famous burner. Carry on your Nineteenth-century physics could not explain why Rutherford’s
research to investigate other model corresponded to a stable atom. The solution to this problem
ways that chemists use marked a turning point in the history of chemistry and physics. To
spectral analysis to examine
appreciate the scope of the problem, and the impact of its eventual
the composition of substances.
solution, it is necessary to remain a short while longer in the nineteenth
Select an appropriate medium
century. In the following pages, you will examine a phenomenon that
to report your findings.
scientists of the time could not explain.
The Problem of Atomic Spectra
You probably recall that visible light is part of a broader continuum
of energy called the electromagnetic spectrum. Figure 3.6 reviews the key
properties of the electromagnetic spectrum of energy.
122 MHR • Unit 2 Structure and Properties
gamma ultra--
x-ray violet Iinnffrraarreedd microwave radio frequency
ray
1016 101144 1100 1122 11001100
700
visible light region
1 second
Figure 3.6 The electromagnetic spectrum and its properties
The visible portion of the electromagnetic spectrum is called a continuous
spectrum, because the component colours are indistinct. They appear
“smeared” together into a continuum of colour. According to nineteenth-
century physics, part of the energy emitted by electrons should be
observable as a continuous spectrum. This is not, however, the case.
Instead, when atoms absorb energy (for example, when they are exposed
to an electric current), you observe a pattern of discrete (distinct),
coloured lines separated by spaces of varying length. See Figure 3.7. You
can also observe this line spectrum for hydrogen, and for other atoms, in
Investigation 3-A.
400 500 600 750 nm
Figure 3.7 The discrete, coloured lines of this spectrum are characteristic of
hydrogen atoms. No other atoms display this pattern of coloured lines.
elbisiv
wavelength (nm)
10 −2 100 102 104 106 108 1010 1012
A Despite differences in
wavelengths and frequency, ultra-
violet
all electromagnetic radiation
rays
travels at the same speed
in a vacuum: 3.00 × 10 −8 m/s.
1020 1018 108 106 104
This value, the speed of light,
is a constant represented by frequency (s
−1)
the symbol c.
400 500 600 750 nm
B The relationship between
frequency (symbol ν, measured frequency (ν) in s−1 (Hz) h am igh p e li r tu de l a o m w p e l r i tude
in Hz) and wavelength (symbol λ, (brighter) (dimmer)
usually measured in nm or m,
wavelength
depending on the energy). As λ 4 s−1 (4 Hz)
wavelength increases, frequency
decreases. As wavelength
decreases, frequency increases.
(Note that 1 Hz = 1 s−1. Note also
that the frequency symbol, ν, λ 8 s−1 (8 Hz)
is the Greek letter nu, not the wavelength, λ
letter v.)
C The amplitude (height) of a
wave represents its intensity.
λ 16 s−1 (16 Hz) A wave with a higher
amplitude has a greater
intensity (is brighter) than a
wave with a lower amplitude.
Chapter 3 Atoms, Electrons, and Periodic Trends • MHR 123
S K I L L F O C U S
Analyzing and interpreting
Communicating results
Atomic Emission Spectra
(Teacher Demonstration)
When a high voltage current is passed through Materials
a glass tube that contains hydrogen gas at low
gas discharge tube apparatus (teacher use only)
pressure, the gas glows with a pinkish-purple
low pressure hydrogen gas tube and tubes for
colour. If you observe this gas discharge tube
other available elements
through a spectroscope or a diffraction grating,
spectroscope or diffraction grating
you can see distinct, coloured lines. This type
of spectrum is called a line spectrum or an
Procedure
emission spectrum. Chemists first observed
spectra like this in the mid-1800s. 1. Practise using the spectroscope or diffraction
grating by observing an incandescent light
bulb. Point the slit of the spectroscope toward
Question
the bulb and move the spectroscope until you
Can the Rutherford model of the atom explain
can clearly see the spectrum.
the emission spectra of elements?
2. Record the appearance of the spectrum from
the incandescent bulb.
Predictions
The Rutherford model of the atom described 3. Your teacher will set up the gas discharge
electrons as tiny masses in motion around a tube apparatus to demonstrate the emission
nucleus. According to this model, excited atoms spectra of hydrogen and other elements.
should emit a continuous spectrum of light
4. Observe the hydrogen discharge tube, and
energy as their electrons give off radiation. In
note its colour when high-voltage current is
fact, according to this model, atoms should
applied to it.
continually radiate energy whether they are
5. With the lights dimmed, examine the
excited or not. Read through the procedure and
hydrogen emission spectrum with the
predict whether your observations will support
aid of a spectroscope or diffraction grating.
or contradict the Rutherford model. Give reasons
Make a careful sketch to record your
for your answer.
observations. Note in particular the colours
you see. Estimate their wavelengths.
Safety Precautions
(Use the figure below to help you estimate the
wavelengths.)
•A very high voltage is required to operate the
6. Follow steps 4 and 5 for the emission spectra
gas discharge tubes. Do not come into contact
produced by other gas discharge tubes that
with the source while viewing the tubes.
your teacher has available.
•Do not work with the gas discharge tubes
yourself. Your teacher will demonstrate how
it works.
400 500 600 750 nm
H
124 MHR • Unit 2 Structure and Properties
Analysis Conclusion
1. According to Rutherford’s model of the atom 6. Reread your prediction and state whether
and nineteenth-century physics, electrons it was accurate or not. Explain your answer
could emit or absorb any quantity of energy. in detail.
(a) Compare the spectrum you observed for
the incandescent bulb to the spectrum that Applications
Rutherford’s model predicts for hydrogen. 7. The emission spectrum of each element is
(b) Compare the spectrum you observed for characteristic of that element. In other
hydrogen to the spectrum you observed for words, it is a “fingerprint” that can be used
the incandescent bulb. Do your observations to identify the element.
seem to support or contradict Rutherford’s (a) Suggest reasons to explain why each
model? Explain your answer. element has a distinct and characteristic
(c) How do you think Rutherford’s model emission spectrum.
would have to be modified in order to (b) Helium was discovered in the Sun before
account for your observations? it was discovered on Earth. How do you
2. How do you think the lines you observed in think this was possible? Use print resources
the hydrogen emission spectrum relate to the or the Internet to help you answer the
energy of the electrons in a hydrogen atom? question.
Include a diagram in your answer. 8. Examine the spectrum below. It is the
3. Compare the hydrogen emission spectrum absorption spectrum for sodium. Absorption
to the other spectra you observed. Why do spectra are produced when atoms absorb light
you think emission spectra are different for of specific wavelengths.
different elements? (a) If you examined the emission spectrum for
sodium in the laboratory, compare it to the
4. Why do you think that scientists initially
absorption spectrum for sodium. (If you
focused their attention on the hydrogen
did not, look for a picture of the emission
emission spectrum rather than the emission
spectrum for sodium in a book or on the
spectrum of another element?
Internet.)
5. Each element has a characteristic emission
(b) In general, how do you think emission
spectrum. Why is it only possible to observe
spectra compare to absorption spectra?
the emission spectra of selected elements in
(c) Instruments based on absorption
a high school laboratory?
spectra are used extensively in analytical
chemistry. One such instrument is an
atomic absorption spectrophotometer. Use
print and electronic resources to find out
how the instrument works, and for what
applications it is used.
Na
Chapter 3 Atoms, Electrons, and Periodic Trends • MHR 125
electron orbits The Bohr Model of the Atom
Scientists of the nineteenth century lacked the concepts necessary to
explain line spectra. Even in the first decade of the twentieth century, a
suitable explanation proved elusive. This changed in 1913 when Niels
nucleus
Bohr, a Danish physicist and student of Rutherford, proposed a new
model for the hydrogen atom. This model retained some of the features of
Rutherford’s model. More importantly, it was able to explain the line spec-
trum for hydrogen because it incorporated several new ideas about energy.
Figure 3.8 The model of the atom
As you can see in Figure 3.8, Bohr’s atomic model pictures electrons in
in 1913. Although Bohr pictured
orbit around a central nucleus. Unlike Rutherford’s model, however, in
the atom in three dimensions, it is
which electrons may move anywhere within the volume of space around
presented here, in two dimensions,
the nucleus, Bohr’s model imposes certain restrictions.
to simplify some of Bohr’s
revolutionary concepts.
The Bohr Atomic Model
1. The atom has only specific, allowable energy levels, called
stationary states. Each stationary state corresponds to the atom’s
electrons occupying fixed, circular orbits around the nucleus.
2. While in one of its stationary states, atoms do not emit energy.
3. An atom changes stationary states by emitting or absorbing a
specific quantity of energy that is exactly equal to the difference
in energy between the two stationary states.
On what basis could Bohr make these claims? In 1900, a physicist named
Max Planck proposed an idea that was so revolutionary that he himself
Web LINK was unwilling to accept its implications. Planck suggested that matter, at
the atomic level, can absorb or emit only discrete quantities of energy.
www.mcgrawhill.ca/links/
Each of these specific quantities is called a quantum of energy. In other
chemistry12
words, Planck said that the energy of an atom is quantized. Something
The concept of quantization
that is quantized can exist only in certain discrete amounts. It is not
enabled physicists to solve
continuous. In this sense, the rungs of a ladder are quantized, while the
problems that nineteenth-
century physics could not. One smooth slope of a ramp is not. Unlike ladders and ramps, however, a
of these involved the thermal quantum is an extremely small “packet” of energy.
properties of solids when they Although Planck said that the energy of matter is quantized, he con-
are heated to incandescence. tinued to describe energy as travelling in the form of waves. He was, in
The other involved the induc-
fact, unwilling to consider that energy might have particle-like properties.
tion of electrical current in
In 1905, however, Albert Einstein was prepared to make just such an
metals when they are exposed
assertion. Light, according to Einstein, is also quantized. It occurs as
to only specific frequencies of
quanta of electromagnetic energy that have particle-like properties. These
electromagnetic radiation.
Use the Internet to investigate particle-like “packets” of energy were later called photons. In Einstein’s
the phenomena known as view, light (and, by extension, all electromagnetic energy) travels in the
blackbody radiation and the form of photons of energy. Light is emitted as photons of energy, and light
photoelectric effect. Write a is absorbed as photons of energy.
brief report outlining the
nature of these phenomena,
How Bohr’s Atomic Model
why nineteenth-century
physics could not explain Explains the Spectrum for Atomic Hydrogen
them, and how the new idea
If you re-read the key points of Bohr’s atomic model above, you can see
of quantization could. Go to
that he is applying the new ideas of quanta in his model. Bohr proposed
the web site above. Click on
that the energy that is emitted and absorbed by an atom must have
Web Linksto find out where to
specific values. The change in energy when an electron moves to higher
go next.
or lower energy levels is not continuous. It is, rather, quantized.
126 MHR • Unit 2 Structure and Properties
Look again at the line spectrum for hydrogen shown in Figure 3.7.
The energy that is associated with the coloured lines in this spectrum
corresponds to the change in energy of an electron as it moves to higher
or lower energy levels. For example, when a hydrogen atom is exposed
to electrical current, or to another form of electromagnetic energy, its
electron absorbs photons of energy. The atom is now said to be in an
excited state. Another common way for atoms to become excited is
through atomic collisions. For example, when two hydrogen atoms
collide, some of the kinetic energy from one atom is transferred to the
other atom. The electron of the second hydrogen atom absorbs this energy
and is excited to a higher energy level.
When the electron of a hydrogen atom that has been excited to the
third energy level falls to the second energy level, it emits light of certain
energy. Specifically, an electron that makes a transition from the third
energy level to the second energy level emits a photon of red light with
a wavelength of 656 nm. Because line spectra result when atoms in an
excited state emit photons as they fall to a lower energy level, these
spectra are also called emission spectra.
Figure 3.9 shows the energy transitions that are responsible for the
coloured lines in hydrogen’s emission spectrum. Notice the use of the
symbol n to designate the allowed energy levels for the hydrogen atom:
n = 1, n = 2, and so on. This symbol, n, represents a positive integer (such
as 1, 2, or 3), and is called a quantum number. You will learn more about
the significance of quantum numbers in section 3.2.
n = 6
n = 5
n = 4
n = 3
n = 2
n = 1
Figure 3.9 How the Bohr model explains the coloured lines in hydrogen’s emission
spectrum. When an excited electron falls from a higher energy level to a lower energy level
(shown by the downward-pointing arrows), it emits a photon with a specific wavelength that
corresponds to one of the coloured lines in the spectrum.
ygrene
400 500 600 750 nm
n = 1
n = 2
n = 3
n = 4
n = 5
n = 6
A Note: Orbits are not drawn to scale. B Note: In its unexcited state, hydrogen‘s electron is in
the energy level closest to the nucleus: n = 1. This is
the lowest-possible energy level, representing a state
of greatest stability for the hydrogen atom.
Chapter 3 Atoms, Electrons, and Periodic Trends • MHR 127
Another kind of spectrum that is related to an atom’s emission spec-
trum is an absorption spectrum. This kind of spectrum results when
electrons of atoms absorb photons of certain wavelengths, and so are
excited from lower energy levels to higher energy levels. Figure 3.10
shows the absorption spectrum for hydrogen. As you can see, discrete,
dark lines appear in the precise locations (wavelengths) as those of the
coloured lines in hydrogen’s emission spectrum.
When light passes through gaseous hydrogen atoms, the electrons in the
hydrogen atoms absorb photons of red, green, blue, and purple light at specific wavelengths.
When the electrons return to lower energy levels, they re-emit photons with these same
wavelengths. However, most of the photons are emitted in a different direction from the one in
which the electrons absorbed the light. As a result, dark lines appear in the spectrum where
photons of those particular wavelengths are absent.
The Successes and Limitations of the Bohr Atomic Model
Bohr’s realization that the atom’s energy is quantized—that electrons are
restricted to specific energy levels (orbits)—was an astounding achieve-
ment. As you have seen, this model successfully predicted the coloured
lines in the visible-light portion of hydrogen’s emission spectrum. It
also successfully predicted other lines, shown in Figure 3.11, that earlier
chemists had discovered in the ultraviolet and infrared portions of
hydrogen’s emission spectrum.
n
0 ∞
6
5
4
3
infrared
2
visible
−100
−200
ultraviolet
−218 1
100 200
wavelength (nm)
Figure 3.11 The ultraviolet series of lines appear as a result of electrons falling from higher
energy levels to n=1. The infrared lines appear as a result of electrons falling from higher
energy levels to n=3.
128 MHR • Unit 2 Structure and Properties
)mota/J(
0201
×
ygrenE
400 nm 500 nm 600 nm 700 nm
Figure 3.10
Math LINK
An atom has an infinite num-
ber of energy levels. In other
words, nranges from 1 to ∞
(infinity). What is the change
in energy when a hydrogen
atom is excited from n = 1
to n = ∞? Use the equation
below to determine the value.
Then consult the periodic table
in Appendix C and examine
hydrogen’s atomic properties.
To what property of hydrogen
does this value correspond? Is
this finding surprising to you?
Explain why.
∆E = E − E
final initial
= −2.18 × 10−18J
(cid:2) (cid:3)
1 − 1
n2 n2 final initial
There was a problem with Bohr’s model, however. It successfully
explained only one-electron systems. That is, it worked fine for
hydrogen and for ions with only one electron, such as He
+
,
Li2+
, and
Be3+
.
Bohr’s model was unable, however, to explain the emission spectra
produced by atoms with two or more electrons. Either Bohr’s model was
a coincidence, or it was an oversimplification in need of modification.
Further investigation was in order.
Careers in Chemistry
Nuclear Medicine three-dimensional computer image that evaluates
the function as well as the structure of an organ.
This procedure enables the physician to diagnose
cancers and other tissue irregularities without the
need for more invasive techniques such as
exploratory surgery.
The dose of radiation that patients receive is
similar to that of a diagnostic x-ray. However,
because many patients are alarmed by the word
“nuclear,” Dr. Goulenchyn says that her team must
explain the procedure tactfully “so that they don’t
run away.” Some physicians ease fears by calling
the discipline “molecular medicine.”
Dr. Goulenchyn sees an increase of 6 to12
percent of patients annually, primarily for suspected
This scan, a product of a nuclear medical technology called
PET, shows changes in metabolic activity in different parts of cancer or heart disease. Her greatest frustration
the brain. The red colour indicates greater activity. is the time she must spend lobbying for new
equipment, particularly for PET, a technique for
The discovery of the atomic nucleus affected all measuring the concentrations of positron-emitting
sciences, including biology and its applications in radioisotopes within the tissues. Positrons are a
the field of medicine. During her graduate studies form of radiation identical to a beam of electrons,
at the University of Western Ontario, Dr. Karen except that the charge of a positron is positive. PET
Goulenchyn excelled in theoretical mathematics, scans can assess biochemical changes in the body,
but switched to medicine because she was drawn especially abnormal ones. These scans provide
to practical applications of science in people’s greater accuracy in determining whether a current
lives. An interest in computers led her to nuclear or proposed therapy is effective.
medicine, which she now practices at the Civic A career in nuclear medicine, Dr. Goulenchyn
Hospital in Ottawa. notes, requires excellence in computers, science,
Nuclear medicine is used chiefly in medical and people skills, with a strong background in
diagnosis. A radiopharmaceutical—a relatively physiology. It also offers an unusual benefit for a
harmless compound with a low dose of radiation— physician: regular working hours. She appreciates
is swallowed or injected into the patient and tracked the time this provides for her family, as well as for
through the bloodstream by instruments such as a her work with the Canadian Association of Nuclear
PET (positron emission tomography) camera. The Medicine, for which she served as president from
nuclear physician can use the results to create a 1996 to 1998.
Chapter 3 Atoms, Electrons, and Periodic Trends • MHR 129
Section Summary
You have seen how scientists in the late nineteenth and early twentieth
century developed and modified the atomic model. Changes in this model
resulted from both experimental evidence and new ideas about the nature
of matter and energy. By 1913, chemists and physicists had a working
model that pointed tantalizingly in a promising direction. During the
third decade of the twentieth century, the promise was fulfilled. In the
next section, you will learn how physicists extended the ideas of Planck,
Einstein, and Bohr to develop an entirely new branch of physics, and a
new model of the atom.
Section Review
1 (a) K/U In what ways did Rutherford’s model of the atom differ from
Thomson’s?
(b) On the basis of what evidence did Rutherford propose his model?
2 K/U Why did Rutherford’s atomic model require modification? Be as
specific as possible in your answer.
3 (a) C Imagine that you are Niels Bohr. Explain your ideas about the
atom to scientists who are familiar with the work of Planck and
Einstein.
(b) Imagine that you are a nineteenth-century scientist who has never
heard of Planck and Einstein’s ideas. You have just reviewed Bohr’s
proposed model for the atom. Write a paragraph describing your
response to Bohr’s model.
4 C List and arrange the types of electromagnetic radiation
(a) in order from longest wavelength to shortest wavelength
(b) in order from highest frequency to lowest frequency
5 C Compare visible light radiation to ultraviolet radiation. How are
they different? How are they the same?
6 I Explain the significance, in terms of absorption or emission of
photons, of the following statements.
(a) An electron moves from n = 1 to n = 6.
(b) An electron moves from n = 5 to n = 2.
(c) An electron moves from n = 4 to n = 3.
7 C Arrange the following in order from lowest energy to highest
energy, and justify your sequence: n = 7, n = 2, n = 5, n = 4, n = 1.
130 MHR • Unit 2 Structure and Properties
The Quantum Mechanical Model 3.2
of the Atom
You have seen how Bohr’s model of the atom explains the emission spec- Section Preview/
trum of hydrogen. The emission spectra of other atoms, however, posed a Specific Expectations
problem. A mercury atom, for example, has many more electrons than a In this section, you will
hydrogen atom. As you can see in Figure 3.12, mercury has more spectral
(cid:2) describethe quantum
lines than hydrogen does. The same is true for other many-electron atoms. mechanical model of the
Observations like these forced Bohr and other scientists to reconsider the atom and its historical
nature of energy levels. The large spaces between the individual colours development
suggested that there are energy differences between individual energy (cid:2) statethe meaning and
levels, as stated in Bohr’s model. The smaller spaces between coloured significance of the first
lines, however, suggested that there were smaller energy differences three quantum numbers
within energy levels. In other words, scientists hypothesized that there are (cid:2) communicateyour under-
sublevels within each energy level. Each of these sublevels has its own standing of the following
slightly different energy. terms: quantum mechanical
model of the atom,orbitals,
ground state,principal
Hg
quantum number (n),
400 450 500 550 600 650 700 750 nm
orbital-shape quantum
number (l),magnetic
H
quantum number (m)
l
400 450 500 550 600 650 700 750 nm
Figure 3.12 The emission spectrum for mercury shows that it has more spectral lines
than the emission spectrum for hydrogen.
It was fairly straightforward to modify Bohr’s model to include the idea
of energy sublevels for the hydrogen spectrum and for atoms or ions with
only one electron. There was a more fundamental problem, however. The
model still could not explain the spectra produced by many-electron
atoms. Therefore, a simple modification of Bohr’s atomic model was not
enough. The many-electron problem called for a new model to explain
spectra of all types of atoms. However, this was not possible until another
important property of matter was discovered.
The Discovery of Matter Waves
By the early 1920s, it was standard knowledge that energy had matter-like
properties. In 1924, a young physics student named Louis de Broglie
stated a hypothesis that followed from this idea. What if, de Broglie
wondered, matter has wave-like properties?
He developed an equation that enabled him to calculate the wave-
length associated with any object—large, small, or microscopic. For
example, a baseball with a mass of 142 g and moving with a speed of
25.0 m/s has a wavelength of 2 × 10 −34m. Objects that you can see and
interact with, such as a baseball, have wavelengths so small that they
do not have any significant observable effect on the object’s motion.
However, for microscopic objects, such as electrons, the effect of wave-
length on motion becomes very significant. For example, an electron
moving at a speed of 5.9 × 106m/s has a wavelength of 1 × 10 −10m. The
size of this wavelength is greater than the size of the hydrogen atom to
which it belongs. (The calculated atomic radius of hydrogen is
5.3 × 10 −11m.)
Chapter 3 Atoms, Electrons, and Periodic Trends • MHR 131
De Broglie’s hypothesis of matter waves received experimental
support in 1927. Researchers observed that streams of moving electrons
produced diffraction patterns similar to those that are produced by waves
of electromagnetic radiation. Since diffraction involves the transmission
of waves through a material, the observation seemed to support the idea
that electrons had wave-like properties.
The Quantum Mechanical Model of the Atom
In 1926, an Austrian physicist, Erwin Schrödinger, used mathematics and
statistics to combine de Broglie’s idea of matter waves and Einstein’s idea
of quantized energy particles (photons). Schrödinger’s mathematical
equations and their interpretations, together with another idea called
Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle (discussed below), resulted in the birth
of the field of quantum mechanics. This is a branch of physics that uses
mathematical equations to describe the wave properties of sub-microscopic
particles such as electrons, atoms, and molecules. Schrödinger used
concepts from quantum mechanics to propose a new atomic model: the
quantum mechanical model of the atom. This model describes atoms as
having certain allowed quantities of energy because of the wave-like
properties of their electrons.
Figure 3.13 depicts the volume surrounding the nucleus of the atom
Figure 3.13 The model of the as being indistinct or cloud-like because of a scientific principle called the
atom in 1927. The fuzzy, spherical
uncertainty principle. The German physicist Werner Heisenberg proposed
region that surrounds the nucleus
the uncertainty principle in 1927. Using mathematics, Heisenberg showed
represents the volume in which
that it is impossible to know both the position and the momentum of an
electrons are most likely to be
object beyond a certain measure of precision. (An object’s momentum is a
found.
property given by its mass multiplied by its velocity.) According to this
principle, if you can know an electron’s precise position and path around
the nucleus, as you would by defining its orbit, you cannot know with
certainty its velocity. Similarly, if you know its precise velocity, you
cannot know with certainty its position. Based on the uncertainty
principle, Bohr’s atomic model is flawed because you cannot assign
fixed paths (orbits) to the motion of electrons.
Clearly, however, electrons exist. And they must exist somewhere. To
describe where that “somewhere” is, scientists used an idea from a branch
of mathematics called statistics. Although you cannot talk about electrons
in terms of certainties, you can talk about them in terms of probabilities.
Schrödinger used a type of equation called a wave equation to define the
probability of finding an atom’s electrons at a particular point within the
atom. There are many solutions to this wave equation, and each solution
represents a particular wave function. Each wave function gives informa-
tion about an electron’s energy and location within an atom. Chemists
call these wave functions orbitals.
In further studies of chemistry and physics, you will learn that the
wave functions that are solutions to the Schrödinger equation have no
direct, physical meaning. They are mathematical ideas. However, the
square of a wave function does have a physical meaning. It is a quantity
that describes the probability that an electron is at a particular point
within the atom at a particular time. The square of each wave function
(orbital) can be used to plot three-dimensional probability distribution
graphs for that orbital. These plots help chemists visualize the space in
which electrons are most likely to be found around atoms. These plots are
132 MHR • Unit 2 Structure and Properties
also referred to as electron probability density graphs. Note: Although
orbitals are wave functions without associated physical characteristics
like shape and size, chemists often use the term orbitals when they mean
three-dimensional probability distribution graphs. To simplify discussion,
this textbook will discuss the size and shapes of orbitals. However, what
is really meant is their associated probability distribution graph, which is
calculated using the square of the wave function.
Each orbital has its own associated energy, and each represents
information about where, inside the atom, the electrons would spend
most of their time. Scientists cannot determine the actual paths of the
moving electrons. However, orbitals indicate where there is a high
probability of finding electrons.
Figure 3.14A represents the probability of finding an electron at any
point in space when the electron is at the lowest energy level (n = 1) of a
hydrogen atom. Where the density of the dots is greater, there is a higher
probability of finding the electron. This graph is “fuzzy-looking” because
the probability of finding the electron anywhere in the n = 1 energy
level of a hydrogen atom is never zero. Farther from the nucleus, the
probability becomes very small, but it will still never reach zero.
Therefore, because the shape of the n = 1 orbital for hydrogen represents
the level of probability of finding an electron, and since the probability
never reaches zero, you have to select a “cut-off” level of probability.
A level of probability is usually expressed as a percentage. Therefore, Distinguish clearly between an
electron orbit, as depicted in
the contour line in Figure 3.14B defines an area that represents 95 percent
Bohr’s atomic model, and an
of the probability graph. This two-dimensional shape is given three
electron orbital, as depicted in
dimensions in Figure 3.14C. What this means is that, at any time, there
the quantum mechanical model
is a 95 percent chance of finding the electron within the volume defined
of the atom.
by the spherical contour.
A B C
+ + +
Figure 3.14 Electron density probability graphs for the lowest energy level in the hydrogen
atom. These diagrams represent the probability of finding an electron at any point in this
energy level.
Quantum Numbers and Orbitals
Figure 3.14 showed electron-density probabilities for the lowest energy
level of the hydrogen atom. This is the most stable energy state for
hydrogen, and is called the ground state. The quantum number, n, for a
hydrogen atom in its ground state is 1. When n = 1 in the hydrogen atom,
its electron is associated with an orbital that has a characteristic energy
and shape. In an excited state, the electron is associated with a different
orbital with its own characteristic energy and shape. This makes sense,
because the electron has absorbed energy in its excited state, so its total
energy increases and its motion changes. Figure 3.15 on the next page
compares the sizes of hydrogen’s atomic orbitals when the atom is in its
ground state and when it is in an excited state.
Chapter 3 Atoms, Electrons, and Periodic Trends • MHR 133
Orbitals have a variety of different possible shapes. Therefore,
scientists use three quantum numbers to describe an atomic orbital. One
n = 1 quantum number, n, describes an orbital’s energy level and size. A second
quantum number, l, describes an orbital’s shape. A third quantum number,
m , describes an orbital’s orientation in space. These three quantum
l
numbers are described further below. The Concept Organizer that follows
afterward summarizes this information. (In section 3.3, you will learn
n = 2 about a fourth quantum number, m s , which is used to describe the
electron inside an orbital.)
The First Quantum Number:
Describing Orbital Energy Level and Size
The principal quantum number (n) is a positive whole number that
n = 3
specifies the energy level of an atomic orbital and its relative size. The
value of n, therefore, may be 1, 2, 3, and so on. A higher value for n
Figure 3.15 The relationship
indicates a higher energy level. A higher n value also means that the
between orbital size and quantum
number for the hydrogen atom. size of the energy level is larger, with a higher probability of finding
As nincreases, the electron’s an electron farther from the nucleus. The greatest number of electrons
energy increases and orbital size that is possible in any energy level is 2n2.
increases.
The Second Quantum Number: Describing Orbital Shape
The second quantum number describes an orbital’s shape, and is a posi-
tive integer that ranges in value from 0 to (n − 1). Chemists use a variety
of names for the second quantum number. For example, you may see it
referred to as the angular momentum quantum number, the azimuthal
quantum number, the secondary quantum number, or the orbital-shape
quantum number.
Regardless of its name, the second quantum number refers to the
energy sublevels within each principal energy level. The name that this
book uses for the second quantum number is orbital-shape quantum
number (l), to help you remember that the value of l determines orbital
shape. (You will see examples of orbital shapes near the end of this
section.)
The value of n places precise limits on the value of l. Recall that l
has a maximum value of (n − 1). So, if n = 1, l = 0 (that is, 1 − 1). If n = 2,
l may be either 0 or 1. If n = 3, l may be either 0, 1, or 2. Notice that the
number of possible values for l in a given energy level is the same as the
value of n. In other words, if n = 2, then there are only two possible sub-
levels (two types of orbital shapes) at this energy level.
Each value for l is given a letter: s, p, d, or f.
• The l = 0 orbital has the letter s.
• The l = 1 orbital has the letter p.
• The l = 2 orbital has the letter d.
• The l = 3 orbital has the letter f.
To identify an energy sublevel (type of orbital), you combine the value
of n with the letter of the orbital shape. For example, the sublevel with
n = 3 and l = 0 is called the 3s sublevel. The sublevel with n = 2 and l = 1
is the 2p sublevel.
134 MHR • Unit 2 Structure and Properties
There are, in fact, additional sublevels beyond l = 3. However, for CHEM
chemical systems known at this time, only the s, p, d, and f sublevels are FACT
required.
The letters used to represent
energy sublevels are
The Third Quantum Number: Describing Orbital Orientation
abbreviations of names that
The magnetic quantum number (m ) is an integer with values ranging nineteenth-century chemists
l
from −l to +l, including 0. This quantum number indicates the orientation used to describe the coloured
lines in emission spectra.
of the orbital in the space around the nucleus. The value of m is limited
l
These names are sharp,
by the value of l. If l = 0, m can be only 0. In other words, for a given
l principal, diffuse, and
value of n, there is only one orbital, of s type (l = 0). If l = 1, m may have
l fundamental.
one of three values: −1, 0, or +1. In other words, for a given value of n,
there are three orbitals of p type (l = 1). Each of these p orbitals has the
same shape and energy, but a different orientation around the nucleus.
Notice that for any given value of l, there are (2l + 1) values for m .
l
The total number of orbitals for any energy level n is given by n2.
For example, if n = 2, it has a total of 4 (thatis, 22) orbitals (an s orbital
and three p orbitals). The Sample Problem below shows further use of
this calculation.
Concept Organizer The Relationship Among the First Three Quantum Numbers
Quantum Numbers
principal quantum number, n 1 2 3
(cid:2) describes size and energy of
an orbital
(cid:2) allowed values: 1, 2, 3, …
orbital shape quantum number, l 0 0 1 0 1 2
(cid:2) describes shape of an orbital
(cid:2) allowed values: 0 to (n − 1)
magnetic quantum number, m l 0 0 −1 0 +1 0 −1 0 +1 −2 −1 0 +1 +2
(cid:2) describes orientation of orbital
(cid:2) allowed values: −l, …0, …+l
Sample Problem
Determining Quantum Numbers
Problem
(a) If n = 3, what are the allowed values for land m, and what is the
l
total number of orbitals in this energy level?
(b) What are the possible values for m if n = 5 and l = 1? What kind of
l
orbital is described by these quantum numbers? How many orbitals
can be described by these quantum numbers?
Continued ...
Chapter 3 Atoms, Electrons, and Periodic Trends • MHR 135
Continued ...
Solution
(a) The allowed values for lare integers ranging from 0 to (n − 1). The
allowed values for m are integers ranging from −l to +lincluding 0.
l
Since each orbital has a single m value, the total number of values
l
for m gives the number of orbitals.
l
To find lfrom n:
If n = 3, lmay be either 0, 1, or 2.
To find m from l:
l
If l = 0, m = 0
l
If l = 1, m may be −1, 0, +1
l
If l = 2, m may be −2, −1, 0, +1, +2
l
Since there are a total of 9 possible values for m, there are 9 orbitals
l
when n = 3.
(b) You determine the type of orbital by combining the value for nwith
the letter used to identify l. You can find possible values for m from
l
l, and the total of the m values gives the number of orbitals.
l
To name the type of orbital:
l = 1, which describes a porbital
Since n = 5, the quantum numbers represent a 5porbital.
To find m from l:
l
If l = 1,m may be −1, 0, +1
l
Therefore, there are 3 possible 5porbitals.
Check Your Solution
(a) Since the total number of orbitals for any given nis n2, when n = 3,
the number of orbitals must be 9 (that is, 32).
(b) The number m values is equivalent to 2l + 1 : 2(1) + 1 = 3. Since the
l
number of orbitals equals the number of m values, the answer of 3
l
must be correct.
Practice Problems
1. What are the allowed values for lin each of the following cases?
(a) n = 5 (b) n = 1
2. What are the allowed values for m, for an electron with the following
l
quantum numbers:
(a) l = 4 (b) l = 0
3. What are the names, m values, and total number of orbitals described
l
by the following quantum numbers?
(a) n = 2, l = 0 (b) n = 4, l = 3
4. Determine the n, l, and possible m values for an electron in the 2p
l
orbital.
5. Which of the following are allowable sets of quantum numbers for an
atomic orbital? Explain your answer in each case.
(a) n = 4, l = 4, m = 0 (c) n = 2, l = 0, m = 0
l l
(b) n = 3, l = 2, m = 1 (d) n = 5, l = 3, m = −4
l l
136 MHR • Unit 2 Structure and Properties
Shapes of Orbitals
An orbital is associated with a size, a three-dimensional shape, and an
orientation around the nucleus. Together, the size, shape, and position
of an orbital represent the probability of finding a specific electron
around the nucleus of an atom. Figure 3.16 shows the probability shapes
associated with the s, p, and d orbitals. (The f orbitals have been omitted
due to their complexity. You may study these orbitals in post-secondary
school chemistry courses.)
Notice that the overall shape of an atom is a combination of all its
orbitals. Thus, the overall shape of an atom is spherical. Be careful, how-
ever, to distinguish for yourself between the overall spherical shape of the
atom, and the spherical shape that is characteristic of only the s orbitals.
Finally, it is important to be clear about what orbitals are when you
view diagrams such as those in Figure 3.16. Orbitals, remember, are solu-
tions to mathematical equations. Those solutions, when manipulated,
describe the motion and position of the electron in terms of probabilities.
Contour diagrams, such as those shown here and in numerous print and
electronic resources, appear solid. It therefore becomes easy to begin
thinking about orbitals as physical “containers” that are “occupied” by
electrons. In some ways, this is unavoidable. Try to remind yourself,
now and then, of the following:
• Electrons have physical substance. They have a mass that can be
measured, and trajectories that can be photographed. They exist in
the physical universe.
• Orbitals are mathematical descriptions of electrons. They do not have
measurable physical properties such as mass or temperature. They exist
in the imagination.
s orbitals
n = 1 n = 2 n = 3
(cid:2) = 0 (cid:2) = 0 (cid:2) = 0
p orbitals
z z z
y y y
n = 2 n = 2 n = 2
(cid:2) = 1 (cid:2) = 1 (cid:2) = 1
x x x
d orbitals
z z zz z z
y y y y y
x x x x x
n = 3 n = 3 n = 3 n = 3 n = 3
(cid:2) = 2 (cid:2) = 2 (cid:2) = 2 (cid:2) = 2 (cid:2) = 2
Figure 3.16 Shapes of the s, p, and dorbitals. Orbitals in the pand dsublevels are oriented
along or between perpendicular x, y, and zaxes.
Chapter 3 Atoms, Electrons, and Periodic Trends • MHR 137
Section Summary
In this section, you saw how the ideas of quantum mechanics led to a
new, revolutionary atomic model—the quantum mechanical model of
the atom. According to this model, electrons have both matter-like and
wave-like properties. Their position and momentum cannot both be deter-
mined with certainty, so they must be described in terms of probabilities.
An orbital represents a mathematical description of the volume of space
in which an electron has a high probability of being found. You learned
the first three quantum numbers that describe the size, energy, shape,
and orientation of an orbital. In the next section, you will use quantum
numbers to describe the total number of electrons in an atom and the
energy levels in which they are most likely to be found in their ground
state. You will also discover how the ideas of quantum mechanics explain
the structure and organization of the periodic table.
Section Review
1 K/U Explain how the quantum mechanical model of the atom differs
from the atomic model that Bohr proposed.
2 K/U List the first three quantum numbers, give their symbols, and
identify the property of orbitals that each describes.
3 C Design a chart that shows all the possible values of l and m l for an
electron with n = 4.
4 C Agree or disagree with the following statement: The meaning of the
quantum number n in Bohr’s atomic model is identical to the meaning
of the principal quantum number n in the quantum mechanical atomic
model. Justify your opinion.
5 I Identify any values that are incorrect in the following sets of
quantum numbers.
(a) n = 1, l = 1, m = 0; name: 1p
l
(b) n = 4, l = 3, m = +1; name: 4d
l
(c) n = 3, l = 1, m = −2; name: 3p
l
6 I Fill in the missing values in the following sets of quantum numbers.
(a) n =?, l =?, m = 0; name: 4p
l
(b) n = 2, l = 1, m = 0; name: ?
l
(c) n = 3, l = 2, m = −2; name: ?
l
(d) n =?, l =?, m =?; name: 2s
l
138 MHR • Unit 2 Structure and Properties
Electron Configurations
and Periodic Trends
For the hydrogen atom (and other single-electron systems), all orbitals that
have the same value for n have the same energy. You can see this in the
energy level diagram shown in Figure 3.17. Hydrogen’s single electron is
in its lowest (most stable) energy state when it is in the 1s orbital. In other
words, the 1s orbital is the ground state for hydrogen. When a hydrogen
atom is in an excited state, its electron may be found in any of its other
orbitals, depending on the amount of energy absorbed.
For the hydrogen atom, orbital energy depends only on the value of n. For
example, all four n =2orbitals have the same energy. All nine n =3orbitals have the same
energy. What must the value of lbe for each of these orbitals?
Atoms with two or more electrons have orbitals with shapes that are
similar to those of hydrogen. However, the interactions among the
additional electrons result in orbitals with the same value of n, but
different energies. For example, Figure 3.18 shows an energy level
diagram for the lithium atom, which has three electrons. You can see that
the 2s orbital has a lower energy than the 2p orbitals. Similarly, the 3p
orbitals are lower in energy than the 3d orbitals. Notice, however, that all
the orbitals within a sublevel have the same energy. For example, the
three p orbitals in the 3p sublevel have the same energy.
3d
3p
3s
2p
2s
1s
Figure 3.18 In the lithium atom, and for all other multi-electron atoms, orbitals in different
energy sublevels differ in energy.
ygrenE
3s 3p 3d
2s 2p
1s
Figure 3.17
ygrenE
3.3
Section Preview/
Specific Expectations
In this section, you will
(cid:2) writeelectron configura-
tions and draworbital
diagrams for atoms of
elements in the periodic
table
(cid:2) explainthe significance of
the exclusion principle
and Hund’s rule in writing
electron configurations
(cid:2) listcharacteristics of the s,
p, d, and fblocks of
elements in the periodic
table
(cid:2) explainthe relationship
between electron
configurations and the
position and properties of
elements in the periodic
table
(cid:2) communicateyour
understanding of the
following terms: spin
quantum number (m ), Pauli
s
exclusion principle, electron
configuration, aufbau
principle, orbital diagram,
Hund’s rule, atomic radius,
ionization energy, electron
affinity
Chapter 3 Atoms, Electrons, and Periodic Trends • MHR 139
Since low energy usually means stability, it is reasonable that the
most stable energy state (ground state) for any atom is one in which its
electrons are in the lowest possible energy level. As you know, this is the
1s orbital (n = 1). However, the electrons of most atoms are not “packed”
into this orbital. In fact, experimental evidence shows that only two atoms
have all their electrons in the 1s orbital: hydrogen and helium. To explain
how and why this is the case, you must consider another property of the
electron.
The Fourth Quantum Number: A Property of the Electron
As you learned from the previous section, three quantum numbers—n, l,
and m —describe the energy, size, shape, and spatial orientation of an
l
orbital. A fourth quantum number describes a property of the electron that
results from its particle-like nature. Experimental evidence suggests that
electrons spin about their axes as they move throughout the volume of
their atoms. Like a tiny top, an electron can spin in one of two directions,
each direction generating a magnetic field. The spin quantum number
(m ) specifies the direction in which the electron is spinning. This
s
quantum number has only two possible values:
+1
or
−1
.
2 2
In 1925, an Austrian physicist, Wolfgang Pauli, proposed that only two
electrons of opposite spin could occupy an orbital. This proposal became
known as the Pauli exclusion principle. What the exclusion principle
does is place a limit on the total number of electrons that may occupy any
orbital. That is, an orbital may have a maximum of two electrons only,
each of which must have the opposite spin direction of the other. It may
also have only one electron of either spin direction. An orbital may also
have no electrons at all.
Summarizing the Four Quantum Numbers for Electrons in Atoms
Quantum
Number Name Symbol Allowed Values Property
principal n positive integers (1, 2, 3, etc.) orbital size and energy
orbital-shape l integers from 0 to (n − 1) orbital shape
magnetic m integers from −l to +l orbital orientation
l
spin m
+1
or
−1
electron spin direction
s 2 2
The Pauli Exclusion Principle and Quantum Numbers
Another way of stating the exclusion principle is that no two electrons
in an atom have the same four quantum numbers. This important idea
means that each electron in an atom has its own unique set of four
quantum numbers. For example, compare the quantum numbers
that distinguish a ground state hydrogen atom from a helium atom. (Recall
that a helium atom has two electrons. Note also that m quantum number
s
is given as
+1
. It could just as easily have a value of
−1
. By convention,
2 2
chemists usually use the positive value first.)
Atom Electron Quantum numbers
Hydrogen lone n = 1, l = 0, ml = 0, ms = + — 1
2
Helium first n = 1, l = 0, ml = 0, ms = + — 1
2
second n = 1, l = 0, ml = 0, ms = − — 1
2
140 MHR • Unit 2 Structure and Properties
Each of a lithium atom’s three electrons also has its own unique set of
quantum numbers, as you can see below. (Assume these quantum
numbers represent a ground state lithium atom.)
Atom Electron Quantum numbers
Lithium first n = 1, l = 0, ml = 0, ms = + — 1
2
second n = 1, l = 0, ml = 0, ms = − — 1
2
third n = 2, l = 0, ml = 0, ms = + — 1
2
Consider the significance of lithium’s quantum numbers. The first two
electrons occupy the 1s orbital, and have the same sets of quantum
numbers as helium’s two electrons. According to the Pauli exclusion
principle, the 1s orbital (n = 1) is now “full” because it contains the
maximum number of electrons: two. For lithium’s third electron, n
cannot equal 1. Therefore, the next principal energy level for the electron
is n = 2. If n = 2, l may have a value of 0 or 1. Remember that an atom’s
ground state represents its lowest energy state. Because an orbital with
l = 0 (an s orbital) has a lower energy than an orbital with l = 1
(a p orbital), you would expect a high probability of finding lithium’s
third electron in the s orbital given by n = 2, l = 0. In fact, experimental
evidence supports this expectation. You know that if l = 0, m has only
l
one possible value: 0. Finally, by convention, m is
+1
.
s 2
It is possible to distinguish atoms by writing sets of quantum numbers
for each of their electrons. However, writing quantum numbers for an
atom such as uranium, which has 92 electrons, would be mind-bogglingly
tedious. Fortunately, chemists have developed a “shortcut” to represent
the number and orbital arrangements of electrons in each atom. As you
will see shortly, these electron configurations, as they are called, are
intimately connected to the structure and logic of the periodic table.
In learning how to write electron configurations, you will discover this
Write a set of quantum num-
connection. You will also find out why orbital energies differ (for bers for each electron of the
example, why a 2s orbital is lower in energy than a 2p orbital). following atoms: beryllium
Note: Before proceeding, it is important to keep the following in mind. (Be), boron (B), and carbon (C).
According to quantum mechanics: Look closely for evidence of
a pattern. Write a short
• Electrons do not “occupy” orbitals. Nor do orbitals “contain” electrons.
paragraph describing this
• Electrons do not “fill” orbitals one at a time. Nor do electrons have pattern and explaining why
properties that designate individual electrons as first, second, third, you would have expected it.
fourth, etc.
• Orbitals do not really have substance or shapes. Orbitals, recall,
are mathematical equations that can be used to calculate probability
densities for electrons. The shapes, and the impression of substance,
result from the contour lines used to set a limit on the extent of
those probabilities.
Nevertheless, it takes time and experience for most people to think
about and talk about atoms in completely quantum mechanical terms. It is
much simpler to think about orbitals as if they have substance. Therefore,
in the text that follows, you will read about electrons “occupying” and
“filling” orbitals. Strictly speaking, this terminology is not scientifically
correct. However, it will help you understand some challenging concepts
more easily.
Chapter 3 Atoms, Electrons, and Periodic Trends • MHR 141
An Introduction to Electron Configurations
7p
6d
7s 5f
6p
5d
4f
6s
5p
4d
5s
4p
3d
4s
3p
3s
2p
2s
1s
Figure 3.19 Atomic orbitals and their relative energies
Figure 3.19 shows the total number of orbitals in which electrons are
likely to be found for all naturally occurring atoms and most synthetic
atoms. The orbitals, represented by boxes, are listed in order of increasing
energy. You will refer to this diagram often as you learn to write electron
configurations.
An atom’s electron configuration is a shorthand notation that shows
the number and arrangement of electrons in its orbitals. Because the
value of n ranges to infinity, there are an infinite number of electron
configurations that are possible for each atom. For each atom, all but
one of these represent the atom in an excited state. However, an atom’s
chemical properties are mainly associated with its ground state electron
configuration. Therefore, unless stated otherwise, you can assume that
any given electron configuration in this book represents an atom in its
ground state. For example, the ground state electron configuration for a
hydrogen atom is 1s1 (pronounced “one ess one”). The superscript 1 indi-
cates that only one electron is in the s orbital. The ground state electron
configuration for a helium atom is 1s2 (pronounced “one ess two”), where
the superscript 2 indicates that there are two electrons in the s orbital. For
a lithium atom, it is 1s22s1. Again, the superscript numbers indicate the
number of electrons in each of the orbitals.
When you are learning to write electron configurations, it is helpful to
start with the first element in the periodic table (hydrogen), and “build
up” the electronic structure of its atom by adding an electron to its lowest
available energy level. Then you move on to the next element (helium) by
adding a proton (and several neutrons) to the nucleus, and by adding an
electron to the appropriate orbital. This imaginary process of building up
the ground state electronic structure for each atom, in order of atomic
number, is called the aufbau principle. (Aufbau comes from a German
word that means “to build up.”)
ygrenE
Refer to the sets of quantum
numbers for hydrogen and
helium that you saw earlier.
Then use the quantum
numbers for lithium to infer
why a lithium atom has
the ground state electron
configuration that it does.
142 MHR • Unit 2 Structure and Properties
Writing Electron Configurations
Electron configurations, as they are used in this book, provide information
about the first two quantum numbers, n and l. (Electron configurations
may also reflect the third quantum number, m , but this notation goes
l
beyond the scope of this chemistry course.) The electron configuration
below represents a boron atom in its ground state.
number of electrons
in each energy sublevel
1s22s22p1
letter designations based on
principal quantum numbers orbital shape quantum number
From the few examples of electron configurations that you have seen so
far, you may have noticed that they do not include information about
the spin direction of the electron. Once you have considered the electron
configurations for a variety of atoms, you will see that you can safely infer
where electrons with opposite spins have been paired together.
There is, however, a system that chemists use alongside electron
configurations to help them plot and keep track of electrons in their
orbitals. An orbital diagram uses a box for each orbital in any given
principal energy level. (Some chemists use a circle or a line instead of
a box.) An empty box represents an orbital in which there are no
electrons (an “unoccupied” orbital). A box that has an upward-pointing
arrow represents an orbital with an electron that spins in one
direction. A box with a downward-pointing arrow represents an
orbital with an electron that spins in the opposite direction. You can
probably surmise that a box with oppositely pointing arrows
represents a filled orbital.
You are nearly ready to begin “building up” the electronic structures of
the atoms, using both electron configurations and orbital diagrams. Below
you will find some guidelines to help you. Refer to these guidelines and
to Figure 3.19 as you work your way through the information that follows.
Guidelines for “Filling” Orbitals
1. Place electrons into the orbitals in order of increasing energy level.
2. Each set of orbitals of the same energy level must be completely
filled before proceeding to the next orbital or series of orbitals.
3. Whenever electrons are added to orbitals of the same energy sub-
level, each orbital receives one electron before any pairing occurs.
4. When electrons are added singly to separate orbitals of the same
energy, the electrons must all have the same spin.
Guidelines 3 and 4 together comprise what is known as Hund’s rule.
If you “obey” Hund’s rule, no two electrons can have the same set of
quantum numbers. Thus, this rule follows from Pauli’s exclusion principle.
Chapter 3 Atoms, Electrons, and Periodic Trends • MHR 143
Writing Electron Configurations for Periods 1 and 2
Below are the electron configurations for atoms of the first ten elements,
along with their orbital diagrams.
Figure 3.20 presents the same basic information about the first ten
elements, arranged in the form of the periodic table. Using these electron
configurations, orbital diagrams, and Figure 3.20, you can probably follow
the logic that leads to the electronic structure of each atom. As you
examine and compare this information, note the following.
• The energy of each orbital (or each group of orbitals) increases as you
move from left to right.
• Boron’s fifth electron must go into the 2p energy sublevel. Since l = 1,
m may be −1, 0, or +1. The fifth electron can go into any of these
l
orbitals, because they all have the same energy. When you draw orbital
diagrams, it is customary to place the electron in the first available box,
from left to right.
• With carbon, you must apply Hund’s rule. In other words, carbon’s sixth
electron must go into the next unoccupied 2p orbital. (Experimental
evidence confirms that the spin of this sixth electron is, in fact, the
same direction as the fifth electron.)
• With oxygen, as with helium’s 1s orbital and beryllium’s 2s orbital, the
last-added (eighth) electron is paired with a 2p electron of opposite
spin. In other words, the Pauli exclusion principle applies.
H (Z = 1) 1s1
1s
He (Z = 2) 1s2
1s
Li (Z = 3) 1s22s1
1s 2s 2p
Be (Z = 4) 1s22s2
1s 2s 2p
B (Z = 5) 1s22s22p1
1s 2s 2p
C (Z = 6) 1s22s22p2
1s 2s 2p
N (Z = 7) 1s22s22p3
1s 2s 2p
O (Z = 8) 1s22s22p4
1s 2s 2p
F (Z = 9) 1s22s22p5
1s 2s 2p
Ne (Z = 10) 1s22s22p6
1s 2s 2p
144 MHR • Unit 2 Structure and Properties
3 4
Li Be B C N O F Ne
1s22s1 1s22s2 1s22s22p1 1s22s22p2 1s22s22p3 1s22s22p4 1s22s22p5 1s22s22p6
Figure 3.20 How orbitals are filled for atoms of the first 10 elements of the periodic table
Electron Configurations and Orbital Diagrams for Period 3
To write the electron configurations and draw the orbital diagrams for
atoms of Period 3 elements, you follow the same process as for Period 2.
The practice problems below give you the chance to write and draw these
representations. In doing so, you will observe a pattern that enables you to
take a “shortcut” in writing electron configurations. As the atomic number
increases, electron configurations become longer and longer. You know
that chemical reactivity depends mainly on an atom’s valence electrons:
the electrons in the outermost-occupied principle energy level. To
highlight these electrons, you can use a simplified notation called a
condensed electron configuration. This notation places the electron
configuration of the noble gas of the previous period in square brackets,
using its atomic symbol only. Then you continue with the configuration of
the next energy level that is being filled.
The condensed electron configuration for a nitrogen atom, for
example, is [He]2s22p3. The notation [He] is used to represent 1s2. For a
sodium atom (Z = 11), the condensed electron configuration is [Ne]3s1.
Here, [Ne] represents, 1s22s22p6. Be aware that condensed electron
configurations are simply convenient short forms. Thus, [Ne]3s1 does not
mean that a sodium atom is the same as a neon atom plus one electron.
Sodium and neon are different elements because the nuclei of their atoms
are completely different.
Chapter 3 Atoms, Electrons, and Periodic Trends • MHR 145
1
doireP
2
doireP
1(IA) 18(VIIIA)
1 2
H He
1s1 1s2
2(IIA) 13(IIIA) 14(IVA) 15(VA) 16(VIA) 17(VIIA)
5 6 7 8 9 10
Practice Problems
6. Use the aufbau principle to write complete electron configurations
and complete orbital diagrams for atoms of the following elements:
sodium, magnesium, aluminum, silicon, phosphorus, sulfur, chlorine,
and argon (atomic numbers 11 through 18).
7. Write condensed electron configurations for atoms of these
same elements.
Continued ...
Continued ...
8. Make a rough sketch of the periodic table for elements 1 through 18,
including the following information: group number, period number,
atomic number, atomic symbol, and condensed electron configuration.
9. A general electron configuration for atoms belonging to any element of
group 1 (IA) is ns1, where nis the quantum number for the
outermost occupied energy level. Based on the patterns you can
observe so far for elements 1 to 18, predict the general electron
configuration for the outermost occupied energy levels of groups
2 (IIA), 13 (IIIA), 14 (IVA), 15 (VA), 16 (VIA), 17 (VIIA), and 18 (VIIIA).
Electron Configurations and Orbital Diagrams for Period 4
You may have noticed that period 3 ended with electrons filling the 3p
energy sublevel. However, when n = 3, l may equal 0, 1, and 2. Perhaps
you wondered what happened to the 3d orbitals (l = 2).
Electrons do not start occupying 3d orbitals until the 4s orbital is
filled. Therefore, the 3d orbitals are filled starting in period 4. The reason
for this change in the expected orbital filling order is that the 4s orbital
has a lower energy than the 3d orbitals. Remember that usually you fill
orbitals in order of increasing energy. (If necessary, refer to the Guidelines
for “Filling” Orbitals and Figure 3.19 to refresh your memory.)
The chart below shows electron configurations and partial orbital
diagrams for the 18 elements of period 4. You would expect the filling
pattern shown for potassium (Z = 19) through vanadium (Z = 23).
However, an unexpected deviation from the pattern occurs with chromi-
um (Z = 24). The same thing happens with copper (Z = 29). All other
configurations for period 4 conform to the aufbau principle.
Why do Cr and Cu have electron configurations that are different from
what you would predict? The guidelines that you have been using state
that you fill orbitals according to increasing energy. In most cases, this
results in the most stable ground state configuration for the atom.
Experimental evidence indicates, however, that some atoms achieve
greater stability with electron configurations that do not conform to
predicted patterns. For chromium, the greatest ground state stability
results from a configuration in which its 4s and 3d orbitals are half-filled.
For copper, a half-filled 4s orbital and a completely filled set of 3d orbitals
gives the most stable configuration. Similar situations arise for a number
of atoms in the remaining periods.
Electron Configurations and Partial Orbital Diagrams for Atoms of Period 4 Elements
Atomic Complete Condensed
Element Number Orbital Diagram (4s, 3d, and 4p Orbitals Only) Electron Configuration Electron Configuration
4s 3d 4p
K Z = 19 [1s22s22p63s23p6]4s1 [Ar]4s1
Ca Z = 20 [1s22s22p63s23p6]4s2 [Ar]4s2
Sc Z = 21 [1s22s22p63s23p6]4s23d1 [Ar]4s23d1
Ti Z = 22 [1s22s22p63s23p6]4s23d2 [Ar]4s23d2
146 MHR • Unit 2 Structure and Properties
4s 3d 4p
V Z = 23 [1s22s22p63s23p6]4s23d3 [Ar]4s23d3
Cr Z = 24 [1s22s22p63s23p6]4s13d5 [Ar]4s13d5
Mn Z = 25 [1s22s22p63s23p6]4s23d5 [Ar]4s23d5
Fe Z = 26 [1s22s22p63s23p6]4s23d6 [Ar]4s23d6
Co Z = 27 [1s22s22p63s23p6]4s23d7 [Ar]4s23d7
Ni Z = 28 [1s22s22p63s23p6]4s23d8 [Ar]4s23d8
Cu Z = 29 [1s22s22p63s23p6]4s13d10 [Ar]4s13d10
Zn Z = 30 [1s22s22p63s23p6]4s23d10 [Ar]4s23d10
Ga Z = 31 [1s22s22p63s23p6]4s23d104p1 [Ar]4s23d104p1
Ge Z = 32 [1s22s22p63s23p6]4s23d104p2 [Ar]4s23d104p2
As Z = 33 [1s22s22p63s23p6]4s23d104p3 [Ar]4s23d104p3
Se Z = 34 [1s22s22p63s23p6]4s23d104p4 [Ar]4s23d104p4
Br Z = 35 [1s22s22p63s23p6]4s23d104p5 [Ar]4s23d104p5
Kr Z = 36 [1s22s22p63s23p6]4s23d104p6 [Ar]4s23d104p6
Electron Configurations and the Periodic Table
So far, you have “built up” atoms of the first 36 elements of the periodic
table. There are more than 80 elements still remaining. You do not,
however, have to build up atoms of these elements to write their electron
configurations. You can do it simply by consulting the periodic table!
All you need is to recognize the significance of several patterns. You have
already observed many of these.
In the process of examining the patterns outlined below, you will
learn the filling order for atoms of elements in periods 5, 6, and 7. You
will also see why the shape and organization of the periodic table is a
direct consequence of the electronic structure of the atoms.
Arranging Elements by Electron Configurations
Figure 3.21 on the next page shows the entire periodic table, with certain
segments colour-coded and labelled according to the type of orbital that
is being filled. If you built up an atom of every element, filling orbitals in
order of increasing energy, you would construct a chart with precisely this
shape and organization. Figure 3.22 highlights the filling order, and there-
fore the energy order, of the orbitals when you read the periodic table
from left to right.
Elements that appear in the s block and the p block are called either
the main group elements or the representative elements. Chemists give
them these names because, collectively, these elements are representative
of a wide range of physical and chemical properties. Among the main
group elements, for example, you will find metals, non-metals, metalloids,
Chapter 3 Atoms, Electrons, and Periodic Trends • MHR 147
highly reactive elements, moderately reactive elements, and unreactive
elements. While most main group elements are solids at room tempera-
ture, roughly one quarter of them are gases, and one is a liquid.
Elements that appear in the d block are called the transition elements.
Figure 3.21 The long form of the They mark the transition from the p orbital filling order to the d orbital
periodic table, with the four energy filling order. By the same reasoning, the f block elements are called
sublevel blocks identified. the inner transition elements, because they mark a transition from the
d orbital filling order to the f orbital filling order.
1 18
(IA) (VIIIA)
2 13 14 15 16 17
1 1s
(IIA) (IIIA) (IVA) (VA) (VIA)(VIIA)
2 2s 2p
3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
3 3s 3p
(IIIB) (IVB) (VB) (VIB)(VIIB) (VIIIB) (IB) (IIB)
4 4s 3d 4p
3
5 5s (IIIB) 4d 5p
6 6s 4f 5d 6p
7 7s 5f 6d p block
(main elements)
s block f block d block
(main group (inner transition elements) (transition elements)
elements)
Patterns Involving Group Numbers and Period Numbers
Elements in a group have similar chemical properties because they have
similar outer electron configurations. That is, they have the same number
of valence electrons. This observation gives rise to three patterns that you
can deduce from the periodic table.
• For main group elements, the last numeral of the group number is the
1s
same as the number of valence electrons. For example, phosphorus in
2s 2p
group 15 has 5 valence electrons. Strontium in group 2 has 2 valence
3s 3p
4s 3d 4p electrons. (If you use the roman-numeral system for numbering groups,
5s 4d 5p the group number is the number of valence electrons.) The only
6s 4f 5d 6p exception to this pattern is helium (group 18), which has only two
7s 5f 6d valence electrons. Nevertheless, helium’s outermost occupied energy
level is complete with two electrons.
Figure 3.22 Reading the periodic
table from left to right, starting at • The n value of the highest occupied energy level is the period number.
the top and finishing at the bottom, For example, atoms of elements that have electrons with n = 3 appear
displays the filling order and the in period 3. Atoms of elements that have electrons with n = 6 appear in
energy order of the atomic orbitals. period 6.
• The square of the n value (n2) equals the total number of orbitals in
that energy level. Furthermore, since each orbital may have a maximum
of two electrons, the maximum number of electrons in any principle
energy level is 2n2. For example, with n = 2, there are four orbitals: one
2s orbital and three 2p orbitals. Squaring the n value gives 22 = 4. The
total number of electrons in this energy level is eight, given by 2n2.
Notice that there are eight elements in period 2. This is no coincidence.
Compare this result with the next period. Does the pattern hold? For
period 3 elements, n = 3. The number of orbitals is n2 = 9. (Verify that
for yourself.) The number of electrons is 2n2 = 18. However, there are
only eight elements in period 3. Why? The 4s orbital has a lower energy
than the 3p orbitals, and thus fills first. The 3d orbitals fill after the 4s
orbitals. Therefore, there are 18 elements in period 4. Recall that the 4f
orbitals do not fill until after the 6s orbital fills.
148 MHR • Unit 2 Structure and Properties
Summarizing Characteristics of s, p, d, and f Block Elements
The s block includes hydrogen, helium, and the elements of groups
A teacher asks the class to
1 (IA) and 2 (IIA). Valence electrons occupy only the ns orbitals write electron configurations
in this block. Hydrogen atoms and atoms of group 1 have partially filled for magnesium, iron, and tin.
s orbitals, represented by the general electron configuration ns1. Helium Lois does not have a periodic
and atoms of group 2 elements have s orbitals filled with the maximum table available. Edward’s
number of valance electrons, represented by the general notation ns2. advice is to use a memory aid
that is shown below. Write a
Because s orbitals can hold a total of two electrons, the s block elements
short paragraph to explain
span two groups.
how to use this memory aid.
The pblock includes elements of groups 13 (IIIA) through 18 (VIIIA).
Electron configurations of the pblock atoms take the general form ns2npa,
where arepresents a value ranging from 1 to 6. Because the three porbitals
1s
can hold a maximum of six electrons, the pblock elements span six groups.
Unique among the p block elements are the atoms of group 18 (VIIIA)
2s 2p
elements: the noble gases, renowned for their chemical stability. Their
electron configuration takes the general form ns2np6, representing a 3s 3p 3d
ground state outer energy level with fully occupied s and p orbitals. The
stability of this configuration is a key factor that drives the formation of 4s 4p 4d 4f
chemical bonds.
The d block includes all the transition elements. In general, atoms of 5s 5p 5d 5f
d block elements have filled ns orbitals, as well as filled or partially filled
d orbitals. Generally, the ns orbitals fill before the (n − 1)d orbitals. 6s 6p 6d
However, there are exceptions (such as chromium and copper) because
these two sublevels are very close in energy, especially at higher values 7s 77pp
of n. Because the five d orbitals can hold a maximum of ten electrons, the
d block spans ten groups.
The f block includes all the inner transition elements. Atoms of
f block elements have filled s orbitals in the outer energy levels, as
well as filled or partially filled 4f and 5f orbitals. In general, the notation
for the orbital filling sequence is ns, followed by (n − 2)f, followed by
(n − 1)d, followed by (for period 6 elements) np. However, there are
many exceptions that make it difficult to predict electron configurations.
Because there are seven f orbitals, with a maximum of fourteen electrons,
the f block spans fourteen groups.
Sample Problem
Determining Quantum Numbers
Problem
You do not have a periodic table. You are told that the condensed
electron configuration for strontium is [Kr]5s2. Identify the group
number, period number, and orbital block in which strontium appears
on the periodic table. Show your reasoning.
Solution
From the electron configuration, you can deduce the energy level of the
valence electrons, which tells you the period number for strontium. The
number of valence electrons and their sublevel enable you to deduce the
group number and the block. Therefore:
Continued ...
Chapter 3 Atoms, Electrons, and Periodic Trends • MHR 149
Continued ...
The configuration for the valence electrons, s2, indicates that stron-
tium is in group 2 (IIA). The value of 5 in 5s2tells you that strontium is
in period 5. The notation s2 means that strontium’s valence electrons fill
the sorbital. Thus, strontium must be in the sblock.
Check Your Solution
All elements in group 2 (IIA) have electron configurations that end with
the notation s2. The link between nvalue and period number is correctly
applied. Strontium has an electron configuration with the general
notation ns2, which is characteristic of sblock elements.
Practice Problems
CHEM
FACT
10. Without looking at a periodic table, identify the group number,
The dblock elements known
period number, and block of an atom that has the following
to nineteenth century chemists
electron configurations.
posed a puzzle. Many of these
metals were known to react (a) [Ne]3s1 (b) [He]2s2 (c) [Kr]5s24d105p5
with neutral molecules.
11. Use the aufbau principle to write complete electron configurations for
In particular, chemists
the atom of the element that fits the following descriptions.
observed that nickel could
(a) group 2 (IIA) element in period 4
bond with carbon monoxide.
The resulting compound, (b) noble gas in period 6
nickel tetracarbonyl, Ni(CO) ,
4 (c) group 12 (IIB) element in period 4
is a gas. At the time, the
(d) group 16 (VIA) element in period 2
nature of the bonding in this
compound was unexplainable. 12. Identify all the possible elements that have the following valence
Even so, chemists could easily electron configurations.
produce and decompose
(a) s2d1 (b) s2p3 (c) s2p6
Ni(CO) . The chemical
4
reactions involved were used 13. For each of the elements below, use the aufbau principle to write the
to purify nickel, and led to the full and condensed electron configurations and draw partial orbital
establishment of a company diagrams for the valence electrons of their atoms. You may consult
that later became International the periodic table in Appendix C, or any other periodic table that
Nickel Company, INCO.
omits electron configurations.
(a) potassium (b) nickel (c) lead
Electron Configurations, Atomic Properties, and Periodic Trends
Electron configurations—representations of the electronic structure of
atoms—help to determine the atomic and chemical properties of the
elements. Properties such as atomic radius, ionization energy, metallic
character, and electron affinity are periodic. That is, they follow recurring
trends in the periodic table. In a previous chemistry course, you studied
these properties and noted their general trends. With your newly
developed understanding of the periodic table, you are in a position to re-
examine these properties and consider the exceptions to the general
trends. Before doing so, carry out the following ThoughtLab, which
applies and synthesizes your understanding of the quantum mechanical
model of the atom, quantum numbers, electron configurations, and the
periodic arrangement of the elements.
150 MHR • Unit 2 Structure and Properties
The arrangement of elements in the periodic table Analysis
is a direct consequence of the allowed values for
1. Explain why there is only one orbital of a given
the four quantum numbers. If the laws of physics
type for each principal quantum number, n.
allowed these numbers to have different values,
2. What is the principal quantum number of the first
the appearance of the periodic table would change.
dblock elements, 13 and 14?
In this activity, you will examine the effect on the
periodic arrangement of the elements when one of 3. What are the atomic numbers of the elements
the quantum numbers has a different set of allowed that are the noble gases in ouruniverse?
values. 4. Which elements would you expect to form
cations with a charge of 2+?
Part 1
5. Which elements would you expect to form
Procedure anions with a charge of 1−?
1. Suppose, in a different universe, that the 6. What is the principal quantum number of the
quantum number m l has only one allowed fblock elements, 25 and 26?
value, m =1. All other allowed values for the
l 7. What are the atomic numbers of the elements in
remaining quantum numbers are unchanged.
this alternative universe that would correspond
Therefore, the set of allowed values for all
to the noble gases of ouruniverse?
quantum numbers is:
n=1,2,3,...
Part 2
l =0,1,2,...(n−1)
Procedure
m =1
l
m
=+1
,
−1 1. In another different universe, the quantum
s 2 2 number m has the allowed values of
l
Write a memory aid for the relative order of m =0,1,2...+l. That is, the values of m are
l l
orbital energies for the first six energy levels. positive integers, to a maximum value of +l. All
2. Assume that the exclusion principle and Hund’s other allowed values are unchanged, so the set
rule are followed. Demonstrate that the periodic of allowed values is:
table for the first 30 elements would be as shown n=1,2,3,...
below: l =0,1,2,...(n−1)
s block m l =0,1,2...+l
m
=+1
,
−1
s 2 2
p block Design the periodic table for the first
30 elements.
2. Label the s, p, and dblock elements.
3. Shade or colour the noble gas-like elements.
d block
Analysis
1. Explain why the number of porbitals in this
imaginary periodic table is less than the number
in the real periodic table.
2. What are the atomic numbers of the elements in
this new universe that are likely to have proper-
ties similar to the alkali metals of our universe?
3. How many of the first 30 elements are probably
non-metals?
4. What is the electron configuration of atomic
number 20?
Chapter 3 Atoms, Electrons, and Periodic Trends • MHR 151
doirep
ThoughtLab Periodic Connections
1 1 2
2 3 4 5 6
3 7 8 9 10
4 11 12 13 14 15 16
5 17 18 19 20 21 22
6 23 24 27 28 29 30
25 26
f block
Periodic Trends in Atomic Radius
As you know, atoms are not solid spheres. Their volumes (the extent of
their orbitals) are described in terms of probabilities. Nevertheless, the
size of an atom—its atomic radius—is a measurable property. Chemists
can determine it by measuring the distance between the nuclei of bonded,
neighbouring atoms. For example, for metals, atomic radius is half the
distance between neighbouring nuclei in a crystal of the metal element.
For elements that occur as molecules, which is the case for many non-
metals, atomic radius is half the distance between nuclei of identical
atoms that bonded together with a single covalent bond. In Figure 3.23,
the radii of metallic elements represent the radius of an atom in a metallic
crystal. The radii of all other elements represent the radius of an atom of
the element participating in a single covalent bond with one additional,
like atom.
1 8
(IA) (VIIIA)
H 37 He 31
1
2 3 4 5 6 7
(IIA) (IIIA) (IVA) (VA) (VIA) (VIIA)
Li 152 Be 112 B 85 C 77 N 75 O 73 F 72 Ne 71
2
Na 186 Mg160 Al 143 Si 118 P 110 S 103 Cl 100 Ar 98
3
K 227 Ca 197 Ga135 Ge122 As 120 Se 119 Br 114 Kr 112
4
Rb 248 Sr 215 In 167 Sn140 Sb140 Te 142 I 133 Xe131
5
Cs 265 Ba 222 Tl 170 Pb 146 Bi 150 Po 168 At(140) Rn(140)
6
Fr(270) Ra(220)
7
3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
(IIIB) (IVB) (VB) (VIB) (VIIB) (VIIIB) (IB) (IIB)
Sc 162 Ti 147 V 134 Cr 128 Mn127 Fe 126 Co125 Ni 124 Cu128 Zn 134
4
Y 180 Zr 160 Nb146 Mo139 Tc 136 Ru134 Rh134 Pd137 Ag144 Cd151
5
La 187 Hf 159 Ta 146 W 139 Re 137 Os135 Ir 136 Pt 138 Au 144 Hg151
6
Figure 3.23 Representations of atomic radii for main group and transition elements.
(Values for atomic radii are given in picometres. Those in parentheses have only two
significant digits.)
152 MHR • Unit 2 Structure and Properties
doireP
Figure 3.23 shows the periodic trends associated with the atomic
radius. You can see that atomic radii generally decrease across a period.
Furthermore, atomic radii generally increase down a group. Two factors
affect differences in atomic radii.
One factor affecting atomic radii is changing n. As n increases, there
is a higher probability of finding electrons farther from their nucleus.
Therefore, the atomic volume is larger. In other words, atomic radius
tends to increase with increasing n, and decrease with decreasing n.
The other factor that affects atomic radii is changing nuclear charge—
specifically, the effective nuclear charge. Effective nuclear charge is the
net force of attraction between electrons and the nucleus they surround.
Only hydrogen’s single electron experiences the full positive charge of
its nucleus. For hydrogen, the nuclear charge experienced by the electron
is Z, its atomic number. For all other atoms, the nuclear charge that any
given electron experiences is offset to some degree by other electrons.
Depending on the electron density between the nucleus and any
particular electron, the net force of attraction—the effective nuclear
charge, Z —may be large or small.
eff
As Z increases, electrons are attracted more strongly to the nucleus,
eff
and the size of the atom decreases. As Z decreases, electrons experience
eff
a reduced force of attraction, and the size of the atom increases. Valence
electrons, especially, experience a smaller Z than inner electrons
eff
because the inner electrons shield or screen them from the attractive force
of the nucleus.
For the main group elements, the combined influences of n, Z , and
eff
this shielding effect have the following outcomes.
• n governs the trend of increasing atomic radius down a group. Down a
group, atoms of each subsequent element have one more level of inner
electrons, increasing the shielding effect. Because of the additional
shielding, Z for the valence electrons changes only slightly. The
eff
increase in atomic size, therefore, results from the increasing value of n.
• Z governs the trend of decreasing atomic radius across a period.
eff
Across a period, atoms of each element have one more electron added
to the same outer energy level—n does not change. The shielding effect
changes only slightly. However, Z changes considerably. The decrease
eff
in atomic size across a period, therefore, results from increasing Z .
eff
The atoms of transition elements do not display the same general trend as
the main group elements. A key reason for this is that electrons are added
to inner energy levels—the d orbitals—rather than to the outer energy
levels. As a result, Z changes relatively little, so atomic size remains
eff
fairly constant. In later chemistry courses, you will learn a more complete
explanation for the atomic radii of transition-element atoms.
Periodic Trends in Ionization Energy
For the hydrogen atom, the difference in energy between n = 1 and n = ∞
represents the energy change associated with the complete removal of its
electron. (By convention, when n = ∞, an electron is considered to be
completely removed from its atom.) The energy needed to completely
remove one electron from a ground state gaseous atom is called the
ionization energy. Energy must be added to the atom to remove an
electron in order to overcome the force of attraction exerted on the
electron by the nucleus. Since multi-electron atoms have two or more
electrons, they also have more than one ionization energy.
Chapter 3 Atoms, Electrons, and Periodic Trends • MHR 153
A gaseous atom’s first ionization energy is the least energy required to
remove an electron from the outermost occupied energy level. The second
ionization energy is always greater than the first ionization energy,
because the electron must be removed from a positively charged ion. The
same reasoning applies for successive ionization energies.
First ionization energy (IE ) is closely linked to an atom’s chemical
1
reactivity. Atoms with a low IE tend to form cations during chemical reac-
1
tions. Notice in Figure 3.24 that the atoms with the lowest IE are those
1
belonging to group 1 elements. These elements, also known as the alkali
metals, are among the most reactive elements in the periodic table. Atoms
of elements with high IE tend to form anions: negatively charged ions.
1
(A notable exception is the noble gases, which do not form ions naturally.)
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80
Atomic number
Figure 3.24 illustrates several trends associated with ionization energy.
• Ionization energy generally decreases down a group. Notice that this
trend is the inverse of the trend for atomic radius. The two trends are,
in fact, linked. As atomic radius increases, the distance of valence
electrons from the nucleus also increases. There is a decrease, therefore,
in the force of attraction exerted by the nucleus on the valence
electrons. Thus, less energy is needed to remove one such electron.
• Ionization energy generally increases across a period. Again, this trend
is linked to the atomic radius. Across a period, the atomic radius
decreases because Z increases. The force of attraction between the
eff
nucleus and valence electrons is subsequently increased. Therefore,
more energy is needed to remove one such electron.
Several minor variations in these trends occur. The variations involve
boron and aluminum in group 13 (IIIA) and oxygen and sulfur in group 16
(VIA). The drop in IE with group 13 occurs because electrons start to fill
1
the np orbitals. These orbitals are higher in energy than the ns orbital, so
the additional electron is more easily removed. Group 16 marks the first
pairing of the p orbital electrons. The np3 configuration of nitrogen is
more stable than the np4 configuration of oxygen. Electron repulsions
154 MHR • Unit 2 Structure and Properties
)lom/Jk(
ygrene
noitazinoi
tsriF
He
Ne
Ar
Kr
Xe
Rn
Li Na
K Rb Cs
Figure 3.24 Periodic trends
involving first ionization energy
increase the orbital energy in oxygen. Therefore, less energy is required to
remove the fourth p sublevel electron in oxygen.
Periodic trends in ionization energy are linked to trends involving the
reactivity of metals. In general, the chemical reactivity of metals increases
down a group and decreases across a period. These trends, as well as a
further trend from metallic to non-metallic properties across a period, and
increasing metallic properties down a group, are shown in Table 3.1.
Table 3.1 Periodic Trends in Reactivity of Metals
With oxygen Reaction with
Reaction in the air With water dilute acids
Group 1 React rapidly to form React vigorously The reaction is
oxides with the with cold water, dangerously
general formula M O. generating H violent, igniting
2 2(g)
These compounds and forming a H generated.
2(g)
are strong bases. strong base with
the general
formula MOH.
Group 2 React moderately to React slowly in React quickly
form basic oxides cold water, generating H .
2(g)
with the general generating H
2(g)
formula MO. and forming a
strong base,
M(OH) .
2
Group 13 React slowly. Al displaces H Al reacts readily
2(g)
Aluminum forms an from steam. if the protective
oxide coating that oxide coating is
protects the metal; removed, to
the compound Al O generate H .
2 3 2(g)
can act as a base or
an acid.
Group 14 C and Si are non- The most metallic Sn and Pb react
metals, and form elements, Sn and slowly to form
acidic oxides. Ge Pb, do not react H .
2(g)
is a metalloid, and with water.
forms an acidic oxide.
SnO can act as an
2
acid or a base. PbO
2
is unreactive.
Transition Metals Zn is the most Zn and Fe Zn reacts readily
(for example, Fe, reactive transition displace H to generate H ,
2(g) 2(g)
Co, Ni, Cu, Zn, metal, and forms ZnO from steam. Fe Cu, Ag, and Au
Ag, Au) when the metal is rusts slowly at do not react.
burned in air. Ag and room temperature.
Au do not react.
Magnesium ribbon reacting Potassium reacting Nickel reacting with
with oxygen in air with water dilute acid
Chapter 3 Atoms, Electrons, and Periodic Trends • MHR 155
Periodic Trends in Electron Affinity
Electron affinity is the change in energy that occurs when an electron is
added to a gaseous atom. As was the case with ionization energy, there is
more than one value for electron affinity. The first electron affinity results
in the formation of an anion with a charge of 1−. For example, when a
neutral fluorine atom acquires an electron, as in a bonding situation,
the resulting electron configuration of the fluoride ion is the same as that
of the noble gas, neon:
F(1s22s22p5) + e − → F − (1s22s22p6)∆E = EA
1
Fluorine is a highly reactive element. The relative ease with which
it gains an electron when it forms bonds is reflected in its high
electron affinity.
1 18
(IA) (VIIIA)
H He
2 13 14 15 16 17
−72.8 (+21)
(IIA) (IIIA) (IVA) (VA) (VIA) (VIIA)
Li Be B C N O F Ne
−59.6 (+241) −26.7 −122 0 −141 −328 (+29)
Na Mg Al Si P S Cl Ar
−52.9 (+230) −42.5 −134 −72.0 −200 −349 (+34)
K Ca Ga Ge As Se Br Kr
−48.4 (+156) −28.9 −119 −78.2 −195 −325 (+39)
Rb Sr In Sn Sb Te I Xe
−46.9 (+167) −28.9 −107 −103 −190 −295 (+40)
Cs Ba Tl Pb Bi Po At Rn
−45.5 (+52) −19.3 −35.1 −91.3 −183 −270 (+41)
Figure 3.25 Electron affinities for the main group elements. Negative values mean that
anions form with the release of energy. Positive values mean that energy is absorbed in order
to form the anion. The positive values are estimated, because the anions formed for atoms of
groups 2 and 18 are unstable.
Figure 3.25 shows electron affinities for atoms of the main group ele-
ments. Positive values mean that energy is required to add an electron.
Negative values mean that energy is given off when an electron is added.
High negative numbers mean a high electron affinity. Low negative num-
bers and positive numbers mean a low electron affinity.
Trends for electron affinity are more irregular than those for atomic
radius and ionization energy, because factors other than atomic size and
Z are involved. In future chemistry courses, you will learn about these
eff
factors and how they explain the irregularities. However, the property of
electron affinity is still significant when you consider it in combination
with ionization energy. The trends that result from this combination are
important for chemical bonding.
• Atoms of elements in group 17 (VIIA), and to a lesser degree group 16
(VIA), have high ionization energies and high electron affinities. As
a result, it takes a great deal of energy to remove electrons from these
atoms. However, these atoms attract electrons strongly, and form
negative ions in ionic compounds.
156 MHR • Unit 2 Structure and Properties
• Atoms of elements in group 1 (IA) and group 2 (IIA) have low ionization
energies and low electron affinities. Atoms of these elements give up
electrons easily, but attract them poorly. Therefore, they form positive
ions in ionic compounds.
• Atoms of elements in group 18 (VIIIA) have very high ionization ener-
gies and very low electron affinities. Therefore, in nature, they do not
gain, give up or share electrons at all. (Under laboratory conditions,
only the larger group 18 atoms can be made to form compounds.)
Section Summary
In this section, you have seen how a theoretical idea, the quantum
mechanical model of the atom, explains the experimentally determined
structure of the periodic table, and the properties of its elements. Your
understanding of the four quantum numbers enabled you to write electron
configurations and draw orbital diagrams for atoms of the elements. You
also learned how to “read” the periodic table to deduce the electron con-
figuration of any element.
Since the start of high school science courses, you have used the
periodic table to help you investigate the composition and behaviour of
the elements. Your early experiences with the periodic table were limited
largely to the first 20 elements, because you could explain their electron
structure without the concepts of orbitals and electron configurations.
The modern, quantum mechanical model of the atom has broadened
your understanding of the elements, the composition of their atoms,
and their chemical and physical behaviour in the world around you.
You will draw upon these concepts in the next chapter, as you expand
your understanding of the forces that are responsible for the millions of
kinds of matter in the universe: chemical bonds.
Section Review
1 (a) K/U What is the fourth quantum number, and in what way is it
different from the other three quantum numbers?
(b) Explain why the fourth quantum number is an example of a
quantized value.
2 C Compare the orbitals of a hydrogen atom with the orbitals of all
other atoms. In what ways are they similar? In what ways are they
different?
3 C Identify the group number, period number, and orbital block of the
periodic table for elements whose atoms have the following electron
configurations.
(a) [Kr]5s24d1 (c) [He]2s22p6
(b) [Ar]4s23d104p3 (d) [Ne]3s23p1
4 C Which requires more energy: removing a valence electron from its
atom or removing an electron from an inner energy level? Explain why.
5 K/U On which side of the periodic table would you find an element
whose atom is likely to form a cation? Which atomic property is
related to this question?
Chapter 3 Atoms, Electrons, and Periodic Trends • MHR 157
6 K/U In what ways are each of the following related to or affected by
one another?
(a) the aufbau principle, the exclusion principle, and Hund’s rule
(b) electron configurations and orbital diagrams
(c) ionization energy and atomic radius
(d) ionization energy and electron affinity
(e) effective nuclear charge and valence electrons
(f) the periodic table and chemical properties of the elements
(g) electron configurations and the periodic table
(h) electron configurations and quantum numbers
(i) electron configurations, period number, and group number
(j) the quantum mechanical model of the atom and the periodic table
7 C Use the aufbau principle to write complete and condensed electron
configurations for the most common ions for the elements listed below,
and explain the significance of any patterns you observe in their
electronic structures.
(a) sodium (c) chlorine
(b) calcium (d) sulfur
8 I The following data lists the ionization energies for a given atom:
IE = 738kJ/mol;IE = 1451kJ/mol;IE = 7733kJ/mol. Predict
1 2 3
the valence electron configuration for this atom, and explain your
reasoning.
158 MHR • Unit 2 Structure and Properties
Review
Reflecting on Chapter 4 4. Briefly describe the contributions made by the
following physicists to the development of the
Summarize this chapter in the format of your
quantum mechanical model of the atom.
choice. Here are a few ideas to use as guidelines:
• Compare the Rutherford, Bohr, and quantum (a) Planck (d) Heisenberg
(b) de Broglie (e) Schrödinger
mechanical models of the atom.
• Distinguish between the view of matter and (c) Einstein
energy in the macroscopic world (the world of 5. List characteristics of the s, p, d, and f blocks to
everyday experience) and the view of matter clearly distinguish among the atoms of their
and energy in the quantum mechanical world. elements.
• Describe, using examples, the relationship 6. Explain how Pauli’s exclusion principle and
between the four quantum numbers and the Hund’s rule assist you in writing electron
electron configurations of atoms. configurations.
• Explain the relationship between the electronic
7. Give the energy level and type of orbital
structure of atoms and the arrangement of
occupied by the electron with the following
elements in the periodic table. set of quantum numbers: n = 3, l = 1,
• Illustrate the trends associated with several m = 0, m = +1 .
atomic and chemical properties of the elements. l s 2
8. Differentiate between a ground state sulfur
Reviewing Key Terms
atom and an excited state sulfur atom.
For each of the following terms, write a sentence Use electron configurations to illustrate this
that shows your understanding of its meaning. difference.
nuclear model emission spectrum 9. Which of the following pairs of atoms would
absorption spectrum quantum you expect to have a larger atomic radius?
photons quantum mechanical Explain your choice.
model of the atom (a) Na, Mg (d) Al, Ga
orbitals ground state (b) Cl, K (e) O, F
principal quantum orbital-shape (c) Ca, Sr (f) Cl, Br
number (n) quantum number (l)
10. Locate each of the following elements on a
magnetic quantum spin quantum
periodic table, and state the orbital block in
number (m ) number (m )
l s which each element is found: U, Zr, Se, Rb, Re,
Pauli exclusion electron configuration
Sr, Dy, Kr.
principle
11. The chemical formulas for the oxides of
aufbau principle orbital diagram
lithium, beryllium, and boron are: Li O, BeO,
Hund’s rule atomic radius 2
and B O . Write the formulas for the oxides
ionization energy electron affinity 2 3
of sodium, potassium, magnesium, calcium,
Knowledge/Understanding aluminum, and gallium. Explain how you
determined their formulas.
1. Explain the experimental observations and
12.(a) How many electron-containing orbitals does
inferences that led Rutherford to propose the
an arsenic atom have in the ground state?
nuclear model of the atom.
(b) How many of the orbitals are completely
2. Explain how the Bohr atomic model differs
filled?
from the Rutherford atomic model, and explain
(c) How many of the orbitals are associated with
the observations and inferences that led Bohr to
the atom’s fourth principal energy level?
propose his model.
(d) How many possible orbitals could electrons
3. Both the Rutherford and Bohr atomic models occupy if the atom were excited?
have been described as planetary models. In
what ways is this comparison appropriate? In
what ways is this comparison misleading?
Chapter 3 Atoms, Electrons, and Periodic Trends • MHR 159
Inquiry (j) a transition metal for which the aufbau
principle predicts an electron configuration
13. Which of the following is the correct orbital
that would be incorrect (Note: There are
diagram for the third and fourth principal
energy levels of a vanadium atom (Z = 23)? several possible answers; you are required
to provide only one.)
Justify your answer.
17. On your copy of the periodic table from
(a)
question 16, colour-code and label the four
orbital blocks.
(b)
18. Imagine that scientists have successfully
(c)
synthesized element X, with atomic number
126. Predict the values of n and l for the
(d)
outermost electron in an atom of this element.
14. Each of the following orbital diagrams is State the number of orbitals there would be in
incorrect. Identify the errors, explain how you this energy sublevel.
recognized them, and use the aufbau principle
Communication
to write electron configurations using the
corrected orbital diagrams. 19. In terms of the general periodic trends for
groups and periods, explain why ranking the
(a) carbon:
following pairs might prove tricky.
(b) iron: (a) K and Sr, according to atomic size
(b) Mn and Fe, according to first
(c) bromine: ionization energy
15. The electron configurations below represent (c) Na and Ca, according to metallic character
atoms in excited states. Identify each atom, and 20. Explain why it is not possible to measure the
write its ground state electron configuration. size of an atom directly.
(a) 1s22s2sp63s13p1 21. Identify elements whose atoms have the
(b) 1s22s22p63s23p44s1 following valence electron configurations:
(c) 1s22s22p63s23p64s23d44p1 (a) 5s1 (c) 3s2
(d) 1s22s22p63s23p64s23d104p65s14d2 (b) 4s23d2 (d) 4s23d104p3
16. Sketch a blank periodic table into your 22. Why are there no p block elements in period 1
notebook to fill, roughly, half a page. Write
of the periodic table?
the letters of the questions below in their
23. At one time, scandium (Z = 21) was placed
appropriate place in the periodic table.
in the same group of the periodic table as
(a) smallest atomic radius in period 3
aluminum (Z = 13).
(b) lowest IE in period 5
1 (a) Use the aufbau principle to write the ground
(c) highest EA in period 17 (VIIA)
state electron configurations for atoms of
(d) largest atomic radius in period 6
these two elements.
(e) most metallic character in period 14 (IVA)
(b) What ionic charge would each have in
(f) group 3 (IIIA) atom that forms the most
common? How might this have led chemists
basic oxide
to place them originally in the same group?
(g) forms a 2+ ion with the electron
(c) Identify and explain all the evidence you
configuration [Ar]4s2
can think of to support their current
(h) has a condensed ground state electron
locations in the periodic table.
configuration of [Ne]3s23p2
(i) period 4 element whose atom, in the ground
state, has an outermost energy level that is
completely full
160 MHR • Unit 2 Structure and Properties
24. The values for ionization energy in the (c)Zn:1s22s22p63s23p64s23d10 (d)O:1s22s22p4
periodic table in Appendix C are first 12.(a)Sc, Y, La, Ac (b)N, P, As, Sb, Bi (c)Ne, Ar, Kr, Xe, Rn
ionization energies. Construct a bar graph 13.(a)K:1s22s22p63s23p64s1; [Ar]4s1;
to show the relative sizes of IE values for (b)Ni:1s22s22p63s23p64s23d8; [Ar]4s23d8;
1
the main group elements. If available, use
(c)Pb:1s22s22p63s23p64s23d104p65s24d105p66s24f145d106p2;
[Xe]6s24f145d106p2
spreadsheet software to plot and render
Section Review3.1: 1.(a)mostly empty space; contains a
your graph.
central, massive, concentration of charge. (b)scattering of
alpha particles that pass through gold foil 4.(a)radio waves,
Making Connections
microwaves, infrared, visible light, ultraviolet,
25. Scientists have succeeded in synthesizing x-rays, gamma rays (b)opposite of (a) 5.UV has higher
about 25 elements that do not exist in nature. energy and frequency, lower wavelength; both travel at the
All except one of these (technetium, Z = 43) same speed and have wave and particle-like properties
are members of period 7. All are very dense 6.(a)photons absorbed to excite electron to higher energy
and radioactive. Many, such as Rutherfordium level (b)photons emitted as electron falls to lower energy
(Z = 104) and Bohrium (Z = 107), are quite level (c)photons emitted as electrons falls to lower energy
level 7.n=1, n=2, n=4, n=5, n=7 3.2: 2.Principal
short-lived, with no known applications
quantum number, n, size and energy; orbital-shape
outside of the laboratory. An exception is the
quantum number, l, shape; magnetic quantum number, m,
element plutonium (Z = 94). Research several l
orientation 5.(a)l=0, 1s(b)4f(c)m
l
≠−2, but could be 0, ±1
applications of this element, and the properties
6.(a)n=4, l=1(b)2p(c)3d(d)n=2, l=0 3.3: 1.magnetic
that make it well-suited for these uses. What
spin quantum number, m; not dependent on value of any
s
risks are associated with plutonium? Do the other quantum number, always ±1/2 for any m value, not
l
risks outweigh the benefits? Justify your derived from quantum mechanics (describes electron, not
opinions. orbital) 3.(a)group 3 (IIIB), period 5, dblock (b)group 15
26. Synthesizing elements requires the use of (VA), period 4, pblock (c)group 18 (VIIIA), period 2,
pblock (d)group 13 (IIIA), period 3, pblock 4.removal of
equipment called particle accelerators.
inner electron, being closer to nucleus, Z is greater
These machines, usually the size of buildings, eff
5.left, ionization energy 7.(a)1s22s22p6, [Ne]
are enormously expensive to build and operate.
(b)1s22s22p63s23p6[Ar] (c)1s22s22p63s23p6[Ar]
Do you think this money could be better spent
(d)1s22s22p63s23p6; stable ions have a noble gas electron
elsewhere? Conduct research to help you exam-
configuration 8.ns2, large jump between IE
2
and IE
3
ine this question thoroughly and thoughtfully.
indicates that a noble gas electron configuration was
Present your findings in the form of an editorial attained after 2 electrons are removed
that either supports or opposes theoretical
scientific research of this kind.
Answers to Practice Problems and Short Answers to
Section Review Questions
Practice Problems: 1.(a)0, 1, 2, 3, 4 (b)0
2.(a)±4,±3,±2,±1,0 (b)0 3.(a)2s; 0; one (b)4f; ±3,±2,±1,0;
seven 4.n=2, l=1, 1m l =0, ±1 5. (b), (c), allowed
6.Na:1s22s22p63s1; Mg:1s22s22p63s2; Al:1s22s22p63s23p1;
Si:1s22s22p63s23p2; P:1s22s22p63s23p3; S:1s22s22p63s23p4;
Cl:1s22s22p63s23p5; Ar:1s22s22p63s23p6 7.Na:[Ne]3s1;
Mg:[Ne]3s2; Al:[Ne]3s23p1; Si:[Ne]3s23p2; P:[Ne]3s23p3;
S:[Ne]3s23p4; Cl:[Ne]3s23p5; Ar:[Ne]3s23p6 9. 2 (IIA): ns2; 13
(IIIA): ns2np1; 14 (IVA): ns2np2; 15 (VA): ns2np3; 16 (VIA):
ns2np4; 17 (VIIA): ns2np5; 18 (VIIIA): ns2np6 10.(a)group1
(IA), period 3, sblock (b)group 2 (IIA), period 2, sblock
(c)group17 (VIIA), period 5, pblock
11.(a)Ca:1s22s22p63s23p64s2
(b)Rn:1s22s22p63s23p64s23d104p65s24d105p66s24f145d106p6
Chapter 3 Atoms, Electrons, and Periodic Trends • MHR 161
Structures and
Properties of Substances
A
Chapter Preview water molecule has a bent shape, while a carbon dioxide molecule
is linear. An ammonia molecule looks like a pyramid, and sulfur
4.1 Chemical Bonding
hexafluoride (one of the most dense and most stable gaseous compounds)
4.2 Molecular Shape and is shaped like an octahedron. In fact, all molecules in nature have a
Polarity
specific shape, which is important to their chemistry.
4.3 Intermolecular Forces Why does the shape of a molecule matter? To answer this question,
in Liquids and Solids consider that, right now, each nerve cell in your brain is communicating
with adjacent nerve cells by releasing molecules called neurotransmitters
from one cell to the next. Enzymes are assisting in the chemical break-
down of food in your digestive system. The aroma of cologne, desk wood,
or cleansers that you may be smelling is a result of odorous molecules
migrating from their sources to specific sites in your nasal passages.
Each of these situations depends on the ability of one molecule with a
specific shape to “fit” into a precise location with a corresponding shape.
The properties of substances derive from the ways in which particles
bond together, the forces that act within and among the compounds they
form, and the shapes that result from these interactions.
In this chapter, you will review and extend your understanding of
Prerequisite
Concepts and Skills chemical bonding. You will discover how and why each molecule has a
characteristic shape, and how molecular shape is linked to the properties
Before you begin this chapter,
of substances. You will also consider the importance of molecular shape
review the following concepts
to the development of materials with specific applications in the world
and skills:
around you.
(cid:2) identifying the number
of valence electrons in
an atom (from previous
What atomic and molecular
studies; Chapter 3,
properties explain the macroscopic
section 3.2)
properties of the fabric used to
(cid:2) writing the ground state make these protective gloves?
electron configurations
of atoms (Chapter 3,
section 3.2)
(cid:2) predicting bond type
using electronegativity
(from previous studies)
162 MHR • Unit 2 Structure and Properties
Chemical Bonding 4.1
Of the more than one hundred elements that occur in nature or that have
Section Preview/
been produced synthetically, only the noble gases exist naturally as single, Specific Expectations
uncombined atoms. The atoms of all other elements occur in some
In this section, you will
combined form, bonded together. Chemical bonds are electrostatic forces
(cid:2) compareionic, covalent,
that hold atoms together in compounds.
and metallic bonding
Why, however, do atoms form bonds at all? The answer to this
(cid:2) predictthe polarity of vari-
question involves energy. In nature, systems of lower energy tend to be
ous covalent bonds, using
favoured over systems of higher energy. In other words, lower-energy
electronegativity values
systems tend to have greater stability than higher-energy systems. Bonded
(cid:2) observeand analyzethe
atoms, therefore, tend to have lower energy than single, uncombined
properties of substances,
atoms.
and inferthe type of bonding
(cid:2) communicateyour under-
Using Lewis Structures to Represent Atoms in Chemical Bonding
standing of the following
Chemical bonding involves the interaction of valence electrons—the terms: chemical bond, ionic
bond, covalent bond, lattice
electrons that occupy the outermost principal energy level of anatom.
energy, bond energy, polar
You have used Lewis structures in previous studies to indicate the
covalent bond, free-electron
valence electrons of atoms. Recall that to draw the Lewis structure of an
model, metallic bond
atom, replace its nucleus and inner electrons with its atomic symbol.
Then add dots around the atomic symbol to symbolize the atom’s valence
electrons. Many chemists place the dots starting at the top and continue
adding dots clockwise, at the right, then bottom, then left. After you have
drawn the first four dots, you begin again at the top, as shown below.
• • • • •• •• •• ••
Na Mg• Al• •Si • • P • • S • •Cl• •Ar•
• • • •
• • • • •• ••
In this chapter, you will use Lewis structures often to represent
molecules and the simplest formula unit of an ionic solid. Drawing a
Lewis structure for a molecule lets you see exactly how many electrons
are involved in each bond, and helps you to keep track of the number of
valence electrons. In the example below, notice that there are two ways
to show the bonding pairs of electrons. Some chemists use dots only.
Other chemists show the bonding pairs as lines between atoms. Dots are
reserved for representing a lone pair (a non-bonding pair) of electrons.
You will see the second example, with lines for bonding pairs, used more
often in this textbook.
•• •• •• ••
• • O• • • • C• • • • O• • or • • O C O• • (four lone pairs)
Bonding and the Properties of Substances
Chemists classify substances according to their bonds and the forces of
attraction that exist between their particles. In the following investigation,
you will observe and record data about the properties of five solids. Each
solid represents a particular type of bonding. Experimental evidence from
this investigation will support some of the explanations you will
encounter later in the chapter. Keep a record of your observations and
ideas for future reference.
Chapter 4 Structures and Properties of Substances • MHR 163
S K I L L F O C U S
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
Properties of Substances
In this investigation, you will study the properties Procedure
of five different types of solids: non-polar cova-
1. Read the entire Procedure before you begin.
lent, polar covalent, ionic, network, and metallic.
Design a table to record your observations.
You will be asked to identify each substance as
one of the five types. In some cases, this will 2. Rub one solid onto the surface of another.
involve making inferences and drawing on past Rank the relative hardness of each solid on a
knowledge and experience. In others, this may scale of 1 to 5. A solid that receives no scratch
involve process-of-elimination. The emphasis is marks when rubbed by the other four is the
on the skills and understandings you use to make hardest (5). A solid that can be scratched by
your decisions. Later, you will be able to assess the other four is the softest (1).
the validity of your decisions.
3. One at a time, place a small quantity (about
0.05 g) of each solid into 25 mL of distilled
Question water in a 100 mL beaker. Observe and record
What are some of the properties of the different the solubility of each solid.
types of solids?
4. For solids that dissolved in step 3, test the
solution for electrical conductivity.
Safety Precautions
5. Test each of the five large solid samples for
electrical conductivity.
• Tie back long hair and any loose clothing.
6. One at a time, put a small sample of each
• Before you light the candle or Bunsen burner, solid on the metal plate. Place the plate on
check that there are no flammable solvents nearby. the ring stand and heat it with the burning
• Use only a pinch of SiO in steps 6 and 7. candle. The plate should be just above the
2
flame. Observe how soon the solid melts.
Materials 7. Repeat step 6 with a Bunsen flame. Observe
samples of paraffin wax, C H (shavings and how soon the solid melts.
20 42
a block)
samples of sucrose, C H O (granular and a Analysis
12 22 11
large piece, such as a candy)
1. Based on what you know about bonding,
samples of sodium chloride, NaCl (granular and
classify each solid as non-polar covalent,
rock salt)
polar covalent, ionic, network, or metallic.
samples of silicon dioxide, SiO (sand and
2 Give reasons to support your decision.
quartz crystals)
2. Determine the electronegativity difference
samples of tin, Sn (granular and foil)
between the elements in each of the
distilled water
substances. How does this difference relate
100 mL beaker and stirrer
to the properties you observed?
metal plate (iron or aluminum)
conductivity tester
candle Conclusion
Bunsen burner 3. Based on the properties you observed, write a
retort stand with ring clamp working definition of each type of solid.
timer
164 MHR • Unit 2 Structure and Properties
Ionic Bonding
The force of attraction between oppositely charged ions (cations and
anions) constitutes an ionic bond. Ionic bonding occurs between atoms
of elements that have large differences in electronegativity — usually a
metal with a very low electronegativity and a non-metal with a very high
electronegativity. The units of ionic compounds such as sodium chloride
and magnesium fluoride cannot be separated easily by direct heating of the
crystal salts. The ions that make up the ionic solid are arranged in a specif-
ic array of repeating units. In solid sodium chloride, for example, the ions
are arranged in a rigid lattice structure. In such systems, the cations and
anions are arranged so that the system has the minimum possible energy.
Because of the large differences in electronegativity, the atoms in an
ionic compound usually come from the s block metals and the p block
non-metals. For example, magnesium in Group 2 (IIA) and fluorine in
Group 17 (VIIA) combine to form the ionic compound magnesium
fluoride, MgF . Figure 4.1 shows a repeating unit in the crystal model
2
of magnesium fluoride. The process that results in the formation of ions
can be illustrated with an orbital diagram or with Lewis structures, as
shown in Figures 4.2 and 4.3. Use them as a guide for the Practice
Problems below. Through bonding, the atoms of each element obtain a
valence electron configuration like that of the nearest noble gas. In this
case, the nearest noble gas for both ions is neon. This observation reflects
the octet rule.
2+ • • −
Mg • F • •
• •
Chapter 4 Structures and Properties of Substances • MHR 165
→ → → → → → → → → F
1s 2s 2p
→ → → → → → → → → F
1s 2s 2p
→ → → → → → → → → → → → Mg
1s 2s 2p 3s
→ → → → → → → → → → − F
1s 2s 2p
→ → → → → → → → → → − F
1s 2s 2p
→ → → → → → → → → →
Mg
F
Figure 4.1 A repeating unit in a
magnesium fluoride crystal
Figure 4.2 An orbital diagram for
MgF
2
Mg2+
1s 2s 2p
• •
• F •
• • • − Figure 4.3 A Lewis structure
Mg + • • • • • • F • for MgF 2
• F • • •
•
• •
Practice Problems
1. Write electron configurations for the following:
(a) Li
+
(b)
Ca2+
(c) Br
−
(d)
O2−
2. Draw Lewis structures for the chemical species in question 1.
3. Draw orbital diagrams and Lewis structures to show how the follow-
ing pairs of elements can combine. In each case, write the chemical
formula for the product.
(a) Li and S (b) Ca and Cl
(c) K and Cl (d) Na and N
Continued ...
Continued ...
4. To which main group on the periodic table does X belong?
(a) MgX (b) X SO
2 4
(c) X O (d) XCO
2 3 3
Properties of Ionic Solids
Magnesium fluoride has many properties that are characteristic of ionic
solids. In general, ionic solids have the following properties:
• crystalline with smooth, shiny surfaces
• hard but brittle
• non-conductors of electricity and heat
• high melting points
Many ionic solids are also soluble in water. Magnesium fluoride, however,
is an exception. It has a very low solubility in water.
Lattice Energy and Ionic Bonding
The reaction between gaseous magnesium ions and gaseous fluorine ions
is highly exothermic. Chemists have determined that 2957 kJ of energy is
released when 1 mol of
Mg2+
and 2 mol of F
−
react to form 1 mol of
(g) (g)
the stable ionic solid, MgF .
2
The amount of energy given off when an ionic crystal forms from the
gaseous ions of its elements is called the lattice energy. Thus, the lattice
energy of MgF is 2957 kJ/mol. The same amount of energy must be
2
added to break the ionic crystal back into its gaseous ions. What is the
relationship between lattice energy and the formation of an ionic bond?
For example, when solid magnesium and gaseous fluorine react to form
magnesium fluoride, the energy change is 1123 kJ/mol. How does this
energy change relate to magnesium fluoride’s lattice energy of 2957 kJ/mol?
Remember that, in general, the lower the total energy of a system is,
Math LINK
the higher is its stability. Any process that requires the addition of energy
The electrostatic force of usually decreases the stability of the ionic arrangement. Any process
attraction, F, between two
that gives off energy usually increases that stability. Ionic crystals such
charges, q and q , separated
1 2 as magnesium fluoride have very high melting points. This means that a
by a distance, d, is given by
the formula: F = kq 1 q 2, where large amount of energy is required to break the bonds that hold the ions
d2 together in their rigid lattice structure. You might wonder if this energy
kis a constant. How would the
comes from the process of ionization. However, this is not the case. The
charge (q) on two oppositely
ionization energy of the metal is always larger than the electron affinity of
charged ions, and the internu-
the non-metal. In other words, the transfer of electrons between gaseous
clear distance between the
ions (d) in the crystal lattice, ions always requires energy. In fact, it is the lattice energy given off
affect the force of attraction (2957 kJ/mol for MgF 2 ) that favours the formation of ionic bonds.
between the ions? For magnesium fluoride, the overall decrease in energy of 1123 kJ/mol
is accounted for mainly by its large lattice energy. The lattice energies
of the magnesium halides decrease from fluoride to iodide. The melting
points of these halides reveal a trend in the same direction, with magne-
sium fluoride having the highest melting point and magnesium iodide
having the lowest melting point. In other words, the compound with the
largest lattice energy has the highest melting point—it requires the most
energy to disrupt the lattice structure.
166 MHR • Unit 2 Structure and Properties
Covalent Bonding electron
Covalent bonding involves a balance between the forces of attraction
nucleus
and repulsion that act between the nuclei and electrons of two or
more atoms. This idea is represented in Figure 4.4, with a molecule of −
hydrogen, H . There is an optimum separation for two hydrogen atoms attraction
2
at which their nucleus-electron attractions, nucleus-nucleus repulsions, + repulsion +
and electron-electron repulsions achieve this balance. This optimum
separation favours a minimum energy for the system, and constitutes the
−
covalent bond between the two hydrogen atoms. Unlike ionic bonding,
in which electrons behave as if they are transferred from one atom to
another, covalent bonding involves the sharing of pairs of electrons. optimum
separation
In Chapter 3 you learned how the quantum mechanical model applies
to the atom. The model can also be extended to explain bonding. A Figure 4.4 Covalent bonding
covalent bond may form when two half-filled atomic orbitals from two involves forces of attraction and
atoms overlap to share the same region of space. A covalent bond involves repulsion that occur simultaneously.
the formation of a new orbital, caused by the overlapping of atomic
orbitals. The new orbital has energy levels that are lower than those of
the original atomic orbitals. Since electrons tend to occupy the lowest
available energy level, the new orbitals provide a more energetically
favourable configuration than the two atoms had before they interacted.
Characteristics of Covalent Bonding
In many cases, electron-sharing enables each atom in a covalent bond to A H • H
acquire a noble gas configuration. For a hydrogen molecule, each atom
acquires a filled valence level like that of helium by treating the shared
pair of electrons as if it is part of its own composition. As you can see in
Figure 4.5, a single shared pair of electrons—a bonding pair—fills the B region of increased
electron density
valence level of both hydrogen atoms at the same time.
The period 2 non-metals from carbon to fluorine must fill their 2s and
their three 2p orbitals to acquire a noble gas configuration like that of
neon. Covalent bonding that involves these elements obeys the octet rule.
In the formation of the diatomic fluorine molecule, F , for example, the
2
bonding (shared) pair of electrons gives each fluorine atom a complete
1s 1s
valence level.
bonding pair lone pairs Figure 4.5 Representations
•• •• •• •• of a covalent bond in a molecule
• • F• • F• • or • • F F• • of hydrogen (A) Lewis structure
•• •• •• ••
(B) Overlap of two 1sorbitals
Each fluorine atom also has three unshared pairs of electrons. These
pairs of electrons, called lone pairs, are not involved in bonding.
The covalent bond that holds molecules of hydrogen, fluorine, and
hydrogen fluoride together is a single bond. It involves a single bonding
pair of electrons. Some molecules are bonded together with two shared
pairs of electrons. These are called double bonds. Carbon dioxide is an Individual atoms of hydrogen
example of a covalent molecule that consists of double bonds. and fluorine are highly
reactive, and readily bond
•• •• •• ••
O• • • • C• • • • O or O C O together to form molecules
•• •• •• ••
of hydrogen fluoride. Draw a
Molecules that are bonded with three shared pairs of electrons have Lewis structure for hydrogen
triple bonds. Nitrogen, N , another diatomic molecule, is a triple-bonded fluoride. Label the bonding
2
molecule. and lone pairs, and explain
why this molecule is stable.
• • N• • • • • • N• • or • • N N• •
Chapter 4 Structures and Properties of Substances • MHR 167
Bond energy is the energy required to break the force of attraction
between two atoms in a bond and to separate them. Thus, bond energy
is a measure of the strength of a bond. You might expect that the bond
energy would increase if more electrons were shared between two atoms
because there would be an increase in charge density between the nuclei
of the bonded atoms. In other words, you might predict that double bonds
are stronger than single bonds, and that triple bonds are stronger than
double bonds. The data in Table 4.1 support this prediction.
Table 4.1 Average Bond Energies of Bonds
Between Carbon Atoms and Between Nitrogen Atoms
Bond Bond energy (kJ/mol) Bond Bond energy (kJ/mol)
C C 347 N N 160
C C 607 N N 418
C C 839 N N 945
Predicting Ionic and Covalent Bonds
There are several methods you can use to predict the type of bond in
an unknown substance. For example, you can consider the substance’s
Consider the differences in
physical properties. In contrast to ionic solids, covalent (molecular)
properties between covalent
compounds and ionic com- compounds typically have the following properties:
pounds. Do these differences • exist as a soft solid, a liquid, or a gas at room temperature
imply that covalent bonds
• have low melting points and boiling points
are weaker than ionic bonds?
Give evidence to justify your • are poor conductors of electricity, even in solution
answer. • may not be soluble in water (acetone, however, is one of many
exceptions; you will find out why shortly)
3.3 What if you know the formula of a compound but don’t know how
+ −
mostly ionic to classify it? In this case, you can use the electronegativity difference
(∆EN > 1.7) between the bonding atoms to predict the type of bond. For example,
two atoms with identical electronegativities, such as chlorine
(∆EN = 3.16 − 3.16 = 0) share their electrons equally. They are bonded
covalently. When two atoms have very different electronegativities, the
2.0 ∆EN
atom with the higher electronegativity value attracts electrons more
strongly than the atom with the lower electronegativity value. In sodium
polar covalent chloride, for instance, chlorine (EN = 3.16) attracts an electron much
(∆EN 0.4–1.7) more strongly than sodium (EN = 0.93). Therefore, sodium’s valence
electron has a very high probability of being found near chlorine, and a
very low probability of being found near sodium. A high electronegativity
mostly covalent difference is characteristic of ionic compounds.
(∆EN < 0.4) It is common for chemists to describe the formation of ionic
0 compounds in terms of a transferring of electrons from one atom to
Figure 4.6 The relationship another. For example, in the formation of sodium chloride, you often
between bonding character and read that sodium loses its valence electron and that chlorine gains an
electronegativity difference. The electron. Terms such as these—electron transfer, losing electrons, gaining
arrow with the “t” shape near the
electrons—make it easier to discuss and model the behaviour of atoms
tail is a vector that indicates the
during ionic bonding and the formation of ionic compounds. Figure 4.6
magnitude and direction of polarity.
provides a guide to classifying chemical bonds based on their electronega-
You will see this symbol again in
section 4.2. tivity difference. Notice that this “bonding continuum,” as it is sometimes
called, avoids definitive classifications. Instead, the character of chemical
bonds changes gradually with ∆EN.
168 MHR • Unit 2 Structure and Properties
Chemists consider bonded atoms with ∆EN between 0 and 0.4 as
Web LINK
being mostly covalent; electrons are shared equally or nearly equally.
For bonded atoms that have ∆EN between 0.4 and 1.7, the bond is www.mcgrawhill.ca/links/
chemistry12
termed polar covalent. A polar covalent bond is a covalent bond with
Another way to classify bond-
an unequally shared pair of electrons between two atoms. This unequal
ing involves calculating the
sharing results in a bond that has partially positive and partially negative
percent ionic character of the
poles. (You will learn about the significance of molecular polarity in
bond. Search for information
section 4.2.) Bonded atoms with ∆EN between 1.7 and 3.3 are mostly
about this approach on the
ionic; electrons are shared so unequally that one bonded atom has a Internet, and write a summary
strong negative charge and the other has a strong positive charge. of your findings. In particular,
The gradual change in the magnitude of ∆EN between two atoms answer this question: Can a
is paralleled by a gradual change in the physical properties of the com- bond ever be 100% covalent or
100% ionic? To start your
pounds they form. For example, chlorine forms compounds with each of
search, access the web site
the main-group elements of period 3, except for argon. Figure 4.7 shows
above. Click on Web Linksto
the relationship between ∆EN and the bonding, structure, and properties
find out where to go next.
of the period 3 chlorides.
sodium magnesium aluminum chloride silicon phosphorus disulphur chlorine
chloride chloride (AlCl3) tetrachloride trichloride dichloride (Cl2)
(NaCl) (MgCl2)
C
••
l•• •• ••C
••
l ••
(SiCl4)
••
(PCl3) (S2Cl2)
Na + ••C •
•
•
•
l•• − Mg 2+ ••C •
•
•
•
l••
2
− Al
C
C •
•
•
• l
l Al
••
••
C
C
•
•
•
•
l
l Si
C
C
•
•
•
•
l
l
••
•• ••C
•
•
•
• l P •• C •
•
•
•
l•• ••C
•
•
•
• l S •
•
•
•
S •
•
•
•
C •
•
•
•
l•• ••C •
•
•
•
l C •
•
•
•
l••
C
••
l•• •• ••C
••
l •• •• ••C
••
l••
Figure 4.7 How does ∆ENaffect bond type and properties of the Period 3 chlorides?
Practice Problems
5. List the following compounds in order of decreasing bond energy:
H(cid:2)Br, H(cid:2)I, H(cid:2)Cl. Use Appendix E to verify your answer.
6. Rank the following compounds in sequence from lowest melting
point to highest melting point, and give reasons for your decisions:
AsBr , KBr, CaBr .
3 2
Continued ...
Chapter 4 Structures and Properties of Substances • MHR 169
Continued ...
7. From their position in the periodic table, predict which bond in
the following groups is the most polar. Verify your predictions by
calculating the ∆EN.
Na (a) C(cid:2)H, Si(cid:2)H, Ge(cid:2)H
(b) Sn(cid:2)Br, Sn(cid:2)I, Sn(cid:2)F
millions (c) C(cid:2)O, C(cid:2)H, C(cid:2)N
of atoms
e
−
sea 8. Classify the bonding in each of the following as covalent (non-polar),
polar covalent, or ionic. Afterwards, rank the polar covalent
compounds in order of increasing polarity.
(a) S (d) SCl
8 2
(b) RbCl (e) F
2
(c) PF (f) SF
3 2
Metallic Bonding
About two-thirds of all the naturally occurring elements are metals.
Despite this great diversity, metals have many properties in common.
Figure 4.8 A representation of Metals conduct electricity and heat in both their solid and liquid states.
the free-electron model of metallic
Most metals are malleable and ductile; that is, they can be easily stretched,
bonding. This model applies to
bent, and deformed without shattering of the whole solid, or can be easily
metal alloys as well as to metallic
made to be with the addition of heat or pressure. While metals show a
elements.
broad range of melting and boiling points, in general, metals change state
at moderate to high temperatures. Most metals have either one or two
valence electrons. What kind of bonding model can account for these
properties?
Based on electronegativity differences, you would not expect metals
to form ionic bonds with themselves or with other metals—and they do
not. Similarly, metals do not have a sufficient number of valence electrons
to form covalent bonds with one another. Metals do, however, share
+ + + +
electrons. Unlike the electron sharing in covalent compounds, however,
+ + + +
electron sharing in metals occurs throughout the entire structure of the
external + + + +
stress applied metal. The free-electron model shown in Figure 4.8 pictures metals as
+ + + +
being composed of a densely packed core of metallic cations, within a
+ + + +
delocalized region of shared, mobile valence electrons. The force of
attraction between the positively charged cations and the pool of valence
+ electrons that moves among them constitutes a metallic bond.
+ +
Properties Explained by the Free-Electron Model
+ + +
deformed metal
+ + + + The free-electron model explains many properties of metals. For example:
+ + + + • Conductivity: Metals are good conductors of electricity and heat because
+ + + electrons can move freely throughout the metallic structure. This freedom
+ + of movement is not possible in solid ionic compounds, because the
+ valence electrons are held within the individual ionic bonds in the lattice.
• Malleability and Ductility: The malleability of metals can be explained
Figure 4.9 Metals are easily
by viewing metallic bonds as being non-directional. The positive ions
deformed because one layer of pos-
are often layered as fixed arrays (like soldiers lined up for inspection).
itive ions can slide over another. At
When stress is applied to a metal, one layer of positive ions can slide
the same time, the free electrons
(shown as a yellow cloud) continue over another layer. The layers move without breaking the array, which is
to bind the metal ions together. the reason why metals do not shatter immediately along a clearly
170 MHR • Unit 2 Structure and Properties
defined point of stress. The delocalized electrons continue to exert a
uniform attraction on the positive ions, as you can see in Figure 4.9.
• Melting and Boiling Points: The melting and boiling points of Group 1
(IA) metals (with an s1 electron in their condensed electron configura-
tion) are generally lower than the melting and boiling points of Group 2
(IIA) metals (with an s2 in their condensed electron configuration).
You would expect this trend, because the greater number of valence
electrons and the larger positive charge of Group 2 (IIA) atoms result in
stronger metallic bonding forces. This trend is also consistent with the
fact that Group 2 metals are smaller in size than Group 1 metals. Trends
involving the transition metals are more complex, in part because they
have a greater number of unpaired electrons in their d-orbitals. Because
these d electrons and those of the valence energy level have similar
magnitudes, the d electrons can participate in metallic bonding. In
general, however, transition elements have very high melting and
boiling points.
Section Summary
In this section, you have used Lewis structures to represent bonding in
ionic and covalent compounds, and have applied the quantum mechani-
cal theory of the atom to enhance your understanding of bonding. All
chemical bonds—whether their predominant character is ionic, covalent,
or between the two—result from the atomic structure and properties of
the bonding atoms. In the next section, you will learn how the positions of
atoms in a compound, and the arrangement of the bonding and lone pairs
of electrons, produce molecules with characteristic shapes. These shapes,
and the forces that arise from them, are intimately linked to the physical
properties of substances, as you will see in the final section of the chapter.
Section Review
1 (a) C Distinguish between an ionic bond, a covalent bond, and a
Web LINK
polar covalent bond.
www.mcgrawhill.ca/links/
(b) C Draw Lewis structures to illustrate how the element bromine
chemistry12
can take part in an ionic bond, a covalent bond, and a polar
The free-electron model is a
covalent bond.
simplified representation of
(c) C How would the properties differ for the compounds you metallic bonding. While it is
have shown? helpful for visualizing metals
at the atomic level, this model
2 K/U Arrange the following bonded pairs in order of decreasing cannot sufficiently explain
electronegativity difference: H(cid:2)Br, Cl(cid:2)I, O(cid:2)H, N(cid:2)Cl, S(cid:2)O. the properties of all metals.
Quantum mechanics offers a
3 K/U Select a physical property of metals. Predict and explain how
more comprehensive model
this property would vary from left to right across a period in the
for metallic bonding. Go to the
periodic table. web site above, and click on
Web Links. This will launch
4 Identify the property shown in Figure 4.10, and name the type of
you into the world of molecular
bonding that accounts for this property.
orbitals and band theory. Use
a graphic organizer or write a
brief report that compares the
free-electron and band-theory
models of metallic bonding.
Chapter 4 Structures and Properties of Substances • MHR 171
− + − + − + − +
+ − + − − + + − − + + −
− + − + + − − + + − − +
+ − + − − + + − −− + + −
+ − + −
Figure 4.10
5 MC Tungsten is used to make the filament in an electric light bulb,
while copper is the element of choice for electric wiring. What
properties do these two metals have in common and in what way(s)
do they differ to warrant their specific uses? What other metals could
be used to substitute for tungsten and copper? Why are tungsten and
copper used more often?
6 MC MgCl 2 and MgO are being considered for use in a high-temperature
industrial environment. What properties of these two compounds
would you check to determine which would be the better choice for
this application? Refer to a reference text and determine which of the
two compounds would be the better choice.
7 (a) C Iron is a hard substance, but it is easily corroded by oxygen
in the presence of water to form iron(III) oxide, commonly called
rust. Rust is chemically very stable but, structurally speaking, it has
very little strength. Explain this difference in properties of iron and
iron(III) oxide, in terms of what you have learned about the type of
bonding in these substances.
(b) C Aluminum reacts with oxygen in air to form aluminum oxide.
Unlike rust, which flakes off, aluminum oxide remains bound
to the aluminum metal, forming a protective layer that prevents
further reaction. What might account for the difference in behaviour
between iron(III) oxide and aluminum oxide and their respective
metals?
172 MHR • Unit 2 Structure and Properties
Molecular Shape and Polarity 4.2
A molecule is a discrete chemical entity, in which atoms are held together
Section Preview/
by the electrostatic attractions of covalent bonds. In previous chemistry Specific Expectations
courses, you used Lewis structures to represent the bonding in simple
In this section, you will
molecules. In a Lewis structure, you assume that each of the atoms in
(cid:2) drawLewis structures for
the molecule achieves a noble gas configuration through the sharing of
molecules and polyatomic
electrons in single, double, or triple bonds. This section introduces you ions
to a systematic approach to drawing Lewis structures for a broader range
(cid:2) representmolecules and
molecules and for polyatomic ions. You will see that, in some cases, there
polyatomic ions that are
are exceptions to the octet rule. Afterwards, you will use bonding theory exceptions to the octet rule
to help you predict the shapes of various molecules. From the shapes of
(cid:2) predictmolecular shape and
these molecules (and the electronegativity difference of their atoms), you polarity of molecules using
will determine the polarity of the substances that are comprised of these Valence-Shell Electron-Pair
molecules. Repulsion (VSEPR) theory
Why is polarity important? It explains why, for example, water is a (cid:2) describeadvances in
liquid at room temperature, rather than a gas. In other words, it helps molecular theory as a result
explain why Earth is capable of supporting life! You will explore the of Canadian research
significance of molecular polarity in greater detail in section 4.3. (cid:2) communicateyour under-
standing of the following
Lewis Structures for Molecules and Polyatomic Ions terms: co-ordinate covalent
bond, resonance structure,
You can use the procedure outlined below to draw the Lewis structures expanded valence energy
for molecules and ions that have a central atom, with other atoms around level, linear, trigonal planar,
it. The Sample Problems and additional text that follow show how to tetrahedral, trigonal bipyra-
apply these steps for several molecules and polyatomic ions that obey the midal, octahedral, dipole
octet rule. Afterwards, use Practice Problems 9 to 13 to practice drawing
Lewis structures.
How To Draw Lewis Structures for Simple Molecules and Ions with
a Central Atom
Step 1 Position the least electronegative atom in the centre of the
molecule or polyatomic ion. Write the other atoms around this
central atom, with each atom bonded to the central atom by a
single bond. Always place a hydrogen atom or a fluorine atom
at an end position in the structure.
Step 2 (a)Determine the total number of valence electrons in the
molecule or ion. For polyatomic ions, pay close attention
to the charge. For example, if you are drawing a polyatomic
anion such as CO
2−
, add two electrons to the total number
3
of valence electrons calculated for the structure CO . For a
3
+
polyatomic cation such as NH , subtract one electron from
4
the total number of valence electrons calculated for the
structure NH .
4
(b)Once you have the total number of valence electrons,
determine the total number of electrons needed for each
atom to achieve a noble gas electron configuration.
Chapter 4 Structures and Properties of Substances • MHR 173
(c)Subtract the first total (number of valence electrons) from the
second total (number of electrons needed to satisfy the octet
rule) to get the number of shared electrons. Then divide this
number by 2 to give the number of bonds. Double or triple
bonds may be needed to account for this number of bonds.
Double bonds count as two bonds. Triple bonds count as
three bonds.
Step 3 Subtract the number of shared electrons from the number of
valence electrons to get the number of non-bonding electrons.
Add these electrons as lone pairs to the atoms surrounding
the central atom so that you achieve a noble gas electron
configuration for each atom.
Sample Problem
Drawing the Lewis Structure of a Molecule
Problem
Draw the Lewis structure for formaldehyde (methanal), CH O.
2
Solution
The molecular formula, CH O, tells you the number of each kind
2
of atom in the molecule. Following steps 1 to 3 from the procedure
outlined above:
Step 1 Since H is always placed at the end position and C is less
electronegative than O, C should be the central atom. Place
the other atoms around C, attached by single bonds.
O
H C H
Step 2 Determine the total number of valence electrons:
(1 C atom × 4e − /C atom) + (1 O atom × 6e − /O atom)
+ (2 H atoms × 1e − /H atom)
= 4e − + 6e − + 2e −
= 12e −
Then, determine the total number of electrons required for each
atom in the structure to achieve a noble gas configuration. This
− −
would be 8 e for C and 8 e for O (to fill their respective valence
−
energy levels) and 2 e for each H (to fill its 1sorbital). So the total
number for CH O is:
2
(2atoms × 8e − /atom) + (2atoms × 2e − /atom) = 20e −
To find the number of shared electrons, subtract the first total
from the second,
20e − − 12e − = 8e −
Now divide the number of shared electrons by two to obtain the
number of bonds.
20e − − 12e − = 8e − ÷ 2 = 4 covalent bonds
Since there are only three atoms surrounding the central atom,
you can infer that one of the bonds is likely a double bond.
174 MHR • Unit 2 Structure and Properties
Step 3 Determine the number of non-bonding electrons by subtracting
the number of shared electrons from the total number of valence
electrons:
12 valence electrons −8 shared electrons
=4 non-bonding valence electrons (that is, 2 lone pairs)
Since H can only form a single bond, a possible structure is:
••
•O
•
H C H
Check Your Solution
Each atom has achieved a noble gas electron configuration. Thus,
you can be confident that this is a reasonable Lewis structure.
Co-ordinate Covalent Bonds
You know that a covalent bond involves the sharing of a pair of electrons
between two atoms; each atom contributes one electron to the shared pair.
+
In some cases, such as the hydronium ion, H O , one atom contributes
3
both of the electrons to the shared pair. The bond in these cases is called
a co-ordinate covalent bond. In terms of the quantum mechanical model, a
co-ordinate covalent bond forms when a filled atomic orbital overlaps with
an empty atomic orbital. Once a co-ordinate bond is formed, it behaves in
the same way as any other single covalent bond. The next Sample Problem
involves a polyatomic ion with a co-ordinate covalent bond.
Sample Problem
Lewis Structures with a Co-ordinate Covalent Bond
Problem
+
Draw the Lewis structure for the ammonium ion, NH .
4
Solution
+
The formula, NH , tells you the number of each kind of atom in the ion.
4
Following steps 1 to 3 from the procedure outlined above:
PROBLEM TIP
Step 1 Since H is always placed at the end position, N is the central atom.
Because you are working
H
with a polyatomic cation, you
H N H must account for the positive
charge. Remember to subtract
H 1 electron from the total
number of valence electrons.
Step 2 Total number of valence electrons:
(1Natom × 5e − /Natom) + (4Hatom × 1e − /Hatom) − 1e −
= 8e −
Total number of electrons required for noble gas configuration:
(1atom × 8e − /atom) + (4atoms × 2e − /atom)
= 16e −
Continued ...
Chapter 4 Structures and Properties of Substances • MHR 175
Continued ...
Number of shared electrons, and the resulting number of bonds:
16e − − 8e − = 8e −
8e − ÷ 2 = 4 covalent bonds
Step 3 Number of non-bonding electrons:
8 valence electrons −8 shared electrons
= 0 non-bonding electrons (0 lone pairs)
+
A possible structure for NH is:
4
+
H
H N H
H
Check Your Solution
Each atom has achieved a noble gas electron configuration. The positive
charge on the ion is included. This is a reasonable Lewis structure for
+
NH .
4
+
Note that the Lewis structure for NH does not indicate which atom
4
provides each shared pair of electrons around the central nitrogen atom.
However, the quantum mechanical model of the atom can explain the
bonding around this nitrogen atom. The condensed electron configuration
for nitrogen is [Ne] 2s22p3. Each nitrogen atom has only three unpaired
2p electrons in three half-filled orbitals available for bonding. Since there
are four covalent bonds shown around nitrogen in the Lewis structure,
electrons in one of the bonds must have come from the filled orbitals of
nitrogen. Therefore, one of the bonds around the central nitrogen atom
must be a co-ordinate covalent bond.
Resonance Structures: More Than One Possible Lewis Structure
Imagine that you are asked to draw the Lewis structure for sulfur dioxide,
SO . A typical answer would look like this:
2
•• •• ••
•O S O•
• •
••
This Lewis structure suggests that SO contains a single bond and
2
a double bond. However, experimental measurements of bond lengths
indicate that the bonds between the S and each O are identical. The two
bonds have properties that are somewhere between a single bond and a
double bond. In effect, the SO molecule contains two “one-and-a-half”
2
bonds.
To communicate the bonding in SO more accurately, chemists
2
draw two Lewis structures and insert a double-headed arrow between
them. Each of these Lewis structures is called a resonance structure.
Resonance structures are models that give the same relative position of
atoms as in Lewis structures, but show different places for their bonding
and lone pairs.
•• •• •• •• •• ••
•O S O• •O S O•
• • • •
•• ••
176 MHR • Unit 2 Structure and Properties
Many molecules and ions—especially organic ones—require
resonance structures to represent their bonding. It is essential to bear
in mind, however, that resonance structures do not exist in reality. For
example, SO does not shift back and forth from one structure to the
2
other. An actual SO molecule is a combination—a hybrid—of its two
2
resonance structures. It is more properly referred to as a resonance hybrid.
You could think of resonance hybrids as being like “mutts.” For example,
a dog that is a cross between a spaniel and a beagle (a “speagle”) is part
spaniel and part beagle. It does not exist as a spaniel one moment and a
beagle the next. Instead, a speagle is an average, of sorts, between the two
breeds. Similarly, a resonance hybrid is a weighted average between two
or more resonance structures.
Practice Problems
9. Draw Lewis structures for each of the following molecules.
−
(a) NH (c) CF (e) BrO (g) H O
3 4 2 2
(b) CH (d) AsH (f) H S (h) ClNO
4 3 2
10. Draw Lewis structures for each of the following ions. (Note:Consider
resonance structures.)
(a) CO
2−
(b) NO
+
(c) ClO
−
(d) SO
2−
3 3 3
11. Dichlorofluoroethane, CH CFCl , has been proposed as a
3 2
replacement for chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs). The presence of
hydrogen in CH CFCl markedly reduces the ozone-depleting
3 2
ability of the compound. Draw a Lewis structure for this molecule.
12. Draw Lewis structures for the following molecules. (Note:Neither
of these molecules has a single central atom.)
(a) N H (b) N F
2 4 2 2
13. Although Group 18 (VIIIA) elements are inactive, chemists are able
to synthesize compounds of several noble gases, including Xe. Draw
a Lewis structure for the XeO molecule. Indicate if co-ordinate
4
covalent bonding is likely a part of the bonding in this molecule.
Central Atoms with an Expanded Valence Level
The octet rule allows a maximum of four bonds (a total of eight electrons)
to form around an atom. Based upon bond energies, however, chemists
have suggested that the bonding in some molecules (and polyatomic ions)
is best explained by a model that shows more than eight electrons in the
valence energy level of the central atom. This central atom is said to have
an expanded valence energy level. One example of a molecule with an
expanded valence energy level is phosphorus pentachloride, PCl . This
5
substance is a pungent, pale-yellow powder that is used in the agricultural,
pharmaceutical, and dyeing industries. Organic chemists also use reactions
with PCl to identify compounds that contain hydroxyl groups.
5
••
• • Cl• • ••
•Cl•
• •
••
•Cl P
•
••
•Cl•
• •
•Cl• ••
• •
••
Chapter 4 Structures and Properties of Substances • MHR 177
Until recently, chemists explained bonding in molecules such as PCl5
by assuming that empty d orbitals of the central atom were involved.
However, experimental evidence does not support this idea. Current
thinking suggests that larger atoms can accommodate additional valence
electrons because of their size. The theory behind this idea goes beyond
the scope of this textbook. Assume that the octet rule usually applies
when drawing Lewis structures for simple molecules. Sometimes,
however, you must violate the rule to allow for more than four bonds
around a central atom.
Practice Problems
14. Draw Lewis structures for the following molecules.
(a) SF (b) BrF
6 5
15. Draw Lewis structures for the following molecules.
(a) XeF (b) PF
4 5
16. How does the arrangement of electrons around the central atom differ
in PI and ClI ? Draw the Lewis structures for these compounds to
3 3
answer this question.
−
17. Draw a Lewis structure for the ion, IF .
4
Shapes and Polarity of Molecules
Up to now, you have represented molecules using Lewis structures.
These two-dimensional, formula-like diagrams help you count and keep
track of valence electrons, and communicate essential information about
the placement and bonding of atoms or ions in a molecule. Chemists often
draw Lewis structures in a way that suggests the shape of a molecule.
However, this is not their function. It is important to remember that Lewis
structures do not communicate any information about a molecule’s shape.
To represent the shapes of real molecules, you need a model that depicts
them in three-dimensions.
In 1957, an English chemist, Ronald Gillespie, joined Hamilton,
Ontario’s McMaster University for a long, distinguished career as a
professor of chemistry. Earlier that year, Gillespie, in collaboration with
a colleague, Ronald Nyholm, developed a model for predicting the shape
of molecules. Like chemistry students around the world since that time,
you are about to learn the central features of this model, called the
Valence-Shell Electron-Pair Repulsion theory. This is usually abbreviated
to VSEPR (pronounced “vesper”) theory. (Note that some chemists use the
term “shell” instead of energy level to describe atomic orbitals.)
Introducing Valence-Shell Electron-Pair Repulsion (VSEPR) Theory
The fundamental principle of the Valence-Shell Electron-Pair Repulsion
theory is that the bonding pairs and lone, non-bonding pairs of electrons
in the valence level of an atom repel one another. As you know, electron
pairs of atoms are localized in orbitals, which are shapes that describe the
space in which electrons are most likely to be found around a nucleus.
The orbital for each electron pair is positioned as far apart from the other
orbitals as possible.
178 MHR • Unit 2 Structure and Properties
The effect of this positioning minimizes the forces of repulsion
between electron pairs. A lone pair (LP) will spread out more than a bond
pair. Therefore, the repulsion is greatest between lone pairs (LP(cid:2)LP).
Bonding pairs (BP) are more localized between the atomic nuclei, so they
spread out less than lone pairs. Therefore, the BP-BP repulsions are smaller
than the LP(cid:2)LP repulsions. The repulsion between a bond pair and a
lone-pair (BP(cid:2)LP) has a magnitude intermediate between the other two.
In other words, in terms of decreasing repulsion:
LP(cid:2)LP > LP(cid:2)BP > BP(cid:2)BP.
In Unit 1, you encountered the tetrahedral shape around a single-
bonded carbon atom, the trigonal planar shape around a carbon atom
with one double bond, and the linear shape around a carbon atom with
a triple bond. These shapes result from repulsions between lone pairs
and bonding pairs of electrons. Now you will use your understanding of
LP and BP repulsions to explain the shapes you learned in Unit 1, and
to predict the shapes of other molecules. Figure 4.11 shows the five basic
geometrical arrangements that result from the interactions of lone pairs
and bonding pairs around a central atom. These arrangements involve up
to six electron groups. An electron group is usually one of the following:
• a single bond
• a double bond
• a triple bond
• a lone pair
Each of the electron-group arrangements in Figure 4.11 results in a
minimum total energy for the molecule. Variations in these arrangements
are possible, depending on whether a bonding pair or a lone pair occupies
a specific position. Therefore, it is important to distinguish between
electron-group arrangement and molecular shape. Electron-group
arrangement refers to the ways in which groups of valence electrons
are positioned around the central atom. Molecular shape refers to the
relative positions of the atomic nuclei in a molecule. When all the
electron groups are bonding pairs, a molecule will have one of the five
geometrical arrangements shown in Figure 4.11. If one or more of the
electron groups include a lone pair of electrons, variations in one of the
five geometric arrangements result.
180˚
120˚ 109.5˚
linear trigonal planar tetrahedral
90˚ 90˚
120˚
90˚
trigonal bipyramidal octahedral
Figure 4.11 The five basic electron-group arrangements and their bond angles
Chapter 4 Structures and Properties of Substances • MHR 179
In the following ExpressLab, you will make models of the five
electron-group arrangements, and measure their bond angles. Afterwards,
you will consider some of the variations in molecular shapes that canoccur
ExpressLab Using Soap Bubbles to Model Molecular Shape
You can use soap bubbles to simulate the 6. On top of the group of three equal-sized
molecular shapes that are predicted by VSEPR bubbles, blow a fourth bubble of the same size
theory. The soap bubbles represent the electron that touches the centre. Estimate the angle that
clouds surrounding the central atom in a molecule. is formed where bubbles meet.
7. On top of the group of bubbles you made in step
Safety Precautions
5, make a fourth bubble that is larger than the
other three (to simulate a lone pair). Record what
• Ensure that each person uses a clean straw. happens to the bond angles.
• Clean up all spills immediately. 8. Have five students each blow a bubble of the
same size at the same time to join and float
Materials
in the air. Identify the shape that results. If
soap solution (mixture of 80 mL distilled water, successful, have six partners join six bubbles in
15 mL detergent, and 5 mL glycerin) the air and identify the shape.
100 mL beaker
9. Clean your work area using dry paper towels
straw
first. Then wipe the area with wet paper towels.
protractor
hard, flat surface Analysis
paper towels
1. What shapes and bond angles were associated
with two, three, and four same-sized bubbles?
Procedure
Give an example of a molecule that matches
1. Obtain approximately 25 mL of the prepared
each of these shapes.
soap solution in a 100 mL beaker.
2. Give an example of a molecule that matches
CAUTION Clean up any spills immediately.
each of the shapes in steps 5 and 7, where you
2. Wet a hard, flat surface, about 10 cm ×10 cm in
made one bubble larger than the others.
area, with the soap solution.
3. What molecular shapes match the arrangements
3. Dip a straw into the soap solution in the beaker
of the bubbles in step 8?
and blow a bubble on the wetted surface.
4. If they are available, use inflated balloons or
CAUTION Each person must use a clean straw.
molecule modeling kits to construct each of
Blow a second bubble of the same size onto
the arrangements in Figure 4.11. How do these
the same surface to touch the first bubble.
models compare with your bubble models?
Record the shape of this simulated molecule
and measure the bond angle between the centres
of the two bubbles where the nuclei of the atoms
would be located.
4. Repeat step 3 with three bubbles of the same
size (to simulate three bonding pairs). Record the
shape and the bond angle between the centres of
the bubbles.
5. Repeat step 3, but this time make one bubble
slightly larger than the other two. This will
simulate a lone pair of electrons. Record what
happens to the bond angles.
180 MHR • Unit 2 Structure and Properties
Molecular Geometry
Each of the molecules in Figure 4.12 has four pairs of electrons around
Electronic Learning Partner
the central atom. Observe the differences in the number of bonding and
lone pairs in these molecules. Methane, CH , has four BPs. Ammonia, Your Chemistry 12 Electronic
4
NH , has three BPs and one LP. Water, H O, has two BPs and two LPs. Learning Partner can help you
3 2
Notice the effect of these differences on the shapes and bond angles of visualize the geometry of
molecular shapes.
the molecules. Methane, with four BPs, has a molecular shape that is the
same as the electron-group arrangement in which four electron groups
surround a central atom: tetrahedral. The angle between any two bonding
pairs in the tetrahedral electron-group arrangement is 109.5˚. This angle
corresponds to the most favourable arrangement of electron groups to
minimize the forces of repulsion among them.
CH
4
H
C CHEM
H FACT
H
H A trigonal bipyramid has two
electron regions where the
109.5˚
repulsions are different. An
NH 3 H 2 O electron pair in the axialregion
(green) experiences three
repulsions at 90˚, and one at
N O 180˚. An electron pair in the
H equatorialregion (yellow)
H H H H experiences two repulsions at
104.5˚ 120˚, and two at 90˚. Repulsions
107.3˚
between electron pairs are
much greater when 90˚ apart
Figure 4.12 Comparing the bond angles in the molecules of CH, NH, and HO.
4 3 2 as compared to 120˚.Therefore,
repulsions in the equatorial
When there are 1 LP and 3 BPs around a central atom, there are two
plane are less than those in
types of repulsions: LP(cid:2)BP and BP(cid:2)BP. Since LP(cid:2)BP repulsions are the axial positions. Because
greater than BP(cid:2)BP repulsions, the bond angle between the bond pairs repulsions are less in the
in NH is reduced from 109.5˚ to 107.3˚. When you draw the shape of a equatorial region, lone pairs
3
trigonal pyramidal molecule, without the lone pair, you can see that the and double bonds always
occupy equatorial positions
three bonds form the shape of a pyramid with a triangular base. In a
molecule of H O, there are two BPs and two LPs. The strong LP(cid:2)LP in trigonal bipyramidal
2 arrangements.
repulsions, in addition to the LP(cid:2)BP repulsions, cause the angle
between the bonding pairs to be reduced further to 104.5˚. You encoun-
tered this variation of the tetrahedral shape in Unit 1: the bent shape
90˚
around an oxygen atom with 2 LPs and two single bonds.
Table 4.2 summarizes the molecular shapes that commonly occur. The
120˚
VSEPR notation used for these shapes adopts the letter “A” to represent
the central atom, the letter “X” to represent a bonding pair, and the letter
“E’ to represent a lone pair of electrons. For example, the VSEPR notation
for NH is AX E. This indicates that ammonia has three BPs around its
3 3
central atom, and one LP.
Chapter 4 Structures and Properties of Substances • MHR 181
Table 4.2 Common Molecular Shapes and Their Electron Group Arrangements
Number of Geometric arrangement Type of
electron groups of electron groups electron pairs VSEPR notation Name of Molecular shape Example
2 linear 2 BP AX X A X BeF
2 2
linear
3 trigonal planar 3 BP AX 3 X BF 3
X A
X
trigonal planar
3 trigonal planar 2 BP, 1 LP AX E SnCl
2 2
•
•
X A
X
angular
4 tetrahedral 4 BP AX 4 X CF 4
A X
X
X
tetrahedral
4 tetrahedral 3 BP, 1LP AX E PCl
3 • • 3
A
X X
X
trigonal pyramidal
4 tetrahedral 2 BP, 2LP AX E H S
2 2 2
• •
A
•
• X
X
angular
5 trigonal 5 BP AX SbCl
5 5
X
bipyramidal
X
X A
X
X
trigonal bipyramidal
5 trigonal 4 BP, 1LP AX E TeCl
4 X 4
bipyramidal
X
•
• A
X
X
seesaw
182 MHR • Unit 2 Structure and Properties
5 trigonal 3 BP, 2LP AX E X BrF
3 2 • 3
bipyramidal •
X A
•
•
X
T-shaped
5 trigonal 2 BP, 3LP AX E XeF
2 3 • 2
bipyramidal •
A
linear
6 octahedral 6 BP AX SF
6 6
octahedral
6 octahedral 5 BP, 1LP AX E BrF
5 5
square pyramidal
6 octahedral 4 BP, 2LP AX E XeF 4 2 4
square planar
Predicting Molecular Shape
You can use the steps below to help you predict the shape of a molecule
(or polyatomic ion) that has one central atom. Refer to these steps as you
work through the Sample Problems and the Practice Problems that follow.
1. Draw a preliminary Lewis structure of the molecule based on the
formula given.
2. Determine the total number of electron groups around the central
atom (bonding pairs, lone pairs and, where applicable, account for
the charge on the ion). Remember that a double bond or a triple
bond is counted as one electron group.
3. Determine which one of the five geometric arrangements will
accommodate this total number of electron groups.
4. Determine the molecular shape from the positions occupied by the
bonding pairs and lone pairs.
Chapter 4 Structures and Properties of Substances • MHR 183
•
•
X
•
•
X
X
X
X
A
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
• •
A
X
X
X
X
•
•
•
•
A
Sample Problem
Predicting Molecular Shape for a Simpler Compound
Problem
+
Determine the molecular shape of the hydronium ion, H O .
3
Plan Your Strategy
Follow the four-step procedure that helps to predict molecular shape.
Use Table 4.2 for names of the electron-group arrangements and
molecular shapes.
Act on Your Strategy
+
Step 1 A possible Lewis structure for H O is:
3
+
H
H O H
••
Step 2 The Lewis structure shows 3 BPs and 1 LP. That is, there are a
total of four electron groups around the central O atom.
Step 3 The geometric arrangement of the electron groups is tetrahedral.
Step 4 For 3 BPs and 1 LP, the molecular shape is trigonal pyramidal.
Check Your Solution
This molecular shape corresponds to the VSEPR notation for this ion,
AX E.
3
Sample Problem
Predicting Molecular Shape for a Complex Compound
Problem
Determine the shape of SiF
2−
using VSEPR theory.
6
Plan Your Strategy
Follow the four-step procedure that helps to predict molecular shape
apply. Use Table 4.2 for names of the electron group arrangements and
molecular shapes.
Act on Your Strategy
Step 1 Draw a preliminary Lewis structure for SiF
2−
.
6
F F
F Si F
F F
This polyatomic ion has six bonds around the central Si atom,
an obvious exception to the octet rule, so the central atom needs
an expanded valence shell.
Total number of valence electrons
= 1Siatom × 4e − /Siatom + 6Fatom × 7e − /Fatom + 2e −
(ionic charge)
= 48e −
184 MHR • Unit 2 Structure and Properties
−
For all seven atoms, 48e are available for bonding. Si forms 6
single bonds to each F atom, 12 electrons are used. There remains
−
36e (18 lone pairs) to be placed around the F atoms. Each F atom
−
uses 3 lone pairs (6e ) to complete an octet. Therefore, a possible
structure is:
•• •• 2−
• F • • F •
• • • •
•• ••
• F Si F •
• •
•• ••
• F • • F •
• • • •
•• ••
Step 2 From the structure, there are 6 BPs and 0 LP, a total of six electron
groups around the central Si atom.
Step 3 The geometric arrangement of the electron group is octahedral.
Step 4 For 6 BPs, the molecular shape is also octahedral.
Check Your Solution
This molecular shape corresponds to theVSEPR notation for this ion, AX .
6
Keep in mind that the need for an expanded valence level for the central
atom may not always be as obvious as in the previous Sample Problem.
For example, what if you were asked to predict the molecular shape of
−
the polyatomic ion, BrCl ? Drawing the Lewis structure enables you to
4
determine that the central atom has an expanded valence level.
Total number of valence electrons = 36 e-
Total number of electrons required for each atom
to have an octet = 40e −
There are not enough electrons for bonding. Therefore, the central
atom requires an expanded valence level. A possible Lewis structure
−
for BrCl is:
4
•• •• −
•Cl• •Cl•
• • • •
•Br•
• •
•Cl• •Cl•
• • • •
•• ••
Now you can see that the central atoms has 4 BPs and 2 LPs, a total of 6
electron groups around it. The geometric arrangement of the electron group
is octahedral. For 4 BPs and 2 LPs, the molecular shape is square planar.
Practice Problems
18. Use VSEPR theory to predict the molecular shape for each of the
following:
(a) HCN (b) SO (c) SO (d) SO
2−
2 3 4
19. Use VSEPR theory to predict the molecular shape for each of the
following:
+ −
(a) CH F (b) AsCl (c) NH (d) BF
2 2 5 4 4
+ −
20. Use VSEPR theory to predict the molecular shapes of NO and NO .
2 2
Continued ...
Chapter 4 Structures and Properties of Substances • MHR 185
Continued ...
21. Draw Lewis structures for the following molecules and ions, and use
VSEPR theory to predict the molecular shape. Indicate the examples
in which the central atom has an expanded octet.
− −
(a) XeI (b) PF (c) AsF (d) AlF
2 6 3 4
22. Given the general formula and the shape of the molecule or ion,
suggest possible elements that could be the central atom, X, in each
of the following:
+
(a) XF (trigonal pyramidal) (c) XF (T-shaped)
3 3
+
(b) XF (tetrahedral)
4
Tools & Techniques
AIM Theory and Electron In the early 1970s, Dr. Bader invented the
Density Maps theory of “Atoms in Molecules,” otherwise known
as AIM theory. This theory links the mathematics
The microscopic world of atoms is difficult to
of quantum mechanics to the atoms and bonds in
imagine, let alone visualize in detail. Chemists and
a molecule. AIM theory adopts electron density,
chemical engineers employ different molecular
which is related to the Schrödinger description of
modelling tools to study the structure, properties,
the atom, as a starting point to mapping molecules.
and reactivity of atoms, and the way they bond to
Chemists often focus on the energetic,
one another. Richard Bader, a chemistry professor at
geometric, and spectroscopic properties of
McMaster University, has invented an interpretative
molecules. However, since the electron density
theory that is gaining acceptance as an accurate
exists in ordinary three-dimensional space, electron
method to describe molecular behaviour and predict
density maps of molecules can be used as tools to
molecular properties. According to Dr. Bader, shown
unearth a wealth of information about the molecule.
below, small molecules are best represented using
This information includes, but is not limited to, a
topological maps, where contour lines (which are
molecule’s magnetic properties, per-atom electron
commonly used to represent elevation on maps)
population, and bond types.
represent the electron density of molecules.
Using diagrams and computer graphics, chemists
use AIM theory to construct three-dimensional
electron density maps of molecules. Chemists can
then use the maps as tools to perform experiments
on the computer as if they were performing the
same experiments in the laboratory, but with higher
efficiency. Many chemists are excited by the prospect
of using computer graphics, both inside and outside
of the classroom, as teaching tools for students and
the public at large.
In addition to being able to simulate very
simple isolated molecules and their reactions,
AIM theory provides a physical basis for the theory
of Lewis electron pairs and the VSEPR model of
molecular geometry. Equipped with computers and
computer-generated, three-dimensional electron
density maps, scientists are able to view molecules
The diagrams above show two different ways to model the and predict molecular phenomena without even
electron density in a plane of a molecule of ethylene . having to get off their chairs!
186 MHR • Unit 2 Structure and Properties
The Relationship Between Molecular Shape and Molecular Polarity
A molecule’s shape and polarity are directly related. As you know, the
electronegativity difference between two atoms is the principal factor
that determines the type of chemical bonding between them. As you saw
in section 4.1, when atoms of two different elements have ∆EN between
0.5 and 1.7, the bond between them is polar covalent. The electrons are
shared unequally between the two types of atoms. For example, in the
HCl molecule, the Cl atom is more electronegative than the H atom. Thus,
the Cl atom exerts a stronger force of attraction on the shared pair of
electrons. As a result, the Cl end of the bond develops a partial negative
charge
(δ−
) and the H end develops a partial positive charge
(δ+
). This
polarity in a bond is called a bond dipole. The vector used to represent a
bond dipole points toward the more electronegative element. For exam-
ple, you could represent the polarity of the bond in hydrogen chloride as:
δ+ δ−
••
H• • Cl• • or HCI
••
For a diatomic molecule such as HCl, or the bond polarity is also the
molecule’s polarity. For polyatomic molecules, such as the examples that
follow, molecular polarity depends on the polarity of all of the bonds and
the angles at which the dipoles come together. Thus, molecular
dipole(cid:2)or just dipole(cid:2)is a termused to describe the charge separation
for the entire molecule.
Consider, for example, BeF , which is a symmetrical, linear molecule.
2
Each Be(cid:2)F bond is polar (because fluorine has a greater electronegativity
than beryllium). Due to the linear shape of this molecule, however,
the polarities of the two bonds are directly opposite each other. The
two bonding polarities exactly counteract each other, so that BeF is a
2
non-polar molecule. The shape of a molecule, combined with the polarity
of its individual bonds, therefore, determine polarity.
δ− δ+ δ−
+
Look back at Chapter 1, pages
F Be F 8–10, to review how to predict
the molecular polarity of
Compare two molecules with the same molecular shape: CCl and
4 organic compounds.
CCl H. Since the polarity of the C(cid:2)Cl bond is different from that of
3
the C(cid:2)H bond, the polarities of these two molecules are different. The
CCl molecule is symmetrical about any axis joining the two atoms of
4
the C(cid:2)Cl bond. The polarities of the C(cid:2)Cl bonds counteract one
another. Thus, the carbon tetrachloride molecule is non-polar. In the
case of CCl H, the polarity of the H(cid:2)Cl bond is different from that of
3
the three C(cid:2)Cl bonds. Thus, the molecule is polar.
+
Cl H
C C
Cl Cl
Cl Cl
Cl Cl
non-polar polar
Table 4.3 summarizes the relationship between molecular polarity and
molecular shape. The letter “A” represents the central atom and the letter
“X” represent a more electronegative atom. An atom represented by the
letter “Y” is more electronegative than the atom represented by the letter
“X.” After you examine this table, do the Practice Problems that follow.
Chapter 4 Structures and Properties of Substances • MHR 187
Table 4.3 Effect of Molecular Shape on Molecular Polarity
Molecular shape Bond polarity Molecular polarity
linear non-polar
X A X
linear polar
X A Y
A
bent polar
X X
trigonal planar X non-polar
A
X X
trigonal planar X polar
A
X Y
tetrahedral XX non-polar
X A
X X
tetrahedral XX polar
X A
X Y
Practice Problems
23. Use VSEPR theory to predict the shape of each of the following
molecules. From the molecular shape and the polarity of the bonds,
determine whether or not the molecule is polar.
(a) CH F (b) CH O (c) GaI
3 2 3
24. Freon-12, CCl F , was used as a coolant in refrigerators until it was
2 2
suspected to be a cause of ozone depletion. Determine the molecular
shape of CCl F and discuss the possibility that the molecule will be
2 2
a dipole.
25. Which of the following is more polar? Justify your answer in each case.
−
(a) NF or NCl (b) ICl or TeCl
3 3 4 4
26. A hypothetical molecule with the formula XY is discovered, through
3
experiment, to exist. It is polar. Which molecular shapes are possible
for this molecule? Which shapes are impossible? Explain why in
each case.
188 MHR • Unit 2 Structure and Properties
Section Summary
In this section, you have pieced together the main components that deter-
mine the structure and polarity of molecules. Why is the polarity of a
molecule important? Polar molecules attract one another more than non-
polar molecules do. Because of this attraction, many physical properties
of substances are affected by the polarity of their molecules. In the next
section, you will consider some of these physical properties for liquid and
solid substances, and learn about other forces that have a significant effect
on the interactions within and among molecules.
Section Review
1 K/U For each of the following molecules, draw a Lewis structure, and
determine if the molecule is polar or non-polar.
(a) AsH (b) CH CN (c) Cl O
3 3 2
2 C Discuss the validity of the statement: “All polar molecules must
have polar bonds and all non-polar molecules must have non-polar
bonds.”
3 K/U What similarities and what differences would you expect in the
molecular shape and the polarity of CH and CH OH? Explain your
4 3
answer.
4 I The molecules BF and NH are known to undergo a combination
3 3
reaction in which the boron and nitrogen atoms of the respective
molecules join together. Sketch a Lewis structure of the molecule that
would be expected to be formed from this reaction. Would the product
molecule be expected to be more or less reactive than the starting
materials? Give a reason for your answer.
5 I Use VSEPR theory to predict the molecular shape and the polarity
of SF . Explain your answer.
2
+
6 I Draw a Lewis structure for PCl 4 . Use VSEPR theory to predict the
molecular shape of this ion.
7 C Identify and explain the factors that determine the structure and
polarity of molecules.
Chapter 4 Structures and Properties of Substances • MHR 189
4.3 Intermolecular Forces
in Liquids and Solids
Section Preview/ Water and hydrogen sulfide have the same molecular shape: bent. Both
Specific Expectations are polar molecules. However, H O, with a molar mass of 18 g, is a liquid
2
In this section, you will at room temperature, while H 2 S, with a molar mass of 34 g, is a gas.
Water’s boiling point is 100˚C, while hydrogen sulfide’s boiling point
(cid:2) distinguishbetween
intermolecular and is −61˚C. These property differences are difficult to explain using the
intramolecular forces bonding models you have learned so far. These models focused on the
forces of attraction between ions in ionic solids, between individual atoms
(cid:2) explainhow the properties
of solids and liquids are con- in covalent and polar covalent compounds, and between positive metal
nected to their component ions and free electrons in metals. These are intramolecular forces—forces
particles and the forces exerted within a molecule or polyatomic ion. During a chemical change,
between and among them intramolecular forces are overcome and chemical bonds are broken.
(cid:2) conductexperiments to Therefore, these forces influence the chemical properties of substances.
observeand analyzethe Forces that influence the physical properties of substances are called
physical properties of intermolecular forces. These are forces of attraction and repulsion that act
different substances and
between molecules or ions.
determinethe type of
Intermolecular forces were extensively studied by the Dutch physicist
bonding involved
Johannes van der Waals (1837–1923). To mark his contributions to the
(cid:2) communicateyour under-
understanding of intermolecular attractions, these forces are often called
standing of the following
van der Waals forces. They are categorized into the following groups:
terms: intramolecular forces,
dipole-dipole forces, ion-dipole forces, induced dipole forces, dispersion
intermolecular forces,
dipole-dipole force, (London) forces, and hydrogen bonding. In the pages that follow, you will
ion-dipole force, see how each of these types of intermolecular forces affects the molecular
ion-induced dipole force, properties of liquids. Following that, you will apply your understanding
dipole-induced dipole force, of intermolecular forces to help you explain some physical properties of
dispersion force, hydrogen
substances in the solid state.
bonding, crystalline solids,
amorphous solids, network
Dipole-Dipole Forces
solids, allotrope
In the liquid state, polar molecules (dipoles) orient themselves so that
oppositely charged ends of the molecules are near to one another. The
attractions between these opposite charges are called dipole-dipole forces.
Figure 4.13 shows the orientation of polar molecules due to these forces
in a liquid.
Figure 4.13 Dipole-dipole forces among polar molecules in the liquid state
190 MHR • Unit 2 Structure and Properties
As a result of these dipole-dipole forces of attraction, polar molecules
will tend to attract one another more at room temperature than similarly
Acetaldehyde (ethanal),
sized non-polar molecules would. The energy required to separate polar
CH CHO, is a polar molecule
molecules from one another is therefore greater than that needed to sepa- 3
that has a boiling point of 20˚C.
rate non-polar molecules of similar molar mass. This is indicated by the
Propane, on the other hand, is
extreme difference in melting and boiling points of these two types of a non-polar molecule of similar
molecular substances. (Recall that melting and boiling points are physical size, number of electrons, and
properties of substances.) molar mass. The boiling point
of propane, CH CH CH , is
3 2 3
−42˚C. Use the concept of
Ion-Dipole Forces
dipole-dipole forces to explain
Sodium chloride and other soluble ionic solids dissolve in polar solvents these property differences.
such as water because of ion-dipole forces. An ion-dipole force is the
force of attraction between an ion and a polar molecule (a dipole). For
+
example, NaCl dissolves in water because the attractions between the Na
−
and Cl ions and the water molecules provide enough energy to overcome
the forces that bind the ions together. Figure 4.14 shows how ion-dipole
forces dissolve any type of soluble ionic compound.
−
+
+ −
−
− +
+
+ − +
−
− +
+
−
− −
Figure 4.14 In aqueous solution, ionic solids dissolve as the negative ends and the positive
ends of the water molecules become oriented with the corresponding oppositely charged ions
that make up the ionic compound, pulling them away from the solid into solution.
Induced Intermolecular Forces
Induction of electric charge occurs when a charge on one object causes a
change in the distribution of charge on a nearby object. Rubbing a balloon
to make it "stick" to a wall is an example of charging by induction. There
are two types of charge-induced dipole forces.
An ion-induced dipole force results when an ion in close proximity
to a non-polar molecule distorts the electron density of the non-polar
molecule. The molecule then becomes momentarily polarized, and the
two species are attracted to each other. This force is active during every
moment of your life, in the bonding between non-polar O molecules
2
and the
Fe2+
ion in hemoglobin. Ion-induced dipole forces, therefore, are
part of the process that transports vital oxygen throughout your body.
A dipole-induced dipole force is similar to that of an ion-induced
dipole force. In this case, however, the charge on a polar molecule is
responsible for inducing the charge on the non-polar molecule. Non-polar
gases such as oxygen and nitrogen dissolve, sparingly, in water because of
dipole-induced dipole forces.
Chapter 4 Structures and Properties of Substances • MHR 191
Dispersion (London) Forces
The shared pairs of electrons in covalent bonds are constantly vibrating.
While this applies to all molecules, it is of particular interest for mole-
cules that are non-polar. The bond vibrations, which are part of the
normal condition of a non-polar molecule, cause momentary, uneven
distributions of charge. In other words, a non-polar molecule becomes
slightly polar for an instant, and continues to do this on a random but
on-going basis. At the instant that one non-polar molecule is in a slightly
polar condition, it is capable of inducing a dipole in a nearby molecule.
An intermolecular force of attraction results. This force of attraction is
called a dispersion force. Chemists also commonly refer to it as a London
force, in honour of the German physicist, Fritz London, who studied
this force. Unlike other intermolecular forces, dispersion (London)
forces act between any particles, polar or otherwise. They are the main
intermolecular forces that act between non-polar molecules, as shown in
Figure 4.15.
Two factors affect the magnitude of dispersion forces. One is the
number of electrons in the molecule and the other is the shape of the
molecule. Vibrations within larger molecules that have more electrons
than smaller molecules can easily cause an uneven distribution of charge.
The dispersion forces between these larger molecules are thus stronger,
which has the effect of raising the boiling point for larger molecules. A
molecule with a spherical shape has a smaller surface area than a straight
chain molecule that has the same number of electrons. The smaller
surface area allows less opportunity for the molecule to induce a charge
on a nearby molecule. Therefore, for two substances with molecules that
have a similar number of electrons, the substance with molecules that
have a more spherical shape will have weaker dispersion forces and a
lower boiling point.
A C
B
Figure 4.15 How dispersion forces develop between identical non-polar molecules. In A,
neither molecule interacts with the other. In B, one molecule becomes, instantaneously, a
dipole. At that moment, the dipolar molecule is able to induce a temporary charge separation
in the other molecule, resulting in a force of attraction between the two. All the molecules
within a sample undergo this same process, as shown in C.
Hydrogen Bonding
A dipole-dipole interaction that is very significant in many biological
molecules and some inorganic molecules, such as H 2 O ((cid:2)) , is hydrogen
bonding. Hydrogen bonding is a particularly strong form of dipole-dipole
attraction that exists between a hydrogen atom in a polar-bonded
molecule that contains bonds such as H(cid:2)O, H(cid:2)N, or H(cid:2)F, and an
unshared pair of electrons on another small, electronegative atom such
as O, N, or F. The small, electronegative atom can be on its own, but is
usually bonded in a molecule.
192 MHR • Unit 2 Structure and Properties
When hydrogen is bonded to oxygen, fluorine, or nitrogen, the strong
force of attraction exerted by any of these three very electronegative atoms
draws the electron density from the hydrogen atom in the polar-bonded
molecule, leaving the hydrogen atom with a partial positive charge. This
dipole is easily attracted to the partially negative lone pair on a nearby
electronegative atom: N, O, or F.
You can see the effect of hydrogen bonding clearly in the boiling
point data of the binary hydrides of Groups 14 to 17 (IVA to VIIA), shown
in Figure 4.16. In Group 14, the trend in boiling point is as expected.
The increase in boiling point from methane, CH , to tin(IV) hydride,
4
SnH , is due to an increase in the number of electrons. Therefore, there
4
are larger dispersion forces, since more electrons are able to temporarily
shift from one part of the molecule to another. In SnH , this results in
4
greater intermolecular forces of attraction. There is no hydrogen bonding
in these substances, because there are no lone pairs on the molecules.
However, the hydrides of Groups 15, 16, and 17 (VA to VIIA) only
show the expected trend based on dispersion forces for the larger mass
hydrides. The smallest mass hydrides, NH , H O, and HF, have relatively
3 2
high boiling points, indicating strong intermolecular forces caused by
hydrogen bonding.
Why is there no hydrogen bonding in H S and H Se, which have
2 2
unshared electron pairs on their central atoms? Neither S nor Se is small
enough or electronegative enough to support hydrogen bonding. Thus,
H O (with its small and very electronegative O atom) has a much higher
2
boiling point than H S and H Se, as you can see in Figure 4.16.
2 2
100
H O
2
0 H 2 Te
SbH NH 3 3 H Se 2 HI
H S 2 AsH 3 SnH HCI HBr 4
−100 PH 3 GeH
4
SiH
4
CH 4
−200
2 3
Period
Figure 4.16 The boiling points of four groups of hydrides. The break in the trends
for NH, HO, and HF is due to hydrogen bonding. The dashed line shows the likely
3 2
boiling point of water, if no hydrogen bonding were present.
A hydrogen bond is only about 5% as strong as a single covalent
bond. However, in substances that contain numerous hydrogen bonds
the impact of hydrogen bonding can be significant. For example, the
double-helix structure of DNA occurs because of hydrogen bonds, as
shown in Figure 4.17. Another substance that contains many hydrogen
bonds, water, is discussed on the following page.
Chapter 4 Structures and Properties of Substances • MHR 193
)C˚(
tniop
gnilioB
P
P
P S
P S
P S
S S
Group 14 (IV A) S P S
Group 15 (V A) P P S P S
P S
Group 16 (VI A) S P
HF Group 17 (VII A) S S
P P
S S
P P S S
P P S P S S P
P S
S P
S
P
H P
O HN
S N H N S
O CH2
4 5
O−
P O O
O H O P O−
CH2 N H O O
N H N
S S
O H N
H
Figure 4.17 A DNA
(deoxyribonucleic acid) molecule
is comprised of two chains, each
formed from covalently bonded
atoms. Hydrogen bonds hold the
two chains together, producing
DNA’s familiar, spiral-like, double
helix structure.
Hydrogen Bonding and Properties of Water
Hydrogen bonding also explains water’s unusual property of being less
dense in the solid state than in the liquid state. As you know from kinetic
molecular theory, lower temperatures cause liquid molecules to move
slower than in their gaseous states. When liquids solidify, the kinetic
energy of the particles is no longer enough to prevent the intermolecular
forces of attraction from causing particles to stick together. For most
substances, their solid states are denser than their liquid states. When
water freezes, however, the water molecules pack in such a way that the
solid state is less dense than the liquid state. Water molecules align in a
specific pattern so that hydrogen atoms of one molecule are oriented
toward the oxygen atom of another molecule. You can see this clearly in
Figure 4.18. If water molecules behaved as most molecules do, then lake
water would freeze from the bottom up, rather than from the top down.
The consequences for aquatic life, and on organisms (like us) that depend
on aquatic ecosystems, would be profound. A lake that freezes from the
bottom up would solidify completely, killing most of the life it contains.
Because ice floats on water, it insulates the water beneath it, preventing
it from freezing.
Hydrogen bonding also explains the solubility in water of polar
covalent compounds. As you learned in Unit 1, the O(cid:2)H functional
group in alcohols is polar. Because of this polar group, alcohols can form
hydrogen bonds with water molecules. Consequently, methanol and
ethanol are soluble in water in all proportions, and every alcohol is more
soluble than its corresponding alkane with the same number of carbon
atoms. (Recall that alkanes do not have the O(cid:2)H functional group.)
Ammonia, NH , is a very soluble gas because it hydrogen-bonds with
3
water. The smaller mass amines, such as methylamine, CH NH , are also
3 2
soluble in water, for the same reason.
How is hydrogen bonding
different from a covalent bond
such as O—H?
Figure 4.18 In its solid state, water has an open, hexagonal, crystalline structure. As a
result of these spaces, ice is less dense than liquid water.
194 MHR • Unit 2 Structure and Properties
Summarizing Intramolecular and Intermolecular Forces
Table 4.4 compares key characteristics of intramolecular and
intermolecular forces. Once you have reviewed this information,
you will have an opportunity to expand the table by doing the
ThoughtLab that follows.
Table 4.4 Comparing Intramolecular and Internolecular Forces
ionic cation-anion 400–4000
covalent nuclei-shared 150–1100
electron pair
metallic cations- 75–1000
+ + +
delocalized
electrons
+ + +
+ + +
ion-dipole ion charge- 40-600
+ dipole charge
hydrogen polar bond to 10–40
bond hydrogen-
δ– δ+ δ–
A H B dipole charge
(lone pair, high
EN of N, O, F)
dipole-dipole dipole charges 5–25
ion-induced ion charge- 3–15
dipole + polarizable
electrons
dipole-induced dipole charge- 2–10
dipole polarizable
electrons
dispersion polarizable 0.05–40
(London) electrons
Chapter 4 Structures and Properties of Substances • MHR 195
ralucelomartnI
ralucelomretnI
Nature
Force Model of Attraction Energy (kJ/mol) Example
+ − +
− + − NaCl
+ − +
H H
Fe
H
+ Na O
H
•• ••
•O H •O H
• •
•
•
H H
I Cl I Cl
Fe2+ O 2
H Cl CI Cl
F F F F
ThoughtLab Properties of Liquids
As you know, intermolecular forces act between • Why does liquid honey flow so slowly from a
both like and unlike molecules. Adhesive forcesare spoon?
intermolecular forces between two different kinds of • Why do some motorists change to different
molecules. Cohesive forcesare intermolecular forces motor oils over the course of a year?
between two molecules of the same kind. Adhesive
2. Based on your inferences and explanations,
and cohesive forces affect the physical properties of
develop definitions for the following terms:
many common phenomena in the world around you.
surface tension, capillarity, and viscosity.
Procedure 3. Verify your inferences and definitions by
consulting print and electronic resources. Then
1. Consider each of the following observations.
identify the property or properties that best
For each, infer the intermolecular (and, where
explain each of the observation statements.
appropriate, intramolecular) forces that are
active, and explain how they account for the Analysis
observations.
1. Compare your inferences and explanations with
• Why are bubbles in a soft drink spherical?
those that you found in reference sources.
• How can water striders walk on water?
Identify those cases in which your ideas matched
• Why does water form beaded droplets on
or closely matched what you found. Explain
surfaces such as leaves, waxed car hoods,
where your reasoning may have led you astray,
and waxed paper?
for those cases in which your ideas did not
• How does a ballpoint pen work?
match closely with reference-source information.
• How does a towel work?
• Why does water form a concave meniscus in a 2. Re-design the Concept Organizer on page xxx
so that it includes practical applications and
tube, while mercury forms a convex meniscus?
explanations such as those you have investigated
in this activity.
Bonding in Solids
In Investigation 4-A, you classified solid substances on the basis of the
types of bonds that hold their molecules or ions together. This is not,
however, the only way to classify solids. Chemists also divide solids
into two categories based on the macroscopic properties that arise
from the arrangements of their component particles. Crystalline solids
have organized particle arrangements, so they have distinct shapes.
Gemstones such as amethyst and garnet are examples of crystalline
solids. Amorphous solids have indistinct shapes, because their particle
arrangements lack order. Glass and rubber are common amorphous solids.
In the next few pages, you will learn about the structure and properties
of crystalline and amorphous solids.
Bonding and Properties of Crystalline Solids
Chemists further classify crystalline solids into five types, based on
their composition. These types are atomic, molecular, network, ionic,
and metallic. Since you have already learned about metallic solids, the
material that follows concentrates on the other four crystalline solids.
You will find a summary of their properties in Table 4.5, following these
descriptions.
196 MHR • Unit 2 Structure and Properties
Atomic Solids
Atomic solids are made up of individual atoms that are held together
solely by dispersion forces. The number of naturally occurring atomic
solids is quite small. In fact, the noble gases in their solid state are the
only examples. Since the only forces holding atomic solids together are
dispersion forces, these solids have very low melting and boiling points.
Molecular Solids
Molecular solids are, as their name implies, made up of molecules. Like
atomic solids, the molecules that make up molecular solids, such as
frozen methane, are held together mainly by dispersion forces.
Consequently, they tend to have low melting and boiling points. In polar
molecular solids, however, stronger dipole-dipole forces, and sometimes
hydrogen bonding, give these compounds higher melting points and
boiling points than non-polar molecular solids. For example, the melting
point of non-polar propane, C H , is −190˚C. A molecule of polar formic
3 8
acid, HCOOH, which has a similar number of electrons and the same
molar mass as propane, melts at 8.4˚C. The large difference in boiling
point is due to the hydrogen bonding and dipole-dipole forces in formic
acid. You will often see molecular solids classified as covalent solids.
However, it is clearer to classify them as molecular solids, because
network solids, which you will see below, also contain covalent bonds.
Network Solids
Unlike the intramolecular covalent bonds that hold atoms together in
discrete molecules, it is possible for atoms to bond covalently into
continuous two- or three-dimensional arrays, called network solids.
A wide range of properties can be found among network solids.
Carbon-Based Network Solids
Figure 4.19 shows four allotropic forms of carbon. Allotropes are different
crystalline or molecular forms of the same element that differ in physical
and chemical properties.
A B C
D
Figure 4.19 Allotropic forms of
carbon: (A) graphite; (B) diamond;
(C) C , buckminsterfullerene;
60
(D) fullerene nanotube
Chapter 4 Structures and Properties of Substances • MHR 197
CHEM The graphite shown in Figure 4.19A is a soft, two-dimensional
FACT network solid that is a good conductor of electricity. It has a high
melting point, which suggests strong bonds, but its softness indicates the
At temperatures around 600˚C
and extremely low pressures, presence of weak bonds as well. Each carbon forms three strong covalent
methane will decompose and bonds with three of its nearest neighbours in a trigonal planar pattern.
deposit a thin film of carbon, This structure gives stability to the layers. The fourth, non-bonding
in the form of diamond, on a pair of electrons is delocalized and free to move within the layers. This
surface. The process, known
gives graphite the ability to conduct an electric current. There are no
as chemical vapour deposition,
intramolecular forces between the layers. Dispersion forces attract one
or CVD, can be used to coat
layer to another, enabling layers to slide by one another. Graphite feels
a wide variety of surfaces. The
hardness of this diamond film slippery as a result of this characteristic. In fact, many industrial
can be used for applications processes use graphite as a lubricant.
that require non-scratch In diamond, each carbon atom forms four strong covalent bonds with
surfaces such as cookware, four other carbon atoms. This three-dimensional array makes diamond the
eyeglasses, and razor blades.
hardest naturally occurring substance. The valence electrons are in highly
localized bonds between carbon atoms. Therefore, diamond does not
conduct electricity. The planes of atoms within the diamond reflect light,
which gives diamond its brilliance and sparkle. The regular arrangement
of the carbon atoms in a crystalline structure, coupled with the strength of
the covalent C(cid:2)C bonds, gives diamond its extreme hardness, and makes
it inert to corrosive chemicals.
Fullerenes make up a group of spherical allotropes of carbon.
Figure 4.19C shows C , which is one type of fullerene discovered in
60
1985. It was given the name buckminsterfullerene because it resembles
the geodesic-domed structure designed by architect R. Buckminster Fuller.
Also known as “buckyballs,” C is just one of several fullerenes that have
60
been discovered. Others have been shown to have the formula C , C ,
70 74
and C . Because of their spherical shape, researchers have speculated
82
that fullerenes might make good lubricants.
Recently, microscopic-level research has developed very small carbon
networks called nanotubes. As you can see in Figure 4.19D, nanotubes
are like a fullerene network that has been stretched into a cylinder shape.
Nanotubes of C and higher may have applications in the manufacture
400
of high-strength fibres. In the year 2000, researchers built a nanotube with
a diameter of 4 × 10 −8 m. Up to that time, this nanotube was the smallest
structure assembled.
Other Network Solids
Many network solids are compounds, not elements.
Examples include silica, SiO , and various metal silicates.
2
If you were asked to draw a Lewis structure representing
O O
SiO , you might draw a molecule that looks like CO .
2 2
Si However, unlike the bonding that occurs in CO , the silicon
2
O O atom in silica does not form a double bond with an oxygen
atom. The likely reason is that silicon’s 3p orbital is too
large to overlap effectively with a 2p orbital of the oxygen
atom. Instead, each silicon atom bonds to four oxygen
atoms to give a tetrahedral network with shared oxygen
atoms, as shown in Figure 4.20. The network is represented
by the formula (SiO ) , indicating that SiO is the simplest
2 n 2
Figure 4.20 A representation of quartz, (SiO) , repeating unit. Quartz is a familiar example of a material
2n
a tetrahedral network with shared oxygen atoms composed of silica.
198 MHR • Unit 2 Structure and Properties
Ionic Crystals
lattice point
You know that an ionic crystal is an array of ions, arranged at regular
positions in a crystal lattice. However, a closer look at the structure of unit cell
ionic crystals shows that they have different and distinct arrangements,
depending on the ions involved—specifically, their charge and the size.
You can compare the effect of size on crystal packing to fruits stacked
in a grocery store. For example, if you were trying to stack two kinds of
fruit to attain the most efficient use of space, kiwi may fit in among grape-
fruit more efficiently than oranges could fill the same space. Similarly, in a
Figure 4.21 Simple cubic crystal
crystal, pairs of ions of the same or similar size are arranged differently
array indicating lattice points and
compared with ions of different sizes.
unit cell.
A crystal lattice is made up of identical repeating unit cells that give
the crystal its characteristic shape. Figure 4.21 shows a three-dimensional
representation of a simple cubic arrangement of unit cells.
In most ionic crystals, the anion is larger than the cation and, Technology LINK
therefore, the packing of the anions determines the arrangement of ions Chemists commonly use a
in the crystal lattice. There are several possible arrangements for ionic process called X-ray
crystals in which the anions are larger than cations, and cations and diffraction to determine the
anions are present in equal molar amounts. For example, Figure 4.22 structure of a compound. Two
pioneers of X-ray diffraction
shows two different arrangements found in the structures of sodium
were Rosalind Franklin and
chloride, NaCl, and cesium chloride, CsCl.
Dorothy Crowfoot Hodgkin.
Franklin’s work on the DNA
Cl-
molecule was instrumental in
A Cl-
the discovery of its helical
shape. Nobel Prize winner
Hodgkin discovered the
structure of complex mole-
Na+ cules, such as cholesterol,
penicillin, insulin, and vitamin
B-12. Find out about X-ray
diffraction: how it works and
the types of scientists who
Na+ employ this technology.
B Cl−
Cs+
Cs+
Cl−
Figure 4.22 (A) Face-centred cubic structure of NaCl; (B) Body-centred cubic structure
071B(04)1496
of CsCl
−
In the sodium chloride crystal, each chloride ion (Cl ) is surrounded
+ + −
by six sodium ions (Na ). Similarly, each Na ion is surrounded by six Cl
+ −
ions. In CsCl, each cesium ion (Cs ) ion is surrounded by eight Cl ions.
Within a crystal lattice, definite lines of cleavage are present along
which a crystal may be split. This is an identifying property of ionic solids.
Chapter 4 Structures and Properties of Substances • MHR 199
Canadians in Chemistry
Dr. R.J. Le Roy programs to perform the exact quantum mechanical
calculation of the absorption coefficients governing
photodissociation processes. Later, when doing
his doctoral thesis at the University of Wisconsin,
he and his thesis supervisor, Dr. Richard Bernstein,
developed the Le Roy-Bernstein theory. This theory
describes the patterns of energies and other
properties for vibrational levels of molecules lying
very close to dissociation.
To determine when to trust the equations of the
Le Roy-Bernstein theory, Dr. Le Roy developed what
he calls “a little rule of thumb,” more generally
You usually study science as discrete fields known as the Le Roy radius. A calculation for the
of inquiry: chemistry, physics, and biology, for Le Roy radius, R , is:
LR
example. Each of these fields has numerous R >R =2[<r 2 >1/2 +<r 2 >1/2]
LR A B
sub-fields, such as geophysics and biochemistry.
where Ris the internuclear distance between two
One of the scientists at the forefront of chemical
atoms A and B.
physics is Canada’s Dr. R.J. Leroy.
The Le Roy radius is the minimum distance at
During a fourth-year undergraduate research
which the equation describing the vibrations of
project at the University of Toronto, Dr. R.J. Leroy
molecules close to dissociation is thought to be
pursued an answer to the following question: If you
valid. The <r 2 > and <r 2 > values are the squares
use photodissociation to separate iodine molecules A B
of the radii of the atoms of the two elements (or
into atoms, what fraction of the light is absorbed,
of the two atoms of the same element) in their
and how does that fraction depend on the colour
ground states.
(frequency) of the light and on the temperature of
Is there a practical outcome to mathematical
the molecules? (Photodissociation is a process that
chemistry? Dr. Le Roy strongly encourages
involves the use of light to decompose molecules.)
“curiosity-oriented science,” as opposed to a
The light causes a bonded molecule in its
focus on short-term, practical results, partly because
ground state to undergo a transition into an excited
practical results do come when processes are
state. In this new state, the atoms repel one another,
fully understood.
causing the molecule to break apart. The fraction
For example, the study of global warming is
of light absorbed, as measured spectroscopically,
hindered, in his view, because the intermolecular
depends on the population of molecules in the
interactions are not well known. “To properly model
initial state.
the processes, we have to understand the exchange
Chemists can use the fraction of light absorbed
of energy during molecular collisions. If we know
by a sample to monitor the concentration of specific
them, we can predict an immense amount.”
molecules in a closed, controlled environment.
To do this, chemists also need to know the value
Making Connections
for a key proportionality constant that is unique to
1. In what ways are chemistry and physics related
each substance, known as the molar absorption
to each other? Design a graphic organizer to
coefficient. These coefficients can be measured at
outline their similarities and differences.
room temperature, but not at high temperatures.
“In principle, we have known the quantum 2. Research and development funding often
mechanics to describe these processes,” Dr. Le Roy encourages chemists and chemical engineers
explains, “But to use that information, we have to to focus on practical applications. How does this
understand the forces atoms experience as the differ from Dr. Le Roy’s perspective? With which
atoms come together or fall apart.” perspective do you agree more? Write an
For his master’s thesis at the University editorial outlining your opinions.
of Toronto, Dr. Le Roy developed computer
200 MHR • Unit 2 Structure and Properties
Determining the Type of Bonding in Substances
The type of bonding in a substance depends upon the kinds of atoms it
contains and the forces of attraction between those atoms. If you know
the physical properties of a substance, you can often predict the type of
bonding in the substance. Table 4.5 summarizes the types of forces of
attraction and the physical properties of solids with different types of
bonding discussed in this section. In Investigation 4-B, you will design
an experiment in which you predict the type of bonding in various
substances, then test your prediction.
Table 4.5 Summary of Properties of Different Types of Solids
Type of Primary Forces Electrical Other Physical Conditions
Crystalline Particles of Attraction Conductivity in Properties of Necessary for
Solid Involved Between Particles Boiling Point Liquid State Crystals Formation Examples
Atom atoms dispersion low very low very soft formed between all Group 18
atoms with no (VIIIA) atoms
electronegativity
difference
Molecular non-polar dispersion, generally very low non-polar: very non-polar: formed non-polar:
molecules dipole-dipole, low soft; soluble in from symmetrical Br2, CH4,
or polar hydrogen bonds (non-polar); non-polar solvents molecules CO2, N2
molecules intermediate containing covalent
polar bonds between
atoms with small
electronegativity
differences
polar: somewhat polar: formed from polar: H2O,
hard, but brittle; asymmetrical NH3, CHCl3.,
many are soluble molecules CH3COOH,
in water containing polar CO, SO2,
covalent bonds. many organic
Electronegativity compounds
difference between
atoms < 1.7
Covalent atoms covalent bonds very high low hard crystals that formed usually graphite,
Network are insoluble in from elements diamond,
most liquids belonging to SiO2
Group 14 (IV A)
Ionic cations and electrostatic high high hard and brittle; formed between NaCl, CaF2,
anions attraction between many dissolve in atoms with Cs2S, MgO,
oppositely water electronegativity MgF2
charged ions difference > 1.7
Metallic atoms metallic bonds most high very high all have a lustre, formed by Hg, Cu, Fe,
are malleable and metals with low Ca, Zn, Pb
ductile, and are electronegativity
good electrical
and thermal
conductors; they
dissolve in other
metals to form
alloys
Chapter 4 Structures and Properties of Substances • MHR 201
S K I L L F O C U S
Initiating and planning
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
Determining the Type
of Bonding in Substances
This investigation challenges you to design an Analysis
experiment to observe and analyze the physical
1. Based on your observations, classify the
properties of different substances, and to deter-
solids. Identify the type of bonding in each
mine the types of bonding present.
substance. Explain your decisions about
classification in detail.
Question
How can you determine the type of bonding in Conclusion
an unknown substance?
2. How did your results compare with your
predictions? If some results were inconclusive,
Safety Precautions
explain the source of this uncertainty and
suggest one way to rectify it.
• Tie back long hair and any loose clothing.
Application
• Before you light the candle or Bunsen burner,
3. Suppose you want to challenge a classmate
check that there are no flammable solvents
to identify a set of substances.
nearby.
• Ensure you have a bucket of sand nearby in (a) Suggest five solids (different from the ones
you used in this investigation) that you
case of fire.
could use.
Materials (b) What tests could your classmate carry out
to classify the substances successfully?
a substance of each of the following types:
Explain why these tests would work.
non-polar molecular, polar molecular, ionic,
(c) Suggest several tests that might provide
network, and metallic
inconclusive results. Explain why.
equipment or apparatus, depending on how you
design your experiment
Procedure
1. Your teacher will give you five samples stored
in bottles. Record the visible properties that
you can observe. Based on these properties,
predict the main type of bonding in each.
2. Design an experiment to test your predictions.
Ensure that you have adequately addressed all
possible safety considerations. Obtain
approval from your teacher before you begin
your investigation.
3. Carry out your investigation and record your
observations.
202 MHR • Unit 2 Structure and Properties
Chemistry Bulletin
Ionic Liquids: A Solution In addition, ionic liquids evaporate sparingly.
to the Problem of Solutions Organic solvents, on the other hand, easily
release fumes that are harmful, often toxic,
Although organic solvents are commonplace in
and that can eventually oxidize and create
industry, they are highly volatile and dangerous
carbon dioxide, a notorious greenhouse gas.
in the large quantities that manufacturing
As solvents, ionic liquids can be uniquely
processes require. Disposing of used solvents
“tuned” to a particular purpose by adjusting
is a major environmental concern.
the anion/cation ratio. To decaffeinate coffee,
Until recently, the idea of a recyclable,
for example, you could create an ionic liquid
non-volatile solvent seemed like the stuff of
that would just dissolve caffeine and nothing
science fiction. But in the 1980s, researchers
else. Current research suggests that ionic
in the United States were trying to create a new
liquids can be recovered from solution
electrolyte for batteries. Instead, they created a
and reused.
colourless, odorless liquid that was composed
Yet, there are still many hurdles that must
of nothing but ions—an ionic liquid.
be overcome before these substances can be
An ionic liquid is a salt in liquid form.
put to widespread use. Because ionic liquids
Ionic liquids do not usually find practical
boil at high temperatures, conventional
applications, since ionic compounds have
methods of separating reaction products from
such high boiling points. For example, sodium
solution cannot be used. Pharmaceutical
chloride does not begin to melt until it reaches
manufacturing processes, for instance, often
a temperature of about 800˚C.
involve the process of distillation. The higher
In an ionic liquid, the cations are much
temperatures required to distill using ionic
larger than in typical ionic substances. As a
liquids (as opposed to organic liquids) would
result, the anions and cations cannot be packed
decompose many of the desired pharmaceutical
together in an orderly way that balances both
compounds.
the sizes and distances of the ions with the
The discovery of ionic liquids is proving a
charges between them. As a result, they remain
fertile field for researchers. Ionic solvents are
in a loosely-packed, liquid form. Because the
revealing new mechanisms of reaction and
charges on the cations have the capacity to
enhancing our understanding of the molecular
bind more anions, an ionic liquid has a net
world. As well, their potential applications in
positive charge. Notice the large cation of the
both industry and the home have encouraged
ionic liquid molecule shown below. This is
several companies, world-wide, to further
what makes ionic liquids suitable solvents.
explore and develop these unusual substances.
The net charge can attract molecules of other
compounds, dissolving them.
Making Connections
+
CH 2 CH 2 1. Investigate some of the industrial processes
where solvents are currently used. Could
N
CH 2 CH 3 PF − ionic liquids be used in any of these
6
industries instead? Why or why not? Look
N
into some of the ideas that ionic liquid
CH
3
researchers have proposed for dealing with
Many properties of ionic liquids make them the unique challenges posed by different
more desirable solvents than organic solvents. industries.
For example, ionic liquids require a lot of
energy to change their state—they remain
as liquids even at temperatures of 200˚C.
Chapter 4 Structures and Properties of Substances • MHR 203
Amorphous Solids
Solids that are composed of molecules that are not arranged in an orderly,
crystalline structure are called amorphous. This term comes from the
Greek word amorphos, meaning “without form.” Glass is a typical
example of this type of solid. Heating silica sand to its melting point of
approximately 1700˚C, adding limestone (CaCO ) and soda ash (Na CO ),
3 2 3
and then allowing the mixture to cool, was the first method of making
soda-lime glass, dating back 4000 years ago.
Today, soda-lime glass makes up almost 90% of all glass manufac-
tured and finds its applications in window glass and bottle production.
It typically contains SiO , Na O, CaO, MgO, and Al O . Soda-lime glass
2 2 2 3
is referred to as an ionic glass, with an approximate composition given by
the formula Na
2
O•CaO•(SiO
2
)
6
. Figure 4.23 shows that each silicon atom
is surrounded by four oxygen atoms in a tetrahedron. These tetrahedra are
randomly arranged among a network of Na
+
and
Ca2+
ions that fill in the
spaces to balance the negative charge on the tetrahedron network.
Glass is an isotropic material, which means that its properties are the
same in all directions. This is a useful property, since it means that glass
expands uniformly as it is heated.
Na
Ca
Si
O
Figure 4.23 Structure of
soda-lime glass. Four oxygen
atoms surround each silicon atom
in randomly arranged tetrahedrons.
CHEM
FACT
You may have heard that By changing the proportion of the components or adding other
glass actually flows very components, different properties can be given to the glass. For example,
slowly over time. This is, in
adding B O so that it makes up 13% by weight of the glass results in
2 3
fact, a misconception, possibly
borosilicate glass, sold as Pyrex™. Its low coefficient of thermal expansion
caused by the fact that some
indicates that it will expand very little when heated. Pyrex™ is, therefore,
older windows are thicker at
the base. In the past, window an “ovenproof” product. Pyrex™ is often also used in laboratory glassware
manufacturers were not able as it can be heated numerous times over a flame without cracking.
to make windows of perfectly Flint glass contains lead(II) oxide, PbO and is used in lenses because
uniform thickness. The of its low refractive index, meaning that light passing through does not
windows were probably set
bend very much.
on their broader side for
Some elements also exist in amorphous forms. For example, charcoal
stability—their thickness did
is an impure, amorphous form of carbon. When sulfur is heated to its
not change over time due to
boiling point and cooled quickly, an amorphous form called plastic sulfur
slowly flowing glass.
forms. It has the formula S∞, and is often called “polymeric sulfur.”
204 MHR • Unit 2 Structure and Properties
Metal alloys can be amorphous, too. Liquidmetal™ alloy is an
amorphous alloy of zirconium mixed with nickel, titanium, copper, and
beryllium. It is used in the heads of some brands of golf clubs. Traditional
metal club heads may have microscopic gaps where planes of metallic
crystals meet. These tiny gaps are a potential source of weakness. The
amorphous alloy is non-crystalline, so the metal structure does not have
potential breakage sites.
A Material Made to Order: Intermolecular and Intramolecular
Forces in Action
The gloves in the photograph at the start of this chapter are anything but
ordinary. The thin, lightweight fabric can withstand startling impacts and
piercing forces, including small projectiles such as bullets. In fact, this
same fabric is used to make bulletproof vests. The long strands of fibre
used to make such protective gear are interlaced to form a dense “net”
that is capable of absorbing large amounts of energy. You have probably
heard the trade name for this astounding fibre: KEVLAR®. It was invented
by an American research chemist, Stephanie Kwolek, in 1965.
The secret to stopping a bullet with a fairly soft fabric is that it
behaves in much the same way as the netting on the goal frame used in
hockey. When a hockey puck strikes a net at 100 km/h, its kinetic energy
is transferred to the lengths of twine of the goal net. This twine is an
interlaced mesh that has strands which stretch horizontally and vertically
to disperse the energy of impact over a wide area.
The sample principle applies to KEVLAR®. It belongs to a class
of fibres called aramids, which are polymers containing aromatic
and amide groups. The polymer forms in the condensation reaction
between terephthalic acid and 1,6-hexamethylenediamine, as shown in
Figure 4.24A. The strength of the polymer comes from the intramolecular
forces in the aromatic group that limit bond rotation in the straight chains,
and the amide linkage that leads to intermolecular hydrogen bonding
between the straight chains, as shown in Figure 4.24B.
O O O O
A H N NH + HOC COH → H N NH C COH + H O
2 2 2 2
H
O N
H
B O N
N O
H
N O
H H
O N
H
O N
N O
H
Figure 4.24 (A) A condensation
N O reaction between terephthalic acid
H H
and 1,6-hexamethylenediamine to
O N
form the monomer used to make
H
KEVLAR®; (B) Structure of KEVLAR®
N
N O
showing hydrogen bonds between
H
straight chains
Chapter 4 Structures and Properties of Substances • MHR 205
In addition to stopping a bullet from penetrating the armour, a
bulletproof vest must also protect the body from the blunt force of impact.
A bulletproof vest cannot have as much “give” as a hockey net (that is, it
should not stretch back as much as hockey nets do upon impact).
Otherwise, its wearer would still be injured, even though the bullet might
not pierce the fabric. To accomplish this, the properties of KEVLAR® are
enhanced by twisting the strands to increase their density and thickness.
The strands are then woven very tightly. A resin coating is applied and
sandwiched between two layers of plastic film. Each layer acts as a net
and slows down the bullet a little at a time until it has been stopped.
Deriving Theory from Application: Superconductors
When she first synthesized KEVLAR®, Stephanie Kwolek did not know
that it would eventually be used in bulletproof vests or protective gloves.
She did, however, understand the theories behind the properties that
make it suitable for such applications—the theories of intermolecular
and intramolecular forces. This is not always the case. Often scientists
discover a material that has useful or interesting properties, but are unable
to explain them.
For example, in 1911, Dutch physicist Heike Kamerlingh Onnes
cooled some mercury to the boiling point of liquid helium: 4 K. He
found that at this low temperature, the mercury developed an astonishing
property. The super-cooled mercury had zero resistance when an electric
current passed through it. In other words, none of the energy of the
electrical current was given off as wasted heat. The mercury had become
a superconductor—a material with no resistance to electric current.
Most conducting materials, even good conductors such as copper, give
off wasted heat as electric current passes though them. In other words,
they have resistance. By contrast, superconductors are “perfect” electrical
conductors.
Scientists are interested in superconductors because they have a num-
ber of properties that arise from their lack of resistance. For example, once
a current is induced in a circuit made with a superconducting material,
the current continues to flow through the circuit indefinitely, without ever
diminishing. Also, superconductors have the ability to completely repel
magnetic field lines. This means that a magnet placed over a supercon-
ductor hovers in mid-air, as shown in Figure 4.25.
Figure 4.25 A magnet hovers above a superconductor, cooled by liquid nitrogen.
206 MHR • Unit 2 Structure and Properties
Since Onnes’s discovery, chemists have discovered other metals that
superconduct at extremely low temperatures. A niobum metal alloy was
found to exhibit superconductivity at 23 K, for example. But scientists
wanted to find materials that exhibit superconductivity at much higher
temperatures, because refrigerants like liquid helium are very expensive.
In 1986, materials containing copper oxide ions were discovered to
be superconductors at 30 K. This was an astounding discovery, because
these materials are insulators at room temperature and higher. Researchers
began experimenting with this new class of superconductors, tweaking
their composition, and soon developed a material (Tl Ba Ca Cu O ) that
2 2 2 3 10
superconducts at 125 K. This is close to the boiling point of nitrogen, a
cheaper refrigerant than liquid helium.
It would be ideal, of course, to eliminate the need for a refrigerant
altogether. Finding a material that exhibits superconductivity at room
temperature is one of the driving forces of superconductivity research,
and the search continues. As of 2001, the highest known temperature
for a superconductor is 138 K. Researchers continue to search for new
classes of materials that superconduct. In fact, in 2001, researchers found
evidence to suggest that carbon nanotubes may superconduct, even at
temperatures surpassing the boiling point of water.
Current and Future Applications
The properties of superconducting materials suggest a wealth of
applications. Despite the need to maintain low temperatures, they have
already found uses in magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), a medical diag-
nostic tool. They have also been used to create powerful electromagnets,
used in magnetically levitated (MAGLEV) trains. Superconductors in
the future could be used to make 100% efficient electrical wires,
allowing power plants to be built far from cities. A room-temperature
superconductor could also mean ultra-fast, low-power electronics.
Many of the ideas necessary to help describe and explain
superconductivity involve topics you will encounter in future chemistry
courses. Even armed with these ideas, however, researchers do not yet
have a complete, accepted theory to explain this intriguing property.
Nevertheless, the list of superconducting materials continues to expand,
and engineers continue to find practical applications for them.
Section Summary
Describing and explaining the chemical and physical changes in the
world around you requires an understanding of matter at the atomic level.
You have seen, for example, that the concepts of intramolecular and
intermolecular forces are both needed to articulate the bonding, structure,
and properties of substances as familiar as water and as exotic as
KEVLAR®. Each year, chemical engineers invent thousands of new
materials and substances. Each has its own characteristic structure and
properties. Each demonstrates the amazing diversity of matter that arises
from atoms, molecules and ions, and the forces among and between them.
In the next Unit, you will continue to examine chemical bonds, but
with a different emphasis. You will learn about the energy changes that
are associated with breaking and forming bonds. In other words, you will
examine the energy changes of chemical reactions.
Chapter 4 Structures and Properties of Substances • MHR 207
Section Review
1 C Compare the intermolecular and intramolecular forces in HBr ((cid:2)) .
2 K/U The boiling point of pure, liquid hydrogen peroxide, H 2 O 2 , is
150˚C. Compare this boiling point to that of water, H O. Account for
2
this difference.
3 K/U Classify the following solids as ionic, network, molecular
(polar or non-polar), or metallic:
(a) P
4
(b) Na PO
3 4
(c) Os
(d) SiO
2
4 C Discuss the bonding that is present in NH 4 Cl (s) .
5 I A solid substance is found to be soluble in water and has a melting
point of 140˚C. In order to classify this solid as ionic, molecular (polar
or non-polar), metallic, or network, what additional test(s) should be
carried out?
6 K/U Determine the molecular shape of PF 2 Cl. Is it a polar molecule?
Why or why not?
7 K/U For the compound, GeH 4 , use VSEPR theory to determine its
molecular shape and indicate whether or not this molecule is polar.
8 C Predict the periodic trend you would expect in the melting points
of the following cesium halides: CsF, CsCl, CsBr, CsI. Explain your
reasoning.
9 MC KEVLAR® is used to make canoes. Explain why it is a suitable
material for constructing a canoe.
10 MC If diamond was not such an expensive substance, would it be
a good choice to use for the following applications? Explain your
answers.
(a) an electrical insulator
(b) a cable for fibre optics
208 MHR • Unit 2 Structure and Properties
Review
Reflecting on Chapter 4 2. Describe the intermolecular forces between the
molecules of hydrogen halides (HF, HCl, HBr,
Summarize this chapter in the format of your
HI), and explain the difference in their boiling
choice. Here are a few ideas to use as guidelines:
• Identify forces of attraction and repulsion that points.
occur in molecules and in ionic solids. 3. Draw a Lewis structure for the following.
• Compare the bonding between a metal and a (a) CHBr 3 (b) HS −
non-metal with the bonding between non-metals. 4. What is the difference between a permanent
• Illustrate how metallic bonding determines uses molecular dipole and an induced dipole in a
of metals. non-polar molecule?
• Debate the statement: “every snowflake has a
5. Cooking oil, a non-polar liquid, has a boiling
different structure from all other snowflakes.”
point in excess of 200˚C. Water boils at 100˚C.
• Describe the models that chemists use to
How can you explain these facts, given the
describe the structure and shape of molecules
strength of water’s hydrogen bonding?
and ions, and assess their value in terms of the
6. What types of intermolecular forces must be
information they communicate.
• Give examples of products and technologies broken to melt solid samples of the following?
(a) NH (b) NaI (c) Fe (d) CH
whose development depends on an understand- 3 4
ing of intramolecular and intermolecular forces, 7. Predict, giving reasons, the order of decreasing
and explain this dependency. boiling points for the following elements:
oxygen, cesium, sulfur, krypton. Refer to the
Reviewing Key Terms periodic table to check your predictions.
For each of the following terms, write a sentence 8. In which compound, H 2 O or in NH 3 , will the
that shows your understanding of its meaning. hydrogen bonding be stronger? Explain.
chemical bond dipole 9. Draw a Lewis structure for O 2− .
2
covalent bond intramolecular forces
10. Distinguish between a crystal and a unit cell of
ionic bond intermolecular forces
the same crystal.
lattice energy dipole-dipole force
11. Explain how pieces of shattered window glass
bond energy ion-dipole force
are different from the shattered pieces of an
polar covalent bond ion-induced dipole
ionic crystal.
free-electron model force
metallic bond dipole-induced dipole 12. Explain the following observations: motor oil
co-ordinate covalent force pours from a can more slowly than water; how-
bond dispersion force ever, in a jar, the meniscus of motor oil is flatter
resonance structure hydrogen bonding than the meniscus of water.
expanded valence crystalline solids 13. List the following substances in order of
energy level amorphous solids increasing boiling points: C H OH, SiO , C H ,
2 5 2 3 8
Valence-Shell network solids K. Give a reason for your answer.
Electron-Pair allotrope
14. What are the molecular shapes of CCl ,
4
Repulsion theory ionic crystals
CH Cl, and CHCl ? In liquid samples of these
3 3
compounds, which would have dipole-dipole
Knowledge/Understanding
forces between molecules?
1. What experimental evidence supports the idea 15. Distinguish between dipole-dipole attraction
that an “octet” in the valence level of atoms forces and an ionic bond.
within a molecule often corresponds to a
minimum total energy for the system?
Chapter 4 Structures and Properties of Substances • MHR 209
16. Draw Lewis structures and indicate the 25. In which liquid, HF ((cid:2)) or H 2 O ((cid:2)) , would the
molecular shape of the following. hydrogen bonding be stronger? Based upon
(a) NOCl (b) AlF
3−
(c) XeO your prediction, which of these two liquids
6 3
17. Draw Lewis diagrams to illustrate the following. would have a higher boiling point? Refer to
(a) a compound of chlorine that is diatomic a reference book to find the boiling points of
and has only dispersion forces between these two liquids to check your predictions.
molecules when in the liquid state Account for any difference between your
(b) a compound of chlorine that is diatomic predictions and the actual boiling points.
and has dipole-dipole attractions when in
Communication
the liquid state
26. Compare the molecules SF and SiF with
18. In what cases is the name of the molecular 4 4
respect to molecular shape and molecular
shape the same as the name of the electron
polarity.
group arrangement?
19. How can a molecule with polar covalent bonds 27. Compare the forces of attraction that must
not be a polar molecule? be overcome to melt samples of NaI and HI.
28.(a) Contrast the physical properties of diamond,
Inquiry
a covalent network solid with the molecular
20. Draw a Lewis structure for PF 2 Cl 3 to show that compound 2,2-dimethylpropane.
it may be polar or non-polar. (b) In diamond, covalent bonds join the
21. Water reaches its maximum density at 4˚C. At carbons atoms. In a molecule of
temperatures above or below 4˚C, the density is 2,2-dimethylpropane, a central carbon
lower. Discuss what is happening to the water atom is covalently bonded to four (cid:2)CH
3
molecules at temperatures around 4˚C. groups. How are the covalent bonds in the
22. The melting point of NaCl is 801˚C, of CaCl is two substances different from one another?
2
782˚C, and of AlCl is 190˚C. The electrostatic (c) How are the physical properties of these two
3
substances related to the covalent bonds in
forces of attraction between ions increase with
them?
an increase in the charge. In these ionic solids,
the charge on the cations Na
+
,
Ca2+
, and
Al3+
29. At room temperature, carbon dioxide, CO , is a
2
is increasing, but the melting point of the corre- gas, while silica, SiO , is a hard solid. Compare
2
sponding compound is decreasing. Suggest an the bonding in these two compounds to
explanation for this trend in the melting point. account for this difference in physical states.
23. Transition metal ions can be multivalent. For 30. Compare the bonding and molecular polarity of
example, gold(I), Au
+
, and gold(III),
Au3+
, are SeO and SeO .
3 2
the two ionic forms for gold. Decomposition 31. Discuss the intermolecular and intramolecular
occurs at 240˚C for Au 2 S and at 197˚C for forces in N 2 H 4 and C 2 H 4 . Based upon the
Au S .
2 3 bonding between molecules, which of these two
(a) Based upon the given information, which of compounds would have a lower boiling point?
the two compounds has bonds with greater
ionic character? Making Connections
(b) Predict which compound would have the
32. Many advanced materials, such as KEVLAR®,
greater lattice energy. Outline the reasoning
have applications that depend on their chemi-
for your answers.
cal inertness. What hazards do such materials
24. Determine if the molecule XeF 6 will have an pose for the environment? In your opinion, do
octahedral shape. the benefits of using these materials outweigh
the long-term risks associated with their use?
Give reasons to justify your answer.
210 MHR • Unit 2 Structure and Properties
33. Considering the changes of states that occur
O
with water in the environment, suggest how
•• •• ••
intermolecular forces of attraction influence (b) ••F N N F•• 13. Xe O (all co-ordinate covalent)
•• •• ••
the weather. O
Answers to Practice Problems and Short Answers to •• ••
Section Review Questions ••F
•• ••F••
••F
••
••
••F••
••F
••
•• ••F
••
••F
••
••
1.(a) 1s2(b)1s22s22p63s23p6(c)1s22s22p63s23p64s23d104p6 •• •• •• ••
14.(a) S (b) ••F Br•• 15.(a) Xe
(d)1s22s22p6 2.(a)[Li]+ (b)[Ca]2+ (c) ••B
•
•
•
• r•• − (d) ••O
•
•
•
• •• 2− ••F •
•
•
•
••F•• F •
•
•
•
•• •• ••F•• F •
•
•
•
•• ••F
••
•• •• ••F
••
••
•• ••
• ••
3.(a) Li + • S •• • • Li + • • S •• • • 2− Li + •• ••F•• ••F •• ••
L
•
i
• •• (b) ••F
••
P
••
(b) Ca• +
•C
•
•
•
•
•
•
l••
••C •
•
•
•
l•• − Ca 2+ ••C •
•
•
•
l•• − 16.In PI
3
••
,
F
• • o
••
ne
F
• •
lo
••
ne pair around P; in ClI
3
, two lone pairs
•Cl•• around the Cl.
••
(c) K • + •C •• l•• K − Cl + ••F •• F •• •• −
•• •• •• ••
17. I
•
Na •• ••
(d) N • a + •N •• • Na + ••N •• •• 3− Na +
••F
••
•• F
••
••
• ••
N • a + 18.(a)linear (b)bent (c)trigonal planar (d)tetrahedral
Na
19.(a)tetrahedral (b)trigonal bipyramidal (c)tetrahedral
4.(a) 6 (VIA) (b) 1 (IA) (c) 3 (IIIA) (d) 2 (IIA) 5. H(cid:2)Cl, (d)tretrahedral 20.NO 2 + linear; NO 2 − bent
K H B (cid:2) r∆ B E r N , H = (cid:2) 2.1 I 4 6 : . i A n s c B r r e 3 a ∆ s E in N g = io 0 n .7 i 8 c , c C h a a B r r a 2 c ∆ t E e N r = 7.( 1 a . ) 9 C 6 (cid:2) , H I ••F •• ••F •• •• F •• •• −
•• ••
(b) Sn(cid:2)F (c) C(cid:2)O 8. covalent: S 8 , F 2 ; polar covalent 21.(a)linear: •• Xe•• (b)octahedral: P
SCl 2 <SF 2 <PF 3 ; ionic: RbCl 9.(a) H N •• H I ••F •
•
•
•
••F•• F •
•
•
•
••
•• ••
H ••F•• H
••
(c)trigonal pyrimidal: As
•• ••
(b) H C H (c) ••F
••
C F
••
••
••F
••
F
••
••
H ••F••
•• ••F
••
•• ••
••
•• −
•• •• •• − •• ••F••
(d) H As H (e) ••Br O•• (f) H S H
•• •• •• ••
(d)tetrahedral: Al F••
H ••
••
(g) H O
••
O
••
H (h) ••C
••
l N
••
O••
••F
•• ••F••
•• •• •• •• ••
22.(a)O (b)P (c)Cl 23.(a)tetrahedral, polar (b)trigonal planar,
•• 2− •• 2− •• 2−
••O•• ••O•• O•• polar (c)trigonal planar, non-polar 24.tetrahedral, polar
10.(a) C C C 2 S 5 e .(a c ) t N io F n 3 4 (b . ) 1 T : e 1 C . ( l b 4 )N 26 a . B tr r i g io o n n i a c l , p B y r(cid:2) ram F id p a o l l , a T r - c s o h v a a p l e e d nt,
••O ••O•• ••O•• ••O•• ••O•• ••O•• Br(cid:2)Cl covalent 2.O(cid:2)H > S(cid:2)O>H(cid:2)Br > Cl(cid:2)I > N(cid:2)Cl
•• •• •• •• ••
3.property will tend to increase 4.cleavage; ionic
+ ••
••O •• ••
••
− ••O •
•
•
•
••O •• •• 4
is
. 2
n
:
o
1
n
.(
-
a
p
)
o
n
l
o
a
n
r
-
a
p
n
o
d
l a
C
r
H
(b
3
)
O
p
H
ola
is
r
p
(c
o
)
l
p
a
o
r
l a
4
r
. l e
3.
ss
b o
r
t
e
h
a c
t
t
e
i
t
v
r
e
a h
s
e
in
d
c
ra
e
l
B
; CH 4
(b) ••N O•• (c) ••O Cl O•• (d) ••S and N now have octet in valence energy level 5.bent, polar
•• •• ••
6.tetrahedral 4.3:2.more opportunity for H-bonding and
••O
••
••
greater dispersion forces in H
2
O
2
3.(a)molecular non-polar,
H ••F •• ••
H H
ionic (c)metallic (d)network 6.trigonal pyramidal, polar
7.tetrahedral, non-polar 8.CsF > CsCl > CsBr > CsI
••
11. H C C Cl•• 12.(a) ••N N••
••
H H
H ••Cl••
••
Chapter 4 Structures and Properties of Substances • MHR 211
Project
UNIT 2
Materials Convention Whale oil was once a popular choice for lamp fuel.
Later, a new, “cutting-edge” fuel was developed from
petroleum to replace whale oil. What was this new
Background fuel? How did it compare to whale oil?
Copper has long been prized for its beauty,
The qualities and characteristics of a material are
malleability, and conductivity. However, in recent
determined by the bonding between the particles
fibre-optic technology, intricate atom-layering
that make up the material. For example, pure car-
production processes are being used to produce a
bon exists in several different forms, or allotropes.
material that has thousands of times the conductive
Each allotrope contains different bonding, and
ability of copper. What is this new material?
therefore has different properties. The “lead” of
a pencil is really made of graphite, a silver-grey
Challenge
allotrope of carbon. Graphite is a good writing tool
because the layered bonding arrangement creates a In this project, you will choose and investigate a
soft material that is easily transferred to paper by material. You may be interested in a common
rubbing. The softness and slipperiness of graphite material or substance that you encounter every
also make it a valuable industrial lubricant. day. Alternatively, you may want to investigate
Diamond, another allotrope of carbon, is one of the one of the many new, cutting-edge materials that
hardest materials on Earth. Diamonds are useful in are currently being developed. You will research
cutting and drilling applications. Because they are the structure, properties, and applications of your
beautiful, sparkling stones, diamonds are also used material, and then prepare a presentation to be set
in jewellery. up in the classroom.
Humans have used the materials in their
Materials
environment for thousands of years. In addition
to natural materials, new materials are continually Try to obtain a sample of your material, to examine
being invented. Some inventions take place by its physical properties. If this is not possible, find
accident, and others by design. These new materials illustrations or photos of the material from books,
are often more effective, efficient, or cheaper than magazines, or the Internet. You will need materials
traditional materials. for your presentation, which may include charts, a
poster, models, pictures, or pamphlets.
Design Criteria
A With your class, prepare a rubric that you will
use for self- and peer-assessments. Your teacher
will use the same rubric to assess your work.
B Your presentation should be visually attractive,
interesting, and educational. It should examine
the relationship between the bonding and
physical properties of your material.
Action Plan
1 Examine or research the physical properties of
the material you have chosen to study. This
step may include a hands-on investigation of
a sample of the material, if available. Record a
detailed description of the properties of your
Optical fibres, each made of two different types of glass, material. Include tests to determine any of the
pass through the eye of a steel needle. following applicable properties.
212 MHR • Unit 2 Structure and Properties
Assessment
After you complete this project, answer the following
questions to assess your work.
(cid:2) Assess the success of your project based on the
response from your peers.
thermal conductivity
(cid:2) Assess the completeness of your research. Could
electrical conductivity
you have found out more?
hardness
boiling point (cid:2) Assess the visual presentation of your project. Was
your information laid out in a clear, interesting, and
melting point
easy-to-understand manner?
solubility in various solvents
surface tension
density Evaluate
2 Research the chemical composition of the 1 Prepare your presentation, and set it up in the
material, and, if applicable, the processes used classroom. During one or two class periods,
to make it. Is your material natural or synthetic? proceed around the classroom, taking notes
If it is synthetic, what substances are used to on the materials presented by your classmates.
produce it? Do these substances come from a While studying all of the materials together,
natural source? note patterns, similarities, and differences in
structure and function.
3 If possible for your material, draw a Lewis
structure of the molecule or molecules on 2 Use the rubric that your class designed to
which your material is based. Predict the evaluate your presentation.
molecular shape using VSEPR theory.
3 As directed by your teacher, use the rubric
4 Build a three-dimensional model showing the your class designed to evaluate the presentation
composition of your material. Prepare a detailed of another student in the class.
drawing to explain the bonding that occurs
between particles in your material. Extension
5 Use your model and drawing to discuss the What methods of analysis would provide scientists
following topics. with the most information on your material? What
(a) the polarity of your material scientific instruments would be helpful in studying
your material? Explain your answer in terms of the
(b) intermolecular forces affecting the properties
structure of your material and the function of the
of your material
instrument.
(c) the types of intramolecular bonding present
in your material
6 Describe and explain any relationship you
observe between the polarity and bonding
of your material (step 5) and its physical
properties (step 1).
7 (a) Decide on some possible functions of the
material you have chosen, based on its
properties.
(b)Research applications of your material in
industry, science, and medicine. How have
inventors used the specific characteristics of
your material to benefit society?
(c) Compare historical, current, and possible
future applications of this material. Has this
material been replaced by a new material?
Are there economic or other reasons why
this material may no longer be used?
Unit 2 Project • MHR 213
Review
Knowledge/Understanding (d) 1s22s12p3
(e) 1s22s22p6
Multiple Choice
6. A crystalline substance that is hard,
In your notebook, write the letter for the best unmalleable, has a high melting point, and
answer to each question. is a non-conductor of electricity could be
1. Which part of the atom did Rutherford discover I an ionic crystal
by bombarding gold foil with alpha particles? II a polar covalent solid
(a) protons III a metal
(b) neutrons IV a network solid
(c) electrons (a) I or II
(d) nucleus (b) I or III
(e) a uniform, positively charged sphere (c) III or IV
2. Which of the following did the Bohr model of (d) II or IV
the atom help explain? (e) I or IV
(a) nuclear structure 7. Which of the following molecules does not
(b) atomic spectra have a linear shape?
(c) structure of the electron (a) Cl O
2
(d) structure of alpha particles (b) CO
2
(e) wave property of the atom (c) XeF
2
3. Which of the following can help explain atomic (d) OCS
emission spectra? (e) BeF 2
(a) A photon of a specific wavelength of light is 8. Which of the following electron configurations
absorbed when an atom’s electron jumps shows a transition metal atom?
from a lower energy level to a higher energy (a) 1s22s22p5
level. (b) 1s22s22p63s23p1
(b) A photon of a specific wavelength of light is (c) 1s22s22p63s23p63d104s1
released when an atom’s electron falls from a (d) 1s22s22p63s23p63d104s24p1
higher energy level to a lower energy level. (e) 1s22s22p63s23p63d104s24p3
(c) Energy of electromagnetic radiation is
9. A substance that has a melting point of 1850˚C
continuous.
and a boiling point of 2700˚C is insoluble in
(d) Electrons continuously release energy as
water and is a good insulator of electricity. The
they orbit the nucleus of the atom.
substance is most likely
(e) Energy is released when an electron jumps
(a) an ionic solid
from a lower energy level to a higher energy
(b) a polar covalent solid
level.
(c) a metal
4. Which of the following is an example of a (d) a network solid
network solid? (e) a molecular solid
(a) sodium, Na
(s) 10. The main factor that leads to the formation of a
(b) sucrose, C H O
12 22 11(s) chemical bond between atoms is
(c) graphite, C
(s) (a) the lowering of melting point and boiling
(d) silica, SiO
2(s) point when a compound is formed
(e) magnesium fluoride, MgF
2(s) (b) a tendency in nature to achieve a minimum
5. Which of the following electron configurations energy for a system
is impossible for an atom, regardless of whether (c) the formation of a shape consistent with
it is in the ground state or an excited state? VSEPR theory
(a) 1s22s22p3 (d) a tendency to make the attractions equal to
(b) 1s2s12p1 the repulsions between atoms
(c) 1s32s12p4 (e) a tendency to reduce the number of existing
particles
214 MHR • Unit 2 Structures and Properties
Short Answers 27. Distinguish between dipole-dipole attraction
In your notebook, write a sentence or a short forces and dispersion (London) forces. Is one
paragraph to answer each question. type of these intermolecular forces stronger
11. The emission spectrum of an element has than the other? Explain.
spectral lines at wavelengths of 620 nm and
Inquiry
640 nm. Sketch the absorption spectrum for
this element. 28. A metal, X, reacts with chlorine to form the
compound XCl . The metal’s third ionization
12. Briefly account for the two spectra referred 2
energy is significantly larger than its first and
to in question 11.
second ionization energies.
13. Use the aufbau principle to write the
(a) To what group does the metal likely belong?
condensed ground state electron configurations
(b) What is the valence electron configuration of
for nitrogen, phosphorus, and arsenic.
an atom of the metal in its ground state?
14. List these elements in order of increasing
29. The last electron to enter an atom, following
atomic size: Na, Mg, K, and Ca.
the aufbau principle, has quantum numbers
15. What VSEPR notations correspond to a n = 3, l = 2, m = −1, andm = +1 . To which
l s 2
molecule that have a bent shape? block of elements and which period on the
16. How do the lone pairs of electrons around periodic table does this element belong?
the central atom of a molecule affect the bond Identify the element, assuming that its orbitals
angle between two bond pairs of electrons. are filled in order of increasing m l .
17. List these elements in order of increasing first 30. If the first five ionization energies of an
ionization energies: element are 1.09, 2.35, 4.62, 6.22, and 37.83
(a) Li, Na, K, Rb MJ/mol respectively, to which group in the
(b) Li, Be, B, C periodic table does this element belong?
Explain your reasoning.
18. Name the two elements in period 4 whose elec-
tron configurations are not accurately predicted 31. Which ionic solid would you expect to have a
by the aufbau principle. higher melting point: LiI or LiBr? Justify your
answer.
19. Which physical properties of an ionic solid are
related to the size of the lattice energy of the 32. Which element in each of the following pairs
crystal? would you expect to be less metallic? Explain
your choices.
20. Explain why, at room temperature, CO is a gas
2
but CS is a liquid. (a) Sb and As (b) Si and P (c) Be and Na
2
21. Sketch an outline of the periodic table and use 33. The first ionization energy for boron is lower
it to compare the trends in atomic size, first than what you would predict, based on the
ionization energy, and electron affinity. general trend for ionization energy across a
period. Explain this exception to the trend.
22. Why do the properties of elements in the peri-
odic table recur periodically? 34. For any molecules that have the general
formula AX , where n is greater than 2, how
23. Use hydrogen and lithium to compare the con- n
can you decide whether a given molecule is
cepts of nuclear charge and effective nuclear
polar or not?
charge.
35. All three metals (Zn, Cd, Hg) in Group 12 (IIB)
24. Explain how to determine the maximum num-
have a ground state electron configuration
ber of electrons in any principal energy level.
ending with d10s2.
25. What is the fourth quantum number, and why
(a) What electrons will be available to partici-
does it have only two possible values?
pate in metallic bonding in these elements?
26. What is the uncertainty principle, and what are (b) What is the most likely charge to be carried
its implications for the atomic model? by stable ions of these metals?
Unit 2 Review • MHR 215
(c) Since Hg is a liquid at room temperature, 46. The group trend for boiling point is the same as
what does this indicate about the strength of the trend for atomic radius. For the compounds
the metallic bonding in Hg compared to the formed between hydrogen and the first three
other two metals in this group? elements of group 16 (VIA), H S has a lower
2
36. Copy the following bond pairs into your note- boiling point than both H 2 O and H 2 Se.
book. Use the electronegativity values in the Explain this diversion from the trend you
periodic table in Appendix E to indicate the would expect.
polarity of the bond in each case. 47. Define the following terms, and identify the
(a) N(cid:2)H term that best describes the H(cid:2)O bond in a
(b) F(cid:2)N water molecule: non-polar covalent, polar
(c) I(cid:2)Cl covalent, ionic.
37. Arrange the following sets of bond pairs in 48. For a solid metallic element:
order of increasing polarity. Identify the (a) Identify four physical properties.
direction of bond polarity for the bond pairs (b) Identify two chemical properties that
in each set. would enable you to classify the element
(a) Cl(cid:2)F, Br(cid:2)Cl, Cl(cid:2)Cl as metallic.
(b) Si(cid:2)Cl, P(cid:2)Cl, S(cid:2)Cl, Si(cid:2)Si 49.(a) Explain why the successive ionization
38. If a molecule with the formula AY is polar, energies for an element always increase.
3
identify the molecular shapes that this mole- (b) Identify an element for which you would
cule could and could not have. predict the difference between two
successive ionization energies to be very
Communication large. Explain what you can infer about
39. Draw a Lewis structure for the ionic compound the electron configuration of the atoms
Ba(OH) . of this element.
2
40. Draw a Lewis structure for the molecule POF 50. In your own words, state Hund’s rule. Explain
3
and predict if it is a dipole. how it applies in drawing the orbital diagram
41. Use VSEPR theory to predict the molecular for a carbon atom.
shape of CH Cl . Draw a sketch to indicate the 51. You can use electronegativity differences to
2 2
polarity of the bonds around the central atom think of chemical bonds as having a percent
to verify that this is a polar molecule. ionic or a percent covalent character. The
42. Draw and compare the Lewis structures of graph below plots percent ionic character
ClO − and OSCl . In which of these cases, if versus ∆EN for a number of gaseous binary
4 2
molecules. Use this graph to answer the
any, does the central atom have an expanded
questions on the next page.
valence energy level?
43. Write the electron configuration and
draw an orbital diagram to show the first 100
excited state of a sodium atom. Assume
that the outermost electron is excited.
75
44. Write a full set of quantum numbers
for the following:
50
(a) the outermost electron in a Li atom
(b) the electron that causes a chlorine
atom to become a chloride ion with
25
a charge of 1−.
45. Summarize the trend in metallic
character, and compare it to the trends 0
1.0 2.0 3.0
for atomic size and ionization energy. ∆EN
216 MHR • Unit 2 Structures and Properties
retcarahc
cinoi
tnecreP
KiF
KCl
Kl KBr NaCl KF
Ionic LiCl
CsCl
LiBr
Lil
Arbitrary
cutoff
HF
Covalent
HCl
IBrHI HBr
Cl 2 ICl
(a) Describe the ionic character of the molecules Making Connections
as a function of ∆EN. 57. Researchers estimate that known reserves of
(b) Which molecule has a 0 percent ionic industrially important transition metals, such
character? What can you infer about the as manganese and iron, will be depleted in less
interactions among the electrons of this than a human lifetime. Scattered about the
molecule? ocean floor are billions of tonnes of small
(c) Do any molecules have a 100 percent ionic chunks of rock ranging in diameter from sever-
character? What can you infer about the al millimetres to several metres. These nodules,
interactions among the electrons of ionic as they are called, consist mainly of manganese
compounds? (Hint: Can atoms give up or and iron oxides, but contain smaller amounts
gain electrons in the way the ionic bonding of other transition-metal compounds as well.
model suggests they do?) The ocean floor is designated as international
(d) Chemists often assign the value of 50 percent property. Therefore, no single country may
as an arbitrary cutoff for separating ionic claim ownership of this vast potential resource.
compounds from covalent compounds. Write an editorial that outlines your recommen-
Based on your answer in part (c), what does dations for how this resource may be shared.
the use of the term “arbitrary” suggest about
58. Many useful products, such as superglue and
the nature of chemical bonds?
fire-retardant materials, are domestic “spin-offs”
52. The periodic trend for electronegativity is the from research that is related to military applica-
inverse of the trend for atomic radius. tions. Military expense budgets are large, in
(a) Make a sketch of the periodic table to part, because of the money required to support
show the group and period trends for this research. In your opinion, should military
electronegativity. budgets be exempt from cost-conservation
(b) Explain, using an example, why you would measures that governments typically must
expect this inverse relationship between consider? Debate this question with your class-
electronegativity and atomic radius. mates, and issue a statement that summarizes
53. Name the two scientists whose ideas showed your decisions.
that the location of an electron in an atom is
uncertain. Explain how their ideas did, in
fact, suggest this fact about electrons.
54. In 1906, the Nobel Prize in chemistry was
awarded to a French chemist, Ferdinand
Moissan, for isolating fluorine in its pure
COURSE
elemental form. Why would this achievement
CHALLENGE
be deserving of such a prestigious honour? Use
The Chemistry of Human Health
your understanding of atomic properties as
Think about these questions as you plan for your
well as chemical bonds to explain your answer.
Chemistry Course Challenge.
55. Use a graphic organizer such as a Venn diagram • What are the properties characteristic of
to compare ionic bonding with metallic metals such as aluminum and calcium based
bonding. on their electronic configurations?
• How would you test for these properties
56. Lead and carbon belong to the same group of
in the laboratory?
the periodic table. One is a metal, while the
• How would you determine the type of
other is a non-metal. How can two elements
bonding or intermolecular forces within
whose atoms have the same number of valence a substance?
electrons be so different in their properties?
Unit 2 Review • MHR 217
Energy Changes and
Rates of Reaction
I
UNIT 3 CONTENTS
n the nineteenth century, railway
CHAPTER 5
tunnels were blasted through the
Energy and Change
Rocky Mountains to connect British
CHAPTER 6 Columbia with the rest of Canada.
Rates of Chemical Reactions Workers used nitroglycerin to blast
through the rock. This compound is
UNIT 3 PROJECT
so unstable, however, that accidents
Developing a Bulletin About
were frequent and many workers
Catalysts and Enzymes
died. Alfred B. Nobel found a way
to stabilize nitroglycerin, and make
UNIT 3 OVERALL EXPECTATIONS it safer to use, when he invented
dynamite.
What energy transformations
and mechanisms are involved What makes nitroglycerin such
in chemical change? a dangerous substance? First, nitro-
What skills are involved in glycerin, C 3 H 5 (NO 3 ) 3((cid:2)) , gives off a
determining energy changes large amount of energy when it
for physical and chemical decomposes. In fact, about 1500 kJ
processes and rates of of energy is released for every mole
reaction? of nitroglycerin that reacts. Second,
How do chemical technologies the decomposition of nitroglycerin
and processes depend on occurs very quickly—in a fraction
the energetics of chemical
of a second. This fast, exothermic
reactions?
reaction is accompanied by a
tremendous shock wave, which is
Unit Project Prep caused by the expansion of the
gaseous products. Finally,
Look ahead to the project at the
nitroglycerin is highly shock-
end of Unit 3. Start preparing for
the project now by listing what you sensitive. Simply shaking or jarring
already know about catalysts and it can cause it to react.
enzymes. Think about how catalysts Thus, nitroglycerin’s explosive
and enzymes affect chemical properties are caused by three fac-
reactions. As you work through the
tors: the energy that is given off by
unit, plan how you will investigate
its decomposition, the rate at which
and present a bulletin about the
the reaction occurs, and the small
uses of catalysts and enzymes in
amount of energy that is needed to
Canadian industries.
initiate the reaction. In this unit,
you will learn about the energy and
rates of various chemical reactions.
218
Energy and Change
T
Chapter Preview hink about a prehistoric family group building a fire. It may seem as
though this fire does not have much in common with a nuclear power
5.1 The Energy of Physical,
plant. Both the fire and thenuclear power plant, however, are technolo-
Chemical, and Nuclear
gies that harness energy-producing processes.
Changes
As you learned in Unit 2, humans continually devise new techno-
5.2 Determining Enthalpy
logies that use chemical reactions to produce materials with useful
of Reaction by
properties. Since the invention of fire, humans have also worked to devise
Experiment
technologies that harness energy. These technologies depend on the fact
5.3 Hess’s Law of Heat
that every chemical, physical, and nuclear process is accompanied by a
Summation
characteristic energy change. Consider the melting of an ice cube to cool a
5.4 Energy Sources
drink, the combustion of natural gas to cook a meal, and the large-scale
production of electricity via a nuclear power plant. All societies depend
on the energy changes that are associated with these physical, chemical,
and nuclear processes.
In this chapter, you will study the causes and magnitude of the
energy changes that accompany physical changes, chemical reactions,
and nuclear reactions. You will see that different processes involve vastly
different amounts of energy. You will learn how to calculate the amount
Prerequisite
Concepts and Skills of energy that is absorbed or released by many simple physical changes
and chemical reactions. This will allow you to predict energy changes
Before you begin this chapter,
without having to carry out the reaction—an important skill to have when
review the following concepts
dealing with dangerous reactions. Finally, you will examine the efficiency
and skills:
and environmental impact of traditional and alternative energy sources.
(cid:2) writing balanced chemical
equations (Concepts and
Skills Review)
(cid:2) performing stoichiometric
calculations (Concepts
and Skills Review)
Enough radiant energy reaches Earth every day to meet
the world’s energy needs many times over. Since this is
the case, why do fossil fuels provide most of Canada’s
energy, while solar power supplies only a tiny fraction?
220 MHR • Unit 3 Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
The Energy of Physical, Chemical, 5.1
and Nuclear Processes
Most physical changes, chemical reactions, and nuclear reactions are Section Preview/
accompanied by changes in energy. These energy changes are crucial to Specific Expectations
life on Earth. For example, chemical reactions in your body generate the In this section, you will
heat that helps to regulate your body temperature. Physical changes, such
(cid:2) writethermochemical equa-
as evaporation, help to keep your body cool. On a much larger scale, there tions, expressing the energy
would be no life on Earth without the energy from the nuclear reactions change as a heat term in the
that take place in the Sun. equation or as ∆H
The study of energy and energy transfer is known as thermodynamics. (cid:2) representenergy changes
Chemists are interested in the branch of thermodynamics known as using diagrams
thermochemistry: the study of energy involved in chemical reactions.
(cid:2) compareenergy changes
In order to discuss energy and its interconversions, thermochemists have that result from physical
agreed on a number of terms and definitions. You will learn about these changes, chemical reac-
terms and definitions over the next few pages. Then you will examine the tions, and nuclear reactions
energy changes that accompany chemical reactions, physical changes, and (cid:2) communicateyour under-
nuclear reactions. standing of the following
terms: thermodynamics,
thermochemistry, law of
Studying Energy Changes
conservation of energy,
The law of conservation of energy states that the total energy of the system, surroundings,
universe is constant. In other words, energy can be neither destroyed heat (Q), temperature (T),
nor created. This idea can be expressed by the following equation: enthalpy (H), enthalpy
change (∆H), endothermic
∆E = 0
universe reaction, exothermic reac-
Energy can, however, be transferred from one substance to another. It can tion, enthalpy of reaction
also be converted into various forms. In order to interpret energy changes, (∆H rxn ), standard enthalpy
scientists must clearly define what part of the universe they are dealing of reaction (∆H˚ rxn ), thermo-
chemical equation, mass
with. The systemis defined as the part of the universe that is being studied
defect, nuclear binding
and observed. In a chemical reaction, the system is usually made up of the
energy, nuclear fission,
reactants and products. By contrast, the surroundingsare everything else
nuclear fusion
in the universe. The two equations below show the relationship between
the universe, a system, and the system’s surroundings.
Universe = System + Surroundings
∆E = ∆E + ∆E = 0
universe system surroundings
From the relationship, we know that any change in the system is
accompanied by an equal and opposite change in the surroundings.
∆E = −∆E
system surroundings
Look at the chemical reaction that is taking place in the flask in
Figure 5.1. A chemist would probably define the system as the contents
of the flask—the reactants and products. Technically, the rest of the
universe is the surroundings. In reality, however, the entire universe
changes very little when the system changes. Therefore, the surroundings
are considered to be only the part of the universe that is likely to be
affected by the energy changes of the system. In Figure 5.1, the flask, the
lab bench, the air in the room, and the student who is carrying out the
reaction all make up the surroundings. The system is more likely to Figure 5.1 The solution in the
significantly influence its immediate surroundings than, say, a flask is the system. The flask, the
mountaintop in Japan (also, technically, part of the surroundings). laboratory, and the student are the
surroundings.
Chapter 5 Energy and Change • MHR 221
Heat and Temperature
Heat, Q, refers to the transfer of kinetic energy. Heat is expressed in the
same units as energy—joules (J). Heat is transferred spontaneously from a
warmer object to a cooler object. When you close the door of your home on
a cold day to “prevent the cold from getting in,” you are actually preventing
the heat from escaping. You are preventing the kinetic energy in your warm
home from transferring to colder objects, including the cold air, outside.
Temperature,T, is a measure of the average kinetic energy of the particles
that make up a substance or system. You can think of temperature as a way
of quantifying how hot or cold a substance is, relative to another substance.
K ˚C
380 373.15 110 100.00
100
370
90
360
80
350
70
340
60
330
50
320
40
310
300 30
20
290
280 273.15 10 0.00
0
270
–10
260
20 –250
10 0.00 –260 −273.15
0 –270
Figure 5.2 Celsius degrees and Kelvin degrees are the same size. The Kelvin scale begins
at absolute zero. This is the temperature at which the particles in a substance have no kinetic
energy. Therefore, Kelvin temperatures are never negative. By contrast, 0˚C is set at the
melting point of water. Celsius temperatures can be positive or negative.
Temperature is measured in either Celsius degrees (˚C) or kelvins (K).
The Celsius scale is a relative scale. It was designed so that water’s
boiling point is at 100˚C and water’s melting point is at 0˚C. The Kelvin
scale, on the other hand, is an absolute scale. It was designed so that 0 K
is the temperature at which a substance possesses no kinetic energy. The
relationship between the Kelvin and Celsius scales is shown in Figure 5.2,
and by the following equation.
Temperature in Kelvin degrees = Temperature in Celsius degrees + 273.15
Enthalpy and Enthalpy Change
Chemists define the total internal energy of a substance at a constant
pressure as its enthalpy, H. Chemists do not work with the absolute
enthalpy of the reactants and products in a physical or chemical process.
Instead, they study the enthalpy change, ∆H, that accompanies a process.
That is, they study the relative enthalpy of the reactants and products in a
system. This is like saying that the distance between your home and your
school is 2 km. You do not usually talk about the absolute position of
your home and school in terms of their latitude, longitude, and elevation.
You talk about their relative position, in relation to each other.
The enthalpy change of a process is equivalent to its heat change at
constant pressure.
222 MHR • Unit 3 Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
Enthalpy Changes in Chemical Reactions
In chemical reactions, enthalpy changes result from chemical bonds being
broken and formed. Chemical bonds are sources of stored energy. Breaking
a bond is a process that requires energy. Creating a bond is a process that
releases energy. For example, consider the combustion reaction that takes
place when nitrogen reacts with oxygen.
N + O → 2NO
2(g) 2(g) (g)
In this reaction, one mole of nitrogen-nitrogen triple bonds and one mole
of oxygen-oxygen double bonds are broken. Two moles of nitrogen-oxygen
bonds are formed. This reaction absorbs energy. In other words, more
energy is released to form two nitrogen-oxygen bonds than is used to break
one nitrogen-nitrogen bond and one oxygen-oxygen bond. When a reaction
results in a net absorption of energy, it is called an endothermic reaction.
On the other hand, when a reaction results in a net release of energy,
it is called an exothermic reaction. In an exothermic reaction, more energy
is released to form bonds than is used to break bonds. Therefore, energy is
released. Figure 5.3 shows the relationship between bond breaking, bond
formation, and endothermic and exothermic reactions.
Reactants Products
Figure 5.3 The energy changes
bonds broken bonds made
that result from bonds breaking and
endothermic reaction:
forming determine whether a reac-
energy absorbed energy released system absorbs E
tion is exothermic or endothermic.
bonds broken bonds made
exothermic reaction:
energy absorbed energy released system releases E
Representing Enthalpy Changes
The enthalpy change of a chemical reaction is known as the enthalpy CHEM
of reaction, ∆H rxn . The enthalpy of reaction is dependent on conditions FACT
such as temperature and pressure. Therefore, chemists often talk about the
Chemists use different sub-
standard enthalpy of reaction, ∆H˚ rxn : the enthalpy change of a chemical scripts to represent enthalpy
reaction that occurs at SATP (25˚C and 100 kPa). Often, ∆H˚ is written changes for specific kinds
rxn
simply as ∆H˚. The ˚ symbol is called “nought.” It refers to a property of of reactions. For example,
a substance at a standard state or under standard conditions. You may ∆H comb represents the enthalpy
change of a combustion
see the enthalpy of reaction referred to as the heat of reaction in other
reaction.
chemistry books.
Representing Exothermic Reactions
There are three different ways to represent the enthalpy change of an
exothermic reaction. The simplest way is to use a thermochemical
equation: a balanced chemical equation that indicates the amount of heat
that is absorbed or released by the reaction it represents. For example,
consider the exothermic reaction of one mole of hydrogen gas with half
a mole of oxygen gas to produce liquid water. For each mole of hydrogen
gas that reacts, 285.8 kJ of heat is produced. Notice that the heat term is
included with the products because heat is produced.
H 2(g) + 1 2 O 2(g) → H 2 O ((cid:2)) + 285.8kJ
Chapter 5 Energy and Change • MHR 223
You can also indicate the enthalpy of reaction as a separate expression
beside the chemical equation. For exothermic reactions, ∆H˚ is always
negative.
H 2(g) + 1 2 O 2(g) → H 2 O ((cid:2)) ∆H˚ rxn = −285.8kJ
A third way to represent the enthalpy of reaction is to use an enthalpy
diagram. Examine Figure 5.4 to see how this is done.
Representing Endothermic Reactions
The endothermic decomposition of solid magnesium carbonate produces
solid magnesium oxide and carbon dioxide gas. For each mole of magne-
sium carbonate that decomposes, 117.3 kJ of energy is absorbed. As for an
exothermic reaction, there are three different ways to represent the
enthalpy change of an endothermic reaction.
You can include the enthalpy of reaction as a heat term in the
chemical equation. Because heat is absorbed in an endothermic reaction,
the heat term is included on the reactant side of the equation.
117.3kJ + MgCO → MgO + CO
3(s) (s) 2(g)
You can also indicate the enthalpy of reaction as a separate expression
beside the chemical reaction. For endothermic reactions, the enthalpy of
reaction is always positive.
MgCO → MgO + CO ∆H˚ = 117.3kJ
3(s) (s) 2(g) rxn
Finally, you can use a diagram to show the enthalpy of reaction.
Figure 5.5 shows how the decomposition of solid magnesium carbonate
can be represented graphically.
Stoichiometry and Thermochemical Equations
The thermochemical equation for the decomposition of magnesium
carbonate, shown above, indicates that 117.3 kJ of energy is absorbed
when one mole, or 84.32 g, of magnesium carbonate decomposes. The
decomposition of two moles of magnesium carbonate absorbs twice as
much energy, or 234.6 kJ.
MgCO → MgO + CO ∆H˚ = 117.3kJ 3(s) (s) 2(g) rxn
2MgCO → 2MgO + 2CO ∆H˚ = 234.6kJ
3(s) (s) 2(g) rxn
Enthalpy of reaction is linearly dependent on the quantity of products.
That is, if the amount of products formed doubles, the enthalpy change
also doubles. Figure 5.6 shows the relationship between the stoichiometry
of a reaction and its enthalpy change. Because of this relationship, an
exothermic reaction that is relatively safe on a small scale may be
extremely dangerous on a large scale. One of the jobs of a chemical
engineer is to design systems that allow exothermic reactions to be carried
out safely on a large scale. For example, the blast furnaces used in steel
making must withstand temperatures of up to 2000˚C, produced by the
exothermic combustion reaction of coal with oxygen.
amount of varies directly with amount of varies directly with heat absorbed
compound A compound B or released
(mol) (factor: molar ratio) (mol) (factor: ∆H r x n ) (kJ)
Figure 5.6 This diagram summarizes the relationship between the stoichiometry
of a reaction and ∆H.
224 MHR • Unit 3 Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
H
,yplahtne
MgO + CO
(s) 2(g)
(products)
∆H˚ = 117.3 kJ
MgCO
3(s)
(reactants)
Figure 5.5 In an endothermic
reaction, the enthalpy of the system
increases as heat energy is
absorbed from the surroundings.
H
,yplahtne
H + 1 –O
2(g) 2 2(g)
(reactants)
∆H˚ = −285.8 kJ
H 2 O ((cid:2))
(products)
Figure 5.4 In an exothermic
reaction, the enthalpy of the system
decreases as energy is released to
the surroundings.
Sample Problem
Stoichiometry and Thermochemical Reactions
Problem
Aluminum reacts readily with chlorine gas to produce aluminum
chloride. The reaction is highly exothermic.
2Al + 3Cl → 2AlCl ∆H˚ = −1408kJ
(s) 2(g) 3(s) rxn
What is the enthalpy change when 1.0 kg of Al reacts completely with
excess Cl ?
2
What Is Required?
You need to calculate the enthalpy change, ∆H, when the given amount
of Al reacts.
What Is Given?
You know the enthalpy change for the reaction of two moles of Al
with one mole of Cl . From the periodic table, you know the molar
2
mass of Al.
2Al + 3Cl → 2AlCl ∆H˚ = −1408kJ
(s) 2(g) 3(s) rxn
M = 26.98g/mol
Al
Plan Your Strategy
Convert the given mass of Al to moles. The enthalpy change is linearly
dependent on the quantity of reactants. Therefore, you can use a ratio to
determine the enthalpy change for 1.0 kg of Al reacting with Cl .
2
Act on Your Strategy
Determine the number of moles of Al in 1 kg. Remember to convert to
grams.
nmolAl = m Al
M
Al
1.0 × 103g
=
26.98g/mol
= 37mol
Use ratios to compare the reference reaction with the known enthalpy
change (∆H )to the reaction with the unknown enthalpy change (∆H ).
1 2
∆H 2 = n 2 molAl
∆H n molAl
1 1
∆H 2 = 37molAl
−1408kJ 2molAl
∆H = −2.6 × 104kJ
2
Check Your Solution
The sign of the answer is negative, which corresponds to an exothermic
reaction. The 1 kg sample contained about 20 times more moles of Al.
Therefore, the enthalpy change for the reaction should be about 20 times
greater, and it is.
Chapter 5 Energy and Change • MHR 225
Practice Problems
1. Consider the following reaction.
N + O → 2NO ∆H˚ = +180.6kJ
2(g) 2(g) (g) rxn
(a) Rewrite the thermochemical equation, including the standard
enthalpy of reaction as either a reactant or a product.
(b) Draw an enthalpy diagram for the reaction.
(c) What is the enthalpy change for the formation of one mole of
nitrogen monoxide?
(d) What is the enthalpy change for the reaction of 1.000 × 102g of
nitrogen with sufficient oxygen?
2. The reaction of iron with oxygen is very familiar. You can see the
resulting rust on buildings, vehicles, and bridges. You may be sur-
prised, however, at the large amount of heat that is produced by this
reaction.
4Fe + 3O → 2Fe O + 1.65 × 103kJ
(s) 2(g) 2 3(s)
(a) What is the enthalpy change for this reaction?
(b) Draw an enthalpy diagram that corresponds to the thermochemical
equation.
(c) What is the enthalpy change for the formation of 23.6 g of iron(III)
oxide?
3. Consider the following thermochemical equation.
25.9kJ + 1H + 1I → HI
2 2(g) 2 2(g) (g)
(a) What is the enthalpy change for this reaction?
(b) How much energy is needed for the reaction of 4.57 × 1024
molecules of iodine, I , with excess hydrogen, H ?
2 2
(c) Draw and label an enthalpy diagram that corresponds to the given
thermochemical equation.
4. Tetraphosphorus decoxide, P O , is an acidic oxide. It reacts with
4 10
water to produce phosphoric acid, H PO , in an exothermic reaction.
3 4
P 4 O 10(s) + 6H 2 O ((cid:2)) → 4H 3 PO 4(aq) ∆H˚ rxn = −257.2kJ
(a) Rewrite the thermochemical equation, including the enthalpy
change as a heat term in the equation.
(b) How much energy is released when 5.00 mol of P O reacts with
4 10
excess water?
(c) How much energy is released when 235 g of H PO is formed?
3 4(aq)
Heat Changes and Physical Changes
Enthalpy changes are associated with physical changes as well as with
chemical reactions. You have observed examples of these enthalpy
changes in your daily life. Suppose that you want to prepare some pasta.
You put an uncovered pot of water on a stove element. The heat from the
element causes the water to become steadily hotter, until it reaches 100˚C
(the boiling point of water at 100 kPa). At this temperature, heat is still
being added to the water. The average kinetic energy of the liquid water
molecules does not increase, however. Instead, the energy is used to break
the intermolecular bonds between the water molecules as they change
from liquid to vapour. The temperature of the liquid water remains at
226 MHR • Unit 3 Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
100˚C until all the water has been vaporized. If you add heat to the
vapour, the temperature of the vapour will increase steadily.
When you heat ice that is colder than 0˚C, a similar process occurs.
The temperature of the ice increases until it is 0˚C (the melting point of
water). If you continue to add heat, the ice remains at 0˚C but begins to
melt, as the bonds between the water molecules in the solid state begin
to break.
Figure 5.7 shows the relationship between temperature and heat for
a solid substance that melts and then vaporizes as heat is added to it.
You can represent the enthalpy change that accompanies a phase
change—from liquid to solid, for example—just like you represented the
enthalpy change of a chemical reaction. You can include a heat term in
the equation, or you can use a separate expression of enthalpy change.
For example, when one mole of water melts, it absorbs 6.02 kJ of energy.
H 2 O (s) + 6.02kJ → H 2 O ((cid:2))
H 2 O (s) → H 2 O ((cid:2)) ∆H = 6.02kJ
Normally, however, chemists represent enthalpy changes associated with
phase changes using modified ∆H symbols. These symbols are described
below.
• enthalpy of vaporization, ∆H : the enthalpy change for the phase
vap
change from liquid to gas
• enthalpy of condensation, ∆H : the enthalpy change for the phase
cond
change of a substance from gas to liquid
• enthalpy of melting, ∆H : the enthalpy change for the phase change of
melt
a substance from solid to liquid
• enthalpy of freezing, ∆H : the enthalpy change for the phase change of
fre
a substance from liquid to solid
Vaporization and condensation are opposite processes. Thus, the
enthalpy changes for these processes have the same value but opposite
signs. For example, 6.02 kJ is needed to vaporize one mole of water.
Therefore, 6.02 kJ of energy is released when one mole of water freezes.
∆H = −∆H
vap cond
Similarly, melting and freezing are opposite processes.
∆H = −∆H
melt fre
Several enthalpies of melting and vaporization are shown in Table 5.1.
Notice that the same units (kJ/mol) are used for the enthalpies of melting,
vaporization, condensation, and freezing. Also notice that energy changes
associated with phase changes can vary widely.
Chapter 5 Energy and Change • MHR 227
erutarepmeT
gas
boiling
point
Figure 5.7 As heat is added to a
liquid
substance, the temperature of the
melting ∆H˚ vap substance steadily increases until it
point reaches its melting point or boiling
solid
point. The temperature then remains
∆H˚
melt steady as the substance undergoes
a phase change.
Heat added
CHEM
FACT
The process of melting is also
known as fusion. Therefore,
you will sometimes see the
enthalpy of melting referred to
as the enthalpy of fusion.
Table 5.1 Enthalpies of Melting and Vaporization for Several Substances
Enthalpy of melting, Enthalpy of vaporization,
Substance ∆H (kJ/mol) ∆H (kJ/mol)
melt vap
argon 1.3 6.3
diethyl ether 7.3 29
ethanol 5.0 40.5
mercury 23.4 59
methane 8.9 0.94
sodium chloride 27.2 207
water 6.02 40.7
Hot Packs and Cold Packs:
Using the Energy of Physical Changes
You just learned about the enthalpy changes that are associated with
phase changes. Another type of physical change that involves a heat
transfer is dissolution. When a solute dissolves in a solvent, the enthalpy
change that occurs is called the enthalpy of solution, ∆H . Dissolution
soln
can be either endothermic or exothermic.
Manufacturers take advantage of endothermic dissolution to
produce cold packs that athletes can use to treat injuries. One type of cold
pack contains water and a salt, such as ammonium nitrate, in separate
compartments. When you crush the pack, the membrane that divides the
compartments breaks, and the salt dissolves. This dissolution process is
endothermic. It absorbs heat for a short period of time, so the cold pack
feels cold. Figure 5.8 shows how a cold pack works.
outer casing
water
soluble salt
membrane of
water pack
A typical cold pack has two separate chambers. One chamber
contains a salt. The other chamber contains water. Crushing
the pack allows the salt to dissolve in the water—an
endothermic process.
Figure 5.8 This person’s shoulder was injured. Using a cold pack helps to reduce the
inflammation of the joint.
Some types of hot packs are constructed in much the same way as the cold
packs described above. They have two compartments. One compartment
contains a salt, such as calcium chloride. The other compartment contains
water. In hot packs, however, the dissolution process is exothermic. It
releases heat to the surroundings.
228 MHR • Unit 3 Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
Energy and Nuclear Reactions
Web LINK
The energy that is released by a physical change, such as the dissolution
www.mcgrawhill.ca/links/
of calcium chloride, can warm your hands. The energy that is released by
chemistry12
a chemical reaction, such as the formation of water, can power a rocket.
Not all hot packs use dissolu-
The energy that is released by a nuclear reaction, such as the nuclear
tion processes. For example,
reactions in the Sun, however, can provide enough heat to fry an egg on one kind of hot pack exploits
a sidewalk that is 150 000 000 km away from the surface of the Sun. the crystallization of sodium
From previous science courses, you will recall that nuclear reactions thiosulfate or sodium acetate.
involve changes in the nuclei of atoms. Often nuclear reactions result in the Another kind uses the oxida-
tion of iron (rusting). On the
transformation of one or more elements into one or more different elements.
Internet, investigate different
Like physical changes and chemical reactions, nuclear reactions are
kinds of hot packs. Are they
accompanied by energy changes. Nuclear reactions, however, produce sig-
all used for the same purpose?
nificantly more energy than physical and chemical processes. In nuclear What are the pros and cons
reactions, a significant amount of the mass of the reactants is actually of their designs? To start your
converted into energy. search, go to the web site
Ever since Albert Einstein devised his famous equation, E = mc2, above and click on Web Links.
we have known that mass and energy are interconvertible. In Einstein’s
equation, E is energy in kg•m2/s2 (J), m is the mass in kg, and c2 is the
square of the speed of light.
c2 = (3.0 × 108m/s)2
= 9.0 × 1016m2/s2
As you can see, c2 is an enormous number. Therefore, even a very tiny
amount of matter is equivalent to a significant amount of energy.
For example, compare the mass of 1 mol of carbon-12 atoms with the
mass of the individual nucleons in 1 mol of carbon-12 atoms. The mass of
6 mol of hydrogen-1 atoms (one proton and one electron each) and 6 mol
of neutrons is 12.098 940 g. The mass of 1 mol of carbon-12 atoms is
exactly 12 g. Note that the mass of the electrons does not change in a
nuclear reaction.
12.098940g/mol
− 12.000000g/mol
0.098940g/mol
The difference in mass is significant. It would show up on any reasonably
precise balance. Thus, the mass of the nucleus of carbon-12 is significant-
ly less than the mass of its component nucleons. The difference in mass
between a nucleus and its nucleons is known as the mass defect. What
causes this mass defect? It is caused by the nuclear binding energy: the
energy associated with the strong force that holds a nucleus together.
Nucleus + Nuclearbindingenergy → Nucleons
You can use Einstein’s equation to calculate the nuclear binding
energy for carbon-12.
∆E = ∆mc2
= (9.89 × 10 −5kg/mol)(9.0 × 1016m2/s2)
= 8.9 × 1012J/mol
= 8.9 × 109kJ/mol
Clearly, the energy associated with the bonds that hold a nucleus together
is much greater than the energy associated with chemical bonds, which
are usually only a few hundred kJ/mol.
The higher the binding energy of a nucleus, the more stable the nucleus
is. Nuclei with mass numbers (A) that are close to 60 are the most stable.
Nuclear reactions, in which nuclei break apart or fuse, tend to form nuclei
that are more stable than the reactant nuclei. Figure 5.9 illustrates the
relative stability of various nuclei.
Chapter 5 Energy and Change • MHR 229
The difference between the nuclear binding energy of the reactant
nuclei and the product nuclei represents the energy change of the
nuclear reaction.
Nuclear Fission
A heavy nucleus can split into lighter nuclei by undergoing nuclear
fission. Nuclear power plants use controlled nuclear fission to provide
energy. Uncontrolled nuclear fission is responsible for the massive
destructiveness of an atomic bomb.
The most familiar fission reactions involve the splitting of uranium
atoms. In these reactions, a uranium-235 atom is bombarded with
neutrons. The uranium nucleus then splits apart into various product
nuclei. Two examples of fission reactions that involve uranium-235 are
shown in Figure 5.10.
+ energy
1 235 92 141 1
n + U Kr+ Ba + 3 n
0 92 36 56 0
+ energy
1 235 90 144 1
n + U Rb + Cs + 2 n
0 92 37 55 0
Figure 5.10 Uranium can undergo fission in numerous different ways, producing various
product nuclei. Two examples are shown here.
230 MHR • Unit 3 Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
)VeM(
noelcun
rep
ygrene
gnidniB
9 34S 56Fe 84Kr 119Sn
16O
8 12C
205Tl
235U
region of very
14N
7 stable nuclei 238U
4He
6
7Li
5 6Li
fusion fission
4
Figure 5.9 This graph shows the
relative stability of nuclei. 3 3H
It indicates whether nuclei are 2 3He
more likely to split or fuse in a
1 2H
nuclear reaction. Notice that
the helium-4 nucleus is unusually
0
stable. 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200 220 240 260
Mass number, A
Electronic Learning Partner
To learn more about nuclear
fission, go to the Chemistry 12
Electronic Learning Partner.
Fission reactions produce vast quantities of energy. For example, when
Math LINK
one mole of uranium-235 splits, it releases 2.1 × 1013 J. By contrast, when
one mole of coal burns, it releases about 3.9 × 106 J. Thus, the combustion The fission of one mole of
uranium-235 produces more
of coal releases about five million times fewer joules of energy per mole
energy than the fusion of one
than the fission of uranium-235.
mole of deuterium with one
mole of tritium. What if you
Nuclear Fusion
compare the energy that is
Two smaller nuclei can fuse to form a larger nucleus, in what is called a produced in terms of massof
nuclear fusion reaction. You and all other life on Earth would not exist reactants? Calculate a ratio
to compare the energy that
without nuclear fusion reactions. These reactions are the source of the
is produced from fusion and
energy produced in the Sun.
fission, per gram of fuel. What
One example of a fusion reaction is the fusion of deuterium
practical consequences arise
and tritium.
from your result?
2H + 3H → 4He + 1n
1 1 2 0
The seemingly simple reaction between deuterium and tritium produces
1.7 × 1012 J of energy for each mole of deuterium. This is about 10 times
fewer joules of energy than are produced by the fission of one mole of
uranium. It is still, however, 500 000 times more energy than is produced
by burning one mole of coal.
Scientists are searching for a way to harness the energy from fusion
reactions. Fusion is a more desirable way to produce energy than fission.
The main product of fusion, helium, is relatively harmless compared with
the radioactive products of fission. Unfortunately,
fusion is proving more difficult than fission to harness.
1024 J
Fusion will not proceed at a reasonable rate without an
daily solar energy
enormous initial input of energy. This is not a problem
1021 J falling on Earth
in the core of the Sun, where the temperature ranges
energy of strong earthquake
from 7 500 000˚C to 15 000 000˚C. It is a problem in
1018 J
industry. Scientists are working on safe and economical daily electrical output of
Canadian dams at Niagara Falls
ways to provide the high-temperature conditions that 1015 J
1000 t of coal burned
are needed to make fusion a workable energy source.
1012 J
Comparing the Energy of Physical, Chemical,
1 t of TNT exploded
and Nuclear Processes 109 J
1 kW • h of electrical energy
In this section, you learned that physical changes, 106 J
heat released from combustion
chemical reactions, and nuclear reactions all involve
of 1 mol glucose
energy changes. You also learned that the energy 103 J
changes have some striking differences in magnitude. heat required to boil 1 mol of water
Figure 5.11 shows energy changes for some physical, 100 J
chemical, and nuclear processes. Some other interesting
10−3 J
energy statistics are included for reference.
10−6 J
10−9 J heat absorbed during division of one
bacterial cell
10−12 J energy from fission of one 235U atom
10−15 J
Figure 5.11 The energy changes of physical, nuclear, and chemical
processes vary widely. In general, however, chemical reactions are 10−18 J
associated with greater energy changes than physical changes.
Nuclear reactions are associated with far greater energy changes than 10−21 J average kinetic energy of a molecule
chemical reactions. in air at 300 K
Chapter 5 Energy and Change • MHR 231
The following Concept Organizer summarizes what you learned about the
energy changes associated with physical changes, chemical reactions, and
nuclear reactions.
Concept Organizer Energy Changes
Heat is released —
exothermic change.
The phase of a
substance changes.
Heat is absorbed —
endothermic change.
In general, physical changes
involve smaller energy changes
Heat is released — than chemical reactions. Nuclear
exothermic reaction. reactions produce far more energy
Bonds between than chemical reactions.
atoms break and form.
Heat is absorbed —
endothermic reaction.
Mass is converted An enormous quantity
into energy. of energy is released.
Section Summary
In section 5.1, you learned about the energy changes that accompany
physical changes, chemical reactions, and nuclear reactions. You learned
how to represent energy changes using thermochemical equations and
diagrams. In the next section, you will determine the enthalpy of a
reaction by experiment.
Section Review
1 K/U In your own words, explain why exothermic reactions have
∆H < 0.
2 K/U Label each thermochemical equation with the most specific
form(s) of ∆H. Remember to pay attention to the sign of ∆H.
(a) Ag + 1 Cl → AgCl + 127.0kJ (at 25˚C and 100 kPa)
(s) 2 2(g) (s)
(b) 44.0kJ + H 2 O ((cid:2)) → H 2 O (g) (at 25˚C and 100 kPa)
(c) C H + 3O → 2CO + 2H O + energy
2 4(g) 2(g) 2(g) 2 (g)
3 C Suppose that one of your friends was absent on the day that you
learned about labelling ∆H. To help your friend, create a table that
summarizes the different ways to label ∆H, and their meanings.
4 I Calcium oxide, CaO, reacts with carbon in the form of graphite.
Calcium carbide, CaC , and carbon monoxide, CO, are produced in
2
an endothermic reaction.
CaO + 3C + 462.3kJ → CaC + CO
(s) (s) 2(s) (g)
(a) 246.7 kJ of energy is available to react. What mass of calcium
carbide is produced, assuming sufficient reactants?
ygrene
gnisaercni
Physical
Changes
Chemical
Reactions
Fission and
Fusion Reactions
232 MHR • Unit 3 Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
(b) What is the enthalpy change for the reaction of 46.7 g of graphite
with excess calcium oxide?
(c) 1.38 × 1024 formula units of calcium oxide react with excess
graphite. How much energy is needed?
5 I Acetylene, C 2 H 2 , undergoes complete combustion in oxygen.
Carbon dioxide and water are formed. When one mole of acetylene
undergoes complete combustion, 1.3 × 103kJ of energy is released.
(a) Write a thermochemical equation for this reaction.
(b) Draw a diagram to represent the thermochemical equation.
(c) How much energy is released when the complete combustion of
acetylene produces 1.50 g of water?
6 C Write an equation to represent each phase change in Table 5.1 on
page 228. Include the enthalpy change as a heat term in the equation.
7 MC When one mole of gaseous water forms from its elements, 241.8 kJ
of energy is released. In other words, when hydrogen burns in oxygen
or air, it produces a great deal of energy. Since the nineteenth century,
scientists have been researching the potential of hydrogen as a fuel.
One way in which the energy of the combustion of hydrogen has been
successfully harnessed is as rocket fuel for aircraft.
(a) Write a thermodynamic equation for the combustion of hydrogen.
(b) Describe three reasons why hydrogen gas is a desirable rocket fuel.
(c) Suggest challenges that engineers might have had to overcome in
order to make hydrogen a workable rocket fuel for aircraft.
(d) Use print and electronic resources to find out about research into
hydrogen as a fuel. Create a time line that shows significant events
and discoveries in this research.
8 MC A healthy human body maintains a temperature of about 37.0˚C.
Explain how physical, chemical, and nuclear processes all contribute,
directly or indirectly, to keeping the human body at a constant
temperature.
Chapter 5 Energy and Change • MHR 233
5.2 Determining Enthalpy
of Reaction by Experiment
Section Preview/ Chemical and physical processes, such as the ones you studied in
Specific Expectations section 5.1, are associated with characteristic enthalpy changes. How do
In this section, you will chemists measure these enthalpy changes?
To measure the enthalpy of a chemical or physical process, chemists
(cid:2) determinethe heat that is
produced by a reaction insulate the system from the surroundings. They can then determine
using a calorimeter, and use the heat change by measuring the temperature change of the system. What
the data obtained to calcu- is the relationship between the heat change and the temperature change?
late the enthalpy change for As you learned in previous science courses, each substance has a charac-
the reaction
teristic property that dictates how its temperature will change when heat
(cid:2) communicateyour under- is lost or gained.
standing of the following
terms: specific heat
Specific Heat Capacity
capacity (c), heat capacity
(C), calorimeter, coffee-cup The amount of energy that is needed to raise the temperature of one
calorimeter, constant- gram of a substance 1˚C (or 1 K) is the specific heat capacity, c, of the
pressure calorimeter substance. Specific heat capacity is usually expressed in units of J/g•˚C.
The specific heat capacities of several substances are given in Table 5.2.
Figure 5.12 shows that you can often predict the relative specific heat
capacities of familiar substances.
Table 5.2 Specific Heat Capacities of Selected Substances
Substance Specific heat capacity (J/g • ˚C at 25˚C)
Element
aluminum 0.900
carbon (graphite) 0.711
hydrogen 14.267
iron 0.444
Compound
ammonia (liquid) 4.70
ethanol 2.46
ethylene glycol 2.42
water (liquid) 4.184
Figure 5.12 On a sunny day, you Other material
would probably prefer to sit on a
air 1.02
bench made of wood rather than
concrete 0.88
a bench made of aluminum. Wood
has a higher heat capacity than glass 0.84
aluminum. Therefore, more heat is wood 1.76
needed to increase its temperature.
You can use the specific heat capacity of a substance to calculate the
amount of energy that is needed to heat a given mass a certain number
of degrees. You can also use the specific heat capacity to determine the
amount of heat that is released when the temperature of a given mass
decreases. The specific heat capacity of liquid water, as shown in
Explain why water is some-
times used as a coolant for
Table 5.2, is 4.184J/g•˚C. This relatively large value indicates that a
considerable amount of energy is needed to raise or lower the temperature
automobile engines.
of water.
234 MHR • Unit 3 Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
All samples of the same substance have the same specific heat
capacity. In contrast, heat capacity, C, relates the heat of a sample, object,
or system to its change in temperature. Heat capacity is usually expressed
in units of kJ/˚C.
Consider a bathtub full of water and a teacup full of water at room
temperature. All the water has the same specific heat capacity, but the
two samples have different heat capacities. It would take a great deal more
heat to raise the temperature of the water in the bathtub by 10˚C than it
would take to raise the temperature of the water in the teacup by 10˚C.
Therefore, the water in the bathtub has a higher heat capacity.
Specific Heat Capacity and Heat Transfer
You can use the following equation to calculate the heat change of a sub-
stance, based on the mass of the substance. You can also use this equation
to calculate the specific heat capacity of the substance and the change in
its temperature.
Q = m•c• ∆T
whereQ = heat(J)
m = mass(g)
c = specificheatcapacity(J/g•˚C)
∆T = T (finaltemperature) − T (initialtemperature)(˚CorK)
f i
Water is often used in controlled surroundings to measure the heat of a
reaction. For example, you can use the equation above to determine the
amount of energy that is needed to heat 1.00 × 102 g of water from 20.0˚C
to 45.0˚C.
Q = m•c• ∆T
The mass of the water is 1.00 × 102 g. The specific heat capacity of water
is 4.184J/g•˚C. The temperature of the water increases by 25.0˚C.
∴Q = (1.00 × 102g)(4.184J/g•˚C)(25.0˚C)
= 1.05 × 104J
To raise the temperature of 1.00 × 102 g of water by 25˚C, 1.05 × 104 J of
heat is needed.
Try the following problems to practise working with specific heat
capacity and temperature change.
Practice Problems
5. A sample of ethylene glycol, used in car radiators, has a mass of
34.8 g. The sample liberates 783 J of heat. The initial temperature
of the sample is 22.1˚C. What is the final temperature?
6. A sample of ethanol, C H OH, absorbs 23.4 kJ of energy. The
2 5
temperature of the sample increases from 5.6˚C to 19.8˚C. What is
the mass of the ethanol sample? The specific heat capacity of ethanol
is 2.46J/g•˚C.
7. A child’s swimming pool contains 1000 L of water. When the water
is warmed by solar energy, its temperature increases from 15.3˚C to
21.8˚C. How much heat does the water absorb?
8. What temperature change results from the loss of 255 kJ from a
10.0 kg sample of water?
Chapter 5 Energy and Change • MHR 235
Measuring Heat Transfer in a Laboratory
From previous science courses, you will probably remember that a
calorimeter is used to measure enthalpy changes for chemical and
physical reactions. A calorimeter works by insulating a system from its
surroundings. By measuring the temperature change of the system, you
can determine the amount of heat that is released or absorbed by the
reaction. For example, the heat that is released by an exothermic
reaction raises the temperature of the system.
Web LINK Q reaction = −Q insulatedsystem
In your previous chemistry course, you learned about various types
www.mcgrawhill.ca/links/
chemistry12 of calorimeters. For instance, you learned about a bomb calorimeter,
The famous French scientist which allows chemists to determine energy changes under conditions
Antoine Laviosier (1743-1794) of constant volume.
is considered by many to In section 5.1, however, you learned that an enthalpy change repre-
be the first modern chemist. sents the heat change between products and reactants at a constant
Lavoisier created a calori-
pressure. Therefore, the calorimeter you use to determine an enthalpy
meter to study the energy that
change should allow the reaction to be carried out at a constant pressure.
is released by the metabolism
In other words, it should be open to the atmosphere.
of a guinea pig. To learn about
To determine enthalpy changes in high school laboratories, a
Lavoisier’s experiment, go to
the web site above and click coffee-cup calorimeter provides fairly accurate results. A coffee-cup
onWeb Links. What do you calorimeter is composed of two nested polystyrene cups (“coffee cups”).
think about using animals in They can be placed in a 250 mL beaker for added stability. Since a
experiments? Write an essay coffee-cup calorimeter is open to the atmosphere, it is also called a
to explain why you agree or
constant-pressure calorimeter.
disagree with this practice.
As with any calorimeter, each part of the coffee-cup calori-meter has
an associated heat capacity. Because these heat capacities are very small,
however, and because a coffee-cup calorimeter is not as accurate as other
calorimeters, the heat capacity of a coffee-cup calorimeter is usually
assumed to be negligible. It is assumed to have a value of 0 J/˚C.
Using a Calorimeter to Determine the Enthalpy of a Reaction
A coffee-cup calorimeter is well-suited to determining the enthalpy
changes of reactions in dilute aqueous solutions. The water in the
calorimeter absorbs (or provides) the energy that is released (or absorbed)
by a chemical reaction. When carrying out an experiment in a dilute
solution, the solution itself absorbs or releases the energy. You can
calculate the amount of energy that is absorbed or released by the
solution using the equation mentioned earlier.
Q = m•c• ∆T
The mass, m, is the mass of the solution, because the solution absorbs the
heat. When a dilute aqueous solution is used in a calorimeter, you can
assume that the solution has the same density and specific heat capacity
as pure water. As you saw above, you can also assume that the heat
capacity of the calorimeter is negligible. In other words, you can assume
that all the heat that is released or absorbed by the reaction is absorbed
or released by the solution.
The following Sample Problem illustrates how calorimetry can be
used to determine ∆H of a chemical reaction.
236 MHR • Unit 3 Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
Sample Problem
Determining the Enthalpy of a Chemical Reaction
Problem
Copper(II) sulfate, CuSO , reacts with sodium hydroxide, NaOH, in a
4
double displacement reaction. A precipitate of copper(II) hydroxide,
Cu(OH) , and aqueous sodium sulfate, Na SO , is produced.
2 2 4
CuSO + 2NaOH → Cu(OH) + Na SO
4(aq) (aq) 2(s) 2 4(aq)
50.0 mL of 0.300 mol/L CuSO solution is mixed with an equal
4
volume of 0.600 mol/L NaOH. The initial temperature of both solutions
is 21.4˚C. After mixing the solutions in the coffee-cup calorimeter, the
highest temperature that is reached is 24.6˚C. Determine the enthalpy
change of the reaction. Then write the thermochemical equation.
What Is Required?
You need to calculate ∆Hof the given reaction.
What Is Given?
You know the volume of each solution. You also know the initial
temperature of each solution and the final temperature of the reaction
mixture.
Volume of CuSO solution, V = 50.0 mL
4 CuSO4
Volume of NaOH solution, V = 50.0 mL
NaOH
Initial temperature, T = 21.4˚C
i
Final temperature, T = 24.6˚C
f
Plan Your Strategy
Step 1 Determine the total volume by adding the volumes of the two
solutions. Determine the total mass of the reaction mixture,
assuming a density of 1.00 g/mL (the density of water).
Step 2 Use the equation Q = m•c• ∆T to calculate the amount of
heat that is absorbed by the solution (in J). Assume that the
reaction mixture has the same specific heat capacity as water
(c = 4.184J/g•˚C).
Step 3 Use the equation Q = −Q to determine the amount of
reaction solution
heat that is released by the reaction.
Step 4 Determine the number of moles of CuSO and NaOH that reacted.
4
If necessary, determine the limiting reactant. Use the amount of
limiting reactant to get ∆Hof the reaction (in kJ/mol).
Step 5 Use your ∆Hto write the thermochemical equation for the
reaction.
Act on Your Strategy
Step 1 The total volume of the reaction mixture is
50.0 mL +50.0 mL =100.0 mL
The mass of the reaction mixture, assuming a density of
1.00 g/mL, is
m = DV
= (1.00g/mL)(100.0mL)
= 1.00 × 102g
Continued ...
Chapter 5 Energy and Change • MHR 237
Continued ...
Step 2 The amount of heat, Q, that is absorbed by the solution is
Q solution = m solution•c solution• ∆T solution
= (100g)(4.184J/g•˚C)(24.6˚C − 21.4˚C)
= 1.3 × 103J
Step 3 Based on the value of Qin step 2, the heat change for the
reaction is −1.3 × 103 J.
Step 4 Calculate the number of moles of CuSO as follows.
4
n = c•V
= (0.300mol/L)(50.0 × 10 −3L)
= 0.0150mol
Calculate the number of moles of NaOH.
nmolNaOH = (0.600mol/L)(50.0 × 10 −3L)
= 0.300mol
The reactants are present in stoichiometric amounts. (There is no
limiting reactant.)
∆Hof the reaction, in kJ/mol CuSO , is
4
∆H =
−1.3 × 103J
0.0150molCuSO
4
= −8.9 × 103J/molCuSO
4
= −89kJ/molCuSO
4
The enthalpy change of the reaction is −89 kJ/mol CuSO .
4
Step 5 The thermochemical equation is
CuSO + 2NaOH → Cu(OH) + Na SO ∆H = −89kJ
4(aq) (aq) 2(s) 2 4(aq)
Check Your Solution
The solution has the correct number of significant digits. The units are
correct. You know that the reaction was exothermic, because the temper-
ature of the solution increased. The calculated ∆His negative, which is
correct for an exothermic reaction.
Practice Problems
9. A chemist wants to determine the enthalpy of neutralization for the
following reaction.
HCl (aq) + NaOH (aq) → NaCl (aq) + H 2 O ((cid:2))
The chemist uses a coffee-cup calorimeter to neutralize completely
61.1 mL of 0.543 mol/L HCl with 42.6 mL of NaOH . The
(aq) (aq)
initial temperature of both solutions is 17.8˚C. After neutralization,
the highest recorded temperature is 21.6˚C. Calculate the enthalpy of
neutralization, in units of kJ/mol of HCl. Assume that the density
of both solutions is 1.00 g/mL. Also assume that the specific heat
capacity of both solutions is the same as the specific heat capacity
of water.
238 MHR • Unit 3 Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
10. A chemist wants to determine empirically the enthalpy change for
the following reaction.
Mg + 2HCl → MgCl + H
(s) (aq) 2(aq) 2(g)
The chemist uses a coffee-cup calorimeter to react 0.50 g of Mg
ribbon with 100 mL of 1.00 mol/L HCl . The initial temperature
(aq)
of the HCl is 20.4˚C. After neutralization, the highest recorded
(aq)
temperature is 40.7˚C.
(a) Calculate the enthalpy change, in kJ/mol of Mg, for the reaction.
(b) State any assumptions that you made in order to determine the
enthalpy change.
11. Nitric acid is neutralized with potassium hydroxide in the following
reaction.
HNO 3(aq) + KOH (aq) → KNO 3(aq) + H 2 O ((cid:2)) ∆H = −53.4kJ/mol
55.0 mL of 1.30 mol/L solutions of both reactants, at 21.4˚C, are
mixed in a calorimeter. What is the final temperature of the mixture?
Assume that the density of both solutions is 1.00 g/mL. Also assume
that the specific heat capacity of both solutions is the same as the
specific heat capacity of water. No heat is lost to the calorimeter
itself.
12. A student uses a coffee-cup calorimeter to determine the enthalpy of
reaction for hydrobromic acid and potassium hydroxide. The student
mixes 100.0 mL of 0.50 mol/L HBr at 21.0˚C with 100.0 mL of
(aq)
0.50 mol/L KOH , also at 21.0˚C. The highest temperature that is
(aq)
reached is 24.4˚C. Write a thermochemical equation for the reaction.
In Practice Problems 9, 11, and 12, you used experimental data to deter-
mine the enthalpy of reaction for neutralization reactions. Neutralization
reactions are particularly well suited to analysis involving the use of a
coffee-cup calorimeter for a number of reasons:
• When using dilute solutions of acids and bases, you can assume
their density is close to the density of water. Therefore, you can easily
measure the volume of the solutions and calculate their mass.
• Neutralization reactions between dilute strong acids and dilute strong
bases tend to cause temperature changes in the reaction mixture that are
large enough to be measurable using a standard thermometer, but small
enough for safety.
• Neutralization reactions take place very quickly. Therefore, the peak
temperature change also occurs very quickly. There is little time for
heat transfer between the insulated system and the surroundings to
take place.
In the following investigation, you will construct a coffee-cup calorimeter
and use it to determine the enthalpy of a neutralization reaction.
Chapter 5 Energy and Change • MHR 239
S K I L L F O C U S
Predicting
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
Determining the Enthalpy
of a Neutralization Reaction
The neutralization of hydrochloric acid with
sodium hydroxide solution is represented by thermometer
the following equation.
stirrer
HCl (aq) + NaOH (aq) → NaCl (aq) + H 2 O ((cid:2)) lid
Using a coffee-cup calorimeter, you will deter-
mine the enthalpy change for this reaction.
polystyrene
Question
cups
What is the heat of neutralization for hydro-
chloric acid and sodium hydroxide solution?
reaction
Prediction mixture
Will the neutralization reaction be endothermic
or exothermic? Record your prediction, and give beaker
(optional,
reasons.
for support)
Safety Precautions
Procedure
If you get any hydrochloric acid or sodium 1. Your teacher will allow the hydrochloric acid
hydroxide solution on your skin, flush your skin and sodium hydroxide solution to come to
with plenty of cold water. room temperature overnight.
2. Read the rest of this Procedure carefully
Materials
before you continue. Set up a graph to record
100 mL graduated cylinder your temperature observations.
400 mL beaker
3. Build a coffee-cup calorimeter, using the
2 polystyrene cups that are the same size
diagram above as a guide. You will need to
polystyrene lid
make two holes in the polystyrene lid—one
thermometer
for the thermometer and one for the stirring
stirring rod
rod. The holes should be as small as possible
1.00 mol/L HCl
(aq) to minimize heat loss to the surroundings.
1.00 mol/L NaOH
(aq)
4. Rinse the graduated cylinder with a small
quantity of 1.00 mol/L NaOH . Use the
(aq)
cylinder to add 50.0 mL of 1.00 mol/L
NaOH to the calorimeter. Record the
(aq)
initial temperature of the NaOH . (This
(aq)
will also represent the initial temperature
of the HCl (aq) .) CAUTION The NaOH (aq) can
burn your skin.
240 MHR • Unit 3 Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
5. Rinse the graduated cylinder with tap (a) Do you think you would have obtained a
water. Then rinse it with a small quantity of different enthalpy change?
1.00 mol/L HCl (aq) . Quickly and carefully, add (b) Would the enthalpy change have been
50.0 mL of 1.00 mol/L HCl (aq) to the NaOH (aq) higher or lower?
in the calorimeter. CAUTION The HCl (aq) can (c) How can you test your answer? Design
burn your skin.
an investigation, and carry it out with the
6. Cover the calorimeter. Record the temperature permission of your teacher.
every 30 s, stirring gently and continuously. (d) What change do you need to make to the
7. When the temperature levels off, record the thermochemical equation if you perform
final temperature, T . the investigation using solid sodium
f
hydroxide?
8. If time permits, repeat steps 4 to 7.
8. In Investigation 5-A, you assumed that the
heat capacity of your calorimeter was 0 J/˚C.
Analysis
(a) Design an investigation to determine the
1. Determine the amount of heat that is absorbed
actual heat capacity of your coffee-cup
by the solution in the calorimeter.
calorimeter, C . Include equations
calorimeter
2. Use the following equation to determine for any calculations you will need to do.
the amount of heat that is released by the If time permits, have your teacher approve
reaction: your procedure and carry out the investiga-
−Q = Q tion. Hint: If you mix hot and cold water
reaction solution
together and no heat is absorbed by the
3. Determine the number of moles of HCl and
(aq) calorimeter itself, then the amount of heat
NaOH that were involved in the reaction.
(aq) absorbed by the cold water should equal
4. Use your knowledge of solutions to explain the amount of heat released by the hot
what happens during a neutralization reac- water. If more heat is released by the hot
tion. Use equations in your answer. Was heat water than is absorbed by the cold water,
released or absorbed during the neutralization the difference must be absorbed by the
reaction? Explain your answer. calorimeter.
(b) Include the heat capacity of your
Conclusion calorimeter in your calculations for
∆H . Use the following
5. Use your results to determine the enthalpy neutralization
equation:
change of the neutralization reaction, in
kJ/mol of NaOH. Write the thermochemical −Q reaction = (m solution•c solution• ∆T) + (C calorimeter• ∆T)
equation for the neutralization reaction.
PROBEWARE
Applications
If you have access to probeware, do Probeware
6. When an acid gets on your skin, why must
Investigation 5-A, or a similar investigation from a
you flush the area with plenty of water rather
probeware company.
than neutralizing the acid with a base?
7. Suppose that you had added solid sodium
hydroxide pellets to hydrochloric acid,
instead of adding hydrochloric acid to sodium
hydroxide solution?
Chapter 5 Energy and Change • MHR 241
Section Summary
In this section, you measured the enthalpy change of a reaction by
calorimetry. You may have noticed that the reactions you studied in this
section involved relatively small energy changes. How do chemists work
quantitatively with some of the large energy changes you examined in
section 5.1? In the next section, you will learn how to calculate the heat
of reaction for virtually any chemical reaction or physical change. This
powerful skill will allow you to find heats of reaction without carrying
out experiments.
Section Review
1 K/U Distinguish between heat capacity and specific heat capacity.
2 K/U What properties of polystyrene make it a suitable material for
a constant-pressure calorimeter? Why are polystyrene coffee cups not
suitable for a constant-volume calorimeter?
3 K/U Suppose that you use concentrated reactant solutions in an
experiment with a coffee-cup calorimeter. Will you make the same
assumptions that you did when you used dilute solutions? Explain.
4 I Concentrated sulfuric acid can be diluted by adding it to water. The
reaction is extremely exothermic. In this question, you will design an
experiment to measure the enthalpy change (in kJ/mol) for the dilution
of concentrated sulfuric acid. Assume that you have access to any
equipment in your school’s chemistry laboratory. Do not carry out
this experiment.
(a) State the equipment and chemicals that you need.
(b) Write a step-by-step procedure.
(c) Set up an appropriate data table.
(d) State any information that you need.
(e) State any simplifying assumptions that you will make.
5 I A chemist mixes 100.0 mL of 0.050 mol/L potassium hydroxide
with 100.0 mL of 0.050 mol/L nitric acid in a constant-pressure
calorimeter. The temperature of the reactants is 21.01˚C. The
temperature of the products is 21.34˚C.
(a) Write a thermochemical equation for the reaction.
(b) If you performed this investigation, would you change the
procedure? If so, how?
6 C Explain why a bomb calorimeter may not provide accurate results
for determining the enthalpy of a reaction.
7 MC From experience, you know that you produce significantly more
heat when you are exercising than when you are resting. Scientists can
study the heat that is produced by human metabolism reactions using
a “human calorimeter.” Based on what you know about calorimetry,
how would you design a human calorimeter? What variables would
you control and study in an investigation using your calorimeter?
Write a brief proposal outlining the design of your human calorimeter
and the experimental approach you would take.
242 MHR • Unit 3 Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
Hess’s Law of Heat Summation 5.3
In section 5.2, you used a coffee-cup calorimeter to determine the quantity
Section Preview/
of heat that was released or absorbed in a chemical reaction. Coffee-cup Specific Expectations
calorimeters are generally used only for dilute aqueous solutions. There
In this section, you will
are many non-aqueous chemical reactions, however. There are also many
(cid:2) explainHess’s law of heat
reactions that release so much energy they are not safe to perform using
summation, using examples
a coffee-cup calorimeter. Imagine trying to determine the enthalpy of
(cid:2) applyHess’s law to
reaction for the detonation of nitroglycerin, an unstable and powerfully
solve problems, including
explosive compound. Furthermore, there are reactions that occur too
problems that involve
slowly for the calorimetric method to be practical. (You will learn more data obtained through
about rates of reactions in the next chapter.) experimentation
Chemists can determine the enthalpy change of any reaction using an (cid:2) calculateheat of reaction
important law, known as Hess’s law of heat summation. This law states using given enthalpies of
that the enthalpy change of a physical or chemical process depends only formation
on the beginning conditions (reactants) and the end conditions (products). (cid:2) communicateyour under-
The enthalpy change is independent of the pathway of the process and standing of the following
the number of intermediate steps in the process. It is the sum of the terms: Hess’s law of heat
enthalpy changes of all the individual steps that make up the process. summation, formation
reactions, standard molar
For example, carbon and oxygen can form carbon dioxide via two
enthalpy of formation(∆H˚)
pathways. f
1. Carbon can react with oxygen to form carbon monoxide. The carbon
monoxide then reacts with oxygen to produce carbon dioxide. The two
equations below represent this pathway.
C + 1 O → CO ∆H˚ = −110.5kJ
(s) 2 2(g) (g)
CO + 1 O → CO ∆H˚ = −283.0kJ
(g) 2 2(g) 2(g)
2. Carbon can also react with oxygen to produce carbon dioxide directly.
C + O → CO ∆H˚ = −393.5kJ
(s) 2(g) 2(g)
In both cases, the net result is that one mole of carbon reacts with one
mole of oxygen to produce one mole of carbon dioxide. (In the first
pathway, all the carbon monoxide that is produced reacts with oxygen to
form carbon dioxide.) Notice that the sum of the enthalpy changes for the
first pathway is the same as the enthalpy change for the second pathway.
Examine Figure 5.13 to see how to represent the two pathways using
one enthalpy diagram.
Chapter 5 Energy and Change • MHR 243
H
,yplahtne
C + O
(s) 2(g)
Figure 5.13 Carbon dioxide
can be formed by the reaction of
∆H˚ = −110.5 kJ oxygen with carbon to form carbon
monoxide, followed by the reaction
CO (g) + – 1 2 O 2(g) ∆H˚ = −393.5 kJ of carbon monoxide with oxygen.
Carbon dioxide can also be formed
directly from carbon and oxygen.
∆H˚ = −283.0 kJ
No matter which pathway is used,
the enthalpy change of the reaction
CO 2(g) is the same.
One way to think about Hess’s law is to compare the energy changes
that occur in a chemical reaction with the changes in the potential energy
of a cyclist on hilly terrain. This comparison is shown in Figure 5.14.
starting point
cyclist A
∆ height cyclist B
Figure 5.14 The routes that
cyclists take to get from the
starting point to the finishing point
has no effect on the netchange in
the cyclists’ gravitational potential
finishing point
energy.
Hess’s law allows you to determine the energy of a chemical reaction
without directly measuring it. In this section, you will examine two ways
in which you can use Hess’s law to calculate the enthalpy change of a
chemical reaction:
1. by combining chemical equations algebraically
2. by using the enthalpy of a special class of reactions called
formation reactions
Combining Chemical Equations Algebraically
According to Hess’s law, the pathway that is taken in a chemical reaction
has no effect on the enthalpy change of the reaction. How can you use
Hess’s law to calculate the enthalpy change of a reaction? One way is to
add equations for reactions with known enthalpy changes, so that their
net result is the reaction you are interested in.
For example, you can combine thermochemical equations (1) and (2)
below to find the enthalpy change for the decomposition of hydrogen
peroxide, equation (3).
(1) H 2 O 2((cid:2)) → H 2(g) + O 2(g) ∆H˚ = +188kJ
(2) H 2(g) + 1 2 O 2(g) → H 2 O ((cid:2)) ∆H˚ = −286kJ
(3) H 2 O 2((cid:2)) → H 2 O ((cid:2)) + 1 2 O 2(g) ∆H˚ = ?
Carefully examine equation (3), the target equation. Notice that
1
H O is on the left (reactant) side, while H O and O are on the right
2 2 2 2 2
(product) side. Now examine equations (1) and (2). Notice which sides of
the equations H O and H O are on. They are on the correct sides, based
2 2 2
on equation (3). Also notice that hydrogen does not appear in equation (3).
Therefore, it must cancel out when equations (1) and (2) are added. Since
there is one mole of H on the product side of equation (1) and one mole
2(g)
of H on the reactant side of equation (2), these two terms cancel. Set up
2(g)
equations (1) and (2) as shown on the next page. Add the products and
the reactants. Then cancel any substances that appear on opposite sides.
244 MHR • Unit 3 Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
(1) H 2 O 2((cid:2)) → H 2(g) + O 2(g) ∆H˚ = +188kJ
(2) H 2(g) + 1 2 O 2(g) → H 2 O ((cid:2)) ∆H˚ = −286kJ
H 2 O 2((cid:2)) + H 2(g) + 1 2 O 2(g) → H 2 O ((cid:2)) + O 2(g) + H 2(g) ∆H˚ = ?
or
(3) H 2 O 2((cid:2)) → H 2 O ((cid:2)) + 1 2 O 2(g) ∆H˚ = ?
Equations (1) and (2) add to give equation (3). Therefore, you know that
the enthalpy change for the decomposition of hydrogen peroxide is the
sum of the enthalpy changes of equations (1) and (2).
H 2 O 2((cid:2)) → H 2 O ((cid:2)) + 1 2 O 2(g) ∆H˚ = 188kJ − 286kJ = −98kJ
Figure 5.15 illustrates this combination of chemical equations in an
enthalpy diagram.
In the previous example, you did not need to manipulate the two equa-
tions with known enthalpy changes. They added to the target equation as
they were written. In many cases, however, you will need to manipulate
the equations before adding them. There are two key ways in which you
can manipulate an equation:
1. Reverse an equation so that the products become reactants and the
reactants become products. When you reverse an equation, you need
to change the sign of ∆H˚(multiply by −1).
2. Multiply each coefficient in an equation by the same integer or
fraction. When you multiply an equation, you need to multiply ∆H˚
by the same number.
Examine the following Sample Problem to see how to manipulate
equations so that they add to the target equation. Try the problems that
follow to practise finding the enthalpy change by adding equations.
Sample Problem
Using Hess’s Law to Determine Enthalpy Change
Problem
One of the methods that the steel industry uses to obtain metallic iron
is to react iron(III) oxide, Fe O , with carbon monoxide, CO.
2 3
Fe O + 3CO → 3CO + 2Fe
2 3(s) (g) 2(g) (s)
Chapter 5 Energy and Change • MHR 245
H
,yplahtne
H + O
2(g) 2(g)
equation (1)
∆H˚ = 188 kJ
H 2 O 2((cid:2)) equation (2)
∆H˚ = −286 kJ
equation (3)
Figure 5.15 The algebraic
∆H˚ = −98 kJ
combination of chemical reactions
H 2 O ((cid:2)) + 1 – 2 O 2(g) can be represented in an enthalpy
diagram.
Continued ...
Continued ...
PROBLEM TIP
Determine the enthalpy change of this reaction, given the following
Before adding chemical equations and their enthalpy changes.
equations, be sure to line up (1) CO + 1O → CO ∆H˚ = −283.0kJ
the equation arrows. (g) 2 2(g) 2(g)
(2) 2Fe + 3O → Fe O ∆H˚ = −822.3kJ
(s) 2 2(g) 2 3
What Is Required?
You need to find ∆H˚ of the target reaction.
Fe O + 3CO → 3CO + 2Fe
2 3(s) (g) 2(g) (s)
What Is Given?
You know the chemical equations for reactions (1) and (2), and their
corresponding enthalpy changes.
Plan Your Strategy
Step 1 Examine equations (1) and (2) to see how they compare with
Electronic Learning Partner
the target equation. Decide how you need to manipulate
Go to the Chemistry 12 equations (1) and (2) so that they add to the target equation.
Electronic Learning Partner (Reverse the equation, multiply the equation, do both, or do
for more information about neither). Remember to adjust ∆H˚ accordingly for each equation.
aspects of material covered
Step 2 Write the manipulated equations so that their equation arrows
in this section of the chapter.
line up. Add the reactants and products on each side, and cancel
substances that appear on both sides.
Step 3 Ensure that you have obtained the target equation. Add ∆H˚ for
the combined equations.
Act on Your Strategy
Step 1 Equation (1) has CO as a reactant and CO as a product, as does
2
the target reaction. The stoichiometric coefficients do not match
the coefficients in the target equation, however. To achieve the
same coefficients, you must multiply equation (1) by 3.
Equation (2) has the required stoichiometric coefficients, but Fe
and Fe O are on the wrong sides of the equation. You need to
2 3
reverse equation (2) and change the sign of ∆H˚.
Step 2 Multiply each equation as required, and add them.
3 ×(1) 3CO + 3O → 3CO ∆H˚ = 3(−283.0kJ)
(g) 2 2(g) 2(g)
−1 ×(2) Fe O → 2Fe + 3O ∆H˚ = −1(−824.2kJ)
2 3(s) (s) 2 2(g)
Fe O + 3O + 3CO → 3CO + 2Fe + 3O
2 3(s) 2 2(g) (g) 2(g) (s) 2 2(g)
or
Fe O + 3CO → 3CO + 2Fe
2 3(s) (g) 2(g) (s)
Step 3 The desired equation is achieved. Therefore, you can calculate
the enthalpy change of the target reaction by adding the heats
of reaction for the manipulated equations.
∆H˚ = 3(−283.0kJ) + 824.2kJ = −24.8kJ
∴Fe O + 3CO → 3CO + 2Fe ∆H˚ = −24.8kJ
2 3(s) (g) 2(g) (s)
Check Your Solution
Because the equations added correctly to the target equation, you know
you manipulated the equations with known enthalpy changes correctly.
Check to ensure that you adjusted ∆H˚ accordingly for each equation.
246 MHR • Unit 3 Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
Practice Problems
13. Ethene, C 2 H 4 , reacts with water to form ethanol, CH 3 CH 2 OH ((cid:2)) .
C 2 H 4(g) + H 2 O ((cid:2)) → CH 3 CH 2 OH ((cid:2))
Determine the enthalpy change of this reaction, given the following
thermochemical equations.
(1) CH 3 CH 2 OH ((cid:2)) + 3O 2(g) → 3H 2 O ((cid:2)) + 2CO 2(g) ∆H˚ = −1367kJ
(2) C 2 H 4(g) + 3O 2(g) → 2H 2 O ((cid:2)) + 2CO 2(g) ∆H˚ = −1411kJ
14. A typical automobile engine uses a lead-acid battery. During
discharge, the following chemical reaction takes place.
Pb (s) + PbO 2(s) + 2H 2 SO 4((cid:2)) → 2PbSO 4(aq) + 2H 2 O ((cid:2))
Determine the enthalpy change of this reaction, given the following
equations.
(1) Pb + PbO + 2SO → 2PbSO ∆H˚ = −775kJ
(s) 2(s) 3(g) 4(s)
(2) SO 3(g) + H 2 O ((cid:2)) → H 2 SO 4((cid:2)) ∆H˚ = −133kJ
15. Mixing household cleansers can result in the production of hydrogen
chloride gas, HCl . Not only is this gas dangerous in its own right,
(g)
but it also reacts with oxygen to form chlorine gas and water vapour.
4HCl + O → 2Cl + 2H O
(g) 2(g) 2(g) 2 (g)
Determine the enthalpy change of this reaction, given the following
equations.
(1) H + Cl → 2HCl ∆H˚ = −185kJ
2(g) 2(g) (g)
(2) H 2(g) + 1 2 O 2(g) → H 2 O ((cid:2)) ∆H˚ = −285.8kJ
(3) H 2 O (g) → H 2 O ((cid:2)) ∆H˚ = −40.7kJ
16. Calculate the enthalpy change of the following reaction between
nitrogen gas and oxygen gas, given thermochemical equations
(1), (2), and (3).
2N + 5O → 2N O
2(g) 2(g) 2 5(g)
(1) 2H 2(g) + O 2(g) → 2H 2 O ((cid:2)) ∆H˚ = −572kJ
(2) N 2 O 5(g) + H 2 O ((cid:2)) → 2HNO 3((cid:2)) ∆H˚ = −77kJ
(3) 1 2 N 2(g) + 3 2 O 2(g) + 1 2 H 2(g) → HNO 3((cid:2)) ∆H˚ = −174kJ
Sometimes it is impractical to use a coffee-cup calorimeter to find the
enthalpy change of a reaction. You can, however, use the calorimeter to
find the enthalpy changes of other reactions, which you can combine to
arrive at the desired reaction. In the following investigation, you will
determine the enthalpy changes of two reactions. Then you will apply
Hess’s law to determine the enthalpy change of a third reaction.
Chapter 5 Energy and Change • MHR 247
S K I L L F O C U S
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
Communicating results
Hess’s Law and the Enthalpy
of Combustion of Magnesium
Magnesium ribbon burns in air in a highly Question
exothermic combustion reaction. (See equation
How can you use equations (2), (3), and (4) to
(1).) A very bright flame accompanies the
determine the enthalpy change of equation (1)?
production of magnesium oxide, as shown in
the photograph below. It is impractical and
Prediction
dangerous to use a coffee-cup calorimeter to
determine the enthalpy change for this reaction. Predict whether reactions (2) and (3) will be
(1) Mg + 1 O → MgO exothermic or endothermic.
(s) 2 2(g) (s)
Instead, you will determine the enthalpy changes
Materials
for two other reactions (equations (2) and (3)
below). You will use these enthalpy changes, coffee cup calorimeter (2 nested coffee cups
along with the known enthalpy change for sitting in a 250 mL beaker)
another reaction (equation (4) below), to deter- thermometer
mine the enthalpy change for the combustion 100 mL graduated cylinder
of magnesium. scoopula
(2) MgO (s) + 2HCl (aq) → MgCl 2(aq) + H 2 O ((cid:2)) electronic balance
MgO powder
(3) Mg + 2HCl → MgCl + H
(s) (aq) 2(aq) 2(g)
Mg ribbon (or Mg turnings)
(4) H 2(g) + 1 2 O 2(g) → H 2 O ((cid:2)) ∆H˚ = −285.8kJ/mol sandpaper or emery paper
Notice that equations (2) and (3) occur in 1.00 mol/L HCl
(aq)
aqueous solution. You can use a coffee-cup
calorimeter to determine the enthalpy changes Safety Precautions
for these reactions. Equation (4) represents the
formation of water directly from its elements in
their standard state. • Hydrochloric acid is corrosive. Use care when
handling it.
• Be careful not to inhale the magnesium oxide
powder.
Procedure
Part 1 Determining ∆H of Equation (2)
1. Read the Procedure for Part 1. Prepare a fully-
labelled set of axes to graph your temperature
observations.
2. Set up the coffee-cup calorimeter. (Refer
to Investigation 5-A) Using a graduated
cylinder, add 100 mL of 1.00 mol/L HCl
(aq)
to the calorimeter. CAUTION HCI (aq) can burn
your skin.
248 MHR • Unit 3 Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
3. Record the initial temperature, T , of the 4.(a) Your teacher will tell you the accepted
i
HCl , to the nearest tenth of a degree. value of ∆H of the combustion of
(aq)
4. Find the mass of no more than 0.80 g of MgO. magnesium. Based on the accepted value,
Record the exact mass. calculate your percent error.
5. Add the MgO powder to the calorimeter con- (b) Suggest some sources of error in the
taining the HCl . Swirl the solution gently, investigation. In what ways could you
(aq)
improve the procedure?
recording the temperature every 30 s until
the highest temperature, T f , is reached. 5. What assumption did you make about
6. Dispose of the reaction solution as directed the amount of heat that was lost to the
by your teacher. calorimeter? Do you think that this is a
fair assumption? Explain.
Part 2 Determining ∆H of Equation (3)
6. Why was it fair to assume that the hydrochlo-
1. Read the Procedure for Part 2. Prepare a fully- ric acid solution has the same density and
labelled set of axes to graph your temperature specific heat capacity as water?
observations.
2. Using a graduated cylinder, add 100 mL of Conclusion
1.00 mol/L HCl to the calorimeter.
(aq) 7. Explain how you used Hess’s law of heat sum-
3. Record the initial temperature, T i , of the mation to determine ∆H of the combustion of
HCl (aq) , to the nearest tenth of a degree. magnesium. State the result you obtained for
4. If you are using magnesium ribbon (as the thermochemical equation that corresponds
opposed to turnings), sand the ribbon. to chemical equation (1).
Accurately determine the mass of no more
than 0.50 g of magnesium. Record the exact Extension
mass.
8. Design an investigation to verify Hess’s law,
5. Add the Mg to the calorimeter containing the using the following equations.
HCl (aq) . Swirl the solution gently, recording (1) NaOH → Na + + OH −
(s) (aq) (aq)
the temperature every 30 s until the highest
(2) NaOH + H + + Cl − →
temperature, T , is reached. (s) (aq) (aq)
f
6. Dispose of the solution as directed by your Na + (aq) + Cl − (aq) + H 2 O ((cid:2))
teacher. (3) Na + (aq) + OH − (aq) + H + (aq) + Cl − (aq) →
Na + (aq) + Cl − (aq) + H 2 O ((cid:2))
Analysis
Assume that you have a coffee-cup
1. Use the equation Q = m•c• ∆T to determine calorimeter, solid NaOH, 1.00 mol/L HCl (aq) ,
the amount of heat that is released or 1.00 mol/L NaOH (aq) , and standard laboratory
absorbed by reactions (2) and (3). List any equipment. Write a step-by-step procedure
assumptions you make. for the investigation. Then outline a plan
for analyzing your data. Be sure to include
2. Convert the mass of MgO and Mg to moles.
Calculate ∆H of each reaction in units of appropriate safety precautions. If time
permits, obtain your teacher’s approval and
kJ/mol of MgO or Mg. Remember to put the
proper sign (+ or −) in front of each ∆H value. carry out the investigation.
3. Algebraically combine equations (2), (3), and
(4), and their corresponding ∆H values, to get
equation (1) and ∆H of the combustion of
magnesium.
Chapter 5 Energy and Change • MHR 249
Using Standard Molar Enthalpies of Formation
You have learned how to add equations with known enthalpy changes
to obtain the enthalpy change for another equation. This method can be
time-consuming and difficult, however, because you need to find reactions
with known enthalpy changes that will add to give your target equation.
There is another way to use Hess’s law to find the enthalpy of an equation.
Formation Reactions
In Investigation 5-B, you used the reaction of oxygen with hydrogen to
form water. Reactions like this one are known as formation reactions. In a
formation reaction, a substance is formed from elements in their standard
states. The enthalpy change of a formation reaction is called the standard
molar enthalpy of formation, ∆H˚ . The standard molar enthalpy of forma-
f
tion is the quantity of energy that is absorbed or released when one mole of
a compound is formed directly from its elements in their standard states.
Some standard molar enthalpies of formation are listed in Table 5.3.
Notice that the standard enthalpies of formation of most compounds are
negative. Thus, most compounds are more stable than the elements they
are made from.
Table 5.3 Selected Standard Molar Enthalpies of Formation
Compound ∆H˚ Formation equations
f
CO
(g)
−110.5 C
(s)
+ 1
2
–O
2(g)
→ CO
(g)
CO −393.5 C + O → CO
2(g) (s) 2(g) 2(g)
CH −74.6 C + 2H → CH
4(g) (s) 2(g) 4(g)
CH 3 OH ((cid:2)) −238.6 C (s) + 2H 2(g) + 1 2 –O 2(g) → CH 3 OH ((cid:2))
C 2 H 5 OH ((cid:2)) −277.6 2C (s) + 3H 2(g) + 1 2 –O 2(g) → C 2 H 5 OH ((cid:2))
C 6 H 6((cid:2)) +49.0 6C (s) + 3H 2(g) → C 6 H 6((cid:2))
C H O −1274.5 6C + 6H + 3O → C H O
6 12 6(s) (s) 2(g) 2(g) 6 12 6(s)
H 2 O ((cid:2)) −285.8 H 2(s) + 1 2 –O 2(g) → H 2 O ((cid:2))
H
2
O
(g)
−241.8 H
2(s)
+ 1
2
–O
2(g)
→ H
2
O
(g)
CaCl −795.4 Ca + Cl → CaCl
2(s) (s) 2(g) 2(s)
CaCO 3(s) −1206.9 Ca (s) + C (s) + – 2 3O 2(g) → CaCO 3(s)
NaCl
(s)
−411.1 Na
(s)
+ 1
2
–Cl
2(g)
→ NaCl
(g)
HCl
(g)
−92.3 1–
2
H
2(s)
+ 1
2
–Cl
2(g)
→ HCl
(g)
HCl
(aq)
−167.5 1–
2
H
2(s)
+ 1
2
–Cl
2(g)
→ HCl
(ag)
By definition, the enthalpy of formation of an element in its standard
state is zero. The standard state of an element is usually its most
stable form under standard conditions. Recall, from section 5.1, that
standard conditions are 25˚C and 100 kPa (close to room temperature
and pressure). Therefore, the standard state of nitrogen is N . The
2(g)
standard state of magnesium is Mg .
(s)
Some elements exist in more than one form under standard condi-
tions. For example, carbon can exist as either graphite or diamond, as
shown in Figure 5.16. Graphite is defined as the standard state of carbon.
Therefore, the standard enthalpy of formation of graphite carbon is 0
kJ/mol. The standard enthalpy of formation of diamond is 1.9 kJ/mol.
Another example is oxygen, O . Oxygen also exists in the form of ozone,
2(g)
250 MHR • Unit 3 Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
O , under standard conditions. The diatomic molecule is defined as the
3(g)
standard state of oxygen, however, because it is far more stable than
ozone. Therefore, the standard enthalpy of formation of oxygen gas, O ,
2(g)
is 0 kJ/mol. The standard enthalpy of formation of ozone is 143 kJ/mol.
Figure 5.16 Carbon can exist as
graphite or diamond under standard
conditions. It can, however, have
C
(graphite)
C
(diamond)
∆H
f
= 1.9 kJ/mol
only one standard state. Carbon’s
standard state is graphite.
When writing a formation equation, always write the elements in their
standard states. For example, examine the equation for the formation of
water directly from its elements under standard conditions.
H 2(g) + 1 2 O 2(g) → H 2 O ((cid:2)) ∆H˚ f = −285.8kJ
A formation equation should show the formation of exactly one mole of
the compound of interest. The following equation shows the formation of
benzene, C H under standard conditions.
6 6
6C (graphite) + 3H 2(g) → C 6 H 6((cid:2)) ∆H˚ f = 49.1kJ
Practice Problems
17. Write a thermochemical equation for the formation of each
substance. Be sure to include the physical state of all the elements
and compounds in the equation. You can find the standard enthalpy
of formation of each substance in Appendix E.
(a) CH (b) NaCl (c) MgO (d) CaCO
4 3
18. Liquid sulfuric acid has a very large negative standard enthalpy of
formation (−814.0 kJ/mol). Write an equation to show the formation
of liquid sulfuric acid. The standard state of sulfur is rhombic
sulfur (S ).
(s)
19. Write a thermochemical equation for the formation of gaseous
cesium. The standard enthalpy of formation of Cs is 76.7 kJ/mol.
(g)
20. Solid phosphorus is found in two forms: white phosphorus (P )
4
and red phosphorus (P). White phosphorus is the standard state.
(a) The enthalpy of formation of red phosphorus is –17.6 kJ/mol. Write
a thermochemical equation for the formation of red phosphorus.
(b) 32.6 g of white phosphorus reacts to form red phosphorus. What is
the enthalpy change?
Chapter 5 Energy and Change • MHR 251
Calculating Enthalpy Changes
You can calculate the enthalpy change of a chemical reaction by adding
the heats of formation of the products and subtracting the heats of forma-
tion of the reactants. The following equation can be used to determine the
enthalpy change of a chemical reaction.
∆H˚ = Σ(n∆H˚ products) − Σ(n∆H˚ reactants)
f f
In this equation, n represents the molar coefficient of each compound in
the balanced chemical equation and Σ means “the sum of.”
As usual, you need to begin with a balanced chemical equation. If a
given reactant or product has a molar coefficient that is not 1, you need to
multiply its ∆H˚ by the same molar coefficient. This makes sense because
f
the units of ∆H˚ are kJ/mol. Consider, for example, the complete
f
combustion of methane, CH .
4(g)
CH + 2O → CO + 2H O
4(g) 2(g) 2(g) 2 (g)
Using the equation for the enthalpy change, and the standard enthalpies
of formation in Appendix E, you can calculate the enthalpy change of this
reaction.
∆H˚ = [(∆H˚ ofCO ) + 2(∆H˚ ofH O )] − [1(∆H˚ ofCH ) + 2(∆H˚ ofO )]
f 2(g) f 2 (g) f 4(g) f 2(g)
Substitute the standard enthalpies of formation from Appendix E to get
the following calculation.
∆H˚ = [(−393.5kJ/mol) + 2(−241.8kJ/mol)] − [(−74.8kJ/mol) + 2(0kJ/mol)]
= −802.3kJ/molofCH
4
How does this method of adding heats of formation relate to Hess’s law?
Consider the equations for the formation of each compound that is
involved in the reaction of methane with oxygen.
(1) H + 1 O → H O ∆H˚ = −241.8kJ
2(g) 2 2(g) 2 (g) f
(2) C + O → CO ∆H˚ = −393.5kJ
(s) 2(g) 2(g) f
(3) C + 2H → CH ∆H˚ = −74.6kJ
(s) 2(g) 4(g) f
There is no equation for the formation of oxygen, because oxygen is an
element in its standard state.
“Using enthalpies of formation
By adding the formation equations, you can obtain the target equation.
is like a shortcut for adding
equations to obtain ∆H˚.” Do Notice that you need to reverse equation (3) and multiply equation (1) by 2.
you agree with this statement? 2 × (1) 2H + O → 2H O ∆H˚ = 2(−241.8)kJ
Explain your answer. 2(g) 2(g) 2 (g) f
(2) C + O → CO ∆H˚ = −393.5kJ
(s) 2(g) 2(g) f
−1 × (3) CH → C + 2H ∆H˚ = −1(−74.6)kJ
4(g) (s) 2(g) f
CH + 2O + C + 2H → 2H O + CO + C + 2H
4(g) 2(g) (s) 2(g) 2 (g) 2(g) (s) 2(g)
or
CH + 2O → 2H O + CO
4(g) 2(g) 2 (g) 2(g)
Add the manipulated ∆H˚ values: ∆H˚ = 2(−241.8)kJ − 393.5kJ + 74.6kJ.
f
= −802.3kJ
This value of ∆H˚ is the same as the value you obtained using ∆H˚
f
data. When you used the addition method, you performed the same
operations on the enthalpies of formation before adding them. Therefore,
using enthalpies of formation to determine the enthalpy of a reaction is
consistent with Hess’s law. Figure 5.17 shows the general process for
determining the enthalpy of a reaction from enthalpies of formation.
252 MHR • Unit 3 Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
Figure 5.17 The overall enthalpy change of any reaction is the sum of the enthalpy change
of the decomposition of the reactants to their elements and the enthalpy change of the forma-
tion of the products from their elements.
It is important to realize that, in most reactions, the reactants do not
actually break down into their elements and then react to form products.
Since there is extensive data about enthalpies of formation, however,
it is useful to calculate the overall enthalpy change this way. Moreover,
according to Hess’s law, the enthalpy change is the same, regardless of
the pathway. (In Chapter 6, you will learn more about the mechanisms
by which compounds and elements react to form different elements and
compounds.) Examine the following Sample Problem to see how to use
enthalpies of formation to determine the enthalpy change of a reaction.
Then try the Practice Problems that follow.
Sample Problem
Using Enthalpies of Formation
Problem
Iron(III) oxide reacts with carbon monoxide to produce elemental iron
and carbon dioxide. Determine the enthalpy change of this reaction,
using known enthalpies of formation.
Fe O + 3CO → 3CO + 2Fe 2 3(s) (g) 2(g) (s)
What Is Required?
You need to find ∆H˚ of the given chemical equation, using ∆H˚ data.
f
What Is Given?
From Appendix E, you can obtain the enthalpies of formation.
∆H˚ ofFe O = −824.2kJ/mol
f 2 3(s)
∆H˚ ofCO = −110.5kJ/mol
f (g)
∆H˚ ofCO = −393.5kJ/mol
f 2(g)
∆H˚ ofFe = 0kJ/mol (by definition)
f (s)
Plan Your Strategy
Multiply each ∆H˚ value by its molar coefficient from the balanced
f
chemical equation. Substitute into the following equation, and then solve.
∆H˚ = Σ(n∆H˚ products) − Σ(n∆H˚ reactants)
f f
Chapter 5 Energy and Change • MHR 253
H
,yplahtne
elements
(decomposition) −∆H˚
f ∆H˚ (formation)
f
reactants
∆H˚
rxn
products
∆H˚ = ∑(n∆H˚products) − ∑(n∆H˚reactants)
rxn f f
You saw the reaction between
iron(III) oxide and carbon
monoxide in the Sample
Problem on page 245. Which
method for determining the
enthalpy of reaction do you
prefer? Explain your answer.
Continued ...
Continued ...
Act on Your Strategy
∆H˚ = Σ(n∆H˚ products) − Σ(n∆H˚ reactants)
f f
= [3(∆H˚ CO ) + 2(∆H˚ Fe )] − [(∆H˚ Fe O ) + 3(∆H˚ CO )]
f 2(g) f (s) f 2 3(s) f (g)
= [(−393.5kJ/mol) + 2(0kJ/mol)] − [(−824.2kJ/mol) + 3(−110.5kJ/mol)]
= −24.8kJ/mol
∴Fe O + 3CO → 3CO + 2Fe ∆H˚ = −24.8kJ/mol
2 3(s) (g) 2(g) (s)
Check Your Solution
A balanced chemical equation was used in the calculation. The number
of significant digits is correct. The units are also correct.
Practice Problems
21. Hydrogen can be added to ethene, C H , to obtain ethane, C H .
2 4 2 6
C H + H → C H
2 4(g) 2(g) 2 6(g)
Show that the equations for the formation of ethene and ethane from
their elements can be algebraically combined to obtain the equation
for the addition of hydrogen to ethene.
22. Zinc sulfide reacts with oxygen gas to produce zinc oxide and sulfur
dioxide.
2ZnS + 3O → 2ZnO + 2SO
(s) 2(g) (s) 2(g)
Write the chemical equation for the formation of the indicated
number of moles of each compound from its elements. Algebraically
combine these equations to obtain the given equation.
23. Small amounts of oxygen gas can be produced in a laboratory by
heating potassium chlorate, KClO .
3
2KClO → 2KCl + 3O
3(s) (s) 2(g)
Calculate the enthalpy change of this reaction, using enthalpies of
formation from Appendix E.
24. Use the following equation to answer the questions below.
CH 3 OH ((cid:2)) + 1.5O 2(g) → CO 2(g) + 2H 2 O (g)
(a) Calculate the enthalpy change of the complete combustion of one
mole of methanol, using enthalpies of formation.
(b) How much energy is released when 125 g of methanol undergoes
complete combustion?
Section Summary
In this section, you learned how to calculate the enthalpy change of
a chemical reaction using Hess’s law of heat summation. Enthalpies of
reaction can be calculated by combining chemical equations algebraically
or by using enthalpies of formation. Hess’s law allows chemists to
determine enthalpies of reaction without having to take calorimetric
measurements. In the next section, you will see how the use of energy
affects your lifestyle and your environment.
254 MHR • Unit 3 Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
Section Review
1 K/U Explain why you need to reverse the sign of ∆H˚ when you
reverse an equation. Use an example in your answer.
2 C In section 5.3, you learned two methods for calculating enthalpy
changes using Hess’s law. If you had only this textbook as a reference,
which method would allow you to calculate enthalpy changes for the
largest number of reactions? Explain your answer.
3 I In the early 1960s, Neil Bartlett, at the University of British
Columbia, was the first person to synthesize compounds of
the noble gas xenon. A number of noble gas compounds (such as XeF ,
2
XeF , XeF , and XeO ) have since been synthesized. Consider the
4 6 3
reaction of xenon difluoride with fluorine gas to produce xenon
tetrafluoride.
XeF + F → XeF
2(g) 2(g) 4(s)
Use the following standard molar enthalpies of formation to calculate
the enthalpy change for this reaction.
Compound ∆H˚ (kJ/mol)
f
XeF −108
2(g)
XeF −251
4(s)
4 I Calculate the enthalpy change of the following reaction, given
equations (1), (2), and (3).
2H 3 BO 3(aq) → B 2 O 3(s) + 3H 2 O ((cid:2))
(1) H 3 BO 3(aq) → HBO 2(aq) + H 2 O ((cid:2)) ∆H˚ = −0.02kJ
(2) H 2 B 4 O 7(s) + H 2 O ((cid:2)) → 4HBO 2(aq) ∆H˚ = −11.3kJ
(3) H 2 B 4 O 7(s) → 2B 2 O 3(s) + H 2 O ((cid:2)) ∆H˚ = 17.5kJ
5 I The standard molar enthalpy of formation of calcium carbonate is
–1207.6 kJ/mol. Calculate the enthalpy of formation of calcium oxide,
given the following equation.
CaO + CO → CaCO ∆H˚ = −178.1kJ
(g) 2(g) 3(s)
6 C A classmate is having difficulty understanding Hess’s law. Write
a few paragraphs to explain the law. Include examples, diagrams, and
an original analogy.
7 C In your own words, explain why using enthalpies of formation
to determine enthalpy of reaction depends on Hess’s law. Include
an example.
Chapter 5 Energy and Change • MHR 255
5.4 Energy Sources
Canadians depend on energy sources, such as those listed in Figure 5.18,
Section Preview/
Specific Expectations to power vehicles, light and heat buildings, and manufacture products
that support our lives and lifestyles. As society’s needs for energy and
In this section, you will
energy-using products grow, scientists and technologists search for more
(cid:2) comparethe efficiency and
economical and environmentally responsible ways to meet these needs.
environmental impact of
conventional and alternative In this section, you will compare energy sources based on their efficiency
sources of energy and environmental impact.
(cid:2) communicateyour under-
standing of the following
terms: non-renewable,
90
renewable
80
70
60
50
40
30
20 10 0
1871 1895 1915 1935 1955 1975 1996
Wood
Energy and Efficiency
When you think about energy efficiency, what comes to mind? You may
think about taking the stairs instead of the elevator, choosing to drive a
small car instead of a sport utility vehicle, or turning off lights when you
are not using them. What, however, does efficiency really mean? How do
you quantify it?
There are several ways to define efficiency. One general definition
says that energy efficiency is the ability to produce a desired effect with
minimum energy expenditure. For example, suppose that you want to
bake a potato. You can use a microwave oven or a conventional oven.
Both options achieve the same effect (baking the potato), but the first
option uses less energy. According to the general definition above, using
the microwave oven is more energy-efficient than using the conventional
oven. The general definition is useful, but it is not quantitative.
Another definition of efficiency suggests that it is the ratio of useful
energy produced to energy used in its production, expressed as a percent.
This definition quantitatively compares input and output of energy. When
you use it, however, you need to be clear about what you mean by “energy
used.” Figure 5.19 shows factors to consider when calculating efficiency
or analyzing efficiency data.
256 MHR • Unit 3 Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
tnecreP
Primary Energy by Source, Canada, 1871 to 1996
(Percent of Energy Consumption)
+
+
+
× ×
× ×
×
×
+ + × × ×
×
×
+
× ×
+
×
Figure 5.18 The energy that
Canadians use comes from a × + +
× v a a c r c i o e u ty n t o f f o s r o t u h r e c e c s h . a W ng h e a s t y fa o c u t o c r a s n × + + + + + + ∗ ∗ × ∗ × ∗× ∗× ∗× ∗× ∗× ∗× s th e i e n k in e t n h e is rg g y r a u p se h ? h H as o w ch d a o n g y e o d u ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗+ + + + + + + + + +
since 1996?
Coal Petroleum Hydro Gas Nuclear
”Useful energy“ is
energy delivered to consumer in usable form
actual work done
Useful energy produced
Efficiency = × 100%
Energy used
”Energy used“ could include
ideal energy content of fuel
energy used to extract and transport fuel
solar energy used to create fuel (e.g. biomass)
energy used to build and maintain power plant Figure 5.19 Efficiency is
expressed as a percent. Always
It is often difficult to determine how much energy is used to produce specify what is included in the
useful energy. Often an efficiency percent only takes into account the “energy used” part of the ratio.
“ideal” energy output of a system, based on the energy content of the fuel.
Efficiency and Natural Gas
When discussing the efficiency of a fuel such as natural gas, you need to
specify how that fuel is being used. Consider, for example, natural gas.
Natural gas is primarily methane. Therefore, you can estimate an ideal
value for energy production using the enthalpy of combustion of methane.
CH + 2O → CO + 2H O ∆H˚ = −802kJ
4(g) 2(g) 2(g) 2 (g)
In other words, 16 g of methane produces 802 kJ of heat (under constant
pressure conditions).
When natural gas is used directly in cooking devices, its efficiency can
be as high as 90%. Thus, for every 16 g of gas burned, you get about 720 kJ
(0.90 × 802 kJ) of usable energy as heat for cooking. This is a much higher
fuel efficiency than you can get with appliances that use electrical energy
produced in a power plant that runs on a fuel such as coal.
If natural gas is used to produce electricity in a power plant, however,
the efficiency is much lower—around 37%. Why? The heat from the
burning natural gas is used to boil water. The kinetic energy of the result-
ing steam is transformed to mechanical energy for turning a turbine.
The turbine generates the electrical energy. Each of these steps has an
associated efficiency that is less than 100%. Thus, at each step, the overall
efficiency of the fuel decreases.
Thinking About the Environment
Efficiency is not the only criterion for selecting an energy source. Since
the 1970s, society has become increasingly conscious of the impact of
energy technologies on the environment.
Suppose that you want to analyze the environmental impact of an
energy source. You can ask the following questions:
• Are any waste products or by-products of the energy production
process harmful to the environment? For example, any process in which
a hydrocarbon is burned produces carbon dioxide. Carbon dioxide is a
known greenhouse gas, which contributes to global warming. Any com-
bustion process provides the heat required to form oxides of nitrogen
from nitrogen gas. Nitrogen oxides contribute to acid precipitation.
• Is obtaining or harnessing the fuel harmful to the environment? For
example, oil wells and strip coal mines destroy habitat. Natural gas Figure 5.20 This gas pipeline
pipelines, shown in Figure 5.20, are visually unappealing. They also harms the ecosystem by splitting
split up habitat, which harms the ecosystem. up habitat.
Chapter 5 Energy and Change • MHR 257
• Will using the energy source permanently remove the fuel from the
environment? A non-renewable energy source (such as coal, oil, or
natural gas) is effectively gone once we have used it up. Non-renewable
energy sources take millions of years to form. We use them up at a
much faster rate than they can be replenished. An energy source that
is clearly renewable is solar energy. The Sun will continue to radiate
energy toward Earth over its lifetime—many millions of years. A some-
what renewable energy source is wood. Trees can be grown to replace
those cut down. It takes trees a long time to grow, however, and habitat
is often destroyed in the meantime.
Comparing Energy Sources
Both efficiency and environmental impact are important factors to con-
sider when comparing energy sources. In the following ThoughtLab, you
will research and compare alternative and conventional energy sources.
ThoughtLab Comparing Energy Sources
In this ThoughtLab, you will work as a class to fuels back to solar energy that powered the
compare two different energy sources. photosynthesis in the plants that eventually
became the fossil fuel. Write a brief outline of
Procedure
your findings.
1. On your own, or with a group, choose an energy 6. Your teacher will pair you (or your group) with
source from the following list. Other energy another student (or group) that has researched a
sources may be discussed and added in class. different energy source. Work together to analyze
solar (radiant) energy wood the comparative merits and drawbacks of the two
petroleum biomass energy sources, based on your research.
hydrogen fuel cell nuclear fission
7. Write a conclusion that summarizes the benefits
natural gas fuel cell natural gas
and risks of both energy sources, in terms of
wind energy coal
their efficiency and environmental impact.
hydroelectric power tar sands
8. Present your findings to the class.
geothermal energy
2. Before beginning your research, record your cur- Analysis
rent ideas about the efficiency and environmental
1. Discuss the presentations as a class.
impact of your chosen energy source.
(a) Decide which energy sources are most
3. Research the efficiency and environmental efficient. Also decide which energy sources
impact of your energy source. If possible,
are least damaging to the environment.
determine what the efficiency data means.
(b) Decide which energy source is best overall in
For example, suppose that a source tells you
terms of both efficiency and environmental
that natural gas is 90% efficient. Is the source
impact.
referring to natural gas burned directly for heat
2. Could the “best overall” energy source be used
or for cooking? Is the energy being converted
to provide a significant portion of Canada’s
from heat to electricity in a power plant? Be as
energy needs? What obstacles would need to
specific as possible.
be overcome for this to happen?
4. Ensure that you use a variety of sources to find
3. Besides efficiency and environmental impact,
your data. Be aware of any bias that might be
what other factors are involved in developing
present in your sources.
and delivering an energy source to consumers?
5. Trace the energy source as far back as you can.
For example, you can trace the energy in fossil
258 MHR • Unit 3 Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
Careers in Chemistry
Nuclear Safety Supervisor kinds of tools and protective clothing are needed,
and take appropriate action to lower radiation doses.
For example:
• Airborne hazards, such as tritium (present in
radiated water vapour), can be reduced by running
the station’s dryer system. The dryer system
catches the radiated vapour and dries it out of
the air.
• Non-airborne radiation can be countered by
shielding the affected area with lead blankets or
sheeting material.
Noronha’s strong mathematics skills were evident
from an early age. When she moved to Canada from
Kenya at age 11, she was immediately put ahead a
grade. Her mathematics skills and her father’s engi-
neering profession were what propelled her toward
Jennifer Noronha
engineering. Noronha earned her engineering
physics degree from McMaster University. Her
In some ways, nuclear power is an appealing power
courses included general chemistry, biomedical
source. Nuclear reactions create large amounts of
theory, and nuclear theory. She worked as a
energy from minimal material, and they generate
commissioning engineer at Darlington during its
none of the carbon dioxide and other emissions that
start-up. She tested the station’s safety shut-down
cause acid rain and global warming. The products
systems and helped to bring the station’s first
and reactants of nuclear reactions, however, are
reactor on-line. “It was pretty amazing,” Noronha
dangerously radioactive. Therefore, special meas-
says. “At the time, it was still relatively new
ures are needed to protect nuclear power station
technology, and it was Canadian technology.”
employees from daily exposure to radiation. That
Noronha got her MBA from the University of
is where Jennifer Noronha comes in. Noronha is
Toronto in 1998. Soon after, she moved to her
the supervisor of Radiological Services at
current position, which allows her to combine her
Darlington. Employee safety—especially from high
people skills and technical expertise.
radiation doses—is her first priority.
The Darlington Nuclear Generating Station
Making Career Connections
is located 70 km east of Toronto. It uses a fuel of
1. Are you interested in the different safety con-
natural uranium to produce enough electricity to
cerns related to Canadian nuclear reactors, and
provide power for a city the size of Toronto.
the steps that are being taken to counter these
Noronha and her radiation protection team plan and
concerns? Contact the Canadian Nuclear Safety
implement safety programs that minimize dose
Commission (CNSC) or explore their web site.
rates, or the amount of radiation that station
(The CNSC is the Ottawa-based government
employees are exposed to.
watchdog for the use of nuclear energy in
Station employees must undergo four weeks
Canada.)
of radiation protection training. This training was
designed by Noronha’s department, based on an 2. To learn more about the wide variety of careers
extensive investigation of radiation fields within in nuclear power generation, Ontario Power
the station, as well as a thorough evaluation of Generation is a good place to start. Their web
past safety programs and approaches. Through this site has a helpful career page that lists opportuni-
training, employees learn how to measure existing ties for students and recent graduates, as well as
dose rates with survey equipment, assess what experienced professionals.
Chapter 5 Energy and Change • MHR 259
Chemistry Bulletin
Hot Ice enough to serve our energy needs anywhere
from 350 years to 3500 years, based on current
When engineers first began extending natural
levels of energy consumption. This would con-
gas pipelines through regions of bitter cold,
stitute a significant source of fossil fuels, if we
they noticed that their lines plugged with a
can find a way to extract the gas safely and
dangerous slush of ice and gas. The intense
economically.
pressure of the lines, combined with the cold,
Unfortunately, hydrates become unstable
led to the formation of methane hydrates,
when the pressure or temperature changes.
a kind of gas-permeated ice. More than a
Even small changes in these conditions can
mere nuisance, methane hydrate plugs were a
cause hydrates to degrade rapidly. Methane
potential threat to pipelines. The build-up of
hydrates are stable at ocean depths greater than
gas pressure behind a methane hydrate plug
300 m, but offshore drilling at these depths has
could lead to an explosion. Now, however,
been known to disturb the hydrate formations,
this same substance may hold the key to a vast
causing large, uncontrolled releases of flamma-
fuel supply.
ble methane gas. Also, methane hydrates often
Methane hydrates form when methane
hold sediment layers together. Therefore, in
molecules become trapped within an ice lattice
addition to the danger of a gas explosion, there
as water freezes. They can form in very cold
is the danger of the sea floor collapsing where
conditions or under high-pressure conditions.
drilling occurs.
Both of these conditions are met in deep
Methane is a significant greenhouse gas.
oceans and in permafrost. In Canada, hydrates
A massive release of methane could cause
have already been found in large quantities in
catastrophic global climate change. Some
the Canadian Arctic. Methane hydrate has a
researchers believe that the drastic climate
number of remarkable properties. For example,
change that occurred during the Pleistocene
when brought into an oxygen atmosphere, the
era was due to methane hydrate destabilization
methane fumes can be ignited, making it
and widespread methane release.
appear that the ice is burning!
Nonetheless, Canada, Japan, the United
States, and Russia all have active research and
exploration programs in this area. As global
oil supplies dwindle, using methane hydrates
might increasingly be seen as worth the risk
and cost.
Making Connections
1. Compare using methane from natural gas
with using methane from methane hydrates
in terms of environmental impact and effi-
ciency. You will need to do some research
Methane releases 25% less carbon dioxide per
to find out extraction methods for each
gram than coal, and it emits none of the oxides
source of methane.
of nitrogen and sulfur that contribute to acid
precipitation. Therefore, using methane in 2. On the Internet, research one possible struc-
place of other fossil fuels is very desirable. ture of methane hydrate. Create a physical
Methane hydrates seem to be an ideal and model or a three-dimensional computer
plentiful “pre-packaged” source of natural gas. model to represent it. Use your model to
Estimates of the exact amount of methane explain why methane hydrates are unstable
stored in hydrates suggest there could be at temperatures that are warmer than 0˚C.
260 MHR • Unit 3 Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
Emerging Energy Sources
In the ThoughtLab on page 258, you probably noticed that all energy
sources have drawbacks as well as benefits. Scientists and engineers are
striving to find and develop new and better energy sources. One energy
source that engineers are trying to harness is nuclear fusion. As you
learned in section 5.1, nuclear fusion provides a great deal of energy from
readily available fuel (isotopes of hydrogen). In addition, nuclear fusion
produces a more benign waste product than nuclear fission (helium).
Unfortunately, fusion is not yet practical and controllable on a large scale
because of the enormous temperatures involved.
Chemists are also striving to find new sources for existing fuels that
work well. The Chemistry Bulletin on the facing page discusses a new
potential source of methane.
Section Summary
In this section, you learned about efficiency. You learned how it can
be defined in different ways for different purposes. You used your
understanding of processes that produce energy to investigate the
efficiency and environmental impact of different energy sources.
In Chapter 5, you learned about the energy that is associated with
chemical reactions. You used a calorimeter to measure heat changes, and
you used these heat changes to write thermochemical equations. You
probably already realize that adding heat to reactants often speeds up a
reaction. In other words, raising the temperature of a system consisting of
a chemical reaction often increases the speed of the reaction. A familiar
example is cooking. You increase the temperature of a heating element
to speed up the reactions that are taking place in the food as it cooks.
How does increasing temperature speed up a reaction? Is the enthalpy
of a reaction related to its speed? Chapter 6 addresses these questions.
Section Review
1 C Your friend tells you about an energy source that is supposed to be
46% efficient. What questions do you need to ask your friend in order
to clarify this claim?
2 C Efficiency and environmental concerns are not always separate. In
fact, they are often closely linked. Give three examples of energy
sources in which changes in efficiency affect environmental impact, or
vice versa.
3 I Design an experiment to determine the efficiency of a laboratory
burner. You will first need to decide how to define the efficiency, and
you will also need to find out what fuel your burner uses. Include a
complete procedure and safety precautions.
4 MC Some high-efficiency gas furnaces can heat with an efficiency of
up to 97%. These gas furnaces work by allowing the water vapour pro-
duced during combustion to condense. Condensation is an exothermic
reaction that releases further energy for heating. Use the information in
this section to demonstrate the increased heat output, using Hess’s law.
The enthalpy of condensation of water is 44 kJ/mol.
Chapter 5 Energy and Change • MHR 261
5 MC “Nuclear energy is an energy source that is less hazardous to the
environment than energy derived from burning coal.” Write a brief
essay, explaining why you agree or disagree with this statement.
6 MC The label on an electric kettle claims that the kettle is 95%
efficient.
(a) What definition of efficiency is the manufacturer using?
(b) Write an expression that shows how the manufacturer might have
arrived at an efficiency of 95% for the kettle.
(c) Design a detailed experiment to test the manufacturers’ claim.
Include safety precautions.
7 K/U Read the Chemistry Bulletin on page 260. How does the
efficiency of using methane as a fuel source compare to using methane
hydrates? Justify your answer.
8 I Hydrogen is a very appealing fuel, in part because burning it
produces only non-polluting water. One of the challenges that
researchers face in making hydrogen fuel a reality is how to produce
hydrogen economically. Researchers are investigating methods of
producing hydrogen indirectly. The following series of equations
represent one such method.
3FeCl + 4H O → Fe O + 6HCl + H ∆H˚ = 318kJ
2(s) 2 (g) 3 4(s) (g) 2(g)
Fe O + 3 Cl + 6HCl → 3FeCl + 3H O + 1 O ∆H˚ = −249kJ
3 4(s) 2 2(g) (g) 3(s) 2 (g) 2 2(g)
3FeCl → 3FeCl + 3 Cl ∆H˚ = 173kJ
3(s) 2(s) 2 2(g)
(a) Show that the net result of the three reactions is the decomposition
of water to produce hydrogen and oxygen.
(b) Use Hess’s law and the enthalpy changes for the reactions to
determine the enthalpy change for the decomposition of one
mole of water. Check your answer, using the enthalpy of formation
of water.
262 MHR • Unit 3 Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
Review
Reflecting on Chapter 5 Knowledge/Understanding
Summarize this chapter in the format of your 1. In your own words, describe the relationship
choice. Here are a few ideas to use as guidelines: between a system and its surroundings. Use
• Compare the magnitude of energy changes an example to illustrate your description.
resulting from physical changes, chemical 2. The vaporization of liquid carbon disulfide,
reactions, and nuclear reactions. CS , requires an energy input of 29 kJ/mol.
2
• Compare the processes that are responsible (a) Is this reaction exothermic or endothermic?
for the energy changes resulting from physical What is the enthalpy change of this reaction?
changes, chemical reactions, and nuclear (b) Write a thermochemical equation of this
reactions. reaction. Include 29 kJ as either a reactant
• Explain the different ways to represent the ener- or a product.
gy changes of physical and chemical processes. (c) Draw and label an enthalpy diagram for the
• Give examples of important exothermic and vaporization of liquid carbon disulfide.
endothermic processes.
3. A given chemical equation is tripled and then
• Explain how a calorimeter is used to determine
reversed. What effect, if any, will there be on
enthalpy of reaction.
the enthalpy change of the reaction?
• Use examples and analogies to explain Hess’s
4. Explain why two nested polystyrene coffee
law.
• Show how to use Hess’s law and experimentally cups, with a lid, make a good constant-pressure
calorimeter.
determined enthalpies of reaction to calculate
unknown enthalpies of reaction. 5. Write the balanced equation for the formation
• Show how to calculate enthalpy of reaction using of each substance.
known enthalpies of formation, and explain how (a) LiCl (s) (b) C 2 H 5 OH ((cid:2)) (c) NH 4 NO 3(s)
this calculation relates to Hess’s law. 6. If the enthalpy of formation of an element
• Explain the concept of efficiency, and discuss in its standard state is equal to zero, explain
the efficiency and environmental impact of why the heat of formation of iodine gas, I ,
2(g)
conventional and alternative energy sources. is 21 kJ/mol.
Reviewing Key Terms Inquiry
For each of the following terms, write a sentence 7. In an oxygen-rich atmosphere, carbon
that shows your understanding of its meaning. burns to produce carbon dioxide, CO . Both
2
thermodynamics thermochemistry carbon monoxide, CO, and carbon dioxide
law of conservation system are produced when carbon is burned in an
of energy oxygen-deficient atmosphere. This makes the
surroundings heat (Q) direct measurement of the enthalpy of forma-
temperature (T) enthalpy (H) tion of CO difficult. CO, however, also burns
enthalpy change (∆H) endothermic reaction in oxygen, O 2 , to produce pure carbon dioxide.
exothermic reaction enthalpy of reaction Explain how you would experimentally deter-
standard enthalpy of thermochemical mine the enthalpy of formation of carbon
reaction (∆H˚) equation monoxide.
mass defect nuclear binding energy 8. Two 30.0 g pieces of aluminium, Al, are placed
nuclear fission nuclear fusion in an insulated container.
specific heat capacity (c) heat capacity (C) (a) One piece of Al has an initial temperature
calorimeter coffee-cup calorimeter of 100.0˚C. The other piece has an initial
constant-pressure Hess’s law of heat temperature of 20.0˚C. What is the tempera-
calorimeter summation ture inside the container after the system
formation reactions standard molar enthalpy has equilibrated? Assume that no heat is
of formation (∆H˚ f ) lost to the container or the surroundings.
non-renewable renewable
Chapter 5 Energy and Change • MHR 263
(b) Repeat the calculation in part (a) with the (b) Using the following equations, determine the
following change: The piece of Al at 20.0˚C enthalpy of formation of H O .
2 2
has a mass of 50.0 g. (1) 2H 2 O 2((cid:2)) → 2H 2 O ((cid:2)) + O 2(g) ∆H˚ = −196kJ
9. The complete combustion of 1.00 mol of (2) H 2(g) + 1 2 O 2(g) → H 2 O ((cid:2)) ∆H˚ = −286kJ
sucrose, C H O , releases −5641 kJ of energy 15. Hydrogen cyanide is a highly poisonous gas. It
12 22 11
(at 25˚C and 100 kPa). is produced from methane and ammonia.
C 12 H 22 O 11(s) + 12O 2(g) → 12CO 2(g) + 11H 2 O ((cid:2)) CH 4(g) + NH 3(g) → HCN (g) + 3H 2(g)
(a) Use the enthalpy change of this reaction, and Find the enthalpy change of this reaction, using
enthalpies of formation from Appendix E, to the following thermochemical equations.
determine the enthalpy of formation of (1) H + 2C + N → 2HCN
2(g) (graphite) 2(g) (g)
sucrose. ∆H˚ = 270kJ
(b) Draw and label an enthalpy diagram for (2) N + 3H → 2NH ∆H˚ = −92kJ
2(g) 2(g) 3(g)
this reaction. (3) C + 2H → CH ∆H˚ = −75kJ
(graphite) 2(g) 4(g)
10. A 10.0 g sample of pure acetic acid, CH CO H, 16. The following equation represents the complete
3 2
is completely burned. The heat released warms combustion of butane, C H .
4 10
2.00 L of water from 22.3˚C to 39.6˚C. Assuming C H + 6.5O → 4CO + 5H O
4 10(g) 2(g) 2(g) 2 (g)
that no heat was lost to the calorimeter, what is (a) Using known enthalpies of formation,
the enthalpy change of the complete combus- calculate the enthalpy change of the complete
tion of acetic acid? Express your answer in combustion of C H . (The enthalpy of
4 10
units of kJ/g and kJ/mol. formation of C H is −126 kJ/mol.)
4 10
11. Use equations (1), (2), and (3) to find the (b) Using known enthalpies of formation, calcu-
enthalpy change of the formation of methane, late the enthalpy change of the complete
CH 4 , from chloroform, CHCl 3 . combustion of ethane, C 2 H 6 , to produce
CHCl 3((cid:2)) + 3HCl (g) → CH 4(g) + 3Cl 2(g) carbon dioxide and water vapour. Express
(1) 1 H + 1 Cl → HCl ∆H˚ = −92.3kJ your answer in units of kJ/mol and kJ/g.
2 2(g) 2 2(g) (g) (c) A 10.0 g sample that is 30% C H and 70%
(2) C + 2H → CH ∆H˚ = −74.8kJ 2 6
(s) 2(g) 4(g)
(3) C (s) + 1 2 H 2(g) + 3 2 Cl 2(g) → CHCl 3((cid:2)) C H 4 o H w 1 0 m , b u y c h m e a n s e s, r g i y s b is u r r n el e e d a s i e n d e ? xcess oxygen.
∆H˚ = −134.5kJ
17. The caloric content (energy content) of foods is
12. The following equation represents the
measured using a bomb calorimeter. A sample
combustion of ethylene glycol, (CH OH) .
2 2
(CH 2 OH) 2((cid:2)) + 5 2 O 2(g) → 2CO 2(g) + 3H 2 O ((cid:2)) c o a f l f o o r o im d e is te b r. u Y rn o e u d c i a n n o m xy a g k e e n a , O si 2 m , p in le s i f d o e o d the
∆H˚ = −1178kJ
calorimeter using an empty food can or pop
Use known enthalpies of formation and the
can. Design an investigation in which you
given enthalpy change to determine the
make your own calorimeter and then use your
enthalpy of formation of ethylene glycol.
calorimeter to measure the energy content of a
13. Most of us associate the foul smell of hydrogen
piece of cheese or a cracker. Include a diagram
sulfide gas, H S , with the smell of rotten eggs.
2 (g) of your proposed calorimeter. List the data, and
H S + 3 O → SO + H O ∆H = −519kJ
2 (g) 2 2(g) 2(g) 2 (g) other observations, that you plan to record. Get
How much energy is released when 15.0 g of
your teacher’s approval before carrying out
H S burns?
2 (g) your investigation. Note: Some students have a
14. Hydrogen peroxide, H 2 O 2 , is a strong oxidizing severe nut allergy. Do not use peanuts, or any
agent. It is used as an antiseptic in a 3.0% other nuts, in your investigation.
aqueous solution. Some chlorine-free bleaches
18. Design an investigation to determine the
contain 6.0% hydrogen peroxide.
enthalpy change of the combustion of ethanol
(a) Write the balanced chemical equation for the
using a wick-type burner, similar to that in a
formation of one mole of H 2 O 2((cid:2)) . kerosene lamp.
(a) Draw and label a diagram of the apparatus.
264 MHR • Unit 3 Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
(b) Write a step-by-step procedure. (a) Write the chemical equation for the complete
(c) Prepare a table to record your data and other combustion of each fuel. Then find the
observations. enthalpy of combustion, ∆H , of each
comb
(d) State any assumptions that you will make fuel. Express your answers in kJ/mol and
when carrying out the calculations. kJ/g. Assume that water vapour, rather than
liquid water, is formed in both reactions.
Communication (b) Which is the more energetic fuel, per unit
mass?
19. Suppose that you need to find the enthalpy
(c) Consider a fixed mass of each fuel. Which
change of a chemical reaction. Unfortunately,
fuel would allow you to drive a greater
you are unable to carry out the reaction in
distance? Explain briefly.
your school laboratory. Does this mean that
(d) Describe how methane and hydrogen could
you cannot find the enthalpy change of the
be obtained. Which of these methods do you
reaction? Explain.
think is less expensive? Explain.
20. Acetylene, C H , and ethylene, C H , are both
2 2 2 4
(e) Which fuel do you think is more
used as fuels. They combine with oxygen gas to
environmentally friendly? Explain.
produce carbon dioxide and water in an
exothermic reaction. Acetylene also reacts with Answers to Practice Problems and Short Answers to
Section Review Questions
hydrogen to produce ethylene, as shown.
C H + H → C H ∆H˚ = −175.1kJ Practice Problems: 1.(a)N 2(g) +O 2(g) +180.6kJ→2NO (g)
2 2(g) 2(g) 2 4(g) (b)Reactants have lower energy than products. (c)+90.3kJ
(a) Without referring to any tables or doing any
(d)+644.5kJ 2.(a)−1.65×103kJ (b)Reactants have higher
calculations, explain why C H has a more
2 2 energy than products. (c)−1.22×102kJ 3.(a)+25.9kJ
positive enthalpy of formation than C 2 H 4 . (b)+393kJ (c)Reactants have lower energy than products.
(b) Do you think C 2 H 2 or C 2 H 4 is a more 4.(a) P 4 O 10(s) +6H 2 O ((cid:2)) →4H 3 PO 4(aq) +257.2kJ
energetic fuel? Explain. (b)−1.29×103kJ (c)−1.54×102kJ 5. 12.8˚C 6.6.70×102g
7.2.7×104kJ 8.6.09˚C 9. −50kJ/mol
Making Connections 10.(a) −4.1×102kJ/molMg (b) The density and heat capacity
21. When a vehicle is parked in the sunlight on a of the solutions are the same as the density and heat
hot summer day, the temperature inside can capacity of water. No heat is lost to the calorimeter.
approach 55˚C. One company has patented a 11.29.7˚C 12.HBr (aq) +KOH (aq) →H 2 O ((cid:2)) +KBr (aq) +57kJ
13.−44kJ 14.−509kJ 15.−120kJ 16.+30kJ
non-CFC propelled aerosol that can be sprayed
inside a vehicle to reduce the temperature to 17.(a) C (s) +2H 2(g) →CH 4(g) +74.6kJ
25˚C within seconds. The spray contains a
(b)Na
(s)
+ 1
2
Cl
2(g)
→NaCl
(s)
+411.2kJ
mixture of two liquids: 10% ethanol, C H OH,
(c)Mg
(s)
+ 1
2
O
2(g)
→MgO
(s)
+601.2kJ
and 90% water by mass.
2 5 (d)Ca
(s)
+C
(s)
+ 3
2
O
2(g)
→CaCO
3(s)
+1207.6kJ
(a) Use thermochemical equations, and the 18.H 2(g) +S (s) +2O 2(g) →H 2 SO 4((cid:2)) +814.0kJ
corresponding enthalpy changes, to explain 19.Cs (s) +76.7kJ→Cs (g) 20.(a) 1 4 P 4(s) →P (s) +17.6kJ
how the spray works. (b)−18.5kJ21.Get the target equation from the two
formation equations. 22.Get the target equation from the
(b) 1.0 g of the aerosol is sprayed into a hot
formation equations. 23.−77.6kJ/mol 24.(a)−637.9kJ
vehicle. How much heat (in kJ) can be
(b)2.49×103kJ
absorbed due to vaporization of the aerosol?
∆ N H ot v e ap : ∆ o H f e va t p ha o n f o w l a = te 3 r 8 = .5 4 6 4 k .0 J/ m kJ o /m l ol and S ( ( b b e ) ) c ∆ 5 t 9 H io 9 ˚ n v k a R J p e ( = c v ) i + e 1 4 w .0 4 : 6 . 5 0 × .1 k : 1 J 0 2 (c 3 .( ) a k ∆ ) J ∆ H H ˚ r ˚ x r n xn = = ∆ − H 1 ˚ 2 co 7 m .0 b < kJ 0 4.(a)34.21 g
(c) Do you think there are any risks associated 5.(a)C 2 H 2(g) + 5 2 O 2(g) →H 2 O ((cid:2)) +2CO 2(g) +1.3×103kJ
with using a spray like the one described (c)108 kJ 7.(a)H
2(g)
+ 1
2
O
2(g)
→H
2
O
(g)
+241.8kJ
above? Explain your answer. 5.2: 5.(a)KOH (aq) +HNO 3(aq) →H 2 O ((cid:2)) +KNO 3(aq) +55kJ
22. Consider methane, CH , and hydrogen, H , as 5.3: 3. −143kJ 4. 14.3kJ5. −636.0kJ
4 2
possible fuel sources.
Chapter 5 Energy and Change • MHR 265
Rates of Chemical
Reactions
R
Chapter Preview acing cars, such as the one shown below, can reach speeds that are well
above 200 km/h. In contrast, the maximum speed of many farm tractors is
6.1 Expressing and
only about 25 km/h. Just as some vehicles travel more quickly than others,
Measuring Reaction
some chemical reactions occur more quickly than others. For example,
Rates
compare the two reactions that occur in vehicles: the decomposition of
6.2 The Rate Law: Reactant
sodium azide in an air bag and the rusting of iron in steel.
Concentration and Rate
When an automobile collision activates an air bag, sodium azide,
6.3 Theories of Reaction
NaN , decomposes to form sodium, Na , and nitrogen gas, N . (The
3(g) (s) 2(g)
Rates
gas inflates the bag.) This chemical reaction occurs almost instantan-
6.4 Reaction Mechanisms eously. It inflates the air bag quickly enough to cushion a driver’s impact
and Catalysts
in a collision.
On the other hand, the reaction of iron with oxygen to form rust pro-
ceeds quite slowly. Most Canadians know that the combination of road salt
and wet snow somewhat increases the rate of the reaction. Even so, it takes
several years for a significant amount of rust to form on the body of a car.
This is a good thing for car owners—if rusting occurred as fast as the
reaction in an inflating air bag, cars would flake to pieces in seconds.
Why do some reactions occur slowly while others seem to take place
Prerequisite
Concepts and Skills instantaneously? How do chemists measure, compare, and express the rates
at which chemical reactions occur? Can chemists predict and control the
Before you begin this chapter,
rate of a chemical reaction? These questions will be answered in Chapter 6.
review the following concepts
and skills:
(cid:2) balancing chemical
The combustion of gasoline is a fast and highly exothermic
equations (Concepts and
reaction. Gasoline is stored in a car’s fuel tank, where it is
Skills Review)
exposed to oxygen in the air. Why does gasoline in a fuel
(cid:2) expressing concentration tank not burst into flames spontaneously?
in units of mol/L (Concepts
and Skills Review)
266 MHR • Unit 3 Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
Expressing and Measuring 6.1
Reaction Rates
Section Preview/
Specific Expectations
As you learned in the Unit 3 opener, nitroglycerin is an explosive
In this section, you will
that was used to clear the way for railroads across North America. It
(cid:2) describe, with the help of
decomposes instantly. The reactions that cause fruit to ripen, then rot,
a graph, reaction rate as a
take place over a period of days. The reactions that lead to human ageing
function of the change of
take place over a lifetime. concentration of a reactant
How quickly a chemical reaction occurs is a crucial factor in how or product with respect
the reaction affects its surroundings. Therefore, knowing the rate of a to time
chemical reaction is integral to understanding the reaction. (cid:2) examinevarious methods
that are used to monitor the
Expressing Reaction Rates rate of a chemical reaction
(cid:2) determineand distinguish
The change in the amount of reactants or products over time is called the
between the average rate
reaction rate. How do chemists express reaction rates? Consider how the
and the instantaneous rate
rates of other processes are expressed. For example, the Olympic sprinter
of a chemical reaction
in Figure 6.1 can run 100 m in about 10 s, resulting in an average running
(cid:2) reviewthe factors that
rate of 100 m/10 s or about 10 m/s.
affect reaction rate
The running rate of a sprinter is calculated by dividing the distance
(cid:2) communicateyour under-
travelled by the interval of time the sprinter takes to travel this distance.
standing of the following
In other words, running rate (speed) is expressed as a change in distance
terms: reaction rate,
divided by a change in time. In general, a change in a quantity with average rate, instantaneous
respect to time can be expressed as follows. rate, catalyst
Changeinquantity
Rate =
Changeintime
Quantity − Quantity
= final initial
t − t
final initial
∆Quantity
=
∆t
Chemists express reaction rates in several ways. For example, a reaction
rate can be expressed as a change in the amount of reactant consumed or
product made per unit of time, as shown below. (The letter A represents
a compound.)
Rateofreaction = AmountofA final − AmountofA initial (inmol)
t − t (ins)
final initial
=
∆AmountofA
(inmol/s)
∆t
When a reaction occurs between gaseous species or in solution, chemists
usually express the reaction rate as a change in the concentration of the Figure 6.1 The running rate
reactant or product per unit time. Recall, from your previous chemistry (speed) of a sprinter is expressed
course, that the concentration of a compound (in mol/L) is symbolized by as a change in distance over time.
placing square brackets, [ ], around the chemical formula. The equation
below is the equation you will work with most often in this section.
Rateofreaction = ConcentrationofA final − ConcentrationofA initial (inmol/L)
t − t (ins)
final initial
= ∆
∆
[A
t
] (inmol/(L•s))
Chapter 6 Rates of Chemical Reactions • MHR 267
Reaction rates are always positive, by convention. A rate that is expressed
as the change in concentration of a product is the rate at which the
concentration of the product is increasing. The rate that is expressed
in terms of the change in concentration of a reactant is the rate at which
the concentration of the reactant is decreasing.
Average and Instantaneous Rates of Reactions
If reactions always proceeded at a constant rate, it would be straight-
forward to find reaction rates. You would just need the initial and final
concentrations and the time interval. Reaction rates, however, are not
usually constant. They change with time. How does this affect the way
that chemists determine reaction rates?
Consider the following reaction.
A → C + D
(g) (g) (g)
Now examine the graph in Figure 6.2. The blue line on the graph shows
the concentration of product C as the reaction progresses, based on the
data in Table 6.1.
Table 6.1 Concentration of C During a Reaction at Constant Temperature
Time (s) [C] (mol/L)
0.0 0.00
5.0 3.12 × 10−3
10.0 4.41 × 10−3
15.0 5.40 × 10−3
20.0 6.24 × 10−3
The average rate of a reaction is the average change in the concentration
of a reactant or product per unit time over a given time interval. For
example, using the data in Table 6.1, you can determine the average rate
of the reaction from t = 0.0 s to t = 5.0 s.
Averagerate =
∆[C]
∆t
= (3.12 × 10 −3mol/L) − 0.00mol/L
5.0s − 0.0s
= 6.2 × 10 −4mol/(L•s)
You can see this calculation in Figure 6.2. On a concentration-time graph,
the average rate of a reaction is represented by the slope of a line that is
drawn between two points on the curve. This line is called a secant.
The average rate of a reaction gives an overall idea of how quickly the
reaction is progressing. It does not, however, tell you how fast the reaction
is progressing at a specific time. For example, suppose that someone
asked you how fast the reaction in Figure 6.2 was progressing over 20.0 s.
You would probably calculate the average rate from t = 0.0 s to t = 20.0 s.
You would come up with the answer 3.12 × 10 −3mol/(L•s). (Try this
calculation yourself.) What would you do, however, if you were asked
how fast the reaction was progressing at exactly t = 10.0 s?
The instantaneous rate of a reaction is the rate of the reaction at a
particular time. To find the instantaneous rate of a reaction using a
concentration-time graph, draw a tangent line to the curve and find the
slope of the tangent. A tangent line is like a secant line, but it touches the
curve at only one point. It does not intersect the curve.
268 MHR • Unit 3 Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
The slope of the tangent is the instantaneous rate of the reaction.
Figure 6.2 shows the tangent line at t = 10.0 s. As shown on the graph,
the slope of the tangent (therefore the instantaneous rate) at t = 10.0 s
is 2.3 × 10 −4mol/(L•s).
Notice that near the beginning of the reaction, when the concentration
of the reactants is relatively high, the slope of the tangent is greater
(steeper). This indicates a faster reaction rate. As the reaction proceeds,
the reactants are used up and the slope of the tangent decreases.
9.00
8.00
7.00
6.00
5.00
4.00
3.00
2.00
1.00
0.00
0 5.0 10.0 15.0 20.0
Figure 6.2 The slope of a tangent drawn to a concentration-time curve represents the
instantaneous rate of the reaction. The slope of a secant is used to determine the average
rate of a reaction.
In the following ThoughtLab, you will use experimental data to draw a
graph that shows the change in concentration of the product of a reaction.
Then you will use the graph to help you determine the instantaneous rate
and average rate of the reaction.
Chapter 6 Rates of Chemical Reactions • MHR 269
)
01
×
L/lom(
]C[
3
Physics LINK
In your previous courses
in science or physics,
you probably learned the
difference between instant-
aneousvelocity and average
velocity. How did you use a
displacement-time graph to
determine instantaneous
velocity and average velocity?
The Concentration of C Versus Time Write a memo that explains
instantaneous rate and
average rate to a physicist,
by comparing reaction rate
with velocity.
∆[C] = 5.4 × 10−3 mol/L − 3.1 × 10−3 mol/L
= 2.3 × 10−3 mol/L
Instantaneous =
∆[C]
∆t
rate
= 2.3 × 10−3 mol/L
10.0 s
= 2.3 × 10−4 mol/(L • s)
∆t = 15.0 s − 5.0 s
= 10.0 s
∆[C] = 3.1 × 10−3 mol/L − 0.0 mol/L
= 3.1 × 10−3 mol/L
Average rate =
∆[C]
∆t
= 3.1 × 10−3 mol/L
5.0 s
∆t = 5.0 s − 0.0 s = 6.2 × 10−4 mol/(L • s)
= 5.0 s
Time (s)
ThoughtLab Average and Instantaneous Reaction Rates
A chemist carried out a reaction to trace the rate 2. Draw a secant to the curve in the interval from
of decomposition of dinitrogen pentoxide. t =0s to t =4800 s.
2N 2 O 5(g) →4NO 2(g) +O 2(g) 3. Draw a tangent to the curve at t =1200 s and at
The chemist collected the following data at a t =4800 s.
constant temperature.
4. Determine the slope of the secant. What is the
Time (s) [O ] (mol/L) average rate of the reaction over the given time
2
interval? Include proper units, and pay attention
0.00 0.0
to significant digits.
6.00 × 102 2.1 × 10−3
5. Determine the slope of each tangent. What is
1.20 × 103 3.6 × 10−3
the instantaneous reaction rate at t =1200 s and
1.80 × 103 4.8 × 10−3 at t =4800 s? Include proper units, and pay
2.40 × 103 5.6 × 10−3 attention to significant digits.
3.00 × 103 6.4 × 10−3
Analysis
3.60 × 103 6.7 × 10−3
1. Why are the units for the average rate and the
4.20 × 103 7.1 × 10−3
instantaneous rate the same?
4.80 × 103 7.5 × 10−3
2. For a given set of data, two students determined
5.40 × 103 7.7 × 10−3 different average reaction rates. If neither student
6.00 × 103 7.8 × 10−3 made an error in the calculations, account for the
difference in their reaction rates.
Procedure 3. Propose a reason for the difference in the
instantaneous rates at 1200 s and 4800 s.
1. Using graph paper or spreadsheet software,
plot and label a graph that shows the rate of 4. When chemists compare the rates of reactions
formation of oxygen gas. The concentration of carried out under different conditions, they
O (in mol/L) is the dependent variable and time often compare the rates near the beginning of
2
(in s) is the independent variable. the reactions. What advantage(s) do you see
in this practice? Hint: Think of slow reactions.
Reaction Rates in Terms of Products and Reactants
In the ThoughtLab, you analyzed the rate of the following reaction in
terms of the production of oxygen.
2N O → 4NO + O
2 5(g) 2(g) 2(g)
There are two other ways to represent the rate of this reaction:
• in terms of the rate of the disappearance of dinitrogen pentoxide
• in terms of the production of nitrogen dioxide
For every 1 mol of O that is produced, 4 mol of NO are also produced.
2 2
This means that the rate of production of NO is four times greater than
2
the rate of production of O . Therefore, the rate of production of O is one
2 2
quarter the rate of production of NO . You can express the relationship
2
between O production and NO production as follows.
2 2
∆[O 2 ] = 1 ∆[NO 2 ]
∆t 4 ∆t
When 1 mol of O is produced, 2 mol of N O are consumed. Therefore,
2 2 5
the rate of production of O is half the rate of disappearance of N O . You
2 2 5
can represent this relationship as follows:
∆[O 2 ] = −1 ∆[N 2 O 5 ]
∆t 2 ∆t
270 MHR • Unit 3 Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
Notice that the expression involving N O (the reactant) has a negative
2 5 Electronic Learning Partner
sign. A change in concentration is calculated using the expression below.
Changeinconcentration = Concentration − Concentration To learn more about reaction
final initial
rates expressed as changes in
Since the concentration of a reactant always decreases as a reaction
concentration over time, go to
progresses, the change in concentration is always negative. By convention,
the Chemistry 12 Electronic
however, a rate is always expressed as a positive number. Therefore, Learning Partner.
expressions that involve reactants must be multiplied by −1 to become
positive.
Examine the Sample Problem below to see how to express reaction
rates in terms of products and reactants. Then try the Practice Problems
that follow.
Sample Problem
Expressing Reaction Rates
Problem
Dinitrogen pentoxide, N O , decomposes to form nitrogen dioxide and
2 5
oxygen.
2N O → 4NO + O
2 5(g) 2(g) 2(g)
NO
2
is produced at a rate of 5.0 × 10 −6mol/(L•s). What is the
corresponding rate of disappearance of N O and rate of formation of O ?
2 5 2
What Is Required?
Since N O is a reactant, you need to calculate its rate of disappearance.
2 5
O is a product, so you need to find its rate of formation.
2
What Is Given?
You know the rate of formation of NO and the balanced chemical
2
equation.
Plan Your Strategy
First check that the chemical equation is balanced. Then use the molar
coefficients in the balanced equation to determine the relative rates of
disappearance and formation.
Since 4 mol of NO are produced for every 2 mol of N O that
2 2 5
decompose, the rate of disappearance of N O is 2, or 1, the rate of
2 5 4 2
formation of NO . Similarly, 1 mol of O is formed for every 4 mol
2 2
of NO . Therefore, the rate of production of O is 1 the rate of NO
2 2 4 2
production.
Act on Your Strategy
RateofdisappearanceofN
2
O
5
=
2
1 × 5.0 × 10 −6mol/(L•s)
= 2.5 × 10 −6mol/(L•s)
RateofproductionofO
2
=
4
1 × 5.0 × 10 −6mol/(L•s)
= 1.2 × 10 −6mol/(L•s)
Check Your Solution
From the coefficients in the balanced chemical equation, you can see that
the rate of decomposition of N O is 2, or 1, the rate of formation of
2 5 4 2
NO . The rate of production of O is 1 the rate of decomposition of N O .
2 2 2 2 5
Chapter 6 Rates of Chemical Reactions • MHR 271
Practice Problems
1. Cyclopropane, C H , is used in the synthesis of organic compounds
3 6
and as a fast-acting anesthetic. It undergoes rearrangement to form
propene. If cyclopropane disappears at a rate of 0.25 mol/s, at what
rate is propene being produced?
2. Ammonia, NH , reacts with oxygen to produce nitric oxide, NO,
3
and water vapour.
4NH + 5O → 4NO + 6H O
3(g) 2(g) (g) 2 (g)
At a specific time in the reaction, ammonia is disappearing at rate
of 0.068 mol/(L•s).
What is the corresponding rate of production of water?
3. Hydrogen bromide reacts with oxygen to produce bromine and
water vapour.
4HBr + O → 2Br + 2H O
(g) 2(g) 2(g) 2 (g)
How does the rate of decomposition of HBr (in mol/(L•s)) compare
with the rate of formation of Br
2
(also in mol/(L•s))? Express your
answer as an equation.
PROBLEM TIP 4. Magnesium metal reacts with hydrochloric acid to produce
magnesium chloride and hydrogen gas.
Recall, from your previous
Mg + 2HCl → MgCl + H
chemistry course, that 1.00 mol (s) (aq) 2(aq) 2(g)
of any gas occupies a volume Over an interval of 1.00 s, the mass of Mg changes by −0.011 g.
(s)
of 24.0 L at 20˚C and 101 kPa.
(a) What is the corresponding rate of consumption of HCl
(aq)
(in mol/s)?
(b) Calculate the corresponding rate of production of H (in L/s)
2(g)
at 20˚C and 101 kPa.
Methods for Measuring Reaction Rates
How do chemists collect the data they need to determine a reaction rate?
To determine empirically the rate of a chemical reaction, chemists must
monitor the concentration or amount of at least one reactant or product.
There are a variety of techniques available. The choice of technique
depends on the reaction under study and the equipment available.
Monitoring Mass, pH, and Conductivity
Consider the reaction of magnesium with hydrochloric acid.
Mg + 2HCl → MgCl + H
(s) (aq) 2(aq) 2(g)
Hydrogen gas is released in the reaction. You can track the decrease in
mass, due to the escaping hydrogen, by carrying out the reaction in an
open vessel on an electric balance. The decrease in mass can be plotted
against time. Some electronic balances can be connected to a computer,
with the appropriate software, to record mass and time data automatically
as the reaction proceeds.
Another technique for monitoring the reaction above involves pH.
Figure 6.3 If the concentration
of HO+ or OH− ions changes over Since HCl is consumed in the reaction, you can record changes in pH
3
the course of a reaction, a chemist with respect to time. Figure 6.3 shows a probe being used to monitor the
can use a pH meter to monitor the changing pH of a solution.
reaction.
272 MHR • Unit 3 Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
A third technique involves electrical conductivity. Dissolved ions in
PROBEWARE
aqueous solution conduct electricity. The electrical conductivity of the
solution is proportional to the concentration of ions. Therefore, reactions If you have access to
that occur in aqueous solution, and involve a change in the quantity of probeware, do Probeware
Investigation 6-A, or a similar
dissolved ions, undergo a change in electrical conductivity. In the reaction
investigation from a probeware
above, hydrochloric acid is a mix of equal molar amounts of two ions:
company.
+ −
hydronium, H O , and chloride, Cl . The MgCl that is produced exists as
3 2
three separate ions in solution: one
Mg2+
ion and two Cl
−
ions. Since there
is an increase in the concentration of ions as the reaction proceeds, the
conductivity of the solution also increases with time.
Monitoring Pressure
When a reaction involves gases, the pressure of the system often changes
as the reaction progresses. Chemists can monitor this pressure change. For
example, consider the decomposition of dinitrogen pentoxide, shown in
the following chemical reaction.
2N O → 4NO + O
2 5(g) 2(g) 2(g)
When 2 mol of N O gas decompose, they form 5 mol of gaseous products.
2 5
Therefore, the pressure of the system increases as the reaction proceeds,
provided that the reaction is carried out in a closed container. Chemists
use a pressure sensor to monitor pressure changes.
Monitoring Colour
Colour change can also be used to monitor the progress of a reaction.
The absorption of light by a chemical compound is directly related to the
concentration of the compound. For example, suppose you add several
drops of blue food colouring to a litre of water. If you add a few millilitres
of bleach to the solution, the intensity of the colour of the food dye
diminishes as it reacts. You can then monitor the colour change. (Do not
try this experiment without your teacher’s supervision.)
For accurate measurements of the colour intensity of a solution,
chemists use a device called a spectrophotometer. (See Figure 6.4.)
Figure 6.4 This photograph
shows a simple spectrophotometer,
which measures the amount of
visible light that is absorbed by
a coloured solution. More sophisti-
cated devices can measure the
absorption of ultraviolet and
infrared radiation.
Monitoring Volume
When a reaction generates gas, chemists can monitor the volume of gas
produced. In Investigation 6-A, you will determine average reaction rates
by recording the time taken to produce a fixed volume of gas. You will
perform several trials of the same reaction to investigate the effects that
temperature, concentration of reactants, and surface area of reactants
have on the reaction rate. You will also perform one trial using a
different reactant.
Chapter 6 Rates of Chemical Reactions • MHR 273
S K I L L F O C U S
Predicting
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
Studying Reaction Rates
You have probably already encountered the 2.0 g powdered CaCO
3
reaction of vinegar with baking soda. The carbon 2.0 g solid CaCO (marble chips)
3
dioxide that is produced can be used to simulate scoopula
a volcano, for example, or to propel a toy car or thermometer
rocket. wash bottle with distilled water
CH COOH + NaHCO → (at room temperature)
3 (aq) 3(s)
NaCH 3 COO (aq) + CO 2(g) + H 2 O ((cid:2)) warm-water bath (prepared using a large beaker
and a hot plate or electric kettle)
Other carbonate-containing compounds, such as
ice bath (ice cubes and water)
calcium carbonate, can also react with vinegar to
paper towel
produce CO .
2
In this investigation, you will determine
Safety Precautions
reaction rates by recording the time taken to
produce a fixed volume of CO . You will collect
2
the CO by downward displacement of water.
2 •Beware of shock hazard if an electric kettle or
hot plate is used.
Question
•Wear safety glasses at all times.
How do factors such as concentration, tempera-
ture, a different reactant, and surface area affect Procedure
the rate of this reaction?
Part 1 The Effect of Concentration
1. The distilled water and vinegar that you are
Prediction
going to use should be at room temperature.
Read the Procedure. Quantitatively predict Measure and record the temperature of either
the effects of changes to the concentration and the vinegar or the distilled water.
temperature. Qualitatively predict the effects
2. Assemble the apparatus for the collection of
of changes to the reactant and surface area.
CO , by downward displacement of water, as
2
shown below.
Materials
one-holed
electronic balance
stopper rubber
pneumatic trough tube
stopwatch clamp
test tube
250 mL Erlenmeyer flask
retort stand and clamp pneumatic
trough
one-holed rubber stopper, fitted with a piece
of glass tubing (must be airtight)
1 m rubber hose to fit glass tubing sink
(must be airtight)
25 or 100 mL graduated cylinder
large test tube
weighing paper, weighing boat, or small beaker
250 ml reaction water
100 mL vinegar (at room temperature) Erlenmeyer mixture
10 g baking soda, NaHCO flask
3
274 MHR • Unit 3 Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
Note: To invert a test tube filled with water, Part 3 The Effect of Reactants and Surface Area
place a piece of paper over the mouth of the 1. Repeat trial 3 in Part 1, using 1.00 g of
filled test tube before inverting it. powdered calcium carbonate, CaCO ,
3
instead of NaHCO . All the reactants should
3. Copy the table below into your notebook, to 3
be at room temperature. Record the time
record your data.
taken to fill the tube with CO . Determine the
2
Volume of Time to fill Average average rate of production of CO (in mL/s).
Mass of Volume of distilled test tube reaction 2
Trial NaHCO3 (g) vinegar (mL) water (mL) with CO2 (s) rate (mL/s)
2. Repeat step 1, using 1.00 g of solid CaCO
3
1 1.00 20.0 0.0
(marble chips) instead of powdered CaCO .
3
2 1.00 15.0 5.0
3 1.00 10.0 10.0
4 1.00 5.0 15.0 Analysis
4. For trial 1, add 20.0 mL of vinegar to the 1. Draw a graph to show your results for Part 1.
flask. Have the stopwatch ready. The end of Plot average reaction rate (in mL CO 2 /s) on
the rubber tubing should be in place under the y-axis. Plot [CH 3 COOH] (in mol/L) on the
the water-filled test tube in the pneumatic x-axis. Vinegar is 5.0% (m/v) CH 3 COOH.
trough. Quickly add 1.00 g of NaHCO to the
3 2. As quantitatively as possible, state a
flask, and put in the stopper. Record the time
relationship between [CH COOH] and the
3
taken to fill the tube completely with CO .
2 average rate of the reaction.
5. Complete trials 2 to 4 with the indicated
3. Compare the average reaction rate for
quantities.
corresponding concentrations of vinegar at
6. Determine the volume of CO you collected the three different temperatures tested.
2
by filling the gas collection test tube to the
4. What effect did a 10˚C temperature change
top with water and then pouring the water
have on the reaction rate? Be as quantitative
into a graduated cylinder.
as possible.
Part 2 The Effect of Temperature 5. What effect did using CaCO instead of
3
1. Repeat trial 3 in Part 1 using a mixture of NaHCO 3 have on the reaction rate?
10 mL of water and 10 mL of vinegar that
6. What effect did the surface area of the CaCO
3
has been cooled to about 10˚C below room
have on the reaction rate?
temperature in an ice bath. Measure and record
the temperature of the mixture immediately
Conclusion
before the reaction. Record the time taken
7. State the effect of each factor on the
to fill the test tube with CO . Determine the
2
reaction rate. Compare your results with
average rate of production of CO (in mL/s).
2
your prediction.
2. Use a hot-water bath to warm a mixture of
10 mL of distilled water and 10 mL of vinegar
Application
to about 10˚C above room temperature. Repeat
8. The rate of this reaction can be expressed by
trial 3 in Part 1 using this heated mixture.
the following equation:
Measure and record the temperature of the
Rate = k[CH COOH]m, where k is a constant
vinegar-water mixture immediately before the 3
and m is usually equal to 0, 1, or 2.
reaction. Record the time taken to fill the test
What value of m do your results suggest?
tube with CO . Determine the average rate of
2
production of CO (in mL/s).
2
Chapter 6 Rates of Chemical Reactions • MHR 275
Factors That Affect Reaction Rate
Chemists have made the following observations about factors that affect
reaction rate. You may already be familiar with some of these observa-
tions, from your previous studies of chemical reactions and from
Investigation 6-A.
Summary of Some Factors That Affect Reaction Rate
1. The rate of a reaction can be increased by increasing the
temperature.
2. Increasing the concentrations of the reactants usually increases
the rate of the reaction.
3. A catalyst is a substance that increases the rate of a reaction.
The catalyst is regenerated at the end of the reaction and can be
re-used. You will learn more about catalysts in section 6.4.
4. Increasing the available surface area of a reactant increases the rate
of a reaction.
5. The rate of a chemical reaction depends on what the reactants are.
Chemists and engineers use these and other factors to manipulate the
rate of a particular reaction to suit their needs. For example, consider the
synthesis of ammonia, NH , from nitrogen and hydrogen.
3
N + 3H → 2NH
2(g) 2(g) 3(g)
This reaction must be carried out with high concentrations of reactants, at
a temperature of 400˚C to 500˚C, in the presence of a catalyst. Otherwise,
the rate of production of ammonia is too slow to be economically feasible.
Section Summary
In this section, you learned how to express reaction rates and how to ana-
lyze reaction rate graphs. You also learned how to determine the average
rate and instantaneous rate of a reaction, given appropriate data. Then
you examined different techniques for monitoring the rate of a reaction.
Finally, you carried out an investigation to review some of the factors that
affect reaction rate. In the next section, you will learn how to use a rate
law equation to show the quantitative relationships between reaction rate
and concentration.
Section Review
1 C In your own words, explain why the rate of a chemical reaction
is fastest at the beginning of the reaction.
2 K/U Show why the expression for the rate of disappearance of a
reactant is always negative, even though rates are always positive,
by convention.
3 K/U Under what circumstances is the rate at which the concentration
of a reactant decreases numerically equal to the rate at which the
concentration of a product increases?
276 MHR • Unit 3 Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
4 I In the following reaction, the rate of production of sulfate ions
is 1.25 × 10 −3 mol/(L•s).
2HCrO − + 3HSO − + 5H + → 2Cr3+ + 3SO 2− + 5H O
4 3 4 2
−
(a) What is the corresponding rate at which [HSO ] decreases over
3
the same time interval?
−
(b) What is the corresponding rate at which [HCrO ] decreases over the
4
same time interval?
5 K/U In this section, you examined the following techniques for
monitoring the progress of a reaction. State the conditions that must
change as a reaction proceeds, to allow each technique to be used.
(a) using a pH meter
(b) using a spectrophotometer
(c) using a conductivity meter
(d) monitoring pressure
6 I Refer to the table in the ThoughtLab on page 270. Redraw the table,
adding one column for [N O ] and one column for [NO ].
2 5 2
(a) Calculate [NO ] at each time interval, based on [O ]. Assume initial
2 2
[NO ] = 0.0 mol/L.
2
(b) On the same set of axes, draw and label a concentration-time graph
with two curves: one for [NO ] and one for [O ].
2 2
(c) What do you notice about the shapes of the two curves?
(d) Determine the instantaneous rate at t = 1200 and t = 4800 for each
compound. How do the instantaneous rates compare?
(e) Is it possible to use the information in the table to calculate [N O ]
2 5
at each time interval? Explain your answer.
(f) On a concentration-time graph, sketch the shape of a curve that
represents [N O ] versus time.
2 5
7 C For each reaction, suggest one or more techniques for monitoring
the progress of the reaction. Explain your answers.
(a) CH 3 CH 2 CH 2 CH 2 CH(cid:2)CH 2((cid:2)) + Br 2(aq) → CH 3 CH 2 CH 2 CH 2 CHBrCH 2 Br ((cid:2))
Hint: Br is brownish-orange. The other compounds are colourless.
2
(b) H 2 O 2(aq) → H 2 O ((cid:2)) + 1 2 O 2(g)
(c) CaCO 3(s) + H 2 SO 4(aq) → CaSO 4(aq) + CO 2(g) + H 2 O ((cid:2))
(d) 5Fe2+ (aq) + MnO 4 − (aq) + 8H + (aq) → Mn2+ (aq) + 5Fe3+ (aq) + 4H 2 O ((cid:2))
−
Hint: The permanganate ion, MnO , is purple. All the other
4
species in the reaction are colourless.
(e) N + 3H → 2NH
2(g) 2(g) 3(g)
Chapter 6 Rates of Chemical Reactions • MHR 277
6.2 The Rate Law: Reactant
Concentration and Rate
Section Preview/ The rate of a chemical reaction depends on several factors, as you learned
Specific Expectations in section 6.1. One of the factors that affect reaction rate is the concentra-
In this section, you will tions of the reactants. You know that the rates of most chemical reactions
increase when the concentrations of the reactants increase. Is there a more
(cid:2) expressthe rate of a
reaction as a rate law specific relationship? In this section, you will explore the quantitative
equation relationships between the rate of a reaction and the concentrations of the
reactants.
(cid:2) explainthe concept of
half-life for a reaction
Relating Reactant Concentrations and Rate
(cid:2) determinethe rate
law equation and rate Consider the general reaction below.
constant for a reaction
aA + bB → products
from experimental data
This reaction occurs at a constant temperature. The reactant formulas are
(cid:2) communicateyour under-
standing of the following represented by A and B. The stoichiometric coefficients are represented by
terms: rate law equation, a and b. In this section, you will study reaction rates that are not affected
rate constant, overall by the concentrations of the products. Therefore, you do not need to use
reaction order, first-order symbols for the products.
reaction, second-order
In general, the rate of a reaction increases when the concentrations of
reaction, initial rates
the reactants increase. The dependence of the rate of a reaction on the
method,half-life (t )
1/2
concentrations of the reactants is given by the following relationship.
Rate ∝ [A]m[B]n
This relationship can be expressed in a general equation called the
rate law equation. The rate law equation is shown in Figure 6.5. For any
reaction, the rate law equation expresses the relationship between the
concentrations of the reactants and the rate of the reaction. The letter k
represents a proportionality constant called the rate constant. There is
a different rate constant for each reaction at any given temperature.
The exponents m and n must be determined by experiment. They
do not necessarily correspond to the stoichiometric coefficients of their
reactants. They are usually 1 or 2, but values of 0, 3, and even fractions
can occur.
Rate constant Rate law exponents
(cid:2) depends on temperature (cid:2) do not change with temperature
(cid:2) is constant under constant conditions (cid:2) must be determined experimentally
= m n
Rate k A B
Concentrations of reactants
Figure 6.5 This diagram explains the components of the rate law.
278 MHR • Unit 3 Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
The values of the exponents in the rate law equation establish the
order of the reaction. If a given reactant is found to have an exponent of 1,
the reaction is said to be first order in this reactant. Similarly, if the
exponent of a reactant is 2, the reaction is second order in this reactant.
The sum of the exponents (m + n) is known as the overall reaction order.
For example, the rate law equation below represents a reaction that is first
order in A, second order in B, and third order (1 + 2) overall.
Rate = k[A]1[B]2
Chemists carry out experiments to determine the rate law equation for a
given reaction at a given temperature. Later in the section, you will work
with data and do this yourself. First, however, it is necessary to examine
further the rate constant and reaction order.
The Rate Constant
The magnitude of the rate constant, k, indicates the speed of a reaction.
A small rate constant indicates a slow reaction. A large rate constant
indicates a fast reaction. For example, a first-order reaction with a rate
constant of 102 s −1 will be essentially complete in less than 0.10 s. By
contrast, a first-order reaction with a rate constant of 10
−3
s
−1
will take
about 2 h.
As a reaction proceeds, the reaction rate decreases because the
concentrations of the reactants decrease. The value of the rate constant,
however, remains the same throughout the reaction. In other words, for a
given reaction under constant conditions, the value of k remains constant.
What happens if the temperature changes? Since the rate of a
chemical reaction depends on temperature, so does k. Because a chemical
reaction depends on temperature, chemists who study reaction rates
must work at constant temperature. Furthermore, the value of k must
be accompanied by the temperature at which the reaction occurred.
For example, for the second order decomposition of hydrogen iodide,
k = 2.7 × 10 −3L/(mol•s) at 440˚C. When the temperature is increased
to 500˚C, k = 3.9 × 10 −3L/(mol•s).
Defining First-Order Reactions
A first-order reaction has an overall order of 1. The decomposition of
dinitrogen pentoxide, N O , is an example of a first-order reaction.
2 5
2N O → 4NO + 5O
2 5(g) 2(g) 2(g)
Experiments have shown that this reaction is first order in N O . In other
2 5
words, the rate law equation is written as follows:
Chemists can trace the
Rate = k[N 2 O 5 ]1 progress of the chemical
Because the overall order of the reaction is one, it is a first-order reaction. reaction shown on the left
by monitoring its conductivity.
Reactions with more than one reactant can also be first-order
Explain why.
reactions. For example, consider the following reaction.
(CH 3 ) 3 CBr (aq) + H 2 O ((cid:2)) → (CH 3 ) 3 OH (aq) + H + (aq) + Br − (aq)
Experiments have shown that the reaction is first order in (CH ) CBr, and
3 3
zero order in water. In other words, the rate of the reaction does not
depend, at all, on the concentration of water. The rate law equation is
written as follows:
Rate = k[(CH 3 ) 3 CBr ((cid:2)) ]1[H 2 O ((cid:2)) ]0
The overall reaction order is 1 (1 + 0). The reaction is first order.
Chapter 6 Rates of Chemical Reactions • MHR 279
You frequently encounter first-order relationships in everyday
life. For example, if one soft drink costs $1.50, two soft drinks cost
$3.00, three cost $4.50, and so on. This first-order relationship can be
represented by the following equation.
Cost = $1.50(Numberofsoftdrinks)1
Defining Second-Order Reactions
CHEM A second-order reaction has an overall reaction order of 2. An example
FACT of a second-order reaction is the decomposition of hydrogen iodide.
For the decomposition reaction 2HI (g) → H 2(g) + I 2(g)
of hydrogen iodide, the value
Chemists have determined, by experiment, that this reaction is second
of the exponent of [HI] in the
order in hydrogen iodide. Therefore, the rate law equation is written
rate law equation is the same
as follows:
as its molar coefficient in the
Rate = k[HI]2
balanced chemical equation.
This is not always the case. Another example of a second-order reaction is the reaction between nitric
The values of the exponents oxide and ozone.
in a rate law equation must
NO + O → NO + O
be determined by experiment. (g) 3(g) 2(g) 2(g)
By experiment, chemists have determined that the reaction is first order in
nitric oxide and first order in ozone, as shown below:
Rate = k[NO]1[O ]1
3
The overall order of the reaction is 2 (1 + 1). Therefore, the reaction is a
Electronic Learning Partner
second order reaction.
Go to the Chemistry 12 For a non-chemistry example of a second-order relationship, consider
Electronic Learning Partner the equation for the simple parabola, y = x2. When x = 3, y = 9.
for more information about When x = 12, the value of y increases to 122 = 144. In other words,
aspects of material covered
when the value of x increases by 4, the value of y increases by a factor
in this section of the chapter. of 42 (16 × 9 = 144).
Other Reactions
There are also other types of reactions, besides first-order and second-
order reactions. For example, consider the decomposition of ammonia on
a tungsten, W, catalyst.
W
2NH (s) N + 3H
3(g) 2(g) 2(g)
The rate law equation for this reaction has been found experimentally.
Rate = k[NH ]0 = k
3
The rate of decomposition of ammonia on a tungsten catalyst is
independent of the concentration of ammonia, since [NH ]0 = 1.
3
In other words, the rate of the reaction is a constant.
Many reactions have overall orders that are higher than 2. Some
reactions have overall orders that are fractions. In this text, however,
you will concentrate on first-order and second-order reactions.
The Initial Rates Method
As you have learned, the values of the exponents in a rate law equation
must be determined experimentally. Chemists determine the values of
m and n by carrying out a series of experiments. Each experiment has a
different, known set of initial concentrations. All other factors, such as
temperature, remain constant. Chemists measure and compare the initial
rate of each reaction. Thus, this method is called the initial rates method.
280 MHR • Unit 3 Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
There are several reasons for using initial rates. One reason is that
chemists do not need to follow each reaction to its end. This saves time,
especially when studying slow reactions.
Rate Experiments
To see how the initial rates method works, consider the following reaction:
2N O → 2NO + O
2 5(g) 2(g) 2(g)
The general rate law equation for this reaction is given below.
Rate = k[N O ]m
2 5
To determine the value of m, a chemist performs three experiments. A
different initial concentration of dinitrogen pentoxide, [N O ] , is used for
2 5 0
each experiment. The subscript 0 represents t = 0. Table 6.2 shows the
results of these experiments.
Table 6.2 Data for Rate Experiments
Experiment Initial [N 2 O 5 ] 0 (mol/L) Initial rate (mol/(L • s))
1 0.010 4.8 × 10−6
2 0.020 9.6 × 10−6
3 0.030 1.5 × 10−5
The value of m can be determined using at least two different methods. By
inspection, you can see that when the concentration of N O is doubled
2 5
(experiments 1 and 2), the rate also doubles. When the concentration of
N O is tripled (experiments 1 and 3), the rate also triples. This indicates
2 5
a first-order relationship, as follows:
Rate = k[N O ]1
2 5
Alternatively, you can compare the rate law equation for each experiment
using ratios. This method is useful when the relationship between
concentration and rate is not immediately obvious from the data.
Write the rate expressions for experiments 1 and 2 as follows:
Rate = k(0.010)m
1
= 4.8 × 10 −6mol/(L•s)
Rate = k(0.020)m
2
= 9.6 × 10 −6mol/(L•s)
Create a ratio to compare the two rates.
Rate 1 = k(0.010mol/L)m = 4.8 × 10 −6mol/(L•s)
Rate
2
k(0.020mol/L)m 9.6 × 10 −6mol/(L•s)
Since k is a constant for reactions that occur at a constant temperature, Check your value of mby
you can cancel out k. setting up a ratio for experi-
ments 1 and 3 (or experiments
k(0.010mol/L)m = 4.8 × 10 −6mol/(L•s) 2 and 3). Solve for m, and
k(0.020mol/L)m 9.6 × 10 −6mol/(L•s)
compare.
(0.5)m = 0.5
m = 1(byinspection)
Chapter 6 Rates of Chemical Reactions • MHR 281
Determining the Rate Constant
Notice that the units of the Once you know the rate law equation for a reaction, you can calculate the
rate constant are determined rate constant using the results from any of the experiments. The rate law
by your calculation. For a equation for the previous rate experiments is written as follows:
first-order reaction, the units Rate = k[N O ]1
are always s−1. Show why this 2 5
is the case. What are the units You can use data from any of the three experiments to calculate k.
for a second-order reaction? Substituting data from experiment 1, you can solve for k.
4.8 × 10 −6mol/(L•s) = k(0.010mol/L)
k = 4.8 × 10 −6mol/(L•s)
0.010mol/L
= 4.8 × 10 −6s −1
Therefore, for the temperature at which the experiments were carried out,
4.8 × 10 −4 s −1 is the rate constant. Using data from experiment 2 would
give the same value of k.
Sample Problem
Finding a Rate Law Equation
Problem
Chlorine dioxide, ClO , reacts with hydroxide ions to produce a mixture
2
of chlorate and chlorite ions.
2ClO 2(aq) + 2OH − (aq) → ClO 3 − (aq) + ClO 2 − (aq) + H 2 O ((cid:2))
The rate data in the table below were determined at a constant
temperature. Find the rate law equation and the value of k.
Initial rate of formation of
Experiment Initial [ClO2] (mol/L) Initial [OH−] (mol/L) products (mol/(L •s))
1 0.0150 0.0250 1.30 × 10 −3
2 0.0150 0.0500 2.60 × 10 −3
3 0.0450 0.0250 1.16 × 10 −2
What Is Required?
You need to find the value of m,n, and kin the general rate law equa-
tion for the reaction.
Rate = k[ClO ]m[OH − ]n
2
What Is Given?
You know the initial concentrations of the reactants and the initial rates
for three experiments.
Plan Your Strategy
−
Step 1 Find two experiments in which [ClO ] remains constant and [OH ]
2
changes. Compare the rates and concentrations to solve for n.
−
Then find two experiments in which [OH ] remains constant and
[ClO ] changes. Compare rates and concentrations to find m.
2
Step 2 Use the data and your calculated values for mand nto solve
for k, using the following equation.
Rate = k[ClO ]m[OH − ]n
2
282 MHR • Unit 3 Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
PROBLEM TIP
Act on Your Strategy
When you set up your ratio to
Step 1 Begin with experiments 1 and 2, where [ClO 2 ] is constant, to compare rates, it does not
determine the order of the reaction with respect to OH − . matter which rate is the
numerator, and which is the
Set up a ratio for the two rates as shown. Notice that you can
denominator. It is often easier
cancel out [ClO ] because you chose experiments in which [ClO ]
2 2 to see the solution, however,
did not change.
if the larger rate is the
Rate 2 = k(0.0150mol/L)m(0.0150mol/L)n = 2.60 × 10 −3mol/(L•s) numerator.
Rate
1
k(0.0500mol/L)m(0.0250mol/L)n 1.30 × 10 −3mol/(L•s)
Because kis a constant, you can cancel it out.
k(0.0500mol/L)n = 2.60 × 10 −3mol/(L•s)
k(0.0250mol/L)n 1.30 × 10 −3mol/(L•s)
(2)n = 2
n = 1(byinspection)
−
Therefore, the reaction is first order with respect to OH .
−
Set up a ratio for experiments 1 and 3, in which [OH ] is
−
constant and [ClO ] changes. You can cancel out the [OH ]
2
terms right away.
Rate 2 = k(0.0450mol/L)m(0.0250mol/L)n = 1.16 × 10 −2mol/(L•s)
Rate
1
k(0.0150mol/L)m(0.0250mol/L)n 1.30 × 10 −3mol/(L•s)
Since kis a constant, you can cancel it out.
k[0.0450mol/L]m = 1.16 × 10 −2mol/(L•s)
k[0.0150mol/L]m 1.30 × 10 −3mol/(L•s)
(3)m = 8.92 ≈ 9
m = 2(byinspection)
The reaction is second order with respect to ClO .
2
Therefore, the rate law equation is written as follows:
Rate = k[ClO ]2[OH − ]
2
−
The reaction is second order in ClO , first order in OH , and third
2
order overall.
Step 2 To find the value of the rate constant, substitute data from any of
the three experiments into the rate law equation. Using the data
from experiment 1 gives the following equation.
1.30 × 10 −3mol/(L•s) = k(0.0150mol/L)2(0.0250mol/L)
Solve for k.
k = 1.30 × 10 −3mol/(L•s)
(0.0150mol/L)2(0.0250mol/L)
= 231L2/(mol2 •s)
Therefore, the rate constant at the temperature of the
experiment is 231L2/(mol2 •s). The rate law equation is
Rate = 231L2/(mol2 •s)[CIO
2
]2[OH − ].
Check Your Solution
To check your values of mand n, solve by inspection. When [ClO ] is
2
−
constant and [OH ] doubles, the rate also doubles and the reaction is first
− −
order in OH . When [OH ] is constant and [ClO ] triples, the rate
2
increases by a factor of 9. Recall that 32 = 9, indicating a second-order
relationship. To check your value of k, substitute data from experiment
2 or 3. You should get the same answer. Also check the units and the
number of significant digits for k.
Chapter 6 Rates of Chemical Reactions • MHR 283
Practice Problems
5. When heated, ethylene oxide decomposes to produce methane and
carbon monoxide.
C H O → CH + CO
2 4 (g) 4(g) (g)
At 415˚C, the following initial rate data were recorded.
Experiment [C 2 H 4 O] 0 (mol/L) Initial rate (mol/(L • s))
1 0.002 85 5.84 × 10−7
2 0.004 28 8.76 × 10−7
3 0.005 70 1.17 × 10−6
Determine the rate law equation and the rate constant at 415˚C.
6. Iodine chloride reacts with hydrogen to produce iodine and hydrogen
chloride.
2ICl + H → I + 2HCl
2 2
At temperature T, the following initial rate data were recorded.
Experiment [ICI] 0 (mol/L) [H 2 ] 0 (mol/L) Initial rate (mol/(L • s))
1 0.20 0.050 0.0015
2 0.40 0.050 0.0030
3 0.20 0.200 0.0060
Determine the rate law equation and the rate constant at temperature T.
7. Sulfuryl chloride (also known as chlorosulfuric acid and thionyl
chloride), SO Cl , is used in a variety of applications, including the
2 2
synthesis of pharmaceuticals, rubber-based plastics, dyestuff, and
rayon. At a certain temperature, the rate of decomposition of sulfuryl
chloride was studied.
SO Cl → SO + Cl
2 2(g) 2(g) 2(g)
[SOCl ](mol/L) Initial rate(mol/(L • s))
2 2
0.150 3.3 × 10−6
0.300 6.6 × 10−6
0.450 9.9 × 10−6
(a) Write the rate law equation for the decomposition of sulfuryl
chloride.
(b) Determine the rate constant, k, for the reaction, with the
appropriate units.
8. Consider the following reaction.
2A + 3B + C → products
This reaction was found to obey the following rate law equation.
Rate = k[A]2[B][C]
Copy the following table into your notebook. Then use the given
information to predict the blank values. Do not write in this textbook.
Initial [A] Initial [B] Initial [C] Initial rate
Experiment (mol/L) (mol/L) (mol/L) (mol/(L • s))
1 0.10 0.20 0.050 0.40
2 0.10 (a) 0.10 0.40
3 0.20 0.050 (b) 0.20
4 (c) 0.025 0.040 0.45
5 0.10 0.010 0.15 (d)
284 MHR • Unit 3 Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
The Half-Life of a Reaction
You have seen that a large rate constant indicates a fast reaction, while
a small rate constant indicates a slow reaction. It is not always easy,
however, to determine how long a reaction will take to be completed
just by looking at the value of k. How can you relate the speed of a
reaction to the units of s
−1
for a first-order reaction?
The half-life, t , of a reaction is the time that is needed for the
1/2
reactant mass or concentration to decrease by one half of its initial
value. The SI units for half-life are seconds. Usually, however, half-life
is expressed in whatever units of time are appropriate to the reaction.
For example, the half-life of a very fast reaction may be measured in
microseconds. The half-life of a slow reaction may be measured in days.
Knowing the half-life of a reaction is an easy way to tell how fast or how
slow a reaction is.
Examine Figure 6.6 to see how half-life and reactant concentration are
related for the first-order decomposition of dinitrogen pentoxide.
0.0600
0.0500
0.0400
0.0300
0.0200
0.0100
0.0000
0 24 48 72
Time (min)
Figure 6.6 This graph shows [NO] versus time for the first three half-lives of the
2 5
decomposition reaction of NO at 44˚C . The spheres in the cubes represent [NO].
2 5 2 5
The half-life of any first-order reaction is always a constant, and it
depends on k. In other words, any first-order reaction (that is, any reaction
with a rate law equation in the form Rate = k[A]) has a half-life that is
independent of the initial concentration of the reactant, A. The half-life
of any first-order reaction can be calculated using the following equation.
t = 0.693 1/2 k
In this equation, k is the first-order rate constant. It has units of s
−1.
Examine the Sample Problem on the next page to learn how to calcu-
late the half-life of a first-order reaction. Then try the Practice Problems
that follow.
Chapter 6 Rates of Chemical Reactions • MHR 285
]
O
N[
5
2
t
0
After t 1/2
After 2t 1/2
After 3t 1/2
t 1/2 t 1/2 t 1/2
Math LINK
Where does the equation
for half-life come from? Each
rate law has an associated
integrated rate law. (A calculus
teacher may be able to show
you how to arrive at the
integrated rate law.) For
first-order reactions, the
integrated rate law is
(cid:2) (cid:3) ln [A] 0 = kt, where A is
[A]
t
a reactant. Show that
[A] = 1[A] for all first-order
t1/2 2 0
reactions. Then use the
integrated rate law to arrive
at the equation for half-life.
Sample Problem
Calculating the Half-Life of a First-Order Reaction
Problem
The decomposition of sulfuryl chloride, SO Cl , is a first-order reaction.
2 2
SO Cl → SO + Cl
2 2(g) 2(g) 2(g)
Rate = k[SO Cl ]
2 2
At 320˚C, the rate constant is 2.2 × 10 −5s −1.
(a) Calculate the half-life of the reaction, in hours.
(b) How long does the sulfuryl chloride take to decrease to 1 of its
8
original concentration?
What Is Required?
(a) You need to find the half-life, t , of the reaction.
1/2
(b) You need to find the time required for [SO Cl ] to decrease to 1 of its
2 2 8
initial value, [SO Cl ] .
2 2 0
What Is Given?
You know the rate equation and the rate constant.
Rate = k[SO Cl ]
2 2
k = 2.2 × 10 −5s −1
Plan Your Strategy
(a) To find t , use the following equation.
1/2
t = 0.693
1/2 k
(b) Each half-life reduces the initial concentration of the reactant,
[A] , by one half.
0
After 1 t , [A] = 1 [A]
1/2 2 0
After 2 t , [A] = 1 × ( 1 [A] )
1/2 2 2 0
= 1 [A]
4 0
PROBLEM TIP
In general, the concentration After 3 t 1/2 , [A] = 2 1 × ( 1 4 [A] 0 )
of reactant that is left after n
half-lives have passed, [A] t , = 8 1 [A] 0
can be expressed as follows.
The concentration of reactant remaining after 3 half-lives is 1, or
[A] t = x[A] 0 = (1 2 )n × [A] 0 (1)3, of the original amount. 8
2
Act on Your Strategy
(a) Solve for t .
1/2
t = 0.693
1/2 2.2 × 10 −5s −1
= 3.2 × 104s
Convert the units of your answer to hours.
t = 3.2 × 104s
1/2 (60s/min)(60min/h)
= 8.8h
The half-life of the reaction, in hours, is 8.8 h.
286 MHR • Unit 3 Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
(b) Determine how many half-lives correspond to 1 × [SO Cl ] .
8 2 2 0
1 × [SO Cl ] = ( 1 )n × [SO Cl ]
8 2 2 0 2 2 2 0
1 = ( 1 )n
8 2
n = 3(byinspection)
Determine the time span that corresponds to 3 half-lives.
3 × 8.8h = 26h
It would take 26 h for the concentration of SO Cl to decrease
2 2
1
to [SO Cl ] .
8 2 2 0
Check Your Solution
The units and significant digits for half-life are correct. The small
rate constant of 2.2 × 10 −5 corresponds to a slow reaction with a long
half-life. Three half-lives corresponds to 1 × 1 × 1 = 1 of the initial
2 2 2 8
concentration.
Practice Problems
9. Cyclopropane, C H , has a three-membered hydrocarbon ring
3 6
structure. It undergoes rearrangement to propene. At 1000˚C, the
first-order rate constant for the decomposition of cyclopropane is
9.2 s
−1.
(a) Determine the half-life of the reaction.
(b) What percent of the original concentration of cyclopropane
will remain after 4 half-lives?
10. Peroxyacetyl nitrate (PAN), H CCO ONO , is a constituent of
3 2 2
photochemical smog. It undergoes a first-order decomposition
reaction with t = 32 min.
1/2
(a) Calculate the rate constant in s
−1
for the first-order decomposition
of PAN.
(b) 128 min after a sample of PAN began to decompose, the
concentration of PAN in the air is 3.1 × 1013molecules/L. What
was the concentration of PAN when the decomposition began?
11. In general, a reaction is essentially over after 10 half-lives. Prove that
this generalization is reasonable.
12. The half-life of a certain first-order reaction is 120 s. How long do you
estimate that it will take for 90% of the original sample to react?
Section Summary
In this section, you learned how to relate the rate of a chemical reaction
to the concentrations of the reactants using the rate law. You classified reac-
tions based on their reaction order. You determined the rate law equation
from empirical data. Then you learned about the half-life of a first-order
reaction. As you worked through sections 6.1 and 6.2, you may have won-
dered whyfactors such as concentration and temperature affect the rates
of chemical reactions. In the following section, you will learn about some
theories that have been developed to explain the effects of these factors.
Chapter 6 Rates of Chemical Reactions • MHR 287
Section Review
1 K/U The following reaction is second order in A and first order in B.
2A + 1B → 3C
What is the rate law equation for the reaction below?
(Assume that A, B, and C are the same compounds for each reaction.)
4A + 2B → 6C
2 K/U Consider the general reaction below.
aA + bB → cC + dD
Based on this equation, is it correct to write the following rate law
equation by inspection? Explain your answer.
Rate = k[A]a[B]b
3 K/U Consider the following rate law equation.
Rate = k[A]2[B]
(a) How does the reaction rate change if [A] decreases by a factor
of 2 and [B] increases by a factor of 4?
(b) How does the reaction rate change if [A] and [B] are doubled?
4 K/U Consider the following rate law equation.
Rate = k[HCrO − ][HSO − ]2[H + ]
4 3
(a) What is the order with respect to each reactant?
(b) What is the overall reaction order?
(c) What are the units for the rate constant?
5 I The data in the table below were collected for the following reaction.
A + B → C + D
Experiment [A] 0 (mol/L) [B] 0 (mol/L) Initial rate (mol/(L • s))
1 0.020 0.020 5.0 × 10−3
2 0.040 0.020 1.0 × 10−2
3 0.040 0.060 9.0 × 10−2
(a) What is the rate law equation for the reaction?
(b) Calculate the value of the rate constant, with proper units.
6 I The data in the table below were collected, at 25˚C, for the
following reaction.
2A + B + 2C → 3D
Determine the rate law equation and the value of k at 25˚C, with
proper units.
Experiment [A] 0 (mol/L) [B] 0 (mol/L) [C] 0 (mol/L) Initial rate (mol/(L • s))
1 0.20 0.10 0.10 4.0 × 10−4
2 0.20 0.30 0.20 1.2 × 10−3
3 0.20 0.10 0.30 4.0 × 10−4
4 0.60 0.30 0.40 3.6 × 10−3
7 I A first-order decomposition reaction has a rate constant of
2.34 × 10 −2 year −1. What is the half-life of the reaction? Express
your answer in years and in seconds.
288 MHR • Unit 3 Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
Theories of Reaction Rates 6.3
In section 6.2, you explored the rate law, which defines the relationship
Section Preview/
between the concentrations of reactants and reaction rate. Why, however, Specific Expectations
does the rate of a reaction increase with increased concentrations of
In this section, you will
reactants? Why do increased temperature and surface area increase
(cid:2) explain, using the collision
reaction rates? To try to explain these and other macroscopic observations,
theory and potential energy
chemists develop theories that describe what happens as reactions proceed diagrams, how different
on the molecular scale. In this section, you will explore these theories. factors, such as temperature
and concentration, control
Collision Theory the rate of a chemical
reaction
Why do factors such as temperature and concentration increase or
(cid:2) analyze simple potential
decrease the rate of a reaction? To answer this question, chemists must
energy diagrams of chemical
first answer another question: What causes a reaction to occur? One reactions
obvious answer is that a reaction occurs when two reactant particles
(cid:2) communicateyour under-
collide with one another. This answer is the basis for collision theory: In
standing of the following
order for a reaction to occur, reacting particles (atoms, molecules, or ions) terms: collision theory,
must collide with one another. activation energy(E ),
a
transition state theory,
The Effect of Concentration on Reactant Rates potential energy diagram,
transition state, activated
You can use simple collision theory to begin to understand why factors complex
such as concentration affect reaction rate. If a collision is necessary for a
reaction to occur, then it makes sense that the rate of the reaction will
increase if there are more collisions per unit time. More reactant particles
Electronic Learning Partner
in a given volume (that is, greater concentration) will increase the number
of collisions between the particles per second. Figure 6.7 illustrates Go to the Chemistry 12
this idea. Electronic Learning Partner
for more information about
aspects of material covered
in this section of the chapter.
Figure 6.7 At increased reactant concentrations, there is an increased number of
collisions per second.
Collision Theory and Surface Area
You can also use simple collision theory to explain why increasing the
surface area of a solid-phase reactant speeds up a reaction. With greater
Figure 6.8 Mixtures of grain or
surface area, more collisions can occur. This explains why campfires are coal dust and air are potentially
started with paper and small twigs, rather than logs. Figure 6.8 shows an explosive, as shown in this grain
example of the effect of surface area on collision rate. elevator explosion.
Chapter 6 Rates of Chemical Reactions • MHR 289
Beyond Collision Theory
Simple collision theory recognizes that a collision between reactants
is necessary for a reaction to proceed. Does every collision result in a
reaction? Consider a 1 mL sample of gas at room temperature and
atmospheric pressure. In the sample, about 1028 collisions per second take
place between gas molecules. If each collision resulted in a reaction, all
gas phase reactions would be complete in about a nanosecond (10
−9
s)—a
ineffective truly explosive rate! As you know from section 6.2, however, gas phase
reactions can occur quite slowly. This suggests that not every collision
between reactants results in a reaction.
ineffective
In order for a collision between reactants to result in a reaction, the
collision must be effective. An effective collision—one that results in the
formation of products—must satisfy the following two criteria. You will
ineffective
investigate these criteria over the next few pages.
ineffective
For a collision to be effective, it must satisfy both of these criteria:
1. correct orientation of reactants
2. sufficient collision energy
effective
Figure 6.9 Only one of these five
possible orientations of NO and Orientation of Reactants
NO 3 will lead to the formation of a Reacting particles must collide with the proper orientation relative to
product.
one another. This is also known as having the correct collision geometry.
The importance of proper collision geometry can be illustrated by the
following reaction.
NO + NO → NO + NO
(g) 3(g) 2(g) 2(g)
Figure 6.9 shows five of the many possible ways in which NO and NO
3
can collide. Only one of these five possibilities has the correct collision
geometry for a reaction to occur. As shown in the figure, only a certain
orientation of reactants prior to collision leads to the formation of two
molecules of nitrogen dioxide.
Activation Energy
In addition to collision geometry, there is a second factor that determines
whether a collision will result in a reaction: the energy of the collision.
The reactants must collide with energy that is sufficient to begin to break
the bonds in the reactants and to begin to form the bonds in the products.
In most reactions, only a small fraction of collisions have sufficient
energy for a reaction to occur. The activation energy, Ea, of a reaction is
the minimum collision energy that is required for a successful reaction.
The collision energy depends on the kinetic energy of the colliding
particles. As you know, temperature is a measure of the average kinetic
energy of the particles in a substance. If you plot the number of collisions
in a substance at a given temperature against the kinetic energy of
each collision, you get a curve like the one in Figure 6.10. The type of
distribution that is shown by this curve is known as a Maxwell-Boltzmann
distribution. The dotted line indicates the activation energy. The shaded
part of the graph indicates the collisions with energy that is equal to or
greater than the activation energy.
How does the distribution of kinetic energy change as the temperature
of a substance increases? Figure 6.11 shows the distribution of kinetic
290 MHR • Unit 3 Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
snoisilloc
fo
noitcarF
E a
Energy
Figure 6.10 The area under a
Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution
graph represents the distribution of
the kinetic energy of collisions at a
constant temperature. At a given
temperature, only a certain fraction
of the molecules in a sample have
enough kinetic energy to react.
energy in a sample of reacting gases at two different temperatures,
T and T , where T > T . The activation energy is indicated by the
1 2 2 1
dashed vertical line. Two observations are apparent from the graph:
1. At both temperatures, a relatively small fraction of collisions have
sufficient kinetic energy—the activation energy—to result in a reaction.
2. As the temperature of a sample increases, the fraction of collisions
with sufficient energy to cause a reaction increases significantly.
greater fraction
at T with enough
2
energy to react
T
1
T > T
2 1
Energy
For many reactions, the rate roughly doubles for every 10˚C rise in
temperature.
Transition State Theory
Transition state theory is used to explain what happens when molecules
collide in a reaction. It examines the transition, or change, from reactants
to products. The kinetic energy of the reactants is transferred to potential
energy as the reactants collide, due to the law of conservation of energy.
This is analogous to a bouncing basketball. The kinetic energy of the ball
is converted to potential energy, which is stored in the deformed ball as it
hits the floor. The potential energy is converted to kinetic energy as the
ball bounces away.
You can represent the increase in potential energy during a chemical
reaction using a potential energy diagram: a diagram that charts the
potential energy of a reaction against the progress of the reaction.
Examples of potential energy diagrams are shown in Figures 6.12 and 6.13
on the next page. The y-axis represents potential energy. The x-axis,
labelled “Reaction progress,” represents the progress of the reaction
through time.
The “hill” in each diagram illustrates the activation energy barrier
of the reaction. A slow reaction has a high activation energy barrier. This
indicates that relatively few reactants have sufficient kinetic energy for
a successful reaction. A fast reaction, by contrast, has a low activation
energy barrier.
A potential energy diagram for an exothermic reaction is shown in
Figure 6.12. The reactants at the beginning of the reaction are at a higher
energy level than the products. The overall difference in potential energy
is the enthalpy change, ∆H. There is no way to predict the activation
energy of a reaction from its enthalpy change. A highly exothermic reac-
tion may be very slow because it has a high activation energy. Conversely,
a reaction that is very fast may release very little heat. The enthalpy
change of a reaction is determined by finding the overall energy that is
Chapter 6 Rates of Chemical Reactions • MHR 291
snoisilloc
fo
noitcarF
Electronic Learning Partner
Go to the Chemistry 12
Electronic Learning Partner
to learn more about collision
geometry.
E
a
Figure 6.11 At increased
temperatures, more particles
collide with enough energy
to react.
transferred. The activation energy of a reaction is determined by analyzing
the reaction rate.
A potential energy diagram for an endothermic reaction is shown in
Figure 6.13. The reactants at the beginning of the reaction are at a lower
energy level than the products. The overall difference in potential energy
between reactants and products is the enthalpy change.
Figure 6.12 A potential energy diagram Figure 6.13 A potential energy
for an exothermic reaction diagram for an endothermic reaction
You may already know that many reactions can proceed in two directions.
For example, hydrogen and oxygen react to form water. Water, however,
can also undergo electrolysis, forming hydrogen and oxygen. This is the
reverse of the first reaction.
H 2(g) + 1 2 O 2(g) → H 2 O ((cid:2)) ∆H˚ = −285.8kJ
H 2 O ((cid:2)) → H 2(g) + 1 2 O 2((cid:2)) ∆H˚ = 285.8kJ
The enthalpy change of the first reaction is the same as the enthalpy
change of the second reaction, with the opposite sign. (You can show
this using Hess’s law.) How are the activation energies of forward and
reverse reactions related? For an exothermic reaction, the activation
energy of the reverse reaction, E equals E + ∆H. For an endo-
a(rev) a(fwd)
thermic reaction, E equals E − ∆H. Figures 6.12 and 6.13 show
a(rev) a(fwd)
the activation energies of forward and reverse reactions.
The top of the activation energy barrier on a potential energy diagram
represents the transition state, or change-over point, of the reaction. The
chemical species that exists at the transition state is referred to as the
activated complex. The activated complex is a transitional species that is
neither product nor reactant. It has partial bonds and is highly unstable.
There is a subtle difference between the transition state and the activated
complex. The transition state refers to the top of the “hill” on a potential
energy diagram. The chemical species that exists at this transition point is
called the activated complex.
Tracing a Reaction With a Potential Energy Diagram
−
Consider the substitution reaction between a hydroxide, OH , ion and
−
methyl bromide, BrCH . Methanol, CH OH, and a bromide, Br , ion
3 3
are formed.
BrCH + OH − → CH OH + Br −
3 3
Figure 6.14 is a potential energy diagram for this reaction. It includes
several “snapshots” as the reaction proceeds.
292 MHR • Unit 3 Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
ygrene
laitnetoP
ygrene
laitnetoP
transition state transition state
E
E a(rev)
a(fwd)
reactants E a(rev) E a(fwd) products
∆H
∆H
reactants
products
Reaction progress Reaction progress
H H H
− Br C 1 OH Br C OH Br C OH
H
H H H H
reactants before transition state activated complex after transition state products
Figure 6.14 As the reactants collide, chemical bonds break and form.
−
For a successful reaction to take place, BrCH and OH must collide in a
3
−
favourable orientation. The OH ion must approach BrCH from the side
3
that is opposite to the Br atom. When this occurs, a partial bond is formed
between the O of the OH − ion and the C atom. Simultaneously, the C(cid:3)Br
bond is weakened.
Because the activated complex contains partial bonds, it is highly
unstable. It can either break down to form products or it can decompose
to re-form the reactants. The activated complex is like a rock teetering on
top of a mountain. It could fall either way.
Chapter 6 Rates of Chemical Reactions • MHR 293
H
H
Br C OH
H H
H
H
H
Br −+ C OH
Reaction progress
ygrenE
E
a(fwd)
E
a(rev)
−
BrCH
3
+ OH ∆H
rxn
Br− + CH OH
3
Sample Problem
Drawing a Potential Energy Diagram
Problem
Carbon monoxide, CO, reacts with nitrogen dioxide, NO . Carbon
2
dioxide, CO , and nitric oxide, NO, are formed. Draw a potential energy
2
diagram to illustrate the progress of the reaction. (You do not need to
draw your diagram to scale). Label the axes, the transition state, and the
activated complex. Indicate the activation energy of the forward reaction,
E = 134kJ, as well as ∆H = −226kJ. Calculate the activation energy
a(fwd)
of the reverse reaction, E , and show it on the graph.
a(rev)
Continued ...
Solution
Since E = ∆H + E
a(rev) a(fwd)
E = 226kJ + 134kJ
a(rev)
= 360kJ
The activation energy of the reverse reaction is 360 kJ.
Check Your Solution
Look carefully at the potential energy diagram. Check that you have
labelled it completely. Since the forward reaction is exothermic, the
reactants should be at a higher energy level than the products, and they
are. The value of E is reasonable.
a(rev)
294 MHR • Unit 3 Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
Jk
,ygrene
laitnetoP
Continued ...
OC…O…NO
transition state
E = 134 kJ a(fwd)
E = 360 kJ
a(rev)
reactants
CO(g) + NO2(g)
∆H = −226 kJ
products
CO2(g) + NO(g)
reaction progress
Practice Problems
13. The following reaction is exothermic.
2ClO → Cl + O
(g) 2(g) 2(g)
Draw and label a potential energy diagram for the reaction. Propose a
reasonable activated complex.
14. Consider the following reaction.
AB + C → AC + B ∆H = +65kJ, E = 34kJ
a(rev)
Draw and label a potential energy diagram for this reaction.
Calculate and label E . Include a possible structure for the
a(fwd)
activated complex.
15. Consider the reaction below.
C + D → CD ∆H = −132kJ, E = 61kJ
a(fwd)
Draw and label a potential energy diagram for this reaction. Calculate
and label E . Include a possible structure for the activated complex.
a(rev)
16. In the upper atmosphere, oxygen exists in forms other than O .
2(g)
For example, it exists as ozone, O , and as single oxygen atoms, O .
3(g) (g)
Ozone and atomic oxygen react to form two molecules of oxygen.
For this reaction, the enthalpy change is −392 kJ and the activation
energy is 19 kJ. Draw and label a potential energy diagram. Include
a value for E . Propose a structure for the activated complex.
a(rev)
Temperature Dependence of Reaction Rates: Applications
Web LINK
As you saw in Figure 6.11, when reactions occur at higher temperatures,
www.mcgrawhill.ca/links/
the percent of particles that have sufficient kinetic energy to react (E )
a chemistry12
increases. Since a greater percent of reactant particles have enough energy
The chirping rate of a cricket
to react, the rate of the reaction increases.
is dependent on temperature,
Chemists exploit the temperature dependence of reaction rates by much like chemical reaction
carrying out chemical reactions at elevated temperatures to speed them rates are. Why does this
up. In organic chemistry, especially, reactions are commonly performed suggest that a cricket is a
under reflux: that is, while boiling the reactants. To prevent reactants and cold-blooded creature?
Search the Internet to
products from escaping as gases, a water-cooled condenser tube is fitted to
determine the mathematical
the reaction vessel. The tube condenses the vapours to liquids and returns
relationship between ambient
them to the reaction vessel. Figure 6.15 shows an experiment performed
temperature and the chirping
under reflux. rate of a cricket. Start your
At home, you take advantage of the temperature dependence of search by going to the web
chemical reactions all the time. For example, to keep your food fresh, site above and clicking on
you store it in a refrigerator. If you have ever left milk or vegetables in Web Links.
the refrigerator for several weeks, however, you have probably observed
that refrigeration does not stop food from spoiling. Instead, it decreases
the rate of the reactions that cause spoilage. When you want to cook your
food quickly, you increase the temperature of the stove. This increases
the rate of the reactions that take place as the food cooks.
clamp
condenser tube
water out
substances
condense
on inside of tube
cold water in
clamp
vapours rise
clamp
reaction vessel
boiling chips
heater
Figure 6.15 As the reactants are boiled under reflux, the vapours
condense and are returned to the reaction vessel. In this way, a chemical
reaction can be carried out at the boiling point of the reactants at
atmospheric pressure, with no loss of reactants, products, or solvent.
Chapter 6 Rates of Chemical Reactions • MHR 295
Section Summary
In this section, you used collision theory and transition state theory to
explain how reaction rates are affected by various factors. You considered
simple reactions, consisting of a single-step collision between reactants.
Not all reactions are simple, however. In fact, most chemical reactions
take place via several steps, occurring in sequence. In the next section,
you will learn about the steps that make up reactions and discover how
these steps relate to reaction rates.
Section Review
1 K/U In your own words, describe how collision theory explains
that increased concentrations result in increased reaction rates.
2 I Suppose that you have a solid sample of an organic substance.
You are going to burn the substance in an analytical furnace and
determine whether or not any unburned matter remains. The substance
is somewhat hard, and you receive it in a solid chunk.
(a) Suggest two ways to increase the rate of burning so that your
analysis will take less time.
(b) Explain why your suggestions would work, using the theories you
learned in this section.
3 K/U Consider the following reaction.
A + B → 2AB E = 143kJ, E = 75kJ
2 2 a(fwd) a(rev)
(a) Is the reaction endothermic or exothermic in the forward direction?
(b) Draw and label a potential energy diagram. Include a value for ∆H.
(c) Suggest a possible activated complex.
4 C Consider two exothermic reactions. Reaction (1) has a much
smaller activation energy than reaction (2).
(a) Sketch a potential energy diagram for each reaction, showing how
the difference in activation energy affects the shape of the graph.
(b) How do you think the rates of reactions (1) and (2) compare?
Explain your answer.
5 C Your friend is confused about the difference between the enthalpy
change and the activation energy of a chemical reaction. Write a few
paragraphs, in which you define each term and distinguish between
them. Use potential energy diagrams to illustrate your answer.
6 MC In a coal-fired electric generating plant, the coal is pulverized
before being mixed with air in the incinerator. Use collision theory
to explain why the coal is pulverized.
7 C People who have been submerged in very cold water, and
presumed drowned, have sometimes been revived. By contrast, people
who have been submerged for a similar period of time in warmer water
have not survived. Suggest reasons for this difference.
8 C Create a graphic organizer to summarize how the theories
you have studied in section 6.3 explain the effects of concentration,
temperature, and surface area on reaction rates.
296 MHR • Unit 3 Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
Reaction Mechanisms 6.4
and Catalysts
Chemical reactions are like factories, where goods (products) are created Section Preview/
from raw materials (reactants). An assembly line, like the one shown in Specific Expectations
Figure 6.16, involves many steps. An automobile is not formed from its In this section, you will
components in just one step. Similarly, most chemical reactions do not
(cid:2) demonstratean under-
proceed immediately from products to reactants. They take place via a standing that most reactions
number of steps. While you can go inside a factory to see all the steps that occur as a series of
are involved in making an automobile or a piece of clothing, you cannot elementary reactions in
observe a chemical equation on a molecular scale as it proceeds. Chemists a reaction mechanism
can experimentally determine the reactants and products of a reaction, but (cid:2) evaluatea proposed
they must use indirect evidence to suggest the steps in-between. mechanism for a
chemical reaction
Elementary Reactions (cid:2) determine, through
experiment, the reaction
A reaction mechanismis a series of steps that make up an overall reaction.
rate and rate law equation
Each step, called an elementary reaction, involves a single molecular for a chemical reaction
event, such as a simple collision between atoms, molecules, or ions.
(cid:2) communicateyour
An elementary step can involve the formation of different molecules or
understanding of the follow-
ions, or it may involve a change in the energy or geometry of the starting ing terms: reaction mecha-
molecules. It cannot be broken down into further, simpler steps. nism, elementary reaction,
reaction intermediates,
For example, consider the following reaction.
molecularity, bimolecular,
2NO + O → 2NO
(g) 2(g) 2(g) unimolecular, termolecular,
Chemists have proposed the following two-step mechanism for this rate-determining step,
reaction. Each step is an elementary reaction. homogeneous catalyst,
heterogeneous catalyst,
Step 1 NO + O → NO
(g) 2(g) 3(g) enzymes, active site,
Step 2 NO + NO → 2NO substrate
3(g) (g) 2(g)
When you add the two elementary reactions, you get the overall reaction.
Notice that NO is present in both elementary reactions, but it is not pres-
3
ent in the overall reaction. It is produced in the first step and consumed
in the second step.
Molecules (or atoms or ions) that are formed in an elementary reaction
and consumed in a subsequent elementary reaction are called reaction
intermediates. Even though they are not products or reactants in the over-
all reaction, reaction intermediates are essential for the reaction to take
place. They are also useful for chemists
who are trying to find evidence to support a proposed reaction mecha-
nism. You will explore this idea in Investigation 6-B.
The Molecularity of Elementary Reactions
The term molecularity refers to the number of reactant particles (mole-
cules, atoms, or ions) that are involved in an elementary
reaction.
In the reaction mechanism you just saw, each elementary
reaction consisted of two molecules colliding and reacting. When two par-
ticles collide and react, the elementary reaction is said to
Figure 6.16 Like most chemical
be bimolecular. reactions, building a car on an
assembly line takes more than
one step.
Chapter 6 Rates of Chemical Reactions • MHR 297
A unimolecular elementary reaction occurs when one molecule or
ion reacts. For example, when one molecule of chlorine absorbs ultraviolet
light, the Cl(cid:3)Cl bond breaks. The product is two chlorine atoms.
UV light
unimolecular Cl 2Cl
2(g) (g)
An elementary reaction may also involve three particles colliding in a
termolecular reaction. Termolecular elementary steps are rare, because
it is unlikely that three particles will collide all at once. Think of it this
bimolecular way. You have probably bumped into someone accidentally, many times,
on the street or in a crowded hallway. How many times, however, have
you and two other people collided at exactly the same time? Figure 6.17
models unimolecular, bimolecular, and termolecular reactions.
Rate Law Equations for Elementary Reactions
In section 6.2, you learned that the rate law equation for a chemical
termolecular reaction cannot be determined just by looking at the chemical equation.
It must be found by experiment. Elementary reactions are the exception
Figure 6.17 This figure shows to this rule. For an elementary reaction, the exponents in the rate law
the molecularity of elementary
equation are the same as the stoichiometric coefficients for each reactant
reactions. Termolecular reactions
in the chemical equation. Table 6.3 shows how rate laws correspond to
are rare.
elementary reactions.
Table 6.3 Elementary Reactions and Their Rate Laws
Elementary reaction Rate law
A → products Rate = k[A]
A + B → products Rate = k[A][B]
2A → products Rate = k[A]2
2A + B → products Rate = k[A]2[B]
Proposing and Evaluating Mechanisms
You can take apart a grandfather clock to take a look at its mechanism.
You can physically examine and take apart its gears and springs to deter-
mine how it works.
When chemists investigate the mechanism of a reaction, they are
not so lucky. Determining the mechanism of a chemical reaction is a bit
like figuring out how a clock works just by looking at its face and hands.
For this reason, reaction mechanisms are proposed rather than definitively
stated. Much of the experimental evidence that is obtained to support
a mechanism is indirect. Researchers need a lot of creativity as they
propose and test mechanisms.
One of the ways that researchers provide evidence for proposed
mechanisms is by proving the existence of a reaction intermediate.
Although a reaction intermediate usually appears for a very short time
and cannot be isolated, there are other ways to show its presence. For
example, if a reaction intermediate is coloured while other reactants are
colourless, a spectrophotometer will show when the reaction intermediate
is formed. You may even be able to see a fleeting colour change without
a spectrophotometer.
298 MHR • Unit 3 Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
When chemists propose a mechanism, they must satisfy the
following criteria:
• The equations for the elementary steps must combine to give the
equation for the overall reaction.
• The proposed elementary steps must be reasonable.
• The mechanism must support the experimentally determined rate law.
The Rate-Determining Step
How do chemists determine whether a proposed mechanism supports the
experimentally determined rate law? They must consider how the rates of
the elementary reactions relate to the rate of the overall reaction.
Elementary reactions in mechanisms all have different rates. Usually one
elementary reaction, called the rate-determining step, is much slower.
Hence, it determines the overall rate.
To understand the rate-determining step, consider a two-step process.
Suppose that you and a friend are making buttered toast for a large group
of people. The first step is toasting the bread. The second step is buttering
the toast. Suppose that toasting two slices of bread takes about two
minutes, but buttering the toast takes only a few seconds.
The rate at which the toast is buttered does not have any effect on
the overall rate of making buttered toast, because it is much faster than
the rate at which the bread is toasted. The overall rate of making buttered
toast, therefore, depends only on the rate of toasting the bread. In other
words, two pieces of buttered toast will be ready every two minutes. This
is the same as the rate for the first step in the “buttered toast mechanism.”
Thus, toasting the bread is the rate-determining step in the mechanism.
Step 1 Bread → Toast (slow, rate-determining)
Step 2 Toast + Butter → Butteredtoast (fast)
Now suppose that the butter is frozen nearly solid. It takes you about five
minutes to scrape off enough butter for one piece of toast. Pieces of toast
pile up, waiting to be buttered. In this case, the rate of making buttered
toast depends on the rate of spreading the butter. The rate of toasting is
fast relative to the rate of buttering.
Step 1 Bread → Toast (fast)
Step 2 Toast+Frozenbutter → Butteredtoast (slow, rate-determining)
The Rate-Determining Step and the Rate Law
How does the rate-determining step relate to the rate law for the overall
equation? Consider the reaction of nitrogen dioxide with chlorine.
2NO + Cl → 2NO Cl
2(g) 2(g) 2 (g)
Experiments show that this reaction has the following rate equation.
Rate = k[NO ][Cl ]
2 2
The proposed mechanism for the reaction is shown below.
Step 1 NO + Cl → NO Cl + Cl (slow)
2(g) 2(g) 2 (g) (g)
Step 2 NO + Cl → NO Cl (fast)
2(g) (g) 2 (g)
The mechanism seems reasonable, because the steps add up to give the
overall reaction. Both steps are plausible, because they are bimolecular
elementary reactions. Does the reaction mechanism support, however, the
experimentally determined rate law?
Chapter 6 Rates of Chemical Reactions • MHR 299
CHEM The first step in the mechanism is slow when compared with the
FACT second step. Therefore, the rate-determining step is step 1. Since the rate
of the overall reaction depends on the rate of the slow step, the rate law
Rate-determining steps can
occur anywhere in a reaction equation for the rate-determining step should match the rate law for the
mechanism. If a slow step is overall reaction.
not the first step of the mecha- By definition, the rate law equation for step 1 is written as follows:
nism, however, the overall rate
Rate = k [NO ][Cl ]
law is more complicated to 1 1 2 2
determine. One reason is that The rate law of the rate-determining step in the proposed mechanism
fast reactions occurring early matches the experimentally determined rate law. Since the proposed
in a mechanism are often mechanism is consistent with the overall rate law equation, it is a
reversible—both the forward
reasonable mechanism.
and reverse reactions take
place. (You will learn more
about these reactions in Unit 4.) Sample Problem
Evaluating a Proposed Mechanism
Problem
Consider the reaction below.
2NO + 2H → N + 2H O
(g) 2(g) 2(g) 2 (g)
The experimentally determined rate law is written as follows:
Rate = k[NO]2[H ]
2
A chemist proposes the mechanism below for the reaction.
Step 1 2NO + H → N O + H O (slow)
(g) 2(g) 2 (g) 2 (g)
Step 2 N O + H → N + H O (fast)
2 (g) 2(g) 2(g) 2 (g)
Determine whether the proposed mechanism is reasonable.
What Is Required?
You need to determine whether the proposed mechanism is reasonable.
To do this, you need to answer the following questions:
• Do the steps add up to the overall reaction?
• Are the steps reasonable in terms of their molecularity?
• Is the proposed mechanism consistent with the experimentally
determined rate law?
What Is Given?
You know the proposed mechanism, the overall reaction, and the rate
law for the overall reaction.
Plan Your Strategy
Add the two reactions, and cancel out reaction intermediates. Check
the molecularity of the steps. Determine the rate law equation for the
rate-determining step, and compare it to the overall rate law equation.
Act on Your Strategy
Add the two steps.
Step 1 2NO + H → N O + H O
(g) 2(g) 2 (g) 2 (g)
Step 2 N O + H → N + H O
2 (g) 2(g) 2 2 (g)
N O + 2H + 2NO → N O + N + 2H O
2 (g) 2(g) (g) 2 (g) 2(g) 2 (g)
or
2NO + 2H → N + 2H O
(g) 2(g) 2(g) 2 (g)
300 MHR • Unit 3 Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
The two steps add up to give the overall reaction. The second step is
bimolecular, so it is chemically reasonable. The first step is termolecular,
which is possible but rare. In the proposed mechanism, step 1 is the
rate-determining reaction. The rate law equation for the first step is
written as follows:
Rate = k [NO ]2[H ]
1 1 2 2
The rate law equation for the slow step matches the rate law equation
for the overall reaction.
Based on the equations for the elementary reactions, the molecularity
of these reactions, and the rate law for the rate-determining step, the
reaction mechanism seems reasonable.
Check Your Solution
The reaction intermediate in the proposed mechanism is N O. When
2
adding the two steps, you were able to cancel out N O.
2
Practice Problems
17. NO and F react to form NO F . The experimentally
2(g) 2(g) 2 (g)
determined rate law for the reaction is written as follows:
Rate = k[NO ][F ]
2 2
A chemist proposes the following mechanism. Determine whether
the mechanism is reasonable.
Step 1 NO + F → NO F + F (slow)
2(g) 2(g) 2 (g) (g)
Step 2 NO + F → NO F (fast)
2(g) (g) 2 (g)
18. A researcher is investigating the following overall reaction.
2C + D → E
The researcher claims that the rate law equation for the reaction
is written as follows:
Rate = k[C][D]
(a) Is the rate law equation possible for the given reaction?
(b) If so, suggest a mechanism that would match the rate law. If not,
explain why not.
19. A chemist proposes the following reaction mechanism for a certain
reaction.
Step 1 A + B → C (slow)
Step 2 C + A → E + F (fast)
(a) Write the equation for the chemical reaction that is described by
this mechanism.
(b) Write a rate law equation that is consistent with the proposed
mechanism.
20.Consider the reaction between 2-bromo-2-methylpropane and water.
(CH 3 ) 3 CBr (aq) + H 2 O ((cid:2)) → (CH 3 ) 3 COH (aq) + H + (aq) + Br − (aq)
Rate experiments show that the reaction is first order in (CH ) CBr,
3 3
but zero order in water. Demonstrate that the accepted mechanism,
shown below, is reasonable.
Step 1 (CH ) CBr → (CH ) C + + Br − (slow)
3 3 (aq) 3 3 (aq) (aq)
Step 2 (CH 3 ) 3 C + (aq) + H 2 O ((cid:2)) → (CH 3 ) 3 COH 2 + (aq) (fast)
Step 3 (CH ) COH + → H + + (CH ) COH (fast)
3 3 2 (aq) (aq) 3 3 (aq)
Chapter 6 Rates of Chemical Reactions • MHR 301
Catalysts
A catalyst is a substance that increases the rate of a chemical reaction
without being consumed by the reaction. Catalysts are of tremendous
importance in all facets of chemistry, from the laboratory to industry.
Many industrial reactions, for example, would not be economically viable
without catalysts. Well over three million tonnes of catalysts are produced
annually in North America.
How a Catalyst Works
A catalyst works by lowering the activation energy of a reaction so that a
larger fraction of the reactants have sufficient energy to react. It lowers the
activation energy by providing an alternative mechanism for the reaction.
The potential energy diagram in Figure 6.18 shows the activation energy
for an uncatalyzed reaction and the activation energy for the same
reaction with the addition of a catalyst.
*
*
*
catalyzed
In Figure 6.18, the catalyzed reaction consists of a two-step mechanism.
The uncatalyzed reaction consists of a one-step mechanism. To see how
a catalyst works, in general, consider a simple, one-step, bimolecular
reaction:
A + B → AB
A catalyst can increase the rate of this reaction by providing an alternative
mechanism with lower activation energy. A possible mechanism for the
catalyzed reaction is shown below.
Step 1 A + catalyst → A(cid:3)catalyst
Step 2 A(cid:3)catalyst + B → AB + catalyst
Overall reaction A + B → AB
Both steps are faster than the original, uncatalyzed reaction. Therefore,
although the overall reaction of the catalyzed mechanism has the same
reactants and products as the uncatalyzed reaction, the catalyzed mecha-
nism is faster. The chemical species A(cid:3)catalyst is a reaction intermediate.
It is produced in step 1 but consumed in step 2. By contrast, the catalyst
is regeneratedin the reaction. It appears as a reactant in step 1 and as
302 MHR • Unit 3 Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
ygrenE
TRANSITION
STATES
uncatalyzed
Ea(fwd)
no catalyst
Ea(rev)
Ea(fwd) no catalyst
with catalyst
Figure 6.18 A catalyst lowers
the activation energy of a reaction
REACTANTS
by providing an alternative mecha-
∆H
nism. A catalyst also increases the
rate of the reverse reaction. What
PRODUCTS
effect does a catalyst have on ∆Hof
a reaction?
Reaction progress
a product in step 2. Although the catalyst changes during the overall
reaction, it is regenerated unchanged at the endof the overall reaction.
Figure 6.19 shows the reaction of sodium potassium tartrate with
H O , catalyzed by cobaltous chloride, CoCl . The CoCl is pink in solu-
2 2 2 2
tion. Notice that the contents of the beaker briefly change colour to dark
green, suggesting the formation of a reaction intermediate. Also notice that
you can see the regeneration of the catalyst when the reaction is over.
Catalysts are divided into two categories, depending on whether or not A
they are in the same phase as the reactants.
Homogeneous Catalysts
A homogeneous catalyst exists in the same phase as the reactants.
Homogeneous catalysts most often catalyze gaseous and aqueous
reactions. For example, aqueous zinc chloride, ZnCl , is used to catalyze
2
the following reaction.
ZnCl
(CH 3 ) 2 CHOH (aq) + HCl (aq) 2(aq) (CH 3 ) 2 CHCl (aq) + H 2 O ((cid:2)) B
The reaction takes place in aqueous solution, and the catalyst is soluble in
water. Therefore, ZnCl is a homogeneous catalyst when it is used with
2
this reaction.
Heterogeneous Catalysts
A heterogeneous catalyst exists in a phase that is different from the phase
of the reaction it catalyzes. An important industrial use of heterogeneous
C
catalysts is the addition of hydrogen to an organic compound that
contains C(cid:2)C double bonds. This process is called hydrogenation.
Consider the hydrogenation of ethylene, shown below.
Pd
H C(cid:2)CH + H (s) H C(cid:3)CH
2 2(g) 2(g) 3 3(g)
Without a catalyst, the reaction is very slow. When the reaction is catalyzed
by a metal such as palladium or platinum, however, the rate increases
dramatically. The ethylene and hydrogen molecules form bonds with the
D
metal surface. This weakens the bonds of the hydrogen and ethylene. The
H(cid:3)H bonds of the hydrogen molecules break, and the hydrogen atoms are
somewhat stabilized because of their attraction to the metal. The hydrogen Figure 6.19 The reaction of
Rochelle’s salt, sodium potassium
atoms react with the ethylene, forming ethane. Figure 6.20 shows the
tartrate, with hydrogen peroxide
hydrogenation of ethylene to ethane.
is catalyzed with CoCl at 70˚C.
2
Photograph A shows the reactants
ethylene, metal separated
H2 C2H4 surface H atoms before mixing.
Photograph B was taken
immediately after CoCl was
2
added. Notice the pink colour.
Photograph C was taken after
about 20 s.
(cid:3)
1 H 2 and C 2 H 4 approach and bond to 2 Rate-limiting step is H H bond breakage. Photograph D was taken after
metal surface.
about 2 min.
ethane,
C2H6
Figure 6.20 Platinum metal is
used as a heterogeneous catalyst
3 One H atom bonds to C 2 H 4 . 4 Another C (cid:3) H bond forms, and C 2 H 6 f e o t r h y th le e n h e y t d o r o e g th e a n n a e ti . on of gaseous
leaves the surface.
Chapter 6 Rates of Chemical Reactions • MHR 303
You may find the term “hydrogenation” familiar. Some food products,
Web LINK
such as margarine and peanut butter, contain hydrogenated vegetable oils.
www.mcgrawhill.ca/links/ Hydrogenation is used in the food industry to convert liquid vegetable
chemistry12
oils, which contain carbon-carbon double bonds, to solid fats, such as
You probably know
shortening, which are fully saturated.
that compounds called
chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs)
are responsible for depleting Biological Catalysts
the ozone layer in Earth’s
Your body depends on reactions that are catalyzed by amazingly efficient
stratosphere. Did you know,
and specific biological catalysts. Biological catalysts are enormous protein
however, that CFCs do their
molecules called enzymes. Their molecular masses range from 15 000 to
destructive work by acting
as homogeneous catalysts? 1 000 000 g/mol.
Use the Internet to find out Only a small portion of the enzyme, called the active site, is actually
how CFCs catalyze the involved in the catalysis reaction. In terms of the enzyme’s overall shape,
decomposition of ozone in the active site is like a nook or a fold in its surface. The reactant molecule,
the stratosphere. To start your
called the substratein an enzyme reaction, binds to the active site. The
research, go to the web site
enzyme works by stabilizing the reaction’s transition state.
above and click on Web Links.
Two models currently exist to explain how an enzyme and its substrate
Communicate your findings
as a two-page press release. interact. One model, called the lock and key model, suggests that an
enzyme is like a lock, and its substrate is like a key. The shape of the active
site on the enzyme exactly fits the shape of the substrate. A second model,
called the induced fit model, suggests that the active site of an enzyme
changes its shape to fit its substrate. Figure 6.21 shows both models.
SUBSTRATES PRODUCT
+ active site
fast slow
enzyme enzyme-substrate enzyme
complex
A Lock-and-key model
SUBSTRATES PRODUCT
active site
+
fast slow
enzyme enzyme-substrate enzyme
complex
B Induced-fit model
Figure 6.21 Diagram A shows the lock and key model of enzyme function. Diagram B
shows the induced-fit model of enzyme function.
Enzymes are involved in many functions of the human body, including
digestion and metabolism. For example, the enzyme lactase is responsible
for catalyzing the breakdown of lactose, a sugar found in milk. People
who are lactose-intolerant are usually missing lactase, or they have insuf-
ficient amounts. If you are lactose-intolerant, you can take commercially
produced supplements that contain lactase.
In the following ThoughtLab, you will investigate other ways in
which industries use and produce catalysts.
304 MHR • Unit 3 Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
ThoughtLab Researching Catalysts
Many reactions that produce useful compounds 5. Include a list of the sources you used. You should
proceed too slowly to be used in industries. include at least three electronic sources and one
Some reactions need to be carried out at high print source for each substance.
temperatures or pressures to proceed quickly.
These conditions, however, are often expensive to Analysis
maintain. Therefore, chemists and engineers use
1. Your report about industrial catalysts should
catalysts to speed up the reactions in order to obtain
answer the following questions.
products at a reasonable rate and under reasonable
(a) What is the chemical formula of the catalyst?
conditions. Similarly, many necessary biological
reactions would proceed too slowly to sustain life Is the catalyst heterogeneous or
without the presence of enzymes. homogeneous?
(b) What process does the catalyst speed up?
Procedure Include products, reactants, the reaction
mechanism (if possible), and information
1. As a class, hold a brainstorming session to create
about the uncatalyzed reaction.
a list of catalysts that are used in industries and
a list of enzymes. Come to class prepared with (c) What technology is required to support the
catalyzed reaction (for example, the design
several suggestions. (You may need to do some
of a catalytic converter)?
initial research.) Two examples in each category
are given below. (d) What is the importance and relevance, to
• industrial catalysts: catalytic converter, Canadians, of the industry associated with
V O catalyst in synthesis of H SO the catalyst?
2 5 2 4(aq)
(contact process) 2. Your report about enzymes should answer the
• enzymes: papain, pepsin questions below.
2. Choose one catalyst and one enzyme from each (a) What chemical process is the enzyme
involved in?
brainstormed list.
(b) How does the enzyme fit into an overall
3. Using electronic and print resources, research
biological process?
your substances.
(c) Are there any ways in which the enzyme can
4. Prepare a brief report about each substance.
be prevented from doing its job? Explain.
Your report should include answers to the
(d) Is the enzyme mass-produced by industry?
Analysis questions below. If you prefer, present
If so, how? For what purpose is it
your research as a web page.
mass-produced?
In the Thought Lab above, you may have included the enzyme catalase
in your brainstormed list. Catalase in your blood is responsible for the
“fizzing” you see when you use a dilute hydrogen peroxide solution to
disinfect a cut. When dilute hydrogen peroxide is poured on a cut, it
decomposes to oxygen gas and water. The decomposition reaction is
catalyzed by catalase.
Have you ever opened an old bottle of hydrogen peroxide and noticed
that it has lost its potency? The hydrogen peroxide has decomposed, leav-
ing you with a bottle of water. At room temperature, in the absence of a
catalyst, the decomposition of H O occurs very slowly, over a period of
2 2
months or years. With the help of a catalyst, however, the rate of the reac-
tion can be increased to the point where it can be easily studied in a high
school laboratory.
In Investigation 6-B, you will write a detailed procedure to determine
the rate law for the catalyzed decomposition of hydrogen peroxide. Instead
of using catalase to catalyze the reaction, you will use an inorganic catalyst.
Chapter 6 Rates of Chemical Reactions • MHR 305
S K I L L F O C U S
Predicting
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
Determining the Rate Law
for a Catalyzed Reaction
Hydrogen peroxide, H O , can be purchased as a Safety Precautions
2 2
dilute solution in a pharmacy or supermarket.
It is used, among other things, as a topical
antiseptic for minor cuts. In this investigation, • The reaction mixture will get hot. Handle the
you will use the I − ion, in the form of aqueous Erlenmeyer flask near the top.
NaI, to catalyze the decomposition of H O . • 6% hydrogen peroxide solution is an
2 2
irritant. Wear safety glasses, latex gloves,
and a laboratory apron.
Questions
What are the exponents m and n, and the rate
Procedure
constant, in the following general rate law
equation? 1. Copy the following table into your notebook,
Rate = k[H O ]m[I − ]n to record your observations. Give your table
2 2
a title.
Prediction
HO NaI
2 2
Will the catalyzed decomposition
Volume of Volume of Volume of O produced
2
be first order or second order with Volume of 6% distilled 1.0 mol/L distilled in 60 s
respect to H 2 O 2 and with respect to I − ? Experiment H 2 O 2 (mL) water (mL) NaI (mL) water (mL) (mL or g)
1 10.0 0 10.0 0
Materials 2 8.0 2.0 10.0 0
3 6.0 4.0 10.0 0
100 mL beaker
4 4.0 6.0 10.0 0
250 mL Erlenmeyer flask
60 mL 6% (m/v) H O 5 10.0 0 8.0 2.0
2 2(aq)
60 mL 1.0 mol/L NaI 6 10.0 0 6.0 4.0
(aq)
3 graduated cylinders (10 mL) 7 10.0 0 4.0 6.0
2 medicine droppers or plastic pipettes
2. The rate of production of oxygen gas can be
masking tape or grease pencil
monitored in different ways. Depending on
electronic top-loading balance,
the equipment you have available, choose
accurate to two decimal places
option 1 or option 2.
Option 1 • Option 1: You can collect the oxygen gas by
pneumatic trough downward displacement of water. Collect
one-holed rubber stopper, fitted with a piece the oxygen produced in the first 60 s of the
of glass tubing (must be airtight) reaction in an upside-down graduated
1 m rubber hose to fit glass tubing cylinder. Refer to Investigation 6-A to see
(must be airtight) how to set up an apparatus for collecting
graduated cylinder to collect gas the gas.
Option 2 • Option 2: If you have an electronic balance
balance, preferably accurate to three decimal that is accurate to 0.001 g, you can monitor
places the change in mass as oxygen is released in
the first 60 s of the reaction.
306 MHR • Unit 3 Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
Note: Gently swirl the reaction mixture for the Applications
first 5 s. To help the bubbles of oxygen leave
5. The iodide ion-catalyzed decomposition of
the solution, gently swirl the reaction flask
hydrogen peroxide to oxygen gas and water is
every 15 s. Stop swirling at 45 s.
believed to occur via the following mechanism.
3. For your chosen option, write out a complete Step 1 H O + I − → H O + OI − (slow)
2 2 2
procedure based on the table on the previous Step 2 H O + OI − → H O + O + I − (fast)
2 2 2 2
page. Include a diagram showing the experi-
(a) Show that these two steps are consistent
mental set-up, and detailed safety precautions.
with the overall stoichiometry of the
Have your teacher approve your procedure,
reaction.
and then carry it out.
(b) Is this mechanism consistent with your
experimentally obtained rate law? Explain.
Analysis
(c) How does this mechanism account for the
1. For each experiment, determine the initial
−
fact that the I ion is a catalyst?
rate of reaction. That is, convert the volume
−
or mass of O within the time interval to (d) What is the role of the hypoiodite, IO , ion
2
get an initial rate of mol O
2
/(L•s). Using the in the mechanism? How do you know?
stoichiometry of the reaction, convert this (e) Draw and label a potential energy-reaction
initial rate to a rate of decomposition of H O coordinate diagram that is consistent with
2 2
in mol/(L•s). this mechanism. Be sure to illustrate any
reaction intermediates.
2.(a) For the experiments in which [H O ] was
2 2
kept constant, plot a graph of reaction rate (f) Postulate a possible activated complex
(y-axis) versus [NaI]. From the shape of the for step 1 of the proposed mechanism.
graph, determine if the reaction is first
6. The rate of decomposition of H O can be
2 2
order or second order with respect to NaI.
increased using other catalysts, such as
Mn2+
(b) For the experiments in which [NaI] was and Fe2+ .
kept constant, plot a graph of reaction rate (a) How do you expect ∆Hfor the decomposi-
(y-axis) versus [H O ]. From the shape of
2 2 tion reaction to change if different catalysts
the graph, determine if the reaction is first
are used?
order or second order with respect to H O .
2 2 (b) Do you expect the rate law to change?
3. Determine the value of k for the reaction, with Explain.
proper units. Pay close attention to significant
digits.
Conclusion
4. Write the rate law equation for the reaction.
Chapter 6 Rates of Chemical Reactions • MHR 307
Canadians in Chemistry
successfully than Henri. Their findings, published in
1913, provided the first useful model of enzyme
function.
In the ground-breaking scientific paper that
presented their work, Menten and Michaelis also
derived an important mathematical formula. This
formula describes the rate at which enzymes break
down their substrates. It correlates the speed of
the enzyme reaction with the concentrations of
the enzyme and the substrate. Called the Michaelis-
Menten equation, it remains fundamental to our
understanding of how enzymes catalyze reactions.
Menten remained an avid researcher all her life.
She worked long days, dividing her time between
teaching at the University of Pittsburgh’s School
of Medicine and working as a pathologist at the
Children’s Hospital of Pittsburgh. She also worked
Dr. Maud L. Menten with her peers and students on more than 70 papers
that dealt with a wide range of medical topics. In
Dr. Maud L. Menten, a leading researcher in the field addition to her work with Michaelis, Menten’s contri-
of biochemistry, was born in Port Lambton, Ontario, butions to science include pioneering techniques for
in 1879. She grew up in rural British Columbia, where studying the chemical composition of tissues and
she had to take a canoe across the Fraser River every for investigating the nature of hemoglobin in human
day to get to school. Later, Menten returned to red blood cells.
Ontario to attend the University of Toronto. Upon It was not until 1949, only a year before retiring
receiving her medical degree in 1911, she became from the University of Pittsburgh, that Menten
one of the first female doctors in Canada. obtained a full professorship. Shortly after retiring,
Menten soon received international recognition Menten joined the Medical Research Institute of
for her study of enzymes. From 1912 to 1913, she British Columbia to do cancer research. Sadly, ill
worked at Leonor Michaelis’ lab at the University of health forced her to cease her scientific work only
Berlin. While conducting experiments on the break- a few years later. She spent her remaining days in
down of sucrose by the enzyme called invertase, Leamington, Ontario.
Menten and Michaelis were able to refine the work Although she was a brilliant medical researcher,
of Victor Henri to explain how enzymes function. A Menten’s enthusiasm overflowed beyond the
few years earlier, Henri had proposed that enzymes boundaries of science. She was a world traveller,
bind directly to their substrates. Michaelis and a mountain climber, a musician, and a student of
Menten obtained the precise measurements that languages. She was even a painter, whose work
were needed to support Henri’s hypothesis. Using made its way into art exhibitions.
the recently developed concept of pH, they were In honour of her lifetime of achievements,
able to buffer their chemical reactions and thereby Maud L. Menten was inducted into the Canadian
control the conditions of their experiments more Medical Hall of Fame in 1998.
Section Summary
In this section, you learned that chemical reactions usually proceed as a
series of steps called elementary reactions. You related the equations for
elementary reactions to rate laws. You learned how the relative speed of
the steps in a reaction mechanism help to predict the rate law of an over-
all reaction. Finally, you learned how a catalyst controls the rate of a
chemical reaction by providing a lower-energy reaction mechanism. In
this chapter, you compared activation energies of forward and reverse
reactions. In the next unit, you will study, in detail, reactions that proceed
in both directions.
308 MHR • Unit 3 Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
Section Review
1 K/U In your own words, describe an elementary reaction.
2 K/U Distinguish between an overall reaction and an elementary
reaction. Include a discussion of rate law.
3 K/U Why do chemists say that a reaction mechanism is proposed?
4 K/U What three criteria must a proposed reaction mechanism satisfy,
for it to be accepted?
5 C Explain the difference between a reaction intermediate and an
activated complex in a reaction mechanism.
6 K/U Consider the reaction below.
C
2A + B D + E
2
A chemist proposes the following reaction mechanism.
Step 1 A + B → AB
2 2
Step 2 AB + C → AB C
2 2
Step 3 AB C + A → A B + C
2 2 2
Step 4 A B → D + E
2 2
(a) Show that the proposed mechanism can account for the
overall reaction.
(b) What is the role of AB C and AB ?
2 2
(c) What is the role of C?
(d) Given a proposed reaction mechanism, how can you differentiate,
in general, between a reaction intermediate and a catalyst?
7 I Chlorine gas reacts with aqueous hydrogen sulfide (also known as
hydrosulfuric acid) to form elemental sulfur and hydrochloric acid.
Cl + H S → S + 2HCl
2(g) 2 (aq) (s) (aq)
The experimentally obtained rate law equation is written as follows:
Rate = k[Cl ][H S]
2 2
Which of the following mechanisms is consistent with this
information? Explain your answer.
Mechanism A
Step 1 Cl + H S → Cl + + HCl + HS − (slow)
2 2
Step 2 Cl + + HS − → HCl + S (fast)
Mechanism B
Step 1 Cl → Cl + + Cl − (slow)
2
Step 2 Cl − + H S → HCl + HS − (fast)
2
Step 3 Cl + + HS − → HCl + S (fast)
8 C Consider the following general endothermic reaction.
A + B → C + D
(a) Explain why a catalyst has no effect on the enthalpy change.
Illustrate your answer with a potential energy diagram.
(b) Explain the effect of a catalyst on a reaction that has similar
products and reactants, but is an exothermic reaction. Illustrate
your answer with a potential energy diagram.
Chapter 6 Rates of Chemical Reactions • MHR 309
9 K/U Consider the general reaction shown below.
2A + B → 2E + F
The experimentally determined rate law equation is written as follows:
Rate = k[A][B]
A proposed mechanism for the reaction has the first step below.
Step 1 A + B → C + F (rate-determining step)
Assuming a two-step mechanism, write a possible second elementary
reaction for this mechanism.
10 MC Historians suspect that many ancient Romans suffered from lead
poisoning. The ancient Romans used lead for their plumbing system
(hence, the Latin name for the element). Lead is a poison because it
can form strong bonds with proteins, including enzymes. Lead and
other heavy metals react with enzymes by binding to functional groups
on their active sites. When lead binds to a protein, such as an enzyme,
the protein often precipitates out of solution.
(a) Based on your understanding of enzymes and the information above,
explain why lead’s ability to form strong bonds with the active sites
of enzymes makes lead toxic to humans.
(b) Egg whites and milk are used as antidotes for heavy metal
poisoning. The victim must ingest the egg white or milk soon after
the lead has been ingested. Then the victim’s stomach must be
pumped. Explain why this antidote works. Why must the stomach
be pumped?
(c) Would the antidote described in part (b) work for someone who
suffers from long-term exposure to lead by ingestion? Explain why
or why not.
310 MHR • Unit 3 Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
Review
Reflecting on Chapter 6 Knowledge/Understanding
Summarize this chapter in the format of your 1. The way that chemists monitor the rate of a
choice. Here are a few ideas to use as guidelines: chemical reaction depends on the reaction.
• Use a graph to describe the rate of reaction as What conditions of a reacting system must
a function of the change of concentration of a change for the each instrument or method
reactant or product with respect to time. below to be useful?
• Distinguish between an average rate and an (a) balance
instantaneous rate of a reaction. (b) downward displacement of water
• Express the rate of a reaction as a rate law (c) spectrophotometer
equation. 2. In your own words, describe how collision
• Explain what the term “half-life” means. theory explains why increased surface area
Calculate the half-life of a first-order reaction. increases the rate of a reaction.
• Use collision theory and transition state theory
3. Agitation (stirring) often increases the rate of a
to explain how concentration, temperature,
reaction. Use collision theory to explain why.
surface area, and the nature of reactants control
4. At elevated temperatures, ammonia reacts with
the rate of a chemical reaction.
• Use a potential energy diagram to demonstrate oxygen as follows:
4NH + 5O → 4NO + 6H O
your understanding of the relationships between 3(g) 2(g) (g) 2 (g)
(a) Write an equation that shows the relation-
activation energy, reactants, products, enthalpy
ship between the rate of reaction expressed
change, and the activated complex.
• Explain why most reactions occur as a series in terms of each reactant and product.
(b) The average rate of production of nitrogen
of elementary reactions. Show how the rate law
for a rate-determining step relates to the rate
monoxide is 6.2 × 10 −2mol/(L•s). What is
the average rate of change in the concentra-
law for an overall reaction.
• Explain how a catalyst increases the rate of a tion of ammonia?
chemical reaction. 5. State two requirements for an effective
collision between reactants.
Reviewing Key Terms
6. State the difference between a homogeneous
For each of the following terms, write a sentence catalyst and a heterogeneous catalyst.
that shows your understanding of its meaning.
reaction rate average rate Inquiry
instantaneous rate catalyst 7. The rate of decomposition of hydrogen perox-
rate law equation rate constant ide was studied at a particular temperature.
o se v c e o r n al d l - r o e r a d c e t r i o r n e a o c r t d io e n r fi in r i s t t i - a o l r d ra e t r e s r e m ac e t t i h o o n d H 2 O 2(aq) → H 2 O ((cid:2)) + 1 2 O 2(g)
(a) The initial concentration of hydrogen
half-life (t ) collision theory
1/2
peroxide was 0.200 mol/L. 10.0 s later,
activation energy (E ) transition state theory
a
it was measured to be 0.196 mol/L. What
potential energy transition state
was the initial rate of the reaction, expressed
diagram
activated complex reaction mechanism
in mol/(L•s)?
(b) 0.500 L of hydrogen peroxide solution was
elementary reaction reaction intermediates
used for the experiment. What mass was lost
molecularity bimolecular
as O bubbled out of solution in this initial
unimolecular termolecular 2
10.0 s interval?
rate-determining step homogeneous catalyst
heterogeneous catalyst enzymes 8. The following first-order reaction has a rate
active site substrate of 3.8 × 10 −3mol/(L•s) when [A] = 0.38 mol/L.
A → products
(a) Calculate the value of k and the half-life
of the reaction.
Chapter 6 Rates of Chemical Reactions • MHR 311
(b) What did you assume when answering 13. Mercury(II) chloride, HgCl , reacts with oxalate
2
part (a)? ions, C O 2− , as follows:
2 4
9. The units of k, the rate constant, depend on 2HgCl 2(aq) +C 2 O 4 2− (aq) →
the overall order of a reaction. For what overall 2Cl − (aq) + 2CO 2(g) + Hg 2 Cl 2(s)
reaction order does the rate constant have the The reaction rate was monitored by measuring
same units as the reaction rate? the mass of Hg Cl formed as a function of time.
2 2
10. The rate constant of a first-order reaction is Initial [Hg Cl ] Initial [CO2−] Initial rate
4.87 × 10 −2s −1 at a particular temperature. 2 2 2 4
Experiment (mol/L) (mol/L) (mol/(L • s))
Calculate the half-life of this reaction. 1 0.0788 0.113 1.35 × 10−6
11. Phosgene, COCl 2 , is a highly toxic gas that is 2 0.0788 0.225 5.33 × 10−6
heavier than air. It can be produced by reacting
3 0.039 0.225 2.63 × 10−6
carbon monoxide with chlorine in a very
slow reaction.
(a) Write the rate law equation for the reaction.
CO + Cl → COCl
(g) 2(g) 2(g) (b) Calculate the value of the rate constant, with
The following initial rate data were collected
the appropriate units.
at a particular temperature.
(c) Calculate the initial rate of the reaction
when [HgCl ] = 0.0400mol/L and
Initial [CO] Initial [Cl] Initial rate 2
Experiment (mol/L) (mol/L) 2 (mol/(L • s)) [C 2 O 4 2− ] = 0.150mol/L.
1 0.500 0.0500 6.45 × 10−30 14. A chemical reaction between compounds A and
2 0.0500 0.0500 6.65 × 10−31 B is first order in A and first order in B. Find
the unknown information in the table below.
3 0.0500 0.500 6.50 × 10−30
4 0.05 00 0.00500 6.60 × 10−32 Experiment Rate (mol/(L • s)) [A] (mol/L) [B] (mol/L)
1 0.10 0.20 0.050
(a) Write the rate law equation for this reaction.
2 0.40 (a) 0.050
(b) Calculate the value of the rate constant.
3 0.80 0.40 (b)
Make sure that you use the proper units.
12. The following reaction was studied using the 15. A chemical reaction between compounds C
method of initial rates. and D is first order in C and second order in D.
3A (aq) + 4B (aq) → products Find the unknown information in the table
The following data were collected. below.
Initial [A] Initial [B] Initial rate Experiment Rate(mol/(L • s)) [A] (mol/L) [B] (mol/L)
Experiment (mol/L) (mol/L) (mol/(L • s))
1 0.10 1.0 0.20
1 0.200 0.200 5.00
2 (a) 2.0 0.20
2 0.600 0.200 45.0
3 (b) 2.0 0.40
3 0.200 0.400 10.0
16. Consider the reaction below.
4 0.600 0.400 90.0
2A + B → C + D
(a) Write the rate law equation. At 20˚C, the activation energy of the forward
(b) What is the overall reaction order? reaction is 59.9 kJ/mol and the activation
(c) Calculate the value of the rate constant, with energy of the reverse reaction is 72.0 kJ/mol.
the proper units. (a) What is the enthalpy change for the reaction?
(b) Sketch a potential energy diagram for the
reaction.
312 MHR • Unit 3 Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
17. Consider the reaction below. (b) How can the idea of activation energy be
C
2A + B D + E used to explain the temperature dependence
2
of rate?
A chemist proposes the following reaction
(c) How can activation energy be used to
mechanism.
explain why a catalyst increases the rate of
Step 1 A + B → AB
2 2
a chemical reaction?
Step 2 AB + C → AB C
2 2
Step 3 AB C + A → A B + C Making Connections
2 2 2
Step 4 A B → D + E 24. Suppose that you are using a Polaroid™ camera
2 2
outdoors during the winter. You want your
Suggest a rate law equation corresponding to
photographs to develop faster. Suggest a way
each of the following situations. Remember that
to accomplish this.
a rate law equation may include only the con-
centration of reactants and catalyst, if any. If 25. Why are catalytic converters not very effective
you think that it is impossible to predict a rate immediately after starting a vehicle in the
law for any of the situations, explain why. State winter? Suggest a way to correct this problem.
any assumptions you make for each situation.
Answers to Practice Problems and Short Answers to
(a) Step 1 is the rate determining step.
Section Review Questions
(b) Step 2 is the rate determining step. Practice Problems:1.0.25 mol/s 2.0.10mol/(L•s)
(c) Step 3 is the rate determining step. 3.∆[Br
2
]/∆t =−0.5∆[HBr]/∆t 4.(a)9.0×10−4mol/s
(b)0.011 L/s 5.Rate=(2.05×10−4s−1)[C
2
H
4
O]
Communication 6.Rate=(0.15L/(mol•s))[ICl][H
2
] 7.(a)Rate=k[SO
2
Cl
2
]
18. Explain why chemical reactions are fastest at (b)k =2.2×10−5s−1 8.(a) 0.10 (b)0.025 (c)0.34 (d)0.060
the beginning. 9.(a) 0.075 s (b)6.2% 10.(a)3.6×10−4s−1
(b)5.0×1014molecules/L 11.Only 0.1% of the reactants
19. Explain why a rate constant must always be
are left. 12.about 400 s 13.Products are at lower energy
accompanied by the temperature at which it than reactants. 14.E
a(fwd)
=99kJ 15.E
a(rev)
=193kJ
was determined. 16.E
a(rev)
=411kJ 17.Yes: Steps add to give overall reaction.
20. Your friend is having trouble understanding Both steps are bimolecular. Rate law for slow step matches
how a rate-determining step in a reaction experimental rate law. 18.(a)yes (b)C+D→B(slow);
mechanism determines the rate of the overall B+C→E(fast) 19.(a) A+2B→E+F (b)Rate=k[A][B]
20.Steps add to give overall reaction. Steps are bimolecular
reaction. Invent a new analogy to explain
or unimolecular. Rate law for slow step matches experi-
the idea to your friend, using a process from
mental rate law.
everyday life that involves slow and fast steps.
Section Review: 6.1: 4.(a)1.25×10−3mol/(L•s)
21. Write a few paragraphs to distinguish (b)8.33×10−4mol/(L•s) 6.2 1.Rate=k[A]2[B] 2.no 3.(a)no
between an activated complex and a reaction change (b)increase by a factor of 8 4.(a)1, 2, 1 (b)4
intermediate. Include equations and diagrams (c)L3/(mol3 •s) 5.(a)Rate=k[A][B]2
in your explanation. (b)6.2×102L2/(mol2 •s) 6.Rate=(0.020L2/(mol2 •s))[A][B]
7.29.6 years; 9.33×108s 6.3: 3.(a)endothermic
22. “For an endothermic reaction, the activation
(b)∆H =68kJ 6.4: 6.(b)reaction intermediates (c)catalyst
energy will always be greater than the enthalpy
7.mechanism A 9.A+C→2E(fast)
change for the reaction.”
(a) Do you agree or disagree with this
statement? Explain your answer.
(b) Replace the word “endothermic” with
“exothermic.” Do you agree or disagree with
this statement now? Explain your answer.
23.(a) Explain, in your own words, what is meant
by the term “activation energy.”
Chapter 6 Rates of Chemical Reactions • MHR 313
Project
UNIT 3
Developing a Bulletin Scientists argued that it was impossible to produce
alcohol, an organic compound, without the action
About Catalysts and of yeast, or some other living organism.
Although no one realized it at the time,
Enzymes Fulhame’s ideas on catalysts were directly relevant
to the debate on vital force. There is no mysterious
vital force in living organisms. Instead, organic
reactions in living organisms depend on organic
catalysts called enzymes.
In 1828, the German chemist Friedrich Wohler
discovered that urea, an organic compound, could
be produced in a laboratory without any help from
a living organism. Wohler’s discovery inspired
other scientists to hypothesize that the fermentation
of sugar into alcohol could also occur without the
presence of living organisms, such as yeast. Some
scientists went further, and insisted that yeast was
not even a living organism.
Urea
Background
Scientists have studied the amazing properties of Eventually, scientists proved that fermentation
enzymes and catalysts for more than 200 years. did not require whole cells of yeast. Fermentation
In 1794, the English chemist Elizabeth Fulhame could still occur if non-living extracts of yeast were
published a book called An Essay on Combustion. present. Through further study and experimentation,
Her book included many of the first recorded ideas the important component in the yeast extract was
about the role of catalysis in chemical processes. identified as an enzyme. If earlier scientists had
In particular, Fulhame was interested in the considered Fulhame’s ideas on catalysts, they might
catalytic properties of the hydrogen and oxygen have arrived at the truth about enzymes sooner!
atoms in water. Over time, scientists have built up a large body
Fulhame’s ideas about inorganic catalysts were of knowledge about many different catalysts and
swept under by the fast and furious debate of her enzymes. This knowledge has been put to good
scientific era. Many of the most prominent scientists use in industry. Difficult and expensive industrial
of her day were arguing over whether organic processes have been made faster, cheaper, and
reactions needed living organisms to occur. Many easier through the use of catalysts and enzymes. For
scientists believed that a vital forcewas present example, enzymes are used in the pharmaceutical
in living organisms and was essential for the industry, in paper-making and recycling processes,
formation of all organic compounds. For example, and in the petroleum industry.Many more industrial
the fermentation of sugar into alcohol takes place uses of catalysts and enzymes are possible, and
through the action of yeast, a living organism. research into catalysts continues.
314 MHR • Unit 3 Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
Assessment
After you complete this project, answer the following
questions to assess your work.
(cid:2) Assess the interest level of the information you
gathered. Did you obtain information of interest to
In this project, you will research some of Grade 12 chemistry students? Did you obtain
the many catalysts and enzymes that are used information of interest to non-science students?
in Canadian industries. Then you will create an
(cid:2) Assess the scientific accuracy and complexity of
information bulletin to present your findings.
the information you gathered. Did you use at least
three major sources? If you used web sites, were
Challenge
they run by reputable organizations? Did you
Design, produce, and distribute an information include information above and beyond the content
bulletin to inform your community about the use of this course?
of catalysts or enzymes in Canadian industries. (cid:2) Assess your communication skills. Did you explain
Choose one or more of the following options: detailed chemical information in a clear and
• If there is a local industry you can study, focus understandable way?
on different aspects of this industry’s use of
catalysts.
• Study a catalyst that is used by several • Will you study a local industry, or cover a
different industries. variety of Canadian industries?
• Compile a variety of uses of catalysts and • Will you examine one enzyme or catalyst in
enzymes across Canada. detail, or will you give an overview of many
• Analyze a cutting-edge technology that involves different catalysts and/or enzymes?
catalysts or enzymes. • How can you ensure that your bulletin is
• Analyze the historical development and use of a visually attractive and interesting?
particular enzyme or catalyst. • How can you motivate readers? For example,
you may want to include activities (such as
Materials
puzzles and quizzes) or a brief list of
Set up your information bulletin in the format of a interesting facts.
brochure or leaflet, suitable to be distributed to 3 If you are working as part of a group, assign a
classmates and other students in your school. task to each member of the group.
Alternatively, present your information bulletin as a
web page, so that you can share your research with Evaluate
a wider audience.
Print out your bulletin. Display it on a poster board
in a hallway of your school, or in a local public
Design Criteria
building. If your bulletin is in the form of a web
A As a class, develop a product rubric to assess
page, present it to the class and then post it on the
the bulletins. For example, you may wish
Internet or on your school’s Intranet.
to evaluate how interesting the bulletins are,
or whether they are easy for non-chemistry
students to understand.
B Your bulletin should be interesting, visually
attractive, factual, and aimed at a wide audience.
Action Plan
1 Decide whether you will work on your own,
with a partner, or as part of a small group.
2 Decide what you want your bulletin to look
Web LINK
like. The following questions will help you
decide on a format. www.mcgrawhill.ca/links/chemistry12
• How many topics will you cover in your Go to the web site above, and click on Web Linksto find
bulletin? appropriate sites to start your research.
• How long will each article in your bulletinbe?
Unit 3 Project • MHR 315
Review
Knowledge/Understanding (a) I and II only (d) II, III, and IV only
(b) II and III only (e) II and IV only
Multiple Choice (c) I and IV only
In your notebook, write the letter for the best 7. Which factor does not affect the rate of a
answer to each question. chemical reaction in aqueous solution?
1. The ∆H˚ of an element in its standard state is (a) the enthalpy change of the reaction
f
defined to be (b) the activation energy of the reaction
(a) 0 kJ/mol (c) the collision frequency of the reacting
(b) 10 kJ/mol particles
(c) −10 kJ/mol (d) the relative orientation of the colliding
(d) greater than 0 kJ/mol particles
(e) a unique value for each element (e) the temperature of the solution
2. 10.9 kJ of energy is needed to vaporize 60.0 g of 8. Which statement about an activated complex
liquid Br vapour at 60˚C. What is the molar is true?
2
heat of vaporization of Br at 60˚C? (a) It is a stable substance.
2
(a) 3.64 kJ/mol (d) 29.1 kJ/mol (b) It has lower chemical potential energy, or
(b) 7.27 kJ/mol (e) 10.9 kJ/mol enthalpy, than reactants or products.
(c) 14.6 kJ/mol (c) It occurs only in endothermic reactions.
3. What is the molar heat of vaporization of water, (d) It occurs at the transition state of the
given the following thermochemical equations? reaction.
H + 1 O → H O + 241.8kJ (e) It always breaks down to form product
2(g) 2 2(g) 2 (g)
molecules.
H 2(g) + 1 2 O 2(g) → H 2 O ((cid:2)) + 285.8kJ 9. A catalyst changes the
(a) 44.0 kJ/mol (d) −527.6 kJ/mol I. mechanism of a reaction
(b) −527.6 kJ/mol (e) 241.8 kJ/mol II. enthalpy change of a reaction
(c) −44.0 kJ/mol III. activation energy of a reaction
4. Which substance has a standard enthalpy of (a) I only (d) II and III only
formation, ∆H˚ f , equal to zero? (b) III only (e) I, II, and III
(a) gold, Au (s) (c) I and III only
(b) water, H 2 O ((cid:2)) 10. The overall rate of any chemical reaction is
(c) carbon monoxide, CO
(s) most closely related to
(d) zinc, Zn
(g) (a) the number of steps in the reaction
(e) water, H O
2 (g) mechanism
5. Which of the following statements are true? (b) the overall reaction
I. The reaction vessel cools when an (c) the fastest step in the reaction mechanism
endothermic reaction occurs. (d) the slowest step in the reaction mechanism
II. An endothermic reaction has a negative (e) the average rate of all the steps in the
value of ∆H. reaction mechanism
III. Heat is liberated when an exothermic
reaction occurs. Short Answer
(a) I and II (d) II and III only In your notebook, write a sentence or a short
(b) I, II, and III (e) none of them paragraph to answer each question.
(c) I and III only 11. Distinguish between an open system and an
6. Which of the following processes are insulated system.
exothermic?
12. In your own words, define the terms “system”
I. boiling water and “surroundings.” Use an example.
II. freezing water
III. condensing steam
IV. melting ice
316 MHR • Unit 3 Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
13. In a chemical reaction, bonds are formed and 24. List the factors that affect the rate of a chemical
broken. reaction.
(a) How would you characterize the enthalpy 25. Draw and label a potential energy diagram for
change of bond breaking? the following exothermic reaction. Include E ,
a
(b) How would you characterize the enthalpy the activated complex, and ∆H.
change of bond formation? A + B → AB
(c) State the relationship between the enthalpy
26. Distinguish between the instantaneous rate and
change of the overall reaction (exothermic
the initial rate of a chemical reaction. Under
or endothermic) and bond breakage and
what circumstances would these two rates be
formation.
the same?
14. “The reactants have more potential energy than
the products.” What kind of reaction does this Inquiry
statement describe? Justify your answer.
27. A student wants to determine the enthalpy
15. What is the relationship between the initial change associated with dissolving solid sodium
quantity of reactants for a reaction and the hydroxide, NaOH, in water. The student dis-
enthalpy change for a reaction? Use a thermo- solves 1.96 g of NaOH in 100.0 mL of water in a
chemical equation in your answer. coffee-cup calorimeter. The initial temperature
16. Compare and contrast enthalpy of vaporization of the water is 23.4˚C. After the NaOH dissolves,
and enthalpy of condensation. the temperature of the water rises to 28.7˚C.
(a) Use these data to determine the enthalpy of
17. What are the characteristics of a good constant-
dissolution of sodium hydroxide, in kJ/mol
pressure calorimeter?
NaOH. Assume that the heat capacity of the
18. A wooden or plastic spoon, rather than a metal
calorimeter is negligible.
spoon, should be used to stir hot soup. Explain
(b) Suppose that the heat capacity of the
why, in terms of specific heat capacity.
calorimeter was not negligible. Explain
19. Butane, C 4 H 10 , is the fuel that is used in how the value of ∆H that you calculated in
disposable lighters. Consider the following part (a) would compare with the actual ∆H.
equation for the complete combustion of butane. (c) Draw and label an enthalpy diagram for this
C 4 H 10(g) + 6.5O 2(g) → 4CO 2(g) + 5H 2 O ((cid:2)) reaction.
(a) Write a separate balanced chemical equation
28. Some solid ammonium nitrate, NH NO , is
4 3
for the formation of C H , the formation of
4 10 added to a coffee-cup calorimeter that contains
CO , and the formation of H O, directly from
2 2 water at room temperature. After the NH NO
4 3
the elements in their standard states.
has dissolved, the temperature of the solution
(b) Algebraically combine these equations to
drops to near 0˚C. Explain this observation.
get the balanced chemical equation for the
29. Consider the following chemical equations and
complete combustion of C H .
4 10
their enthalpy changes.
20. The enthalpy of formation of an element in
CH + 2O →
4(g) 2(g)
its standard state is zero. Explain why the
CO + 2H O ∆H = −8.0 × 102kJ
enthalpy of formation of I is 21 kJ/mol, 2(g) 2 (g)
not 0 kJ/mol. 2(g) CaO (s) + H 2 O ((cid:2)) → Ca(OH) 2(aq) ∆H = −65kJ
What volume of methane, at 20˚C and 100 kPa,
21. Briefly state why it is useful to know the
would have to be combusted in order to release
half-life of a reaction.
the same amount of energy as the reaction of
22. The rate of a chemical reaction is dependent
1.0 × 102g of CaO with sufficient water? (The
on its ∆H. Do you agree or disagree with this
volume of 1.00 mol of any gas at 20˚C and
statement? Briefly justify your answer.
100 kPa is 24 L.)
23. What is the relationship between the units
of the rate constant, k, and the overall
reaction order?
Unit 3 Review • MHR 317
30. The complete combustion of 1.00 mol of The general rate law of this reaction is
sucrose (table sugar), C H O , yields given below.
12 22 11
5.65 × 103kJ. Rate = k[Mg]m[HCl]n
(a) Write a balanced thermochemical equation Several trials of the reaction are carried out,
for the combustion of sucrose. each using a piece of magnesium ribbon of a
(b) Calculate the amount of energy that is fixed length. This is analogous to constant
released when 5.00 g of sucrose (about one concentration. The general rate law equation
teaspoon) is combusted. can now be written as follows:
31. Carbon monoxide reacts with hydrogen gas to Rate = k′[HCl]n, where k′= k[Mg]m
produce a mixture of methane, carbon dioxide, Design an investigation to determine the value
and water. (This mixture is known as substitute of n in the rate law equation. Assume that you
natural gas.) have a stock solution of 6.0 mol/L HCl, magne-
4CO (g) + 8H 2(g) → 3CH 4(g) + CO 2(g) + 2H 2 O ((cid:2)) sium ribbon, a stopwatch, and any standard
Use the following thermochemical equations to laboratory glassware available. If you want to
determine the enthalpy change of the reaction. carry out your investigation, have your teacher
C + 2H → CH + 74.8kJ approve the procedure first.
(graphite) 2(g) 4(g)
CO + 1 O → CO + 283.1kJ 35. Thioacetamide, CH 3 CSNH 2 , reacts with
(g) 2 2(g) 2(g)
water as shown in the balanced chemical
H + 1 O → H O + 241.8kJ
2(g) 2 2(g) 2 (g) equation below.
C (graphite) + 1 2 O 2(g) → CO (g) + 110.5kJ CH 3 C(S)NH 2(aq) + H 2 O ((cid:2)) →
H 2 O ((cid:2)) + 44.0kJ → H 2 O (g) H 2 S (aq) + CH 3 CONH 2(aq)
The experimentally observed rate law equation
32. The decomposition of aqueous hydrogen
is written as follows:
peroxide, H 2 O 2 , can be catalyzed by different Rate = k[H O + ][CH C(S)NH ]
catalysts, such as aqueous sodium iodide, NaI, 3 3 2
(a) Do you expect the reaction rate to change if
or aqueous iron(II) nitrate, Fe(NO ) .
3 2 some solid NaOH is added to the reaction
(a) The enthalpy change, in kJ/mol of H O ,
2 2 vessel? Explain.
would be the same for this reaction, regard-
(b) Do you expect the reaction rate to change if
less of the catalyst. Explain why, with the
250 mL of water is added to 250 mL of the
help of a potential energy diagram.
reacting solution? Explain.
(b) Design an investigation to verify your
(c) How will the reaction rate change if the reac-
explanation in part (a). Do not attempt to
tion is carried out at 40˚C instead of at 20˚C?
carry out the investigation without the
supervision of your teacher.
Communication
33. Acetone, CH COCH , reacts with iodine in
3 3 36. If a solution of acid accidentally comes in
acidic solution.
H+ contact with your skin, you are told to run
CH COCH + I CH COCH I + HI the affected area under cold water for several
3 3(aq) 2(aq) 3 2 (aq) (aq)
minutes. Explain why it is not advisable to
The experimentally observed rate law equation
simply neutralize the acid with a basic solution.
is written as follows:
Rate = k[CH COCH ][H + ] 37. A classmate is having difficulty understanding
3 3
(a) What is the effect on the reaction rate if the how the concepts of system, insulated system,
concentration of CH COCH is doubled? and surroundings are related to exothermic and
3 3
(b) What is the effect on the reaction rate if the endothemic reactions. Write a note to explain
concentration of I is doubled? to your classmate how the concepts are related.
2
Use diagrams to help clarify your explanation.
34. Consider the heterogeneous reaction of solid
magnesium with hydrochloric acid. 38. Consider the following data for the complete
Mg (s) + 2HCl (aq) → MgCl 2(aq) + H 2(g) combustion of the C 1 to C 8 alkanes.
318 MHR • Unit 3 Energy Changes and Rates of Reaction
Making Connections
Name Formula ∆H (kJ/mol of alkane)
comb
methane CH −8.90 × 102 40. Suppose that you are having a new home built
4
in a rural area, where natural gas is not avail-
ethane C H −1.56 × 103
2 6 able. You have two choices for fuelling your
propane C 3 H 8 −2.22 × 103 furnace:
butane C H −2.88 × 103 •propane, C H , delivered as a liquid under
4 10 3 8
pentane C H −3.54 × 103 pressure and stored in a tank
5 12
•home heating oil, delivered as a liquid (not
hexane C H −4.16 × 103
6 14
under pressure) and stored in a tank
heptane C H −4.81 × 103
7 16 What factors do you need to consider in order
octane C 8 H 18 −5.45 × 103 to decide on the best fuel? What assumptions
do you need to make?
(a) Using either graph paper or spreadsheet soft-
ware, plot a graph of ∆H (y-axis) versus 41. Suppose that you read the following statement
comb
in a magazine: 0.95 thousand cubic feet of
the number of C atoms in the fuel (x-axis).
(b) Extrapolate your graph to predict ∆H natural gas is equal to a gigajoule, GJ, of energy.
comb
Being a media-literate student, you are sceptical
of decane, C H .
10 22
of this claim and wish to verify it. The following
(c) From your graph, develop an equation to
determine ∆H of a straight-chain alkane, assumptions/information may be useful.
comb
•Natural gas is pure methane.
given the number of carbons. Your equation
should be of the form ∆H = …. •Methane undergoes complete combustion.
(d) Use the equation you developed in part (c) •H 2 O ((cid:2)) is formed, rather than H 2 O (g) .
to determine ∆H of C H . How does •1.00 mol of any gas occupies 24 L at 20˚C
comb 10 22
this value compare with the value of ∆H you and 100 kPa.
•1 foot = 12 inches; 1 inch = 2.54 cm;
determined by extrapolation from the graph?
1L = 1dm3
Explain why.
42. Many taxis and delivery vehicles, especially
(e) Methane, ethane, propane, and butane are all
in large cities, have been converted to burn
gases at room temperature. You know that
propane, C H , rather than gasoline. This is
equal volumes of different gases contain the 3 8
done to save money. For most vehicles, the
same number of moles under identical con-
conversion to propane must be done at the
ditions of temperature and pressure. Which
owner’s expense. Suppose that a taxi owner
of these gases do you think would make the
wants to calculate how far a taxi needs to be
best fuel? Explain your answer.
driven in order to recoup the conversion cost.
39. A chemistry student wrote the following List the information that the owner needs in
sentences to remind herself of important order to do the calculation. Also list any
concepts. Write a paragraph to expand on each simplifying assumptions.
concept. Use examples and diagrams where
appropriate.
COURSE
(a) Hess’s law can be used to determine the
CHALLENGE
enthalpy change of a reaction, instead of
The Chemistry of Human Health
measuring the enthalpy change in a laboratory.
Consider the following points as you plan your Chemistry
(b) A pH meter can be used to monitor the
Course Challenge:
progress of a reaction. • How can you determine and compare rates of
(c) The rate law equation for a reaction is
chemical reactions?
dictated by the rate-determining step in the • What are some key differences between inorganic
reaction’s mechanism. catalysts and enzymes?
(d) A catalyst speeds up a reaction, but it does • How are enzymes important for maintaining human
not affect the enthalpy change of the reaction. health?
Unit 3 Review • MHR 319
Chemical Systems
and Equilibrium
P
UNIT 4 CONTENTS
hotochromic lenses darken in
CHAPTER 7
sunlight and then gradually clear
Reversible Reactions and Chemical
in shade and dim light. The change
Equilibrium
is permanent in constant light
CHAPTER 8 conditions, yet reversible if the
Acids, Bases, and pH light intensity changes. How?
The molten glass contains
CHAPTER 9
dissolved silver chloride. As the
Aqueous Solutions and Solubility
solution cools, silver chloride
Equilibria
precipitates, forming tiny silver
UNIT 4 ISSUE chloride crystals. Light striking
Earth in Equilibrium these crystals produces silver and
chlorine atoms. The silver atoms
tend to clump together to form
UNIT 4 OVERALL EXPECTATIONS
particles that are big enough to
What are the properties of a block light and darken the glass.
system at equilibrium? What
Adding copper(I) chloride to
factors affect the extent of a
the molten glass makes the process
chemical reaction?
reversible. When light intensity
How can you measure the
diminishes, copper ions remove
position of equilibrium experi-
electrons from silver atoms, convert-
mentally and predict the
ing the silver atoms into silver ions.
concentrations of chemicals
in a system at equilibrium? The silver ions then migrate back
to the silver chloride crystals. The
How can understanding
glass becomes transparent again.
chemical equilibrium help
you explain systems in biology, Most of the reactions that you
ecology, and chemical have studied have essentially gone
industries? to completion. You can use stoi-
chiometry to calculate the amounts
of products formed, assuming that
Unit Issue Prep
the chemical reaction proceeds only
Why is an understanding of Earth’s
from left to right. In many chemical
geochemical cycles important?
reactions, however, a mixture of
Look at the issue for Unit 4, on
reactants and products form because
page 456. Start preparing now by
the reaction can also proceed from
listing questions that you would
like answered. Record additional right to left. In this unit, you will
questions as you progress through study the concepts that describe
this unit. reversible reactions.
320
Reversible Reactions and
Chemical Equilibrium
Y
Chapter Preview our body contains over 1 kg of nitrogen, mainly in the proteins and
nucleic acids that make up your cells. Your body, however, cannot absorb
7.1 Recognizing Equilibrium
nitrogen directly from the atmosphere. You get the nitrogen-containing
7.2 Thermodynamics and compounds you need by eating plants and other foods.
Equilibrium
Plants cannot absorb nitrogen directly from the atmosphere, either.
7.3 The Equilibrium Their roots absorb nitrogen compounds—mainly nitrates—from the soil.
Constant Some of these nitrates result from atmospheric chemical reactions that
7.4 Predicting the Direction involve nitrogen and oxygen. First, lightning supplies the energy that is
of a Reaction needed to form nitric oxide from nitrogen and oxygen. The resulting nitric
oxide combines with oxygen to form nitrogen dioxide, which reacts with
rainwater to form nitric acid. Then, in the seas and the soil at Earth’s
−
surface, nitric acid ionizes to produce nitrate, NO . Plants and plant-like
3
organisms can readily absorb nitrate.
Scientists call this chemical “circle of life” the nitrogen cycle. There
are, as you know, similar, equally important cyclic processes in nature.
Each process involves reversible changes: changes that may proceed in
either direction, from reactants to products or from products to reactants.
In this chapter, you will study factors that affect reversible changes,
Prerequisite
Concepts and Skills notably those in chemical reactions. You will learn how to determine the
amounts of reactants and products that are present when their proportions
Before you begin this chapter,
no longer change. You will also learn how to make qualitative predictions
review the following concepts
about the ways that chemists can change these proportions. Finally, you
and skills:
will see how industrial chemists apply their knowledge of reversible
(cid:2) using the relationship
changes to increase the yield of chemicals that are important to society.
between rate of reaction
and concentration
(Chapter 6, section 6.2)
How is this dynamic situation simi-
(cid:2) using stoichiometry with lar to the activity of reactants and
chemical equations products in a chemical reaction?
(previous studies)
(cid:2) calculating molar
concentrations
(previous studies)
322 MHR • Unit 4 Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
Recognizing Equilibrium 7.1
In Unit 3, you learned that the rate of any reaction depends on the
Section Preview/
concentration of the reacting chemicals. As a reaction proceeds, the Specific Expectations
concentrations of the “product” chemicals increases, and the reverse
In this section, you will
reaction may re-form “reactants.” Under certain conditions, the rate of
(cid:2) identifyand illustrate
the reverse reaction increases as the rate of the forward reaction decreases.
equilibrium in various
Eventually, the rate of the forward reaction equals the rate of the reverse systems and the conditions
reaction. Equilibrium occurs when opposing changes, such as those just that lead to equilibrium
described, are occurring simultaneously at the same rate.
(cid:2) describe, in terms of
How can you recognize equilibrium? In the following paragraphs, you equilibrium, the behaviour
will read about physical changes that may or may not involve a system of ionic solutes in unsatu-
at equilibrium. As you consider these changes, note which systems are at rated, saturated, and
equilibrium and what changes are taking place. Also note the conditions supersaturated solutions
that would be needed for the changes to occur in the opposite direction at (cid:2) communicateyour
the same rate. The ExpressLab that follows these descriptions will add to understanding of the
following terms: equilibrium,
your understanding of equilibrium. It will help you recognize systems that
homogeneous equilibrium,
are at equilibrium and systems that are not.
heterogeneous equilibrium
• A puddle of water remains after a summer shower. The puddle evapo-
rates because some of the water molecules near the surface have enough
kinetic energy to escape from the liquid. At the same time, some water
molecules in the air may condense back into the liquid. The chance
of this happening is small, however. The puddle soon evaporates
completely, as shown in Figure 7.1(A).
• Even if you put a lid on a jar of water, some of the water in the jar
evaporates. Careful measurements show that the level of liquid water
in the jar initially decreases because more water evaporates than
condenses. As the number of water vapour molecules increases,
however, some condense back into the liquid. Eventually, the number
of evaporating molecules and the number of condensing molecules
are equal. The level of water inside the jar remains constant. At this
point, shown in Figure 7.1(B), equilibrium has been reached.
A B
Figure 7.1 Why is (B) an example of equilibrium, while (A) is not?
Chapter 7 Reversible Reactions and Chemical Equilibrium • MHR 323
• Crystals of copper(II) sulfate pentahydrate, CuSO 4•5H
2
O, are blue. If
you place a few small crystals in a beaker of water, water molecules
break apart the ions and they enter into the solution. A few ions in
the solution may re-attach to the crystals. Because more ions enter the
solution than re-attach to the crystals, however, all the solid eventually
dissolves. If you keep adding crystals of copper(II) sulfate pentahydrate,
the solution eventually becomes saturated. Crystals remain at the
bottom of the beaker, as shown in Figure 7.2.
A B
Figure 7.2 Which of these systems, (A) or (B), is at equilibrium? Will changing the
temperature affect the concentration of the solution in the equilibrium system?
• Figure 7.3(A) shows a supersaturated solution of sodium acetate. It was
prepared by adding sodium acetate to a saturated aqueous solution. The
mixture was heated to dissolve the added crystals. Finally, the solution
was left to return slowly to room temperature. In Figure 7.3(B), a single
crystal of sodium acetate has been added to the supersaturated solution.
As you can see, solute ions rapidly leave the solution, and solid forms.
A B
Figure 7.3 These photographs show a supersaturated solution of sodium acetate and the
effect of adding a crystal to it. Is either of these systems at equilibrium?
324 MHR • Unit 4 Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
ExpressLab Modelling Equilibrium
In this ExpressLab, you will model what happens 7. Add approximately 5 mL of water to the reactant
when forward and reverse reactions occur. You will cylinder. Record the volume in each cylinder.
take measurements to gain quantitative insight into Then repeat steps 4 and 5 until there is no further
an equilibrium system. Then you will observe the change in volume.
effect of introducing a change to the equilibrium.
Analysis
Materials
1. Plot a graph of the data you collected. Put trans-
2 graduated cylinders (25 mL) fer number on the x-axis and volume of water on
2 glass tubes with different diameters (for example, the y-axis. Use different symbols or colours to
10 mm and 6 mm) distinguish between the reactant volume and the
2 labels or a grease pencil product volume. Draw the best smooth curve
supply of water, coloured with food dye through the data.
2. In this activity, the volume of water is a model for
Procedure
concentration. How can you use your graph to
1. Copy the following table into your notebook, to compare the rate of the forward reaction with the
record your observations. rate of the reverse reaction? What happens to
these rates as the reaction proceeds?
Transfer Volume of water in Volume of water in
3. At the point where the two curves cross, is the
number reactant cylinder (mL) product cylinder (mL)
rate of the forward reaction equal to the rate of
0 25.0 0.0
the reverse reaction? Explain.
1
4. How can you recognize when the system is at
2
equilibrium?
2. Label one graduated cylinder “reactant.” Label 5. Were the volumes of water (that is, concentra-
the other “product.” tions of reactants and products) in the two tubes
equal at equilibrium? How do you know?
3. Fill the reactant cylinder with coloured water, up
to the 25.0 mL mark. Leave the product cylinder 6. In a chemical reaction, what corresponds to the
empty. addition of more water to the reactant cylinder?
How did the final volume of water in the product
4. With your partner, transfer water simultaneously
cylinder change as a result of adding more water
from one cylinder to the other as follows: Lower
to the reactant cylinder?
the larger-diameter glass tube into the reactant
Volumeofproduct
cylinder. Keep the top of the tube open. When 7. Determine the ratio at the
Volumeofreactant
the tube touches the bottom of the cylinder,
end of the first equilibrium and at the end of the
cover the open end with a finger. Then transfer
second equilibrium. Within experimental error,
the liquid to the product cylinder. At the same
were these two ratios the same or different?
timeas you are transferring liquid into the
8. In this activity, what do you think determined
product cylinder, your partner must use the
the relative volumes of water in the graduated
smaller-diameter tube to transfer liquid from
cylinders? In a real chemical reaction, what
the product cylinder into the reactant cylinder.
factors might affect the relative concentrations
5. Remove the glass tubes. Record the volume of
of reactants and products at equilibrium?
water in each graduated cylinder, to the nearest
9. Explain why the system in this activity is a
0.1 mL.
closed system.
6. Repeat steps 4 and 5 until there is no further
change in the volumes of water in the graduated
cylinders.
Chapter 7 Reversible Reactions and Chemical Equilibrium • MHR 325
Conditions That Apply to All Equilibrium Systems
The fundamental requirement for equilibrium is that opposing changes
must occur at the same rate. There are many processes that reach
equilibrium. Three physical processes that reach equilibrium are
• a solid in contact with a solution that contains this solid: for example,
sugar crystals in a saturated aqueous sugar solution
• the vapour above a pure liquid: for example, a closed jar that contains
liquid water
• the vapour above a pure solid: for example, mothballs in a closed drawer
Two chemical processes that reach equilibrium are
• a reaction with reactants and products in the same phase: for example,
a reaction between two gases to produce a gaseous product. In this
chapter, you will focus on reactions in which the reactants and
products are in the same phase. The equilibrium they reach is called
homogeneous equilibrium.
A decomposition reaction is
taking place in a closed con- • a reaction in which reactants and products are in different phases:
tainer, R → P. At equilibrium, for example, an aqueous solution of ions, in which the ions combine to
does the concentration of
produce a slightly soluble solid that forms a precipitate. In Chapters 8
reactant have to equal the
and 9, you will work extensively with reactions in which the reactants
concentration of product?
and products are in different phases. The equilibrium they reach is
Explain your answer.
called heterogeneous equilibrium.
What is it that equilibrium systems like these have in common? What con-
ditions are necessary for equilibrium to become established? As outlined
in the box below, there are four conditions that apply to all equilibrium
systems.
The Four Conditions That Apply to All Equilibrium Systems
1. Equilibrium is achieved in a reversible process when the rates of
opposing changes are equal. A double arrow,
(cid:2)(cid:3),
indicates reversible
changes. For example:
H 2 O ((cid:4))
(cid:2)(cid:3)
H 2 O (g)
H + Cl (cid:2)(cid:3) 2HCl
2(g) 2(g) (g)
2. The observable (macroscopic) properties of a system at equilibrium
are constant. At equilibrium, there is no overall change in the
properties that depend on the total quantity of matter in the
system. Examples of these properties include colour, pressure,
concentration, and pH.
You can summarize the first two equilibrium conditions by stating that
equilibrium involves dynamic change at the molecular level but no change
at the macroscopic level.
3. Equilibrium can only be reached in a closed system. A closed system
is a system that does not allow the input or escape of any component
of the equilibrium system, including energy. For this reason, a
system can be at equilibrium only if it is at constant temperature.
A common example of a closed system is carbon dioxide gas that
is in equilibrium with dissolved carbon dioxide in a soda drink.
326 MHR • Unit 4 Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
The system remains at equilibrium as long as the container is not
opened. Note that small changes to the components of a system are
sometimes negligible. Thus, equilibrium principles can be applied
if a system is not physically closed. For example, consider the
equilibrium of a solid in a saturated aqueous solution, such as
CaO (s) + H 2 O ((cid:4)) (cid:2)(cid:3) Ca2+ (aq) + 2OH − (aq) . You can neglect the small
amount of water that vaporizes from the open beaker during an
experiment.
4. Equilibrium can be approached from either direction. For example,
the proportions of H , Cl , and HCl (in a closed container at
2(g) 2(g) (g)
constant temperature) are the same at equilibrium, regardless of
whether you started with H and Cl or whether you started
2(g) (g)
with HCl .
(g)
Section Summary
In this section, you learned how to recognize equilibrium. As well,
you learned about the conditions that are needed for equilibrium to be
reached. Later in this chapter, you will examine what happens when
some equilibrium conditions in a system are changed. You will learn
how chemists can control conditions to increase the yield of reactions.
Energy is an important component of most equilibrium systems. The
input or output of energy in a system causes the temperature to change.
Thus, the requirement that an equilibrium system be closed means that
the temperature of the system must remain constant. In the next section,
you will examine more closely the effects of thermodynamics on
equilibrium systems. In particular, you will examine the factors that
affect the amount of reactant and product in a reaction and the
factors that determine whether or not a reaction is spontaneous.
Section Review
1 K/U Give two physical and two chemical processes that are
examples of reversible changes that are not at equilibrium.
2 K/U Explain, in terms of reaction rates, how the changes that take
place in a reversible reaction approach equilibrium.
3 K/U A sealed carbonated-drink bottle contains a liquid drink with a
space above it. The space contains carbon dioxide at a pressure of
about 405 kPa.
(a) What changes are taking place at the molecular level?
(b) Which macroscopic properties are constant?
4 K/U Agree or disagree with the following statement, and give reasons
Electronic Learning Partner
to support your answer: “In a sealed jar of water at equilibrium, the
quantity of water molecules in the liquid state equals the quantity of Observe a molecular view
water vapour molecules.” of dynamic equilibrium in
your Chemistry 12 Electronic
5 I Ice and slush are a feature of Canadian winters. Under what Learning Partner.
conditions do ice and water form an equilibrium mixture?
Chapter 7 Reversible Reactions and Chemical Equilibrium • MHR 327
7.2 Thermodynamics and Equilibrium
You can easily predict what will happen in a number of physical and
Section Preview/
Specific Expectations chemical processes. What will happen if you let go of a pencil that you
are holding tip-down on a table? What will you observe if you add a few
In this section, you will
drops of food colouring to some water in a glass? If a piece of paper starts
(cid:2) identifyqualitatively entropy
to burn in a plentiful supply of air, what are the products of the reaction?
changes that are associated
with physical and chemical How will an iron nail change if it is left outside? These are all examples
processes of favourable (or spontaneous) changes. A favourable change is a change
that has a natural tendency to happen under certain conditions.
(cid:2) describehow reactions
have a tendency to achieve
minimum energy and What Conditions Favour a Change?
maximum entropy
What conditions determine whether or not a change is favourable? How
(cid:2) explainthe effect of
are different conditions related to equilibrium, where forward and reverse
changes in enthalpy,
changes occur at the same rate? The answers to these questions are linked
entropy, and temperature
to two important concepts in thermodynamics: enthalpy and entropy.
on a chemical reaction
(cid:2) communicateyour under- Enthalpy and Favourable Changes
standing of the following
terms: favourable change, Energy is a key condition in favourable changes. For example, you know
entropy (S), second law of that a ball always rolls downhill. Its gravitational potential energy is
thermodynamics, free lower at the bottom of the hill than at the top. For the ball to roll uphill—
energy an unfavourable (or non-spontaneous) change—you have to apply energy
to the ball. Chemical reactions are similar. When products have less
enthalpy than reactants, the reaction releases energy. Therefore, the
reaction is exothermic. Are favourable changes those that are exothermic
under certain conditions?
Certainly many favourable physical and chemical changes are
exothermic. Some favourable changes, however, involve no release of
energy. Others are actually endothermic. For example, a favourable
endothermic chemical reaction occurs when barium hydroxide and
ammonium thiocyanate are placed in an Erlenmeyer flask, as shown
in Figure 7.4.
Ba(OH) 2•8H 2 O (s) + 2NH 4 SCN (s) → Ba(SCN) 2(aq) + 10H 2 O ((cid:4)) + 2NH 3(g)
∆H = +170kJ
When the flask is stoppered and the contents are shaken, the solids
intermingle. The reaction produces a slush-like mixture. This favourable,
but endothermic, reaction absorbs enough energy to freeze a thin layer of
water under the flask.
Figure 7.4 A favourable
endothermic reaction occurs when
barium hydroxide is mixed with
ammonium thiocyanate. If you
removed the stopper in photograph
(B), you would detect the charac-
teristic odour of ammonia.
A B
328 MHR • Unit 4 Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
Temperature and Favourable Changes
Another condition that determines whether or not a particular reaction is
favoured is temperature. Consider the reversible synthesis reaction
between mercury and oxygen, and the decomposition of mercury(II) oxide.
Hg ((cid:4)) + 1 2 O 2(g) (cid:2)(cid:3) HgO (s) ∆H = ±90.8kJ
From left to right, the reaction is exothermic. Therefore, the enthalpy
change, ∆H, is negative. If the enthalpy change was the only condition
that determined whether a reaction is favourable, then the synthesis
reaction would take place. The synthesis reaction does take place—but
only at relatively moderate temperatures. Above 400˚C, the reverse
reaction is favourable. The decomposition of HgO occurs. Thus, the
(s)
direction in which this reaction proceeds depends on temperature.
This is fundamentally different from the dependence of reaction rate
on temperature that you learned about in Unit 3. The reaction between
Hg ((cid:4)) , O 2(g) , and HgO (s) does not just change its rate with a change in
temperature, it changes its direction.
Temperature and Enthalpy Alone
Cannot Explain Favourable Reactions
Temperature and enthalpy are not the only conditions that determine
whether a change is favourable. Consider the process shown in Figure 7.5.
A closed valve links two flasks together. The left flask contains an ideal
gas. The right flask is evacuated. When the valve is opened, you expect the
gas to diffuse into the evacuated flask until the pressure in both flasks is
equal. You do not expect to see the reverse process—with all the gas mole-
cules ending up in one of the flasks—unless work is done on the system.
flask with ideal gas evacuated flask ideal gas in both flasks
closed valve open valve
Figure 7.5 If the gas is ideal, this favourable change involves no change in energy. Why
must the gas be ideal?
The process shown in Figure 7.5 is certainly a favourable change. Yet no
exchange of energy is involved. The condition that influences this change
is called entropy. It is an important condition in all physical and chemical
changes.
Entropy and Favourable Changes
Entropy, S, is the tendency toward randomness or disorder in a system.
It is also a thermodynamic property that can be measured. It can be used
to describe qualitative changes in energy.
An ordered arrangement of particles (atoms, ions, or molecules) has
lower entropy (smaller disorder) than the same number of particles in
random arrangements. Thus, the entropy of a pure substance depends on
its state. The entropy of a system increases (becomes more disordered)
with temperature, because the motion of particles becomes more chaotic
at higher temperatures. See Figure 7.6 on the next page.
Chapter 7 Reversible Reactions and Chemical Equilibrium • MHR 329
solid liquid gas
increasing entropy
Figure 7.6 The entropy of the particles in a sample of matter increases as the matter
changes state from solid to liquid to gas.
The mathematical definition of entropy describes the probability of a
given arrangement of particles. A system of moving particles with low
entropy probably has greater order than a similar system with higher
entropy. Why say “probably”? Consider gas molecules in a container at
room temperature. The gas molecules are moving rapidly, colliding with
other molecules and the walls of the container. They have relatively large
entropy. What if two different gases occupy the same container? It is pos-
sible, in principle, for the gases to separate so they are on opposite sides
of the container. Given the huge number of particles, however, the proba-
bility of this happening is so close to zero that chemists say it will never
happen. Nevertheless, it remains possible. The outcome is not certain.
As you know from Unit 3, chemists often use the terms “system” and
“surroundings” to describe a chemical reaction. The system is the reaction
itself—the reactants and products. The surroundings are everything else
in the universe. According to the first law of thermodynamics (the law
of conservation of energy) the algebraic sum of the energy changes in
a system and its surroundings is zero. Unlike energy, entropy is not
conserved. The total amount of entropy is increasing. This is part of the
second law of thermodynamics: the total entropy of the universe is
constantly increasing. The key word here is “total.” If you are studying
a system, you must add together changes in the entropy of the system,
∆S , and changes in the entropy of the surroundings, ∆S .
sys surr
Consider what happens to you and your classmates (the particles in a
“system”) on your way to class. Initially, you and your classmates are in
different places in the school, walking with different velocities toward the
classroom. Going to class represents a relatively large amount of entropy.
The final state of the system, when everyone is seated, represents a
330 MHR • Unit 4 Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
smaller amount of entropy. Thus, the entropy of the system decreased.
How, then, did the entropy of the universe increase?
The answer to this question involves changes to the surroundings.
Each of you, on your way to class, metabolized energy. The movement
and heat from your bodies added to the entropy of the air particles around
you. In fact, the increase in the entropy of the surroundings was greater
than the decrease in the entropy of the system. Therefore, the total
entropy of the universe increased.
What does entropy have to do with favourable chemical changes and
equilibrium systems? All favourable changes involve an increase in the
total amount of entropy. Recall the endothermic reaction in Figure 7.4.
Ba(OH) 2•8H 2 O (s) + 2NH 4 SCN (s) → Ba(SCN) 2(aq) + 10H 2 O ((cid:4)) + 2NH 3(g)
∆H = +170kJ
The reaction is favourable, partly because the reactants are two solids and
the products are a solution, water, and a gas. The products have a much
larger entropy than the reactants. This helps to make the reaction
favourable.
Now recall the reaction between mercury and oxygen. It favours
the formation of HgO below about 400˚C, but the decomposition of HgO
above 400˚C. This reaction highlights the importance of temperature to
favourable change. Enthalpy, entropy, and temperature are linked in a
concept called free energy.
Free Energy and Equilibrium
Imagine a perfect engine—an engine without any friction between its
moving parts. This engine would still be unable to convert all the energy
in a fuel into useful work. The reason is that some energy, such as the
energy of the hot exhaust, is used to increase the entropy of the surround-
ings. The term free energy means available energy. In a chemical change,
free energy is a measure of the useful work that can be obtained from a
reaction. Free energy is often called Gibbs free energy, and given the
symbol G, in honour of Josiah Willard Gibbs (1839–1903). Gibbs, a
professor of chemistry at Harvard University, developed the concept
of free energy and the equations that describe it.
The change in the free energy of a system, ∆G, at constant temperature
is given by the equation ∆G = ∆H − T∆S. In this equation, as in most
chemistry equations, the temperature, T, must be in Kelvin degrees. The
symbol ∆H represents the change in enthalpy. The symbol ∆S represents
the change in entropy.
∆G = ∆H − T∆S
change in free energy change in entropy
Biology LINK
change in enthalpy Kelvin temperature
The concept of free energy
The value of ∆G for a chemical reaction tells us whether the reaction is a appears in other areas of
source of useful energy. Such energy can be converted into another form, science, notably biology.
Find out the meanings of
such as mechanical energy to drive machinery or electrical energy in a
the terms “exergonic” and
battery. The rest of the energy from the reaction enters the environment as
“endergonic.” How are these
heat. It increases the entropy of the surroundings.
terms related to free energy?
Chapter 7 Reversible Reactions and Chemical Equilibrium • MHR 331
The equation ∆G = ∆H − T∆S, and the sign of ∆G, can help to explain
why some chemical reactions are favourable at room temperature, why
others are not, and how temperature affects the direction of a reaction.
The change in the free energy of a chemical reaction is related
to the direction of the reaction and to equilibrium as follows:
• When ∆G is negative, the forward reaction is favourable.
• When ∆G is zero, the reaction is at equilibrium.
• When ∆G is positive, the reaction is favourable in the reverse direction
but not in the forward direction.
Exothermic reactions are often favourable because the sign of ∆H is
negative. The equation shows that exothermic reactions are unfavourable
only when ∆S is negative and the value of −T∆S is large enough to make
∆G positive. This is what happens in the reaction between mercury
and oxygen.
Hg ((cid:4)) + 1 2 O 2(g) → HgO (s) ∆H = −90.8kJ
From left to right, the reaction is exothermic. There is a decrease in
entropy because gas molecules react to form a solid. At temperatures
greater than about 400˚C (673 K), the value of −T∆S is positive and greater
than 90.8 kJ. Thus, ∆G becomes positive. The forward reaction is no
longer favourable, as experiments confirm.
In most reactions, the entropy of the system increases (S is positive),
so the value of −T∆S is negative. Therefore, most reactions tend to be
more favourable at higher temperatures. At low temperatures, reactions
are likely to be favourable only if they are highly exothermic.
Section Summary
Table 7.1 shows how you can use the signs of ∆H and ∆S to determine
whether a chemical reaction is favourable. It also shows how ∆H and ∆S
may vary with temperature. Keep in mind that a favourable reaction may
be fast or slow. Thermodynamics makes no prediction about the rate of a
reaction, only whether or not it can take place. Also, before any reaction
begins, the activation energy must be supplied.
Table 7.1 How the Signs of ∆H and ∆SAffect the Favourability of a Reaction
∆H ∆S −T∆S Comments and examples
− + − Both ∆H and ∆S favour the reaction. The
reaction is favourable at all temperatures.
Example: 2O
3(g)
→ 3O
2(g)
+ − + Neither ∆H nor ∆S favours the reaction. The
reaction is unfavourable at all temperatures.
Example: 3O → 2O
2(g) 3(g)
− − + ∆H is favourable, but ∆S is not. The reaction
is likely to be favourable at relatively
low temperatures.
Example: Hg ((cid:4)) + – 1 2 O 2(g) → HgO (s)
+ + − ∆S is favourable, but ∆H is not. The reaction
is likely to be favourable at higher temperatures.
Example: HgO (s) → Hg ((cid:4)) + – 1 2 O 2(g)
332 MHR • Unit 4 Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
Note that the entropy of a system cannot increase forever. Eventually,
a maximum state of disorder is reached. When this happens, the system
appears to have constant properties, even though changes are still taking
place at the molecular level. We say that a chemical system is at equilibri-
um when it has constant observable properties. Therefore, equilibrium
occurs when a system has reached its maximum entropy. In the next
section, you will look more closely at the reactants and products of
chemical systems and learn how equilibrium is measured.
Section Review
1 K/U Explain the difference between a favourable chemical change
and an unfavourable chemical change. Give two examples of each
type of change.
2 C Write a short paragraph, or use a graphic organizer, to show
the relationship among the following concepts: favourable chemical
change, temperature, enthalpy, entropy, free energy.
3 K/U In each process, how does the entropy of the system change?
(a) ice melting (d) HCl + NH → NH Cl
(g) 3(g) 4 (s)
(b) water vapour condensing (e) CaCO → CaO + CO
3(s) (s) 2(g)
(c) sugar dissolving in water
4 K/U What is the sign of the entropy change in each chemical
reaction?
(a) N O → 2NO (d) N + 3H → 2NH
2 4(g) 2(g) 2(g) 2(g) 3(g)
(b) PCl + Cl → PCl (e) S + O → SO
3(g) 2(g) 5(g) (s) 2(g) 2(g)
(c) 2Al + 3 O → Al O
(s) 2 2(g) 2 3(s)
5 I When water freezes, the phase change that occurs is exothermic.
H 2 O ((cid:4)) → H 2 O (s) ∆H = −6.02kJ
Based on the change in enthalpy, you would expect that water would
always freeze. Use the concepts of entropy and free energy to explain
why this phase change is favourable only below 0˚C.
Chapter 7 Reversible Reactions and Chemical Equilibrium • MHR 333
7.3 The Equilibrium Constant
Chemists use both thermodynamics and rate to study chemical reactions.
Section Preview/
Specific Expectations Thermodynamics determines whether a reaction will occur at a certain
temperature and when equilibrium will be reached. The rate of a reaction
In this section, you will
determines the time it takes for a certain concentration of product to form.
(cid:2) expressyour understanding
In this section, you will learn about the extent of a reaction: the relative
of the law of chemical
equilibrium as it applies to concentrations of products to reactants at equilibrium.
concentrations of reactants
and products at equilibrium Opposing Rates and the Law of Chemical Equilibrium
(cid:2) collectexperimental data In 1864, two Norwegian chemists, Cato Guldberg and Peter Waage,
to determine an equilibrium
summarized their experiments on chemical equilibrium in the law of
constant for concentration
chemical equilibrium: At equilibrium, there is a constant ratio between
(cid:2) solveequilibrium problems
the concentrations of the products and reactants in any change.
involving concentrations of
Figure 7.7 shows how the law of chemical equilibrium applies to one
reactants and products
chemical system. Chemists have studied this system extensively. It
(cid:2) communicateyour under-
involves the reversible reaction between two gases: dinitrogen tetroxide,
standing of the following
which is colourless, and nitrogen dioxide, which is dark brown.
terms: law of chemical
equilibrium, equilibrium N O
(cid:2)(cid:3)
2NO
2 4(g) 2(g)
constant (K ), ICE table
c colourless brown
By observing the intensity of the brown colour in the mixture, chemists
can determine the concentration of nitrogen dioxide.
A B C D
Figure 7.7 As this system nears equilibrium, the rate of the forward reaction decreases
and the rate of the reverse reaction increases. At equilibrium, the macroscopic properties of
this system are constant. Changes at the molecular level take place at equal rates.
334 MHR • Unit 4 Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
noitartnecnoC
NO
2
N O 2 4
Time
noitartnecnoC NO 2
N O 2 4
Time
Dinitrogen tetroxide gas is produced by vaporizing dinitrogen
tetroxide liquid. Dinitrogen tetroxide liquid boils at 21˚C. If a small
quantity is placed in a sealed flask at 100˚C, it vaporizes, filling the flask
with dinitrogen tetroxide gas.
Suppose that the initial concentration of N O is 0.0200 mol/L.
2 4(g)
The initial concentration of NO is zero. The initial rate of the forward
2(g)
reaction, k, is relatively large, while the initial rate of the reverse
f
reaction, k , is zero. The initial conditions correspond to the first
r
exchange in the ExpressLab on page 325, where the reactant cylinder was
How did the ExpressLab on
full and the product cylinder was empty. As the reaction proceeds, the
page 325 model a reaction
rate of the forward reaction decreases because the concentration of N O
2 4(g)
approaching equilibrium? How
decreases. At the same time, the rate of the reverse reaction increases
did it model the situation when
because the concentration of NO increases. At equilibrium, k = k .
2(g) f r equilibrium was reached?
There are no further changes in the relative amounts of N O and NO .
2 4 2
The Equilibrium Constant
From other experiments involving the reaction between nitrogen
tetroxide and nitrogen dioxide, chemists know that both the forward
and reverse reactions involve elementary steps. Thus, you can write rate
equations for the reactions.
Forward reaction: N O → 2NO Reverse reaction: 2NO → N O
2 4(g) 2(g) 2(g) 2 4(g)
Forward rate: k [N O ] Reverse rate: k [NO ]2
f 2 4 f 2
At equilibrium,
Fowardrate = Reverserate
k [N O ] = k [NO ]2
f 2 4 r 2
The ratio of rate constants is another constant. The forward rate constant,
k, divided by the reverse rate constant, k , is called the equilibrium
f r
constant, K .
eq k f = K = [NO 2 ]2
k eq [N O ]
r 2 4
You can write rate equations for these reactions because they are
elementary mechanisms. Guldberg and Waage, however, showed that
similar results are found for any reaction, regardless of the mechanism.
For any general equilibrium equation, let P, Q, R, and S represent
chemical formulas and a, b, c, and d represent their respective
coefficients in the chemical equation.
aP + bQ (cid:2)(cid:3) cR + dS
Recall that molar concentrations are indicated by square brackets.
The equilibrium expression is usually expressed in terms of molar
concentrations. Thus, the subscript “c” is usually used instead of “eq”
in the equilibrium constant.
K =
[R]c[S]d
c [P]a[Q]b
This equilibrium expression depends only on the stoichiometry of the CHEM
reaction. By convention, chemists always write the concentrations of the FACT
products in the numerator and the concentrations of the reactants in the
The law of chemical equili-
denominator. Each concentration term is raised to the power of the coeffi- brium is sometimes known as
cient in the chemical equation. The terms are multiplied, never added. the law of mass action. Before
The following Sample Problem shows how to find the equilibrium the term “concentration” was
expression for a reaction. In this chapter, you will use equilibrium used, the concept of amount
per unit volume was called
expressions for homogeneous reactions (mostly reactions between gases).
“active mass.”
In Chapters 8 and 9, you will learn how to use equilibrium expressions
for heterogeneous systems.
Chapter 7 Reversible Reactions and Chemical Equilibrium • MHR 335
Sample Problem
Writing Equilibrium Expressions
Problem
One of the steps in the production of sulfuric acid involves the catalytic
oxidation of sulfur dioxide.
2SO + O → 2SO
2(g) 2(g) 3(g)
Write the equilibrium expression.
What Is Required?
You need to find an expression for K .
c
What Is Given?
You know the balanced chemical equation.
Plan Your Strategy
The expression for K is a fraction. The concentration of the product
c
is in the numerator, and the concentrations of the reactants are in the
denominator. Each concentration term must be raised to the power of
the coefficient in the balanced equation.
Act on Your Strategy
K = [SO 3 ]2
c [SO ]2[O ]
2 2
Check Your Solution
The square brackets indicate concentrations. The product is in the
numerator, and each term is raised to the power of the coefficient in
the chemical equation. The coefficient or power of 1 is not written,
thus following chemistry conventions.
Practice Problems
Write the equilibrium expression for each homogeneous reaction.
1. The reaction between ethanol and ethanoic acid to form ethyl
ethanoate and water:
CH 3 CH 2 OH ((cid:4)) + CH 3 COOH ((cid:4)) (cid:2)(cid:3) CH 3 CHOOCH 2 CH 3((cid:4)) + H 2 O ((cid:4))
2. The reaction between nitrogen gas and oxygen gas at high
temperatures:
N + O (cid:2)(cid:3) 2NO
2(g) 2(g) (g)
3. The reaction between hydrogen gas and oxygen gas to form water
vapour:
2H + O (cid:2)(cid:3) 2H O
2(g) 2(g) 2 (g)
4. The reduction-oxidation equilibrium of iron and iodine ions in
aqueous solution:
2Fe3+ + 2I − (cid:2)(cid:3) 2Fe2+ + I
(aq) (aq) (aq) 2(aq)
Note:You will learn about reduction-oxidation reactions in the
next unit.
5. The oxidation of ammonia (one of the reactions in the production of
nitric acid):
4NH + 5O (cid:2)(cid:3) 4NO + 6H O
3(g) 2(g) (g) 2 (g)
336 MHR • Unit 4 Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
The Equilibrium Constant and Temperature
Adding a chemical that is involved in a reaction at equilibrium increases
the rate at which this chemical reacts. The rate, however, decreases as the
concentration of the added chemical decreases. Eventually, equilibrium
is re-established with the same equilibrium constant. For a given system
at equilibrium, the value of the equilibrium constant depends only on
temperature. Changing the temperature of a reacting mixture changes the
rate of the forward and reverse reactions by different amounts, because
the forward and reverse reactions have different activation energies. A
reacting mixture at one temperature has an equilibrium constant whose
value changes if the mixture is allowed to reach equilibrium at a different
temperature.
The numerical value of the equilibrium constant does not depend
on whether the starting point involves reactants or products. These
are just labels that chemists use to identify particular chemicals in the
reaction mixture. Also, at a given temperature, the value of K does not
c
depend on the starting concentrations. The reaction gives the same ratio
of products and reactants according to the equilibrium law. Remember,
however, that K is calculated using concentration values when the
c
system is at equilibrium.
Sample Problem
Calculating an Equilibrium Constant
Problem
A mixture of nitrogen and chlorine gases was kept at a certain
temperature in a 5.0 L reaction flask.
N + 3Cl (cid:2)(cid:3) 2NCl
2(g) 2(g) 3(g)
When the equilibrium mixture was analyzed, it was found to contain
0.0070 mol of N , 0.0022 mol of Cl , and 0.95 mol of NCl .
2(g) 2(g) 3(g)
Calculate the equilibrium constant for this reaction.
What Is Required?
You need to calculate the value of K .
c
What Is Given?
You have the balanced chemical equation and the amount of each
substance at equilibrium.
Plan Your Strategy
Step 1 Calculate the molar concentration of each compound at
equilibrium.
Step 2 Write the equilibrium expression. Then substitute the
equilibrium molar concentrations into the expression.
Act on Your Strategy
Step 1 The reaction takes place in a 5.0 L flask. Calculate the molar
concentrations at equilibrium.
[N ] = 0.0070mol = 1.4 × 10 −3mol/L
2 5.0L
Continued ...
Chapter 7 Reversible Reactions and Chemical Equilibrium • MHR 337
Continued ...
[Cl ] = 0.0022mol = 1.9 × 10 −1mol/L
2 5.0L
[NCl ] = 0.95mol = 1.9 × 10 −1mol/L
3 5.0L
PROBLEM TIP Step 2 Write the equilibrium expression. Substitute the equilibrium
Notice that units are not molar concentrations into the expression.
included when using or calcu- K = [NCl 3 ]2
lating the value of K c . This is c [N 2 ][Cl 2 ]3
the usual practice. The units = (1.9 × 10 −1)2
do not help you check your (1.4 × 10 −3) × (4.4 × 10 −4)3
solution.
= 3.0 × 1011
Check Your Solution
The equilibrium expression has the product terms in the numerator
and the reactant terms in the denominator. The exponents in the
equilibrium expression match the corresponding coefficients in the
chemical equation. The molar concentrations at equilibrium were
substituted into the expression.
Practice Problems
6. The following reaction took place in a sealed flask at 250˚C.
PCl (cid:2)(cid:3) PCl + Cl
5(g) 3(g) 2(g)
At equilibrium, the gases in the flask had the following
concentrations: [PCl ] = 1.2 × 10 −2mol/L, [PCl ] = 1.5 × 10 −2mol/L,
5 3
and [Cl ] = 1.5 × 10 −2mol/L. Calculate the value of K at 250˚C.
2 c
7. Iodine and bromine react to form iodine monobromide, IBr.
I + Br (cid:2)(cid:3) 2IBr
2(g) 2(g) (g)
At 250˚C, an equilibrium mixture in a 2.0 L flask contained 0.024 mol
of I , 0.050 mol of Br , and 0.38 mol of IBr . What is the value of
2(g) 2(g) (g)
K for the reaction at 250˚C?
c
8. At high temperatures, carbon dioxide gas decomposes into carbon
monoxide and oxygen gas. At equilibrium, the gases have the follow-
ing concentrations: [CO ] = 1.2mol/L, [CO ] = 0.35mol/L, and
2(g) (g)
[O ] = 0.15mol/L. Determine K at the temperature of the reaction.
2(g) c
9. Hydrogen sulfide is a pungent, poisonous gas. At 1400 K, an
equilibrium mixture was found to contain 0.013 mol/L hydrogen,
0.046 mol/L sulfur in the form of S , and 0.18 mol/L hydrogen
2(g)
sulfide. Calculate the equilibrium constant, at 1400 K, for the
following reaction.
2H S (cid:2)(cid:3) 2H + S
2 (g) 2(g) 2(g)
10. Methane, ethyne, and hydrogen form the following equilibrium
mixture.
2CH (cid:2)(cid:3) C H + 3H
4(g) 2 2(g) 2(g)
While studying this reaction mixture, a chemist analyzed a 4.0 L
sealed flask at 1700˚C. The chemist found 0.46 mol of CH , 0.64 mol
4(g)
of C H , and 0.92 mol of H . What is the value of K for the
2 2(g) 2(g) c
reaction at 1700˚C?
338 MHR • Unit 4 Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
Measuring Equilibrium Concentrations
The equilibrium constant, K , is calculated by substituting equilibrium
c
concentrations into the equilibrium expression. Experimentally, this
means that a reaction mixture must come to equilibrium. Then one or
more properties are measured. The properties that are measured depend
on the reaction. Common examples for gaseous reactions include colour,
pH, and pressure. From these measurements, the concentrations of the
reacting substances can be determined. Thus, you do not need to measure
all the concentrations in the mixture at equilibrium. You can determine
some equilibrium concentrations if you know the initial concentrations Think about a chemical system
of the reactants and the concentration of one product at equilibrium. at equilibrium. Are the concen-
trations of the reactants and
For example, a mixture of iron(III) nitrate and potassium thiocyanate,
products in the same ratio
in aqueous solution, react to form the iron(III) thiocyanate ion,
as the coefficients in the
Fe(SCN)2+
. The reactant solutions are nearly colourless. The product
(aq) chemical equation? Explain
solution ranges in colour from orange to blood-red, depending on its
your answer.
concentration. The nitrate and potassium ions are spectators. Therefore,
the net ionic equation is
Fe3+ + SCN − (cid:2)(cid:3) Fe(SCN)2+
(aq) (aq) (aq)
colourless red
Because the reaction involves a colour change, you can determine the
concentration of
Fe(SCN)2+
by measuring the intensity of the colour.
(aq)
You will find out how to do this in Investigation 7-A. For now, assume
that it can be done. From the measurements of colour intensity, you
can calculate the equilibrium concentration of
Fe(SCN)2+
. Then,
(aq)
knowing the initial concentration of each solution, you can calculate
the equilibrium concentration of each ion using the chemical equation.
Suppose, for instance, that the initial concentration of
Fe3+
is
(aq)
−
0.0064 mol/L and the initial concentration of SCN is 0.0010 mol/L.
(aq)
When the solutions are mixed, the red complex ion forms. By measuring
the intensity of its colour, you can determine that the concentration of
Fe(SCN)2+ is 4.5 × 10 −4mol/L. From the stoichiometry of the equation,
(aq)
each mole of
Fe(SCN)2+
forms when equal amounts of
Fe3+
and
(aq) (aq)
SCN − react. So, if there is 4.5 × 10 −4mol/L of Fe(SCN)2+ at
(aq) (aq)
equilibrium, then the same amounts of both
Fe3+
and SCN
−
must
(aq) (aq)
have reacted. This represents the change in their concentrations. The
equilibrium concentration of a reacting species is the sum of its initial
concentration and the change that results from the reaction. Therefore,
the concentration of Fe3+ at equilibrium is (0.0064 − 0.000 45) mol/L =
(aq)
0.005 95 mol/L, or 0.0060 mol/L. You can calculate the equilibrium
−
concentration of SCN the same way, and complete the table below.
(aq)
Concentration (mol/L) Fe3+ (aq) + SCN − (aq) (cid:2) (cid:2) Fe(SCN)2+ (aq)
Initial 0.0064 0.0010 0
Change −4.5 × 10−4 −4.5 × 10−4 4.5 × 10−4
Equilibrium 0.0060 5.5 × 10−4 4.5 × 10−4
Finally, you can calculate K by substituting the equilibrium
c
concentrations into the equilibrium expression.
In the following investigation, you will collect experimental data
to determine an equilibrium constant.
Chapter 7 Reversible Reactions and Chemical Equilibrium • MHR 339
S K I L L F O C U S
Predicting
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
Measuring an Communicating results
Equilibrium Constant
The colour intensity of a solution is related to the You will prepare four equilibrium mixtures
concentration of the ions and the depth of the with different initial concentrations of
Fe3+
(aq)
−
solution. By adjusting the depth of a solution ions and SCN ions. You will calculate the
(aq)
with unknown concentration until it has the initial concentrations of these reacting ions from
same intensity as a solution with known concen- the volumes and concentrations of the stock
tration, you can determine the concentration solutions used, and the total volumes of the
of the unknown solution. For example, if the equilibrium mixtures. Then you will determine
concentration of a solution is lower than the the concentration of
Fe(SCN)2+
ions in each
standard, the depth of the solution has to be mixture by comparing the colour intensity of the
greater in order to have the same colour intensity. mixture with the colour intensity of a solution
Thus, the ratio of the concentrations of two solu- that has known concentration. After you find
tions with the same colour intensity is inversely the concentration of
Fe(SCN)2+
ions, you will
proportional to the ratio of their depths. use it to calculate the concentrations of the
In this investigation, you will examine other two ions at equilibrium. You will substitute
the homogeneous equilibrium between the three concentrations for each mixture into
iron(III) (ferric) ions, thiocyanate ions, and the equilibrium expression to determine the
ferrithiocyanate ions,
Fe(SCN)2+
. equilibrium constant.
Fe3+ + SCN − (cid:2)(cid:3) Fe(SCN)2+
(aq) (aq) (aq)
Which solution is the least concentrated? Why is the colour intensity the same when you look vertically through the solutions?
340 MHR • Unit 4 Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
Question strip of paper
diffuse light source, such as a light box
What is the value of the equilibrium constant at
medicine dropper
room temperature for the following reaction?
3 Mohr pipettes (5.0 mL)
Fe3+ + SCN − (cid:2)(cid:3) Fe(SCN)2+
(aq) (aq) (aq) 20.0 mL Mohr pipette
pipette bulb
Prediction
30 mL 0.0020 mol/L KSCN
(aq)
Write the equilibrium expression for this 30 mL 0.0020 mol/L Fe(NO ) (acidified)
3 3(aq)
reaction. 25 mL 0.200 mol/L Fe(NO ) (acidified)
3 3(aq)
distilled water
Safety Precautions
Procedure
1. Copy the following tables into your notebook,
• The Fe(NO ) solution is acidified with nitric
3 3
and give them titles. You will use the tables to
acid. It should be handled with care. Wash any
record your measurements and calculations.
spills on your skin or clothing with plenty of
water, and inform your teacher. 2. Label five test tubes and five vials with the
• All glassware must be clean and dry before numbers 1 through 5. Label three beakers
with the names and concentrations of the
using it.
stock solutions: 2.00 × 10 −3 mol/L KSCN,
2.00 × 10 −3 mol/L Fe(NO ) , and 0.200 mol/L
Materials 3 3
Fe(NO ) . Pour about 30 mL of each stock
3 3
3 beakers (100 mL)
solution into its labelled beaker. Be sure to
5 test tubes (18 mm × 150 mm)
distinguish between the different concentra-
5 flat-bottom vials
tions of the iron(III) nitrate solutions. Make
test tube rack
sure that you choose the correct solution when
labels or grease pencil
needed in the investigation. Measure the vol-
thermometer
ume of each solution as carefully as possible
stirring rod
to ensure the accuracy of your results.
Test tube Fe(NO) (mL) HO (mL) KSCN (mL) Initial [SCN–] (mol/L)
33 2
2 5.0 3.0 2.0
3 5.0 2.0 3.0
4 5.0 1.0 4.0
5 5.0 0 5.0
Depth of standard solution
Depth of solution Depth of
Vial in vial (mm) standard solution (mm) Depth of solution in vial
2
3
4
5
Chapter 7 Reversible Reactions and Chemical Equilibrium • MHR 341
3. Prepare the standard solution of FeSCN2+ in of white paper as background to make your
test tube 1. Use the 20 mL Mohr pipette to rough colour intensity comparison.
transfer 18.0 mL of 0.200 mol/L Fe(NO )
3 3(aq) 9. Wrap a sheet of paper around vials 1 and 2
into the test tube. Then use a 5 mL pipette to
to prevent light from entering the sides of the
add 2.0 mL of 2.00 × 10 −3 mol/L KSCN. The
solutions. Looking down through the vials
large excess of
Fe3+
is to ensure that all the
(aq) over a diffuse light source, adjust the volume
SCN
−
will react to form
Fe(SCN)2+
.
(aq) (aq) of the standard solution in vial 1 until the
4. Pipette 5.0 mL of 2.0 × 10 −3 mol/L Fe(NO ) colour intensity in the vials is the same. Use
3 3(aq)
into each of the other four test tubes a medicine dropper to remove or add standard
(labelled 2 to 5). solution. Be careful not to add standard
solution to vial 2.
5. Pipette 3.0 mL, 2.0 mL, 1.0 mL, and 0 mL
of distilled water into test tubes 2 to 5. 10. When the colour intensity is the same in
both vials, measure and record the depth of
6. Pipette 2.0 mL, 3.0 mL, 4.0 mL, and 5.0 mL of
solution in each vial as carefully as possible.
2.0 × 10 −3 mol/L KSCN into test tubes 2 to
(aq)
5. Each of these test tubes should now contain 11. Repeat steps 9 and 10 using vials 3 to 5.
10.0 mL of solution. Notice that the first table
12. Discard the solutions into the container
you prepared (in step 1) shows the volumes of
supplied by your teacher. Rinse the test tubes
the liquids you added to the test tubes. Use a
and vials with distilled water. Then return all
stirring rod to mix each solution. (Remember
the equipment. Wash your hands.
to rinse the stirring rod with water and then
dry it with a paper towel before you stir each 13. Copy the following table into your notebook,
solution. Measure and record the temperature to summarize the results of your calculations.
of one of the solutions. Assume that all the
(a) Calculate the equilibrium concentration of
solutions are at the same temperature. Fe(SCN)2+
in the standard solution you pre-
7. Pour about 5 mL of the standard solution from pared in test tube 1. The
[Fe(SCN)2+
] standard
test tube 1 into vial 1. is essentially the same as the starting con-
−
centration of SCN in test tube 1. The
(aq)
8. Pour some of the solution from test tube 2
large excess of
Fe3+
ensured that the
(aq)
into vial 2. Look down through vials 1 and 2. −
reaction of SCN was almost complete.
Add enough solution to vial 2 to make its
Remember, however, to include the
colour intensity about the same as the colour
volume of Fe(NO ) in the total volume
3 3(aq)
intensity of the solution in vial 1. Use a sheet
of the solution for your calculation.
Initial concentrations Equilibrium concentrations
Test tube [Fe3+] [SCN−] [Fe3+] [SCN−] [Fe(SCN)2+] Equilibrium constant, K
i i eq eq eq c
2
3
4
5
342 MHR • Unit 4 Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
(b) Calculate the initial concentration of Fe3+ 3. Use your four sets of data to evaluate the
(aq)
in test tubes 2 to 5. [Fe3+ ] is the same in following expressions:
i
these four test tubes. They all contained the [Fe(SCN)2+ ][Fe3+ ][SCN − ]
same volume of Fe(NO 3 ) 3(aq) , and the total [Fe3+ ] + [SCN − ]
final volume was the same. Remember to [Fe(SCN)2+
]
use the total volume of the solution in your
Do these expressions give a value that is more
calculation.
constant than your equilibrium constant?
(c) Calculate the initial concentration of
Make up another expression, and evaluate it
− −
SCN in test tubes 2 to 5. [SCN ] is
(aq) i using your four sets of data. How constant is
different in each test tube.
its value?
(d) Calculate the equilibrium concentration
of
Fe(SCN)2+
in test tubes 2 to 5. Use the
4. Suppose that the following reaction was the
equilibrium reaction.
following equation:
Fe3+ + 2SCN − (cid:2)(cid:3) Fe(SCN) +
[FeSCN2+ ] = Depthofstandardsolution × [FeSCN2+ ] (aq) (aq) 2 (aq)
eq Depthofsolutioninvial standard (a) Would the equilibrium concentration of the
product be different from the concentration
(e) Based on the stoichiometry of the reaction,
of the product in the actual reaction?
each mole of
Fe(SCN)2+
is formed by the
Explain.
reaction of one mole of
Fe3+
with one mole
− (b) Would the value of K be different from the
of SCN . Thus, you can find the equilibri- c
value you calculated earlier? Explain.
um concentrations of these ions by using
the equations below:
[Fe3+ ] = [Fe3+ ] − [Fe(SCN)2+ ] Conclusion
eq i eq
[SCN − ] = [SCN − ] − [Fe(SCN)2+ ] 5. Write a short conclusion, summarizing your
eq i eq
results for this investigation.
(f) Calculate four values for the equilibrium
constant, K , by substituting the equilibri-
c
um concentrations into the equilibrium
expression. Find the average of your four
values for K .
c
Analysis
1. How did the colour intensity of the solutions
in test tubes 2 to 5 vary at equilibrium?
Explain your observation.
2. How consistent are the four values you
calculated for K ? Suggest reasons that could
c
account for any differences.
Chapter 7 Reversible Reactions and Chemical Equilibrium • MHR 343
Equilibrium Calculations
The Sample Problems that follow all involve homogeneous equilibrium
systems. Each problem illustrates a particular type of system and includes
brief tips. Each problem also includes a table like the one on page 339 to
organize the data. Because this table is used to record the initial, change,
and equilibrium values of the reacting species, it is often called an ICE
table. In Chapters 8 and 9, you will use ICE tables again to help you solve
problems that involve heterogeneous equilibrium systems.
Sample Problem
Finding Equilibrium Amounts From Initial Amounts and K
c
Problem
The following reaction increases the proportion of hydrogen gas for use
as a fuel.
CO + H O (cid:2)(cid:3) H + CO
(g) 2 (g) 2(g) 2(g)
This reaction has been studied at different temperatures to find the
optimum conditions. At 700 K, the equilibrium constant is 8.3. Suppose
that you start with 1.0 mol of CO and 1.0 mol of H O in a 5.0 L
(g) 2 (g)
container. What amount of each substance will be present in the
container when the gases are at equilibrium, at 700 K?
What Is Required?
You need to find the amount (in moles) of CO , H O , H , and CO
(g) 2 (g) 2(g) 2(g)
at equilibrium.
What Is Given?
You have the balanced chemical equation. You know the initial amount
of each gas, the volume of the container, and the equilibrium constant.
Plan Your Strategy
PROBLEM TIP
Step 1 Calculate the initial concentrations.
Generally, it is best to let
Step 2 Set up an ICE table. Record the initial concentrations you
xrepresent the substance with
calculated in step 1 in your ICE table. Let the change in molar
the smallest coefficient in the
concentrations of the reactants be x. Use the stoichiometry of
chemical equation. This helps
the chemical equation to write and record expressions for the
to avoid fractional values of x
in the equilibrium expression. equilibrium concentrations.
Fractional values make solving Step 3 Write the equilibrium expression. Substitute the expressions for
the expression more difficult.
the equilibrium concentrations into the equilibrium expression.
Solve the equilibrium expression for x.
Step 4 Calculate the equilibrium concentration of each gas. Then use the
volume of the container to find the amount of each gas.
Act on Your Strategy
Step 1 The initial amount of CO is equal to the initial amount of H O.
2
∴[CO] = [H O] = 1.0mol = 0.20mol/L
2 5.0L
344 MHR • Unit 4 Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
Step 2 Set up an ICE table.
Concentration (mol/L) CO (g) + H 2 O (g) (cid:2) (cid:2) H 2(g) + CO 2(g)
Initial 0.20 0.20 0 0
Change −x −x +x +x
Equilibrium 0.20 − x 0.20 − x 0 + x 0 + x
Step 3 K = [H 2 ][CO 2 ]
c [CO][H O]
2 PROBLEM TIP
0.83 = (x)(x) = (x)2 In this problem, the right-
(0.20 − x)(0.20 − x) (0.20 − x)2
hand side of the equilibrium
±0.911 = (x) expression is a perfect square.
(0.20 − x)
Noticing perfect squares, then
Solving for both values, taking the square root of both
x = 0.148 and x = 0.306 sides, makes solving the equa-
tion easier. It avoids solving a
Step 4 The value x = 0.306 is physically impossible because it would quadratic equation.
result in a negative concentration of both CO and H O at
2
equilibrium.
∴[H ] = [CO ] = 0.15mol/L
2 2
[CO] = [H O] = 0.20 − 0.15 = 0.05mol/L
2
To find the amount of each gas, multiply the concentration of each
gas by the volume of the container (5.0 L).
Amount of H = CO = 0.75mol
2(g) 2(g)
Amount of CO = H O = 0.25mol
(g) 2 (g)
Check Your Solution
The equilibrium expression has product terms in the numerator
and reactant terms in the denominator. The amounts of chemicals at
equilibrium are given in moles. Check K .
c
K =
(0.75)2
= 9.0
c (0.25)2
This is close to the given value, K = 8.3. The difference is due to
c
mathematical rounding.
Many problems do not involve perfect squares. You may need to use a
quadratic equation to solve the equilibrium expression.
Sample Problem
Solving an Equilibrium Expression Using a Quadratic Equation
Problem
The following reaction has an equilibrium constant of 25.0 at 1100 K.
H + I (cid:2)(cid:3) 2HI
2(g) 2(g) (g)
2.00 mol of H and 3.00 mol of I are placed in a 1.00 L reaction
2(g) 2(g)
vessel at 1100 K. What is the equilibrium concentration of each gas?
Continued ...
Chapter 7 Reversible Reactions and Chemical Equilibrium • MHR 345
Continued ...
What Is Required?
You need to find [H ], [I ], and [HI].
2 2
What Is Given?
You have the balanced chemical equation. You know the equilibrium
constant for the reaction, K = 25. You also know the concentrations of
c
the reactants and product: [H ] = 2.00mol/L, [I ] = 3.00mol/L, and
2 i 2 i
[HI] = 0.
i
Plan Your Strategy
Step 1 Set up an ICE table. Let the change in molar concentrations of the
reactants be x. Use the stoichiometry of the chemical equation to
write expressions for the equilibrium concentrations. Record these
expressions in your ICE table.
Step 2 Write the equilibrium expression. Substitute the expressions for
the equilibrium concentrations into the equilibrium expression.
Rearrange the equilibrium expression into the form of a quadratic
equation. Solve the quadratic equation for x.
Step 3 Substitute xinto the equilibrium line of the ICE table to find the
equilibrium concentrations.
Act on Your Strategy
Step 1 Set up an ICE table.
Concentration (mol/L) H 2(g) + I 2(g) (cid:2) (cid:2) 2HI (g)
Initial 2.00 3.00 0
Change −x −x +2x
Equilibrium 2.00 − x 3.00 − x +2x
PROBLEM TIP
Step 2 Write and solve the equilibrium expression.
In the equilibrium expression,
the numerator is [HI]2. The K = [HI]2
concentration is 2x, so the c [H 2 ][I 2 ]
substitution is (2x)2 = 4x2. 25.0 = (2x)2
A common mistake is to write (2.00 − x)(3.00 − x)
2x2. You can avoid this mistake
This equation does not involve a perfect square. It must be
by using brackets.
re-arranged into a quadratic equation.
0.840x2 − 5.00x + 6.00 = 0
Recall that a quadratic equation of the form ax2 + bx + c = 0
has the following solution:
√
x = −b ± b2 − 4ac
2a
√
∴x = −(−5.00) ± 25.0 − 20.16
1.68
= 5.00 ± 2.2
1.68
x = 4.3and x = 1.7
346 MHR • Unit 4 Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
Step 3 The value x = 4.3is not physically possible. It would result in
negative concentrations of H and I at equilibrium. The concen-
2 2
tration of each substance at equilibrium is found by substituting
x = 1.7into the last line of the ICE table.
Concentration (mol/L) H 2(g) + I 2(g) (cid:2) (cid:2) 2HI (g)
Equilibrium 2.00 − 1.7 3.00 − 1.7 3.4
Applying the rule for subtraction involving measured values,
[H ] = 0.3mol/L
2
[I ] = 1.3mol/L
2
[HI] = 3.4mol/L
Check Your Solution
The coefficients in the chemical equation match the exponents in the
equilibrium expression. To check your concentrations, substitute them
back into the equilibrium expression.
K =
3.42
= 30
c 0.3 × 1.3
Solving the quadratic equation gives a value of x, correct to one
decimal place. As a result, [H ] can have only one significant figure.
2
The calculated value of K is equal to the given value, within the error
c
introduced by rounding.
Practice Problems
11. At 25˚C, the value of K for the following reaction is 82.
c
I + Cl (cid:2)(cid:3) 2ICl
2(g) 2(g) (g)
0.83 mol of I and 0.83 mol of Cl are placed in a 10 L container
2(g) 2(g)
at 25˚C. What are the concentrations of the three gases at equilibrium?
12. At a certain temperature, K = 4.0 for the following reaction.
c
2HF (cid:2)(cid:3) H + F
(g) 2(g) 2(g)
A 1.0 L reaction vessel contained 0.045 mol of F at equilibrium.
2(g)
What was the initial amount of HF in the reaction vessel?
13. A chemist was studying the following reaction.
SO + NO (cid:2)(cid:3) NO + SO
2(g) 2(g) (g) 3(g)
In a 1.0 L container, the chemist added 1.7 × 10 −1 mol of SO to
2(g)
1.1 × 10 −1 mol of NO . The value of K for the reaction at a certain
2(g) c
temperature is 4.8. What is the equilibrium concentration of SO at
3(g)
this temperature?
14. Phosgene, COCl , is an extremely toxic gas. It was used during
2(g)
World War I. Today it is used to manufacture pesticides, pharmaceuti-
cals, dyes, and polymers. It is prepared by mixing carbon monoxide
and chlorine gas.
CO + Cl (cid:2)(cid:3) COCl
(g) 2(g) 2(g)
Continued ...
Chapter 7 Reversible Reactions and Chemical Equilibrium • MHR 347
Continued ...
0.055 mol of CO and 0.072 mol of Cl are placed in a 5.0 L
(g) 2(g)
container. At 870 K, the equilibrium constant is 0.20. What are the
equilibrium concentrations of the mixture at 870 K?
15. Hydrogen bromide decomposes at 700 K.
2HBr (cid:2)(cid:3) H + Br K = 4.2 × 10 −9
(g) 2(g) 2(g) c
0.090 mol of HBr is placed in a 2.0 L reaction vessel and heated to
700 K. What is the equilibrium concentration of each gas?
Qualitatively Interpreting the Equilibrium Constant
The Sample Problem on page 344 showed how to calculate the amounts of
gases at equilibrium for the following reaction.
CO + H O (cid:2)(cid:3) H + CO
(g) 2 (g) 2(g) 2(g)
Recall that the equilibrium constant for this reaction was 8.3 at 700 K.
1.0 mol of CO and 1.0 mol of H O were put in a 5.0 L container. At
(g) 2 (g)
equilibrium, 0.48 mol of H and 0.48 mol of CO were present. The
2(g) 2(g)
starting amounts were in stoichiometric ratios. Consequently, if the reac-
tion had gone to completion, there would have been no limiting reactant.
You would have expected 1.0 mol of both H and CO . Thus, you can
2(g) 2(g)
calculate the percent yield of the reaction as follows:
Equilibrium[H ] × 100%
Percentyield = 2
Maximum[H ]
2
= 0.48 × 100%
1.0
= 48%
This value indicates the extent of the reaction. It is linked to the size of
K . As you know, the equilibrium expression is always written with the
c
product terms over the reactant terms. Therefore, a large K means that the
c
concentration of products is larger than the concentration of reactants at
equilibrium. When referring to a reaction with a large K , chemists often
c
say that the position of equilibrium lies to the right, or that it favours the
products. Similarly, if K is small, the concentration of reactants is larger
c
than the concentration of products. Chemists say that the position of
equilibrium lies to the left, or that it favours reactants. Thus, the
following general statements are true:
• When K > 1, products are favoured. The equilibrium lies far to the right.
Reactions where K is greater than 1010 are usually regarded as going to
completion.
• When K ≈ 1, there are approximately equal concentrations of reactants
and products at equilibrium.
•When K < 1, reactants are favoured. The equilibrium lies far to the left.
Reactions in which K is smaller than 10
−10
are usually regarded as not
taking place at all.
Notice that the subscript “c” has been left off K in these general state-
ments. This reflects the fact that there are other equilibrium constants
that these statements apply to, not just equilibrium constants involving
concentrations. You will learn about other types of equilibrium constants
in the next two chapters. For the rest of this chapter, though, you will
continue to see the subscript “c” used.
348 MHR • Unit 4 Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
In the Sample Problem and Practice Problems below, you will
consider how temperature affects the extent of a reaction. Keep in mind
that the size of K is not related to the time that a reaction takes to achieve
c
equilibrium. Very large values of K may be associated with reactions
c
that take place extremely slowly. The time that a reaction takes to reach
equilibrium depends on the rate of the reaction. This is determined by
the size of the activation energy.
Sample Problem
Temperature and the Extent of a Reaction
Does a small value of K
c
Problem indicate a slow reaction? Use
an example to justify your
Consider the reaction of carbon monoxide and chlorine to form
answer.
phosgene, COCl .
2(g)
CO + Cl (cid:2)(cid:3) COCl
(g) 2(g) 2(g)
At 870 K, the value of K is 0.20. At 370 K, the value of K is 4.6 × 107.
c c
Based on only the values of K , is the production of COCl more
c 2(g)
favourable at the higher or lower temperature?
What Is Required?
You need to choose the temperature that favours the greater
concentration of product.
What Is Given?
K = 0.2 at 870 K
c
K = 4.6 × 107 at 370 K
c
Plan Your Strategy
Phosgene is a product in the chemical equation. A greater concentration
of product corresponds to a larger value of K .
c
Act on Your Strategy
The value of K is larger at 370 K. The position of equilibrium lies far
c
to the right. It favours the formation of COCl at the lower temperature.
2
Check Your Solution
The problem asked you to choose the temperature for a larger concentra-
tion of the product. K is expressed as a fraction with product terms in
c
the numerator. Therefore, the larger value of K corresponds to the larger
c
concentration of product.
Practice Problems
16. For the reaction H + I (cid:2)(cid:3) 2HI , the value of K is 25.0 at 1100 K
2(g) 2(g) (g) c
and 8.0 × 102 at room temperature, 300 K. Which temperature favours
the dissociation of HI into its component gases?
(g)
17. Three reactions, and their equilibrium constants, are given below.
I. N + O (cid:2)(cid:3) 2NO K = 4.7 × 10 −31
2(g) 2(g) (g) c
II. 2NO + O (cid:2)(cid:3) 2NO K = 1.8 × 10 −6
(g) 2(g) 2(g) c
III. N O (cid:2)(cid:3) 2NO K = 0.025
2 4(g) 2(g) c
Continued ...
Chapter 7 Reversible Reactions and Chemical Equilibrium • MHR 349
Continued ...
Arrange these reactions in the order of their tendency to form
products.
18. Identify each reaction as essentially going to completion or
not taking place.
(a) N + 3Cl (cid:2)(cid:3) 2NCl K = 3.0 × 1011
2(g) 2(g) 3(g) c
(b) 2CH (cid:2)(cid:3) C H + H K = 9.5 × 10 −13
4(g) 2 6(g) 2(g) c
(c) 2NO + 2CO (cid:2)(cid:3) N + 2CO K = 2.2 × 1059
(g) (g) 2(g) 2(g) c
19. Most metal ions combine with other ions in solution. For example,
in aqueous ammonia, silver(I) ions are at equilibrium with different
complex ions.
[Ag(H 2 O) 2 ] + (aq) + 2NH 3(aq) (cid:2)(cid:3) [Ag(NH 3 ) 2 ] + (aq) + 2H 2 O ((cid:4))
At room temperature, K for this reaction is 1 × 107. Which of the
c
two silver complex ions is more stable? Explain your reasoning.
20. Consider the following reaction.
H + Cl (cid:2)(cid:3) 2HCl K = 2.4 × 1033 at 25˚C
2(g) 2(g) (g) c
HCl is placed in a reaction vessel. To what extent do you expect the
(g)
equilibrium mixture to dissociate into H and Cl ?
2(g) 2(g)
The Meaning of a Small Equilibrium Constant
Understanding the meaning of a small equilibrium constant can
sometimes help to simplify a calculation that would otherwise involve
a quadratic equation. When K is small compared with the initial concen-
c
tration, the value of the initial concentration minus x is approximately
equal to the initial concentration. Thus, you can ignore x. Of course, if the
initial concentration of a substance is zero, any equilibrium concentration
of the substance, no matter how small, is significant. In general, values
of K are not measured with accuracy better than 5%. Therefore, making
c
the approximation is justified if the calculation error you introduce is
less than 5%.
To help you decide whether or not the approximation is justified,
divide the initial concentration by the value of K . If the answer is greater
c
than 500, the approximation is justified. If the answer is between 100 and
500, it may be justified. If the answer is less than 100, it is not justified.
The equilibrium expression must be solved in full.
Sample Problem
Using the Approximation Method
Problem
The atmosphere contains large amounts of oxygen and nitrogen. The two
gases do not react, however, at ordinary temperatures. They do react at
high temperatures, such as the temperatures produced by a lightning
flash or a running car engine. In fact, nitrogen oxides from exhaust gases
are a serious pollution problem.
A chemist is studying the following equilibrium reaction.
N + O (cid:2)(cid:3) 2NO
2(g) 2(g) (g)
350 MHR • Unit 4 Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
The chemist puts 0.085 mol of N and 0.038 mol of O in a 1.0 L
2(g) 2(g)
rigid cylinder. At the temperature of the exhaust gases from a particular
engine, the value of K is 4.2 × 10 −8. What is the concentration of NO
c (g)
in the mixture at equilibrium?
What Is Required?
You need to find the concentration of NO at equilibrium.
What Is Given?
You have the balanced chemical equation. You know the value of K and
c
the following concentrations: [N ] = 0.085mol/L and[O ] = 0.038mol/L.
2 2
Plan Your Strategy
Step 1 Divide the smallest initial concentration by K to determine
c
whether you can ignore the change in concentration.
Step 2 Set up an ICE table. Let xrepresent the change in [N ] and [O ].
2 2
Step 3 Write the equilibrium expression. Substitute the equilibrium
concentrations into the equilibrium expression. Solve the
equilibrium expression for x.
Step 4 Calculate [NO] at equilibrium.
Act on Your Strategy
Step 1 Smallestinitialconcentration = 0.038
K 4.2 × 10 −8
c
= 9.0 × 105
Because this is well above 500, you can ignore the changes in
[N ] and [O ].
2 2
Step 2
Concentration (mol/L) N 2(g) + O 2(g) (cid:2) (cid:2) 2NO (g)
Initial 0.085 0.038 0
Change −x −x +2x
Equilibrium 0.085 − x ≈ 0.085 0.038 − x ≈ 0.038 2x
Step 3 K =
[NO]2
c [N ][O ]
2 2
4.2 × 10 −8 = (2x)2
0.085 × 0.038
=
4x2
0.00323
√
x = 3.39 × 10−11
= 5.82 × 10 −6
Step 4 [NO] = 2x
Therefore, the concentration of NO at equilibrium is 1.2 × 10 −5 mol/L.
(g)
Continued ...
Chapter 7 Reversible Reactions and Chemical Equilibrium • MHR 351
Continued ...
Check Your Solution
First, check your assumption that x is negligible compared with the
initial concentrations. Your assumption is valid because, using the rules
for subtracting measured quantities, 0.038 − (5.8 × 10 −6) = 0.038. Next,
check the equilibrium values:
(1.2 × 10 −5)2 = 4.5 × 10 −8
0.0085 × 0.038
This is equal to the equilibrium constant, within rounding errors in the
calculation.
Practice Problems
21. The following equation represents the equilibrium reaction for the
dissociation of phosgene gas.
COCl (cid:2)(cid:3) CO + Cl
2(g) (g) 2(g)
At 100˚C, the value of K for this reaction is 2.2 × 10 −8. The initial
c
concentration of COCl in a closed container at 100˚C is 1.5 mol/L.
2(g)
What are the equilibrium concentrations of CO and Cl ?
(g) 2(g)
22. Hydrogen sulfide is a poisonous gas with a characteristic, offensive
odour. It dissociates at 1400˚C, with K equal to 2.4 × 10 −4.
c
H S (cid:2)(cid:3) 2H + S
2 (g) 2(g) 2(g)
4.0 mol of H S is placed in a 3.0 L container. What is the equilibrium
2
concentration of H at 1400˚C?
2(g)
23. At a certain temperature, the value of K for the following reaction is
c
3.3 × 10 −12.
2NCl (cid:2)(cid:3) N + 3Cl
3(g) 2(g) 2(g)
A certain amount of nitrogen trichloride, NCl , is put in a 1.0 L
3(g)
reaction vessel at this temperature. At equilibrium, 4.6 × 10 −4 mol
of N is present. What amount of NCl was put in the reaction
2(g) 3(g)
vessel?
24. At a certain temperature, the value of K for the following reaction
c
is 4.2 × 10 −8.
N + O (cid:2)(cid:3) 2NO
2(g) 2(g) (g)
0.45 mol of N and 0.26 mol of O are put in a 6.0 L reaction
2(g) 2(g)
vessel. What is the equilibrium concentration of NO at this
(g)
temperature?
25. At a particular temperature, K for the decomposition of carbon
c
dioxide gas is 2.0 × 10 −6.
2CO (cid:2)(cid:3) 2CO + O
2(g) (g) 2(g)
3.0 mol of CO is put in a 5.0 L container. Calculate the equilibrium
2
concentration of each gas.
352 MHR • Unit 4 Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
Section Summary
In this section, you learned that the equilibrium constant, K , is a ratio
c
of product concentrations to reactant concentrations. You used concentra-
tions to find K, and you used K to find concentrations. You also used an
ICE table to track and summarize the initial, change, and equilibrium
quantities in a reaction. You found that the value of K is small for reac-
c
tions that reach equilibrium with a high concentration of reactants, and
the value of K is large for reactions that reach equilibrium with a low
c
concentration of reactants. In the next section, you will learn how to
determine whether or not a reaction is at equilibrium, and, if it is not,
in which direction it will go to achieve equilibrium.
Section Review
1 K/U Write equilibrium expressions for each homogeneous reaction.
(a) SbCl (cid:2)(cid:3) SbCl + Cl
5(g) 3(g) 2(g)
(b) 2H + 2NO (cid:2)(cid:3) N + 2H O
2(g) (g) 2(g) 2 (g)
(c) 2H S + CH (cid:2)(cid:3) 4H + CS
2 (g) 4(g) 2(g) 2(g)
2 I When 1.0 mol of ammonia gas is injected into a 0.50 L flask, the
following reaction proceeds to equilibrium.
2NH (cid:2)(cid:3) N + 3H
3(g) 2(g) 2(g)
At equilibrium, 0.30 mol of hydrogen gas is present.
(a) Calculate the equilibrium concentrations of N and NH .
2(g) 3(g)
(b) What is the value of K ?
c
3 I At a certain temperature, K c for the following reaction between
sulfur dioxide and nitrogen dioxide is 4.8.
SO + NO (cid:2)(cid:3) NO + SO
2(g) 2(g) (g) 3(g)
SO and NO have the same initial concentration: 0.36 mol/L.
2(g) 2(g)
What amount of SO is present in a 5.0 L container at equilibrium?
3(g)
4 I Phosphorus trichloride reacts with chlorine to form phosphorus
pentachloride.
PCl + Cl (cid:2)(cid:3) PCl
3(g) 2(g) 5(g)
0.75 mol of PCl and 0.75 mol of Cl are placed in a 8.0 L reaction
3 2
vessel at 500 K. What is the equilibrium concentration of the mixture?
The value of K at 500 K is 49.
c
5 MC Hydrogen gas has several advantages and disadvantages as a
potential fuel. Hydrogen can be obtained by the thermal decomposition
of water at high temperatures.
2H O (cid:2)(cid:3) 2H + O K = 7.3 × 10 −18 at 1000˚C
2 (g) 2(g) 2(g) c
(a) The initial concentration of water in a reaction vessel is 0.055mol/L.
What is the equilibrium concentration of H at 1000˚C?
2(g)
(b) Comment on the practicality of the thermal decomposition of water
to obtain H .
2(g)
Chapter 7 Reversible Reactions and Chemical Equilibrium • MHR 353
7.4 Predicting the
Direction of a Reaction
Section Preview/ So far in this chapter, you have worked with reactions that have reached
Specific Expectations equilibrium. What if a reaction has not yet reached equilibrium, however?
In this section, you will How can you predict the direction in which the reaction must proceed to
reach equilibrium? To do this, you substitute the concentrations of reac-
(cid:2) explainhow to use
Le Châtelier’s principle to tants and products into an expression that is identical to the equilibrium
predict the direction in expression. Because these concentrations may not be the concentrations
which a chemical system at that the equilibrium system would have, the expression is given a
equilibrium will shift when different name: the reaction quotient. The reaction quotient, Q , is an
c
concentration changes
expression that is identical to the equilibrium constant expression, but
(cid:2) applyLe Châtelier’s principle its value is calculated using concentrations that are not necessarily
to makeand testpredictions those at equilibrium.
about how different factors
affect a chemical system at The Relationship Between the Equilibrium Constant
equilibrium
and the Reaction Quotient
(cid:2) communicateyour Recall the general reaction aP + bQ (cid:2)(cid:3) cR + dS. The reaction quotient
understanding of the
expression for this reaction is
following terms: reaction
quotient (Q c ), Le Châtelier’s Q = [R]c[S]d
principle, common ion effect c [P]a[Q]b
You can calculate a value for Q by substituting the concentration of each
c
substance into this expression. If the value of Q is equal to K , the system
c c
must be at equilibrium. If Q is greater than K , the numerator must be
c c
very large. The concentrations of the chemicals on the right side of the
equation must be more than their concentrations at equilibrium. In this
situation, the system attains equilibrium by moving to the left. Conversely,
if Q is less than K , the system attains equilibrium by moving to the
c c
right. Figure 7.8 summarizes these relationships between Q and K .
c c
Q
c
K c Q c K c p o r f o r g e r a e c s t s i on K c
Q c p o r f o r g e r a e c s t s i on
reactants products equilibrium reactants products
Figure 7.8 This diagram shows how Q and K determine reaction direction. When
c c
Q <K , the system attains equilibrium by moving to the right, favouring products. When
c c
Q =K , the system is at equilibrium. When Q >K , the system attains equilibrium by moving
c c c c
to the left, favouring reactants.
The next Sample Problem shows you how to calculate Q and interpret
c
its value.
354 MHR • Unit 4 Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
Sample Problem
Determining the Direction of Shift to Attain Equilibrium
Problem
Ammonia is one of the world’s most important chemicals, in terms of the
quantity manufactured. Some ammonia is processed into nitric acid and
various polymers. Roughly 80% of ammonia is used to make fertilizers,
such as ammonium nitrate. In the Haber process for manufacturing
ammonia, nitrogen and hydrogen combine in the presence of a catalyst.
N + 3H (cid:2)(cid:3) 2NH
2(g) 2(g) 3(g)
At 500˚C, the value of K for this reaction is 0.40. The following concen-
c
trations of gases are present in a container at 500˚C: [N ] = 0.10 mol/L,
2(g)
[H ] = 0.30 mol/L, and [NH ] = 0.20 mol/L. Is this mixture of gases
2(g) 3(g)
at equilibrium? If not, in which direction will the reaction go to reach
equilibrium?
What Is Required?
You need to calculate Q and interpret its value.
c
What Is Given?
You have the balanced chemical equation. You know that the value of K
c
is 0.40. You also know the concentrations of the gases: [N ] = 0.10 mol/L,
2
[H ] = 0.30 mol/L, and [NH ] = 0.20 mol/L.
2 3
Plan Your Strategy
Write the expression for Q , and then calculate its value. Compare
c
the value of Q with the value of K . Decide whether the system is at
c c
equilibrium and, if not, in which direction the reaction will go.
Act on Your Strategy
Q = [NH 3 ]2
c [N ][H ]3
2 2
=
(0.20)2
(0.10)(0.30)3
= 14.8
∴Q > 0.40
c
The system is not at equilibrium. The reaction will proceed by moving
to the left.
Check Your Solution
Check your calculation of Q . (Errors in evaluating fractions with
c
exponents are common.) The value of K is less than one, so you would
c
expect the numerator to be less than the denominator. This is difficult to
evaluate without a calculator, however, because of the powers.
Chapter 7 Reversible Reactions and Chemical Equilibrium • MHR 355
Practice Problems
26. The following reaction takes place inside a cylinder with a movable
piston.
2NO
(cid:2)(cid:3)
N O
2(g) 2 4(g)
At room temperature, the equilibrium concentrations inside the
cylinder are [NO ] = 0.0206 mol/L and [N O ] = 0.0724mol/L.
2 2 4
(a) Calculate the value of K .
c
(b) Calculate the concentration of each gas at the moment that the
piston is used to halve the volume of the reacting mixture. Assume
that the temperature remains constant.
(c) Determine the value of Q when the volume is halved.
c
(d) Predict the direction in which the reaction will proceed
to re-establish equilibrium.
27. Ethyl acetate is an ester that can be synthesized by reacting ethanoic
acid (acetic acid) with ethanol. At room temperature, the equilibrium
constant for this reaction is 2.2.
CH 3 COOH ((cid:4)) + CH 3 CH 2 OH ((cid:4)) (cid:2)(cid:3) CH 3 COOCH 2 CH 3(l) + H 2 O ((cid:4))
Various samples were analyzed. The concentrations are given in the
table below. Decide whether each sample is at equilibrium. If it is
not at equilibrium, predict the direction in which the reaction will
proceed to establish equilibrium.
[CHCOOH] [CHCHOH] [CHCOOCHCH]
3 3 2 3 2 3
Sample (mol/L) (mol/L) (mol/L) [HO] (mol/L)
2
(a) 0.10 0.10 0.10 0.10
(b) 0.084 0.13 0.16 0.28
(c) 0.14 0.21 0.33 0.20
(d) 0.063 0.11 0.15 0.17
28. In the past, methanol was obtained by heating wood without
allowing the wood to burn. The products were collected, and
methanol (sometimes called “wood alcohol”) was separated by
distillation. Today methanol is manufactured by reacting carbon
monoxide with hydrogen gas.
CO + 2H (cid:2)(cid:3) CH OH
(g) 2(g) 3 (g)
At 210˚C, K for this reaction is 14.5. A gaseous mixture at 210˚C
c
contains the following concentrations of gases: [CO] = 0.25mol/L,
[H ] = 0.15 mol/L, and [CH OH] = 0.36 mol/L. What will be the
2 3
direction of the reaction if the gaseous mixture reaches equilibrium?
Le Châtelier’s Principle
What happens to a system at equilibrium if the concentration of one of the
reacting chemicals is changed? This question has practical importance,
because many manufacturing processes are continual. Products are
removed and more reactants are added without stopping the process. For
example, consider the Haber process that was mentioned in the previous
Sample Problem.
N + 3H (cid:2)(cid:3) 2NH
2(g) 2(g) 3(g)
356 MHR • Unit 4 Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
At 500˚C, K is 0.40. The gases have the following concentrations:
c
[N ] = 0.10mol/L, [H ] = 0.10mol/L, and [NH ] = 0.0063mol/L. (You
2 2 3
can check this by calculating Q and making sure that it is equal to K .)
c c
Ammonia can be removed from the equilibrium mixture by cooling
because ammonia liquefies at a higher temperature than either nitrogen
or hydrogen. What happens to an equilibrium mixture if some ammonia
is removed? To find out, you need to calculate Q .
c
Q = [NH 3 ]2
c [N ][H ]3
2 2
If ammonia is removed from the equilibrium mixture, the numerator will
decrease, so Q will be smaller than K . When Q < K , the system attains
c c c c
equilibrium by moving to the right. Why? The system must respond to
the removal of ammonia by forming more ammonia. Similarly, if nitrogen,
hydrogen, or both were added, the system would re-establish equilibrium
by shifting to the right. As long as the temperature remains constant,
the re-established equilibrium will have the same K as the original
c
equilibrium.
A French chemist, Henri Le Châtelier, experimented with various
chemical equilibrium systems. (See Figure 7.9.) In 1888, Le Châtelier
summarized his work on changes to equilibrium systems in a general
statement called Le Châtelier’s principle. It may be stated as follows:
A dynamic equilibrium tends to respond so as to relieve the effect of any
change in the conditions that affect the equilibrium.
Le Châtelier’s principle predicts the way that an equilibrium system
responds to change. For example, when the concentration of a substance
in a reaction mixture is changed, Le Châtelier’s principle qualitatively
predicts what you can show quantitatively by evaluating the reaction quo-
tient. If products are removed from an equilibrium system, more products
must be formed to relieve the change. This is just as you would predict,
because Q will be less than K .
c c
Le Châtelier’s principle also predicts what will happen when other
changes are made to an equilibrium system. For example, you can use Le
Châtelier’s principle to predict the effects of changing the volume of a
cylinder that contains a mixture of gases, or the effects of changing the Figure 7.9 Henri Le Châtelier
(1850–1936) specialized in mining
temperature of an equilibrium system. In the next investigation, you will
engineering. He studied the thermo-
use Le Châtelier’s principle to predict the effects of making various
dynamics involved in heating ores
changes to different equilibrium systems. The Chemistry Bulletin that
to obtain metals. His results led
follows the investigation considers applications of Le Châtelier’s principle to important advances in the under-
to areas outside of chemistry. Afterward, you will continue your studies of standing of equilibrium systems.
Le Châtelier’s principle and equilibrium systems in chemistry.
Electronic Learning Partner
Your Chemistry 12 Electronic
Learning Partner can help you
reinforce your understanding
of Le Châtelier’s principle.
Chapter 7 Reversible Reactions and Chemical Equilibrium • MHR 357
S K I L L F O C U S
Predicting
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
Perturbing Equilibrium
In this investigation, you will use Le Châtelier’s Part 2
principle to predict the effect of changing one 25 mL beaker
factor in each system at equilibrium. Then you 2 test tubes
will test your prediction using a colour change test tube rack
or the appearance (or disappearance) of a scoopula
precipitate. 0.01 mol/L NH
3(aq)
6.0 mol/L HCl
(aq)
Question phenolphthalein solution
NH Cl
How can Le Châtelier’s principle qualitatively 4 (s)
predict the effect of a change in a chemical
Part 3
equilibrium?
4 small test tubes
CoCl
Predictions 2(s)
ethanol
Your teacher will give you a table that lists four
concentrated HCl in a dropper bottle
(aq)
equilibrium systems and the changes you will
0.1 mol/L AgNO in a dropper bottle
3(aq)
make to each system. In the appropriate column,
distilled water in a dropper bottle
record your predictions for each test. If you
25 mL or 50 mL beaker
predict that the change will cause the system
test tube rack
to re-attain equilibrium by shifting toward the
test tube holder
reactants, record “left.” If you predict that the
hot-water bath (prepared by your teacher)
system will re-establish equilibrium by shifting
cold-water bath (prepared by your teacher)
toward the products, record “right.”
Part 4
Safety Precautions small piece of copper
concentrated nitric acid
test tube
• Potassium chromate and barium chloride
test tube rack
are toxic.
one-hole stopper
• Hydrochloric acid and sodium hydroxide glass delivery tube
are corrosive. Wash any spills on your skin short length of rubber tubing
or clothing with plenty of cool water. Inform syringe with a cap or rubber stopper
your teacher immediately. to seal the tip
NO /N O tubes
2(g) 2 4(g)
Materials boiling water
ice water
Part 1
3 test tubes
0.1 mol/L K CrO
2 4(aq)
1 mol/L HCl
(aq)
1 mol/L NaOH
(aq)
1 mol/L Fe(NO )
3 3(aq)
1 mol/L BaCl
2(aq)
358 MHR • Unit 4 Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
Procedure 3. To the other test tube, add a few drops of
HCl until you see a change. Again note
Part 1 The Chromate/Dichromate Equilibrium (aq)
+
the colour change. (The H ions combine
Equilibrium System −
with the OH ions, removing them from the
H + (aq) + 2CrO 4 2− (aq) (cid:2)(cid:3) Cr 2 O 7 2− (aq) + OH − (aq) equilibrium mixture.)
yellowish orange
4. Dispose of the chemicals as instructed by your
1. Pour about 5 mL of 0.1 mol/L K CrO into teacher.
2 4(aq)
each of three test tubes. You will use test
Part 3 Concentration and Temperature
tube 1 as a colour reference.
Changes
2. Add 5 drops of HCl to test tube 2. Record
(aq) Safety Precautions
any colour change.
3. Add 5 drops of NaOH to test tube 2. Record
(aq)
what happens. • Concentrated hydrochloric acid is hazardous to
your eyes, skin, and clothing. Treat spills with
4. Finally, add 5 drops of Fe(NO ) to test
3 3(aq) baking powder and copious amounts of cool
tube 2. A precipitate of Fe(OH) should
3(s) water. Inform your teacher immediately.
form. Note the colour of the solution above
• Ethanol is flammable. Keep samples of ethanol
the precipitate.
and the supply bottle away from open flames.
5. Add 5 drops of BaCl to test tube 3. A pre-
2(aq)
cipitate of BaCrO should form. Record the Equilibrium System
4(s)
colour of the solution above the precipitate. Co(H 2 O) 6 2+ (aq) + 4Cl − (aq) (cid:2)(cid:3) CoCl 4 2− (aq) + 6H 2 O ((cid:4))
6. Dispose of the chemicals as instructed by pink blue or purple
your teacher. ∆H = +50kJ/mol
Part 2 Changes to a Base Equilibrium System 1. Measure about 15 mL of ethanol into a small
beaker.
Safety Precautions
2. Record the colour of the CoCl . Dissolve a
2
small amount (about half the size of a pea)
Ammonia and hydrochloric acid are corrosive.
in the beaker of ethanol. The solution should
Wash any spills on your skin or clothing with
be blue or purple. If it is pink, add drops of
plenty of cool water. Inform your teacher
concentrated HCl until the solution is
(aq)
immediately.
blue-purple.
Equilibrium System 3. Divide the cobalt solution equally among the
NH 3(aq) + H 2 O ((cid:4)) (cid:2)(cid:3) NH 4 + (aq) + OH − (aq) four small test tubes. Put one of the test tubes
aside as a control.
1. Pour about 10 mL of NH into a small
3(aq)
beaker. Place the beaker on a sheet of white 4. To each of the other three test tubes, add
3 drops of distilled water, one drop at a time.
paper. Add 2 drops of phenolphthalein
Stir after you add each drop. Record any
indicator.
change in colour that occurs with each drop.
2. Divide the solution equally into two small
test tubes. To one of the test tubes, add a 5. To one of the test tubes from step 4, add 5
drops of concentrated HCl, one drop at a time
few small crystals of NH Cl on the end
4 (s)
with stirring. Record the results.
of a scoopula. Record your observations.
Chapter 7 Reversible Reactions and Chemical Equilibrium • MHR 359
6. Silver and chloride ions combine to form a Equilibrium System
precipitate of AgCl. To the third test tube, add N O (cid:2)(cid:3) 2NO ∆H = +59kJ/mol
2 4(g) 2(g)
AgNO , one drop at a time, until no more
3(aq) colourless brown
precipitate appears. Record the colour of the
1. Your teacher will use sealed tubes that con-
solution as the chloride ions precipitate.
tain a mixture of N O and NO . One tube
2 4(g) 2(g)
7. Record the colour of the liquid mixture in will be placed in boiling water, and a second
the fourth test tube. Use a test tube holder to tube will be placed in ice water. A third tube
immerse this test tube in the hot-water bath. (if available) will remain at room temperature
Record any colour change. as a control. Compare and record the colour
of the gas mixture at each temperature.
8. Place the test tube from step 7 in the
cold-water bath. Record any colour change. 2. NO can be prepared by reacting copper
2(g)
with concentrated nitric acid. The gas is
9. Dispose of the chemicals as instructed by
poisonous. The reaction, if your teacher
your teacher.
performs it, must take place in a fume hood.
Part 4 Investigating Gaseous Equilibria
3. By using a one-hole stopper, glass delivery
CAUTION These are not student tests. Your tube, and a short length of rubber tubing,
teacher may demonstrate this equilibrium if a some NO can be collected in a syringe. The
2(g)
suitable fume hood is available for the first test, syringe is then sealed by attaching a cap or by
and if sealed tubes containing a mixture of nitro- pushing the needle into a rubber stopper.
gen dioxide, NO , and dinitrogen tetroxide,
2(g)
4. Observe what happens when the syringe
N O , are available for the second test. If either
2 4(g)
plunger is pressed down sharply, changing the
or both tests are not demonstrated, refer to the
volume of the equilibrium mixture. You will
photographs that show the changes.
observe an immediate change in colour. Then,
if the plunger is held in a fixed position, the
Safety Precautions
colour will change over a few seconds as the
system re-establishes equilibrium. Carefully
• Concentrated nitric acid is highly corrosive record these colour changes.
and a strong oxidizing agent.
• Nitrogen dioxide and dinitrogen tetroxide are
poisonous gases.
These three tubes contain a mixture of NO and NO . The tube on the left is in an ice-water mixture. The centre tube is at
2(g) 2 4(g)
room temperature. The tube on the right is in boiling water. Given that NO is brown, can you explain the shift in equilibrium?
2(g)
Think about Le Châtelier’s principle and the enthalpy of the reaction between the two gases.
360 MHR • Unit 4 Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
Analysis (c) Do you think the value of K changed or
c
remained the same when the equilibrium
1. Compare the predictions you made using
mixture was heated? Explain your answer.
Le Châtelier’s principle with the observations
you made in your tests. Account for any 5. Think about the N 2 O 4(g) /NO 2(g) equilibrium.
differences. (a) How was the total pressure of the
mixture affected when the plunger was
2. In which tests did you increase the concentra-
pushed down?
tion of a reactant or a product? Did your
observations indicate a shift in equilibrium to (b) How was the pressure of the mixture
form more or less of the reactant or product? affected by the total number of gas
molecules in the syringe?
3. In which tests did you decrease the concentra-
(c) Explain the observed shift in equilibrium
tion of a reactant or product? Did your obser-
when the plunger was pushed down. In
vations indicate a shift in equilibrium to form
your explanation, refer to Le Châtelier’s
more or less of the reactant or product?
principle and the total amount of gas in
4. In two of the systems you studied, the the syringe.
enthalpy changes were given.
(d) What would be the effect, if any, on the
N 2 O 4(g) (cid:2)(cid:3) 2NO 2(g) ∆H = +59kJ/mol following equilibrium system if the volume
Co(H 2 O) 6 2+ (aq) + 4Cl − (aq) (cid:2)(cid:3) CoCl 4 2− (aq) + 6H 2 O ((cid:4)) was reduced? Explain.
∆H = +50kJ/mol 2IBr (cid:2)(cid:3) I + Br
(g) 2(g) 2(g)
(a) Are these systems endothermic or
exothermic when read from left to right? Conclusion
(b) When heated, did these systems shift to the 6. How did your results compare with your
left or to the right? In terms of the energy predictions? Discuss and resolve any
change, was the observed shift in equilibri- discrepancies with your class.
um toward the endothermic or exothermic
side of the reaction?
The sealed syringe contains a mixture of NO and NO . The photograph on the left shows an equilibrium mixture at
2(g) 2 4(g)
atmospheric pressure. The middle photograph shows that the plunger has been pushed down, increasing the pressure. Two
changes cause the darker appearance of the gas mixture. First, the concentration of gases is greater. Second, decreasing the
volume heats the gas. This causes a shift toward NO . The photograph on the right shows the result a few seconds after the
2(g)
plunger was pushed down. The gas has cooled back to room temperature. The colour of the mixture is less brown, indicating
a shift toward NO .
2 4(g)
Chapter 7 Reversible Reactions and Chemical Equilibrium • MHR 361
Chemistry Bulletin
Le Châtelier’s Principle: that the ice over parts of Scandinavia and northern
Beyond Chemistry Europe was well over 2 km thick during the last ice
age. As a result of the ice melting and the removal
of the weight pushing down on Earth’s crust, the
central part of Scandinavia has risen over 500 m.
This uplift is continuing. Here gravitational
potential energy is being conserved.
In ecology, ecosystems are really examples
of steady state systems. Ecosystems involve a
flow of energy in only one direction, from the Sun.
Nevertheless, populations of plants and animals
develop stable numbers that react to external
changes, such as disease and variations in the
weather. For example, if the number of carnivores
in an ecosystem increases, more herbivores are
eaten and the herbivore population decreases.
The carnivores then have difficulty finding food.
How is Le Châtelier’s principle related to predator-prey
Theirpopulations decrease due to competition,
interactions in ecosystems?
emigration, and starvation until a new balance,
however delicate, is attained.
Le Châtelier’s principle is a general statement
Le Châtelier’s principle also applies to biology.
about how any system in equilibrium—not
Homeostasis is the tendency of a body system
just a chemical system—responds to change.
to remain in a state of equilibrium. Examples of
Le Châtelier principle concerns the conservation
homeostasis include the maintenance of body
of energy or matter. There are corresponding
temperature (homeothermy) and the pH balance
laws in several other areas of science.
of blood.
Heinrich Lenz studied the direction of the
In economics, the law of supply and demand
current that is induced in a conductor as a result
is similar to Le Châtelier’s principle. When the price
of changing the magnetic field near it. You can think
of a commodity, such as the price of a kilogram of
of this as the change in a system in electromagnetic
apples, is constant, the market for the commodity
equilibrium. Lenz published his law in 1834. It states
is at equilibrium. If the supply of the commodity
that when a conductor interacts with a magnetic
falls, the equilibrium is changed. The market
field, there must be an induced current that
adjusts by increasing the price, which tends to
opposes the interaction, because of the law of con-
increase the supply.
servation of energy. Lenz’s law is used to explain
the direction of the induced current in generators,
Making Connections
transformers, inductors, and many other systems.
In geology, John Pratt and George Airy 1. Identify and describe two other examples,
introduced the idea of isostacy in 1855. Earth’s in science or other fields, that illustrate
crust is in gravitational equilibrium in almost Le Châtelier’s principle.
all places. The crust responds to changes in the 2. Draw diagrams to show the above examples
load on it, however, by slowly moving vertically. of Le Châtelier’s principle in human physiology,
Examples of how the load on Earth’s crust can ecology, and economics. Show how different
change include the weathering of mountain ranges conditions affect the equilibrium and how the
and the melting of ice caps. Geologists estimate systems react to establish a new equilibrium.
362 MHR • Unit 4 Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
The Effect of Ions on Aqueous Equilibrium Systems
Many important equilibrium systems involve ions in aqueous solution.
The common ion effect applies Le Châtelier’s principle to ions in aqueous
solution. As its name suggests, the common ion effect involves adding
an ion to a solution in which the ion is already present in solution. It is
really a concentration effect. The equilibrium shifts away from the added
ion, as predicted by Le Châtelier’s principle.
An aqueous solution that contains certain ions can be added to
another solution to form a precipitate, if the ions have low solubility.
−
For example, adding silver nitrate solution to test for Cl is effective
(aq)
due to the very low solubility of silver chloride. You can use the precipi-
tation of an insoluble salt to remove almost all of a particular ion from
a solution and, as a result, cause a shift in the position of equilibrium
of the original solution. The common ion effect is important in the
solubility of salts. The precipitation of insoluble salts is used to identify
the presence of unknown ions. You will learn more about the common
ion effect in Chapter 9.
The Effect of Temperature Changes on the Position of Equilibrium
As you know, the value of the equilibrium constant changes with tempera-
ture, because the rates of the forward and reverse reactions are affected.
Le Châtelier’s principle still holds, however. It can be used to predict the
effect of temperature changes on a system when the sign of the enthalpy
change for the reaction is known. For example, the dissociation of sulfur
trioxide is endothermic.
2SO (cid:2)(cid:3) 2SO + O ∆H = 197kJ
3(g) 2(g) 2(g)
As the reaction proceeds from left to right, energy is absorbed by the
chemical system and converted to chemical potential energy. If an
equilibrium mixture of these gases is heated, energy is added to the
system. Le Châtelier’s principle predicts a shift that will relieve the
imposed change. Therefore, the shift will tend to remove the added
energy. This will happen if the equilibrium shifts to the right, increasing
the amount of SO and O formed. As a result, the value of K will
2(g) 2(g) c
increase. The shift in equilibrium is consistent (as it must be) with the CHEM
law of conservation of energy. FACT
Suppose that the equilibrium of an endothermic reaction shifted
Chickens have no sweat
to the left when the system was heated. From right to left, the reaction glands. When the temperature
is exothermic. Thus, a shift to the left would release energy to the sur- rises, they tend to breathe
roundings. This would make the mixture hotter. The equilibrium would faster. This lowers the concen-
shift still more to the left, releasing more and more energy. Clearly, this tration of carbonate ions in
their blood. Because eggshells
cannot happen without violating the law of conservation of energy.
are mostly calcium carbonate,
The effect of temperature on the position of equilibrium can be
faster-breathing chickens lay
summarized as follows: eggs with thinner shells.
• Endothermic change (∆H > 0): An increase in temperature shifts the Rather than installing expen-
sive air conditioning, chicken
equilibrium to the right, forming more products. The value of K
c
farmers can supply carbonated
increases. A decrease in temperature shifts the equilibrium to the left,
water for their chickens to
forming more reactants. The value of K decreases.
c drink when the temperature
• Exothermic change (∆H < 0): An increase in temperature shifts the equi- reaches “fowl” highs. How
librium to the left, forming more reactants. The value of K decreases. does this relate to
c
A decrease in temperature shifts the equilibrium to the right, forming Le Châtelier’s principle?
more products. The value of K increases.
c
Chapter 7 Reversible Reactions and Chemical Equilibrium • MHR 363
The Effects of Volume and Pressure Changes on Equilibrium
When the volume of a mixture of gases decreases, the pressure of the
gases must increase. Le Châtelier’s principle predicts a shift in equili-
brium to relieve this change. Therefore, the shift must tend to reduce the
pressure of the gases. Molecules striking the walls of a container cause
gas pressure, so a reduction in gas pressure at constant temperature must
mean fewer gas molecules. Consider the following reaction again.
2SO (cid:2)(cid:3) 2SO + O
3(g) 2(g) 2(g)
There are two gas molecules on the left side of the equation.
There are three gas molecules on the right side. Consequently,
if the equilibrium shifts to the left, the pressure of the mix-
ture will decrease. Reducing the volume of an equilibrium
mixture of gases, at constant temperature, causes a shift in
equilibrium in the direction of fewer gas molecules. What if
there is the same number of gas molecules on both sides of
the reaction equation? Changing the volume of the container,
as shown in Figure 7.10, has no effect on the position of
equilibrium. The value of K will be unchanged, as long as
c
there is no change in temperature.
It is possible to increase the total pressure of gases in
a rigid container by injecting more gas. If the injected gas
reacts with the other gases in the equilibrium mixture,
the effect is the same as increasing the concentration of a
reactant. The equilibrium shifts to reduce the amount of
added gas. If the injected gas does not react with the other
gases (if an “inert” gas is added), there is no effect on the
equilibrium. This is because the added gas is not part of
the equilibrium system. Its addition causes no change in
the volume of the container. Nitrogen (because of its low
reactivity) and the noble gases are often used as inert gases.
If the container expands when an inert gas is added, the
effect is the same as increasing the volume and therefore
decreasing the pressure of the reacting gases.
The Effect of a Catalyst on Equilibrium
A catalyst speeds up the rate of a reaction, either by allowing a
different reaction mechanism or by providing additional mechanisms.
The overall effect is to lower the activation energy, which increases the
rate of reaction. The activation energy is lowered the same amount for
the forward and reverse reactions, however. There is the same increase
in reaction rates for both reactions. As a result, a catalyst does not affect
the position of equilibrium. It only affects the time that is taken to achieve
equilibrium.
Table 7.2 summarizes the effect of a catalyst, and other effects of
changing conditions, on a system at equilibrium. The Sample Problem
that follows provides an opportunity for you to use Le Châtelier’s
principle to predict the equilibrium shift in response to various
conditions.
364 MHR • Unit 4 Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
)L/lom(
noitartnecnoC
2SO 2SO + O
3(g) 2(g) 2(g)
SO 3
SO
2
O
2
Time
initial final
equilibrium equilibrium
sudden decrease
in volume
Figure 7.10 Note the changes
in the concentrations of the
reacting gases. When the new
equilibrium is established, the
concentrations are different.
Compare the concentrations of
the gases in the first equilibrium
and second equilibrium.
Table 7.2 The Effects of Changing Conditions on a System at Equilibrium
Type of reaction Change to system Effect on K Direction of change
c
all reactions increasing any reactant no effect toward products
concentration, or decreasing
any product concentration
decreasing any reactant no effect toward reactants
concentration, or increasing
any product concentration
using a catalyst no effect no change
exothermic increasing temperature decreases toward reactants
decreasing temperature increases toward products
endothermic increasing temperature increases toward products
decreasing temperature decreases toward reactants
equal number of changing the volume of the no effect no change
reactant and product container, or adding a
gas molecules non-reacting gas
more gaseous decreasing the volume no effect toward reactants
product molecules of the container at constant
than reactant temperature
gaseous molecules
increasing the volume of the no effect toward products
container at constant temperature,
or adding a non-reacting gas at
contstant pressure
fewer gaseous decreasing the volume of the no effect toward products
product molecules container at constant temperature
than reactant
increasing the volume of the no effect toward reactants
gaseous molecules
container at constant temperature
Sample Problem
Using Le Châtelier’s Principle
Problem
The following equilibrium takes place in a rigid container.
PCl (cid:2)(cid:3) PCl + Cl ∆H = 56kJ
5(g) 3(g) 2(g)
In which direction does the equilibrium shift as a result of each change?
(a) adding phosphorus pentachloride gas
(b) removing chlorine gas
(c) decreasing the temperature
(d) increasing the pressure by adding helium gas
(e) using a catalyst
What Is Required?
You need to determine whether each change causes the equilibrium to
shift to the left or the right, or whether it has no effect.
What Is Given?
You have the balanced chemical equation. You know that the enthalpy
change is 56 kJ. Therefore, the reaction is endothermic.
Continued ...
Chapter 7 Reversible Reactions and Chemical Equilibrium • MHR 365
Continued ...
Plan Your Strategy
Identify the change. Then use the chemical equation to determine the
shift in equilibrium that will minimize the change.
Act on Your Strategy
(a) [PCl ] increases. Therefore, the equilibrium must shift to minimize
5
[PCl ]. The reaction shifts to the right.
5
(b) [Cl ] is reduced. Therefore, the equilibrium must shift to increase
2
[Cl ]. The reaction shifts to the right.
2
(c) The temperature decreases. Therefore, the equilibrium must shift in
the direction in which the reaction is exothermic. From left to right,
the reaction is endothermic. Thus, the reaction must be exothermic
from right to left. The reaction shifts to the left if the temperature is
decreased.
(d) Helium does not react with any of the gases in the mixture.
The position of equilibrium does not change.
(e) A catalyst has no effect on the position of equilibrium.
Check Your Solution
Check the changes. Any change that affects the equilibrium reaction
must result in a shift that minimizes it.
Practice Problems
29. Consider the following reaction.
H + I + 52kJ (cid:2)(cid:3) 2HI
2(g) 2(g) (g)
In which direction does the equilibrium shift if there is an increase in
temperature?
30. A decrease in the pressure of each equilibrium system below is
caused by increasing the volume of the reaction container. In which
direction does the equilibrium shift?
(a) CO + H (cid:2)(cid:3) CO + H O
2(g) 2(g) (g) 2 (g)
(b) 2NO
(cid:2)(cid:3)
N O
2(g) 2 4(g)
(c) 2CO (cid:2)(cid:3) 2CO + O
2(g) (g) 2(g)
(d) CH + 2H S (cid:2)(cid:3) CS + 4H
4(g) 2 (g) 2(g) 2(g)
31. The following reaction is exothermic.
2NO + 2H (cid:2)(cid:3) N + 2H O
(g) 2(g) 2(g) 2 (g)
In which direction does the equilibrium shift as a result of
each change?
(a) removing the hydrogen gas
(b) increasing the pressure of gases in the reaction vessel by
decreasing the volume
(c) increasing the pressure of gases in the reaction vessel by pumping
in argon gas while keeping the volume of the vessel constant
(d) increasing the temperature
(e) using a catalyst
366 MHR • Unit 4 Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
32. In question 31, which changes affect the value of K ? Which changes
c
do not affect the value of K ?
c
33. Toluene, C H , is an important organic solvent. It is made industrially
7 8
from methyl cyclohexane.
C H (cid:2)(cid:3) C H + 3H
7 14(g) 7 8(g) 2(g)
The forward reaction is endothermic. State three different changes to
an equilibrium mixture of these reacting gases that would shift the
equilibrium toward greater production of toluene.
Applying Le Châtelier’s Principle: Manufacturing Ammonia
Industrial processes must be run at optimal conditions to be economic.
This means more than simply manipulating the reaction conditions to
maximize the extent of the reaction. Business people, and the profession-
als they hire to advise them, must consider other factors as well. These
factors include the rate of the reaction, safety, the location of the plant, the
cost to build and operate the plant, the cost of acquiring reactant materi-
als, the cost of transporting products, and the cost of hiring, educating,
and maintaining plant workers.
The chapter introduction mentioned the importance of nitrogen to
plants and animals. Despite nitrogen’s abundance in the atmosphere, its
low reactivity means that there is a limited supply in a form that organ-
isms can use. In nature, bacteria and the energy of lightning supply the
nitrates and other nitrogen compounds that plants need to survive.
Humans use technology to produce these compounds for our extensive
agricultural industry.
In this chapter, you learned about the Haber process for manufactur-
ing ammonia. You used this process to help you understand various
concepts related to equilibrium. As you can see in Figure 7.11, ammonia
is a valuable industrial chemical. Its annual global production is well over
100 million tonnes. The vast majority of ammonia, roughly 80%, is used
to make fertilizers. You will now examine how the equilibrium concepts
you have been studying work together to provide society with a reliable,
cost-effective supply of ammonia.
Before World War I, the main source of nitrates for human use was
from large deposits of bird droppings in Peru and sodium nitrate from
Unit Issue Prep
Chile. These sources were becoming scarce and expensive. Then Fritz
To begin preparing for the Unit 4
Haber (1868–1934), a lecturer in a technical college in Germany, began
Issue, make a simplified sketch of
to experiment with ways to manufacture ammonia. Haber knew that
the carbon cycle,
ammonia could be easily converted to nitrates and other useful nitrogen
Chapter 7 Reversible Reactions and Chemical Equilibrium • MHR 367
Ammonia (HN)
3
nitric acid (HNO) fertilizers other
3
polymers ammonium explosives cleaning refrigeration
nitrate products
(NHNO)
4 3
fertilizers explosives pharmaceuticals rubber stabilizers
Figure 7.11 Because ammonia is used to manufacture many essential products, it is one of
the top five industrial chemicals in the world.
compounds. What he needed was a method for producing large quantities
of ammonia at minimal cost.
Haber experimented with the direct synthesis of ammonia.
N + 3H (cid:2)(cid:3) 2NH ∆H˚ = −92kJ/mol
2(g) 2(g) 3(g)
Because the reaction is exothermic, heat is released as the reaction
proceeds. Le Châtelier’s principle predicts that the yield of ammonia
is greater at lower temperatures. Just as in the contact process for manu-
facturing sulfuric acid, however, high yield is not the only important
factor. The rate of reaction for ammonia synthesis is too slow at low
temperatures.
Le Châtelier’s principle also predicts that the yield of ammonia is
greater at higher pressures. High-pressure plants are expensive to build
and maintain, however. In fact, the first industrial plant that manufactured
ammonia had its reaction vessel blow up. A German chemical engineer,
Carl Bosch, solved this problem by designing a double-walled steel vessel
that could operate at several hundred times atmospheric pressure. Modern
plants operate at pressures in the range of 20 200 kPa to 30 400 kPa.
The gas mixture is kept pressurized in a condenser. (See Figure 7.12.)
Ammonia is removed from the reaction vessel by cooling the gas mixture.
Because of the hydrogen bonding between ammonia molecules, the gas
condenses into a liquid while the nitrogen and hydrogen remain as gases.
Nitrogen is removed to shift the equilibrium toward the production of
more ammonia. Once the ammonia is removed, the gases are recycled
back to the reaction vessel in a continuous operation.
368 MHR • Unit 4 Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
unreacted
H and N
2(g) 2(g)
= = H N 2 2 H + 2(g) compressor cha r m ea b c e ti r o w n ith N H H 2( 3 g ( ) g) c a o m nd m e o n n s i e a r NH 3((cid:4)) st t o a r n a k ge
= NH N 2(g) catalyst bed N 2(g)
3
Figure 7.12 This diagram shows the stages in the Haber-Bosch process for manufacturing
ammonia. The catalyst is a mixture of MgO, AlO , and SiO , with embedded iron crystals.
2 3 2
By manipulating the pressure and removing ammonia from the reaction CHEM
vessel, Haber successfully increased the yield of ammonia. To increase the FACT
rate of the reaction, Haber needed to find a catalyst. A catalyst would During World War I, Haber
allow the reaction to proceed at higher temperatures—a compromise helped to develop the technol-
between rate and yield. Some historians claim that Haber performed more ogy for deploying phosgene,
than 6500 experiments trying to find a suitable catalyst. He finally chose chlorine, and mustard gas as
weapons of chemical warfare.
an iron catalyst. This catalyst works well at the relatively moderate
His wife Clara, also a chemist,
temperature of 400˚C that is used for the reaction. It lasts about five years
was disgusted by the use
before losing its effectiveness.
of science in war. When her
Haber received the Nobel prize for Chemistry in 1918. Bosch received
husband refused to stop his
a Nobel prize in 1931 for his work on high pressure reactions. Today the support of the war effort, she
Haber-Bosch process is used to manufacture virtually all the ammonia committed suicide.
that is produced in the world. Plants are usually located near a source of
natural gas, which is used to obtain the hydrogen gas.
CH + H O → CO + 3H
4(g) 2 (g) (g) 2(g)
The other raw material is air, which provides an inexhaustible supply of
nitrogen gas. Web LINK
www.mcgrawhill.ca/links/
Section Summary chemistry12
In this section, you learned that the expression for the reaction quotient Sulfuric acid, methanol, and
polystyrene are other industri-
is the same as the expression for the equilibrium constant. The concentra-
ally important chemicals
tions that are used to solve these expressions may be different, however.
that depend on equilibrium
When Q is less than K , the reaction proceeds to form more products.
c c reactions for their production.
When Q is greater than K , the reaction proceeds to form more reactants.
c c Choose one of these chemi-
These changes continue until Q c is equal to K c . Le Châtelier’s principle cals, or another industrial
describes this tendency of a chemical system to return to equilibrium after chemical. Research methods
a change moves it from equilibrium. The industrial process for manufac- that are used to produce it,
turing ammonia illustrates how chemical engineers apply Le Châtelier’s as well as the products that
are derived from it. To start
principle to provide the most economical yield of a valuable chemical
your research, go to the web
product.
site above and click on Web
K is only one of several equilibrium constants that chemists use to
c Links. Prepare a report that
describe chemical systems. In the next chapter, you will learn how
outlines what you learned.
equilibrium applies to chemical systems that involve acids and bases.
Chapter 7 Reversible Reactions and Chemical Equilibrium • MHR 369
Section Review
1 I In which direction does the equilibrium shift as a result of the
change to each homogeneous equilibrium system?
(a) Adding Cl : 2Cl + O (cid:2)(cid:3) 2Cl O
2(g) 2(g) 2(g) 2 (g)
(b) Removing N : 2NO (cid:2)(cid:3) N + 2O
2(g) 2(g) 2(g) 2(g)
(c) Using a catalyst: CH + H O (cid:2)(cid:3) CO + H
4(g) 2 (g) 2(g) 2(g)
(d) Decreasing the total volume of the reaction container:
2NO
(cid:2)(cid:3)
N O
2(g) 2 4(g)
(e) Increasing the temperature: CO + 3H (cid:2)(cid:3) CH + H O
(g) 2(g) 4(g) 2 (g)
∆H = −230kJ
2 I For each reversible reaction, determine whether the forward
reaction is favoured by high temperatures or low temperatures.
(a) N O (cid:2)(cid:3) 2NO ∆H = +59kJ
2 4(g) 2(g)
(b) 2ICl (cid:2)(cid:3) I + Cl ∆H = −35kJ
(g) 2(g) 2(g)
(c) 2CO + 566kJ (cid:2)(cid:3) 2CO + O
2(g) (g) 2(g)
(d) 2HF (cid:2)(cid:3) H + F ∆H = −536kJ
(g) 2(g) 2(g)
3 I In each reaction, the volume of the reaction vessel is decreased.
What is the effect (if any) on the position of equilibrium?
(a) N + O (cid:2)(cid:3) 2NO
2(g) 2(g) (g)
(b) 4HCl + O (cid:2)(cid:3) 2Cl + 2H O
(g) 2(g) 2(g) 2 (g)
(c) 2H S + CH (cid:2)(cid:3) 4H + CS
2 (g) 4(g) 2(g) 2(g)
(d) 2CH 3 COOH (aq) + Ba(OH) 2(aq) (cid:2)(cid:3) Ba(CH 3 COO) 2(aq) + 2H 2 O ((cid:4))
4 MC As you learned, the Haber process is used to produce ammonia.
(a) Write the chemical equation for the Haber process.
(b) Describe three changes that would increase the yield of ammonia,
and explain why.
5 MC A key step in the production of sulfuric acid is the conversion of
sulfur dioxide to sulfur trioxide. This step is exothermic.
(a) Write the chemical equation for this step, showing the sign of ∆H.
(b) Describe three changes that would increase the yield of sulfur
trioxide.
(c) Explain why the reaction is carried out at a relatively high
temperature.
(d) Why is a catalyst (vanadium pentoxide) used?
370 MHR • Unit 4 Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
Careers in Chemistry
Anesthesiology: Dr. Karwa enjoys the immediate gratification
A Career in Pain Management that comes with anesthesiology and the speed at
which the anesthetics exact their effects. “What I like
most about my job is the ability to let patients have
their surgery being completely unaware of it, and to
make them as pain-free as possible during and after
surgery,” she says. She chose medicine as a career
because she was interested in biology and because
she wanted to help other people with their health
problems, after witnessing her father’s struggles
with rheumatic heart disease.
Dr. Karwa completed high school in Bombay,
India, and later studied medicine at the University
of Bombay. After medical school, she immigrated
to Canada. She completed residency training in
anesthesia at the University of Toronto and now
Laila Rafik Karwa
works at St. Joseph’s Health Science Centre as a
staff anesthesiologist.
Dr. Laila Rafik Karwa is a specialist in pain. She
In Canada, students who are interested in a
prevents it, manages it, and alleviates it. She is
career as an anesthesiologist must complete two to
an anesthesiologist.
three years of university before applying to medical
Anesthesiologists are medical doctors who are
school. Many medical schools in Canada require
responsible for inducing sleep before surgery, and
applicants to have taken courses in specific subjects
for managing patients’ pain before, during, and after
in the biological and physical sciences, and to
surgery. Anesthesiologists are also involved in
have some background in the humanities or social
managing pain in patients who have severe
sciences. This education also helps students prepare
illnesses, or acute or chronic pain. For example,
for the Medical College Admissions Test (MCAT),
Karwa’s areas of interest include pediatric and
which is required for application to most medical
obstetric anesthesia and acute pain management.
schools. The MCAT tests an applicant’s aptitude for
Anesthesiologists must have an intimate
science, verbal reasoning, and writing. Most medical
knowledge of the chemical and physical properties
school programs in Canada are four years long.
of gases. Many anesthetics are inhaled and are
Medical school graduates who decide to do
delivered to the bloodstream by diffusion. The
specialty training in anesthesiology must complete
speed at which diffusion occurs between the lungs,
a postgraduate residency program, which usually
the blood, and other tissues of the body depends
takes at least five years.
on a constant called the partition coefficient. This
constant is a ratio that describes the equilibrium Making Career Connections
concentrations of a solute that is dissolved in two
1. Although anesthesiologists tend to be associated
separate phases. The solute becomes separated
with surgery, they also work outside the confines
(partitioned) between the two solvents in such a way
of the operating room. Research other locations
that its concentration in one is directly proportional
where you might find an anesthesiologist.
to its concentration in the other.
Gases diffuse from areas of high concentration 2. Anesthetics are powerful medications. What risks
to areas of low concentration. The speed at which to patients’ health do anesthesiologists have to
diffusion occurs in the body depends on partition consider when they administer anesthetics?
coefficients. The faster the concentration in the lung 3. Anesthetics are classified into three main groups:
and brain tissues reaches the inhaled concentration general, regional, and local. Research the criteria
of an anesthetic, the sooner a patient is induced. for this classification, and explain the distinctions.
Chapter 7 Reversible Reactions and Chemical Equilibrium • MHR 371
Review
Reflecting on Chapter 7 Knowledge/Understanding
Summarize this chapter in the format of your 1. Explain the difference between the rate of
choice. Here are a few ideas to use as guidelines: a reaction and the extent of a reaction.
• State the four conditions that apply to all 2. At equilibrium, there is no overall change in
equilibrium systems. Give examples to the concentrations of reactants and products.
illustrate these conditions. Why, then, is this state described as dynamic?
• Identify conditions that favour a reaction, and
3. For a reaction that goes to completion, is K
c
explain how they are related to equilibrium.
very large or very small? Explain why.
• Describe how enthalpy and entropy are related
4. In a chemical reaction, the change in enthalpy
to chemical equilibrium.
• Compare the first and second laws of and the change in entropy are determined by
the nature of the compounds involved.
thermodynamics.
• Use experimental data to determine an (a) What signs of ∆H and ∆S indicate that both
factors contribute to a favourable reaction?
equilibrium constant for concentration.
• Describe how to use an ICE table to solve (b) What signs of ∆H and ∆S indicate that
problems that involve K . both factors combine to make a reaction
c
• Compare Q and K to determine the direction unfavourable?
c c
of a chemical reaction. 5. Name the factors that can affect the equilibrium
• Explain the meaning of a small value of K c . of a reaction.
• Use Le Châtelier’s principle to predict the
6. Increasing temperature tends to increase the
direction of a reaction.
solubility of a solid in a liquid, but it tends to
• Outline the effects of changing conditions on a
decrease the solubility of gases. Explain why.
chemical system at equilibrium.
• Summarize the use of equilibrium and 7. The following reaction is at equilibrium.
Which condition will produce a shift to the
Le Châtelier’s principle in industrial processes,
right: a decrease in volume or a decrease in
such as the production of ammonia and
temperature? Explain why.
sulfuric acid.
H + Cl (cid:2)(cid:3) 2HCl + heat
2(g) 2(g) (g)
Reviewing Key Terms 8. The following system is at equilibrium. Will an
increase in pressure result in a shift to the left
For each of the following terms, write a sentence
or to the right? How do you know?
that shows your understanding of its meaning.
2CO (cid:2)(cid:3) 2CO + O
equilibrium 2(g) 2(g)
homogeneous equilibrium 9. Consider the following reaction.
heterogeneous equilibrium CO (g) + 3H 2(g) (cid:2)(cid:3) CH 4(g) + H 2 O (g)
favourable change (a) The volume and temperature are kept
entropy (S) constant, but the pressure on the system is
second law of thermodynamics increased. Explain how this affects the con-
free energy centration of the reactants and products, and
law of chemical equilibrium the direction in which the equilibrium shifts.
equilibrium constant (K c ) (b) When equilibrium has been re-established,
ICE table which substance(s) will show an increase in
reaction quotient (Q c ) concentration?
Le Châtelier’s principle
common ion effect
372 MHR • Unit 4 Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
Inquiry 15. Perpetual motion machines seem to be a
favourite project for inventors who do not
10. The following equation represents the
understand the second law of thermodynamics.
dissociation of hydrogen iodide gas. At 430˚C,
Design a simple machine that, once started,
the value of K is 0.20.
c
2HI (cid:2)(cid:3) H + I would recycle energy and, according to the
(g) 2(g) (g) first law of thermodynamics, should carry on
Some HI is placed in a closed container
(g) forever. Why does the second law of thermody-
at 430˚C. Analysis at equilibrium shows that
namics rule out the possibility of ever making
the concentration of I is 5.6 × 10 −4mol/L.
2(g) a perpetual motion machine?
What are the equilibrium concentrations of
16. Consider an equilibrium in which oxygen gas
H and HI ?
2(g) (g) reacts with gaseous hydrogen chloride to form
11. The oxidation of sulfur dioxide to sulfur gaseous water and chlorine gas. At equilibrium,
trioxide is an important reaction. At 1000 K,
the gases have the following concentrations:
the value of K c is 3.6 × 10 −3. [O ] = 8.6 × 10 −2mol/L,
2SO 2(g) + O 2(g) (cid:2)(cid:3) 2SO 3(g) [H 2 Cl] = 2.7 × 10 −2mol/L,
A closed flask originally contains 1.7 mol/L [H O] = 7.8 × 10 −3mol/L,
2
SO 2(g) and 1.7 mol/L O 2(g) . What is [SO 3 ] at [Cl ] = 3.6 × 10 −3mol/L.
2
equilibrium when the reaction vessel is
(a) Write a balanced chemical equation for
maintained at 1000 K?
this reaction.
12. Ethanol and propanoic acid react to form the (b) Calculate the value of the equilibrium
ester ethyl propanoate, which has the odour constant.
of bananas.
17. Sulfur trioxide gas reacts with gaseous
CH 3 CH 2 OH ((cid:4)) + CH 3 CH 2 COOH ((cid:4)) (cid:2)(cid:3) hydrogen fluoride to produce gaseous sulfur
CH 3 CH 2 COOCH 2 CH 3 + H 2 O ((cid:4)) hexafluoride and water vapour. The value of K
c
At 50˚C, K c for this reaction is 7.5. If 30.0 g of is 6.3 × 10 −3.
ethanol is mixed with 40.0 g of propanoic acid,
(a) Write a balanced chemical equation for
what mass of ethyl propanoate will be present
this reaction.
in the equilibrium mixture at 50˚C?
(b) 2.9 mol of sulfur trioxide is mixed with
Hint: Calculate the initial amounts of the 9.1 mol of hydrogen fluoride in a 4.7 L flask.
reactants. Then solve the equilibrium equation Set up an equation to determine the equilib-
using amounts instead of concentrations. The rium concentration of sodium hexafluoride.
volume of the mixture does not affect the (c) Explain why you are likely unable to solve
calculation. this equation.
13. 0.50 mol of CO and 0.50 mol of H O 18. The following results were collected for two
(g) 2 (g)
are placed in a 10 L container at 700 K. experiments that involve the reaction, at 600˚C,
The following reaction occurs. between gaseous sulfur dioxide and oxygen to
CO + H O (cid:2)(cid:3) H + CO K = 8.3 form gaseous sulfur trioxide. Show that the
(g) 2 (g) 2(g) 2(g) c
What is the concentration of each gas that is value of K was the same in both experiments.
c
present at equilibrium?
Experiment 1 Experiment 2
14. Sulfur atoms combine to form molecules that
have different numbers of atoms depending Initial Equilibrium Initial Equilibrium
concentration concentration concentration concentration
on the temperature. At about 1050˚C, the
(mol/L) (mol/L) (mol/L) (mol/L)
following dissociation occurs.
S (cid:2)(cid:3) 4S [SO 2 ] = 2.00 [SO 2 ] = 1.50 [SO 2 ] = 0.500 [SO 2 ] = 0.590
8(g) 2(g)
The initial concentration of S 8(g) in a flask is [O 2 ] = 1.50 [O 2 ] = 1.25 [O 2 ] = 0 [O 2 ] = 0.0450
9.2 × 10 −3mol/L, and the equilibrium concen- [SO ] = 3.00 [SO ] = 3.50 [SO ] = 0.350 [SO ] = 0.260
3 3 3 3
tration of the same gas is 2.3 × 10 −3mol/L.
What is the value of K ?
c
Chapter 7 Reversible Reactions and Chemical Equilibrium • MHR 373
19. Write the chemical equation for the reversible 25. One of the steps in the Ostwald process for the
reaction that has the following equilibrium production of nitric acid involves the oxidation
expression. of ammonia.
K =
[NO]4[H
2
O]6 4NH
3(g)
+ 5O
2(g)
(cid:2)(cid:3) 4NO
(g)
+ 6H
2
O
(g)
c [NH ]4[O ]5 ∆H = −905kJ
3 2
Assume that, at a certain temperature, (a) State the reaction conditions that favour
[NO] and [NH 3 ] are equal. Also assume the production of nitrogen monoxide.
that [H 2 O] = 2.0mol/L and [O 2 ] = 3.0mol/L. (b) A rhodium/platinum alloy is used as a
What is the value of K c at this temperature? catalyst. What effect does the catalyst have
on the rate of reaction? What effect does the
Communication catalyst have on the position of equilibrium?
(c) Explain why the reaction temperature is
20. Discuss the following statements, which
relatively high, typically about 900˚C.
are attributed to the chemist Harry Bent:
(d) A relatively low pressure of about 710 kPa
• The first law of thermodynamics says you
is used. Suggest why.
cannot win, you can only break even.
(e) In the next step of the Ostwald process,
• The second law of thermodynamics says
nitrogen monoxide is mixed with air to form
you cannot break even.
nitrogen dioxide.
21. Equal amounts of hydrogen gas and iodine 2NO + O (cid:2)(cid:3) 2NO ∆H = −115kJ
(g) 2(g) 2(g)
vapour are heated in a sealed flask.
Why are the gases cooled for this reaction?
(a) Sketch a graph to show how [H ] and
2(g) What do you think happens to the heat that
[HI ] change over time.
(g) is extracted?
(b) Would you expect a graph of [I 2(g) ] and [HI (g) ] (f) Finally, the nitrogen dioxide reacts with
to appear much different from your first water to form nitric acid.
graph? Explain why. 3NO 2(g) + H 2 O ((cid:4)) (cid:2)(cid:3) 2HNO 3(aq) + NO (g)
(c) How does the value of Q change over time What is done with the NO that is formed?
c (g)
for this reaction? Name three uses of this product.
22. A younger student in your school wants to 26. Polystyrene is one of our most useful polymers.
grow a crystal of copper(II) sulfate. Write a Polystyrene resin is manufactured from styrene,
short explanation that outlines how the student which is made as follows:
can use a small crystal and a saturated solution C H CH CH + 123kJ (cid:2)(cid:3) C H CHCH + H
6 5 2 3(g) 6 5 2(g) 2(g)
of copper(II) sulfate to grow a larger crystal. (a) Predict the effects (if any) on this
equilibrium if the following changes
Making Connections are made:
23. The tendency of systems to reach a maximum • increasing the applied pressure
state of entropy has been applied to the • removing styrene
social sciences. Does the second law of • reducing the temperature
thermodynamics help to explain the increase • adding a catalyst
in garbage on the streets? Justify your answer. • adding helium
24. At 25˚C, the value of K for the reaction 27.(a) Based on your predictions in question 26,
c
between nitrogen and oxygen is 4.7 × 10 −31: select the conditions that would maximize
N + O (cid:2)(cid:3) 2NO K = 4.7 × 10 −31 the equilibrium yield of styrene.
2(g) 2(g) (g) c
Assuming that air is composed of 80% nitrogen (b) Why are the conditions you selected
by volume and 20% oxygen by volume, unlikely to be used by industry? What
estimate the concentration of nitric oxide to conditions must be used to maximize the
be expected in the atmosphere. Why is the yield of an industrial process?
actual [NO] usually greater?
374 MHR • Unit 4 Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
(c) In practice, the pressure of the ethyl benzene 22.[H
2
]=8.6×10−2mol/L 23.6.1×10−5mol
is kept low. An inert substance—super- 24.[NO]=1.2×10−5mol/L 25.[CO
2
]=0.59mol/L;
heated steam—is added to keep the total [CO]=1.1×10−2mol/L; [O 2 ]=5.6×10−3mol/L
pressure of the mixture at atmospheric 26.(a)K c =171 (b)[NO 2 ]=0.0412mol/L;
pressure. What advantage does this method [N 2 O 4 ]=0.145mol/L (c)Q c =85.3(d)right 27.(a)right (b)left
(c)at equilibrium (d)left 28.left 29.right 30.(a)no change
have over running the reaction without
(b)left (c)right (d)right 31.(a)left (b)right (c)no change (d)left
the steam at a pressure that is less than
atmospheric pressure? (e)no change 32. Only (d) changes the value of K c .
33.adding methyl cyclohexane; removing toluene;
(d) The super-heated steam supplies energy to
decreasing the pressure; increasing the temperature
the system. Why is this desirable? It also
Section Review: 7.2: 3.(a)increases (b)decreases (c)increases
reacts with any carbon that is formed as a + − − − +
(d) decreases (e)increases 4.(a) (b) (c) (d) (e)
by-product at high temperatures, preventing [SbCl ][Cl ] [N ][H O]2 [H ]4[CS ]
7.3: 1.(a) 3 2 (b) 2 2 (c) 2 2
the carbon from contaminating the catalyst. [SbCl ] [H ]2[NO]2 [H S]2[CH ]
5 2 2 4
What products are formed as a result of the 2.(a)[N
2
]=0.20mol/L; [NH
3
]=1.6mol/L (b)K
c
=0.017
reaction between carbon and steam? 3.1.2 mol 4.[PCl 3 ]=[Cl]=0.035mol/L;
(e) What is the advantage of using super-heated [PCl 5 ]=0.059mol/L 5.(a)[H 2 ]=3.5×10−7mol/L(b)an
steam at 600˚C rather than ordinary steam at impractical method 7.4: 1.(a) right (b)right (c)unchanged
(d) right (e)left 2.(a)high temperatures (b)low temperatures
100˚C?
(c)high temperatures (d)low temperatures 3.(a)unchanged
(f) In practice, an iron oxide catalyst is used.
(b)right (c)left (d) unchanged (because liquid volumes are
Explain why this is desirable.
largely unaffected by pressure changes)
(g) At 600˚C, with an iron oxide catalyst, the 4.(a)N
2
+3H
2
(cid:2)(cid:3) 2NH
3
(b)adding N
2
or H
2
; removing NH
3
;
conversion is only about 35% complete.
increasing the pressure; lowering the temperature
The yield could be increased by raising the
(because the reaction is exothermic)
temperature. Suggest two plausible reasons
why this is not done.
(h) The ethyl benzene that has not reacted is
separated from the styrene by fractional
distillation. The boiling point of ethyl
benzene is 136˚C, and the boiling point of
styrene is 146˚C. The styrene, of course,
is used to make polystyrene. What is done
with the ethyl benzene?
Answers to Practice Problems and Short Answers to
Section Review Questions
Practice Problems: 1.K
c
=
C
[C
H
H 3
C
C
H
OO
O
C
H
H
][
2
C
C
H
H 3
C
]
O
[H
O
2 O
H
]
]
3 2 3
2. K c = [N [N ] O [O ]2 ] 3. K c = [H [H ] 2 2 O [O ]2 ] 4. K c = [ [ F F e e 3 2 + + ] ] 2 2 [ [ I I − 2 ] ] 2
2 2 2 2
5. K c = [ [ N N O H ]4 ] [ 4 H [O 2 O ] ] 5 6 6.1.9×10−2 7.1.2×102 8.0.013
3 2
9. 2.4×10−4 10.0.15 11.[I 2 ]=[Cl 2 ]=0.015mol/L;
[ICl]=14mol/L 12.HF=0.11mol
13.[SO
3
]=0.089mol/L 14.[CO]=0.011mol/L;
[Cl ]=0.014mol/L; [COCl ]=3.1×10−5mol/L
2 2
15.[HBr]=0.045mol/L; [H
2
]=[Br
2
]=2.9×10−6mol/L
16.1100 K 17.III, II, I 18.(a) completion (b)no reaction
(c)completion 19.Ag(NH
3
)
2
]+
(aq)
20.essentially no
dissociation 21.[CO]=[Cl
2
]=1.8×10−4mol/L
Chapter 7 Reversible Reactions and Chemical Equilibrium • MHR 375
Acids, Bases, and pH
F
Chapter Preview or many people, the word “acid” evokes the image of a fuming, highly
corrosive, dangerous liquid. This image is fairly accurate for concentrated
8.1 Explaining the
hydrochloric acid, a strong acid. Most acids, however, are not as corrosive
Properties of Acids
as hydrochloric acid, although they may still be very hazardous. For
and Bases
example, hydrofluoric acid can cause deep, slow-healing tissue burns if
8.2 The Equilibrium of
it is handled carelessly. It is used by artists and artisans who etch glass. It
Weak Acids and Bases
reacts with the silica in glass to form a compound that dissolves, leaving
8.3 Bases and Buffers
the glass with a brilliant surface. Hydrofluoric acid is highly corrosive.
8.4 Acid-Base Titration Even a 1% solution is considered to be hazardous. Yet chemists classify
Curves
hydrofluoric acid as a weak acid.
You learned about acids and bases in your previous chemistry course.
In this chapter, you will extend your knowledge to learn how the struc-
ture of a compound determines whether it is an acid or a base. You will
use the equilibrium constant of the reaction of an acid or base with water
to determine whether the acid or base is strong or weak. You will apply
your understanding of dissociation and pH to investigate buffer solutions:
solutions that resist changes in pH. Finally, you will examine acid-base
titrations that involve combinations of strong and weak acids and bases.
Prerequisite
Concepts and Skills
Before you begin this chapter,
review the following concepts The hydrohalic acids (HX ), where X represents a
(aq)
and skills: halogen) include HF, HCl, HBr, and HI. Only HF is a
(cid:2) writing net ionic equations weak acid. The rest are strong acids. What factors
(Concepts and Skills account for this difference?
Review)
(cid:2) calculating molar concen-
trations (Concepts and
Skills Review)
(cid:2) solving equilibrium
problems (Chapter 7,
sections 7.3 and 7.4)
(cid:2) explaining the
mathematical properties
of logarithms (previous
studies)
(cid:2) performing acid-base
titrations (previous
studies)
376 MHR • Unit 4 Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
Explaining the Properties 8.1
of Acids and Bases
Table 8.1 outlines properties of acids and bases that you have examined in Section Preview/
previous courses. In this section, you will review two theories that help to Specific Expectations
explain these and other properties. As well, you will use your under- In this section, you will
standing of molecular structure to help you understand why acids and
(cid:2) comparestrong acids
bases differ in strength. and bases, and weak acids
and bases, in terms of
Table 8.1 Examples and Common Properties of Acids and Bases
equilibrium
Example Acids Bases
(cid:2) identifyconjugate acid-base
solid acetyl salicylic acid sodium hydroxide pairs
liquid acetic acid aniline (cid:2) solveproblems that involve
strong acids and strong
gas hydrogen chloride ammonia
bases
Property Acids Bases
(cid:2) communicateyour under-
taste Acids taste sour. Bases taste bitter. standing of the following
CAUTION Never taste terms: hydronium ion
chemicals in a lab. (HO+ ), conjugate
3 (aq)
texture of solution Acids do not have a Bases feel slippery. acid-base pair,monoprotic
CAUTION Never characteristic texture. acids, polyprotic acids
deliberately touch
chemicals. Strong,
concentrated acids
and bases will burn
your skin.
reaction with Acidic phenolphthalein Basic phenolphthalein
phenolphthalein is colourless. is pink.
reaction with litmus Acids turn blue litmus Bases turn red litmus blue.
paper red.
reaction with metals Acids react with Bases react with certain
metals above hydrogen metals (such as Al) to
in the activity series to form H
2(g).
displace H .
2(g)
reaction with Carbon dioxide is formed. No reaction occurs.
carbonates
reaction with No reaction occurs. Ammonia, NH , a gas
3
ammonium chloride with a characteristic
odour, is produced.
neutralization Acids neutralize basic Bases neutralize acidic
reaction solutions. solutions.
reaction with fatty No reaction occurs. Bases react to form soap
acids (a saponification reaction).
aqueous property Non-metal oxides form Metal oxides form basic
of oxides acidic solutions: solutions: for example,
for example, CaO (s) + H 2 O ((cid:2)) → Ca(OH) 2(aq)
CO 2(g) + H 2 O ((cid:2)) → H 2 CO 3(aq)
amount of dissociation Strong acids dissociate Strong bases dissociate
in aqueous solution completely. Weak acids completely. Weak bases
(strength) dissociate only partially. dissociate only partially.
Chapter 8 Acids, Bases, and pH • MHR 377
The following ExpressLab highlights concepts that you will examine in
this section, as well as later in the chapter.
ExpressLab Comparing Acid-Base Reactions
You will perform three acid-base reactions. Before Analysis
you begin, read the Procedure and make a predic-
1.(a) What rate-related change did you observe
tion about the relative rates of these reactions.
in each test tube?
(b) If you wanted to collect quantitative data
Safety Precautions
for each reaction, how could you modify
the experiment?
The solutions that are used in this lab are irritants 2. In all three test tubes, the following reaction
and should be handled with care. Wash any spills occurred.
on your skin or clothing with plenty of water. Inform CaCO 3(s) +2H 3 O+ (aq) →CO 2(g) +Ca2+ (aq) +3H 2 O ((cid:2))
your teacher immediately. The only difference between the test tubes was
the concentration of H+ in the acidic solutions
(aq)
Materials
that reacted with CaCO . Explain your ranking
3(s)
powdered calcium carbonate, CaCO 3(s) of the rates of reaction in terms of [H 3 O+].
3 squeeze bottles, each containing one of the 3. The concentrations of HCl and CH COOH
(aq) 3 (aq)
following solutions: 2.0 mol/L HCl (aq) ; were identical. The following dissociation
2.0 mol/L CH 3 COOH (aq) ; mixture of reactions occurred.
2.0 mol/L CH 3 COOH (aq) and 2.0 mol/L NaCH 3 COO (aq) HCl (aq) +H 2 O ((cid:2)) (cid:3)(cid:4) H 3 O+ (aq) +Cl+ (aq)
scoopula CH 3 COOH (aq) +H 2 O ((cid:2)) (cid:3)(cid:4) H 3 O+ (aq) +CH 3 COO− (aq)
3 test tubes
Explain your ranking of the [H O+] in these
test tube rack 3
solutions in terms of the extent of the
labels or grease pencil
equilibrium dissociation.
Procedure 4. The third solution was a mixture of 2.0 mol/L
CHCOOH and 2.0 mol/L NaCHCOO . How
1. Label each test tube to identify the solution 3 (aq) 3 (aq)
did the addition of sodium acetate affect the
it will contain. Then fill each test tube with the
equilibrium of the dissociation reaction of
corresponding solution, to a depth of about 2 cm.
acetic acid?
2. Add a small amount of CaCO (enough to cover
3(s)
5. Explain your ranking of the rate of the reaction
the tip of a scoopula) to each test tube. Try to
between calcium carbonate and the solution
add the same amount of CaCO to all three
3(s)
that was a mixture of acetic acid and sodium
test tubes.
acetate.
3. Record your observations. Rank the rates of the
three reactions from fastest to slowest.
The Arrhenius Theory of Acids and Bases
According to the Arrhenius theory (1887), acids and bases are defined
in terms of their structure and the ions produced when they dissolve
in water.
• An acid is a substance that dissociates in water to form H + . Two
(aq)
examples of Arrhenius acids are hydrochloric acid, HCl, and sulfuric
acid, H SO .
2 4
• A base is a substance that dissociates in water to form OH − . Two
(aq)
examples of Arrhenius bases are sodium hydroxide, NaOH, and
potassium hydroxide, KOH.
378 MHR • Unit 4 Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
The Arrhenius theory explains acid-base reactions as a combination of
+ −
H and OH . It provides insight into the heat of neutralization for
(aq) (aq)
the reaction between a strong acid and a strong base. (Strong acids and
bases dissociate completely into ions in solution.) For example, consider
the following reaction.
HCl (aq) + NaOH (aq) → NaCl (aq) + H 2 O ((cid:2)) ∆H = −56kJ
The total ionic equation for this reaction is
H + (aq) + Cl − (aq) + Na + (aq) + OH − (aq) → Na + (aq) + Cl − (aq) + H 2 O ((cid:2)) ∆H = −56kJ
Subtracting spectator ions from both sides, the net ionic equation is
H + (aq) + OH − (aq) → H 2 O ((cid:2)) ∆H = −56kJ
Different combinations of strong Arrhenius acids and bases react with the
same exothermic result. Measurements always show the release of 56 kJ of
energy per mole of water formed. This makes sense, because the net ionic
equation is the same regardless of the specific neutralization reaction that
occurs.
+
The Arrhenius theory has limitations, however. For example, H ,
(aq)
a bare proton, does not exist in water. The positive charge on a proton is
attracted to the region of negative charge on the lone pair of electrons on
a water molecule’s oxygen atom. The combination is a hydrated proton
+
called a hydronium ion, H O .
3 (aq)
H + (aq) + H 2 O ((cid:2)) → H 3 O + (aq)
The hydronium ion, itself, forms hydrogen bonds with other water
molecules. (See Figure 8.1.) Thus, a better formula for the ion that is
+
present in acidic solutions is [H(H O) ] , where n is usually 4 or 5. For
2 n
convenience, however, chemists usually use a single hydronium ion
when writing equations.
+
hydrogen bond
Figure 8.1 In aqueous solution,
the hydronium ion, HO+, forms
H O+ 3
3
hydrogen bonds with other water
molecules.
The Arrhenius theory also has limitations for explaining certain reactions.
For example, aqueous solutions of ammonia are basic. They react with
acids in neutralization reactions, even though ammonia does not contain
the hydroxide ion. Many aqueous solutions of salts with no hydroxide
ions are basic, too. Some reactions take place without any liquid solvent.
For example, ammonium chloride can be formed by the reaction between
ammonia and hydrogen chloride, which are both gases:
NH + HCl → NH Cl
3(g) (g) 4 (s)
Chapter 8 Acids, Bases, and pH • MHR 379
The Brønsted-Lowry Theory
The limitations of the Arrhenius theory of acids and bases are overcome
by a more general theory, called the Brønsted-Lowry theory. This theory
was proposed independently, in 1923, by Johannes Brønsted, a Danish
chemist, and Thomas Lowry, an English chemist. It recognizes an
acid-base reaction as a chemical equilibrium, having both a forward
reaction and a reverse reaction that involve the transfer of a proton. The
Brønsted-Lowry theory defines acids and bases as follows:
• An acid is a substance from which a proton can be removed. (Some
chemists describe Brønsted-Lowry acids as “proton-donors.”)
• A base is a substance that can accept a proton. (Some chemists describe
Brønsted-Lowry bases as “proton-acceptors.”)
Note that the word “proton” refers to the nucleus of a hydrogen atom —an
+
H ion that has been removed from the acid molecule. It does not refer
to a proton removed from the nucleus of another atom, such as oxygen or
sulfur, that may be present in the acid molecule. As mentioned previously,
+
H ions share electrons with any species (ion or molecule) that has a lone
pair of electrons. In aqueous solution, the proton bonds with a water
molecule to form the hydronium ion. Unlike the Arrhenius theory,
however, the Brønsted-Lowry theory is not restricted to aqueous solutions.
For example, the lone pair of electrons on an ammonia molecule can bond
+
with H , and liquid ammonia can act as a base.
Definition Term Arrhenius Theory Brønsted-Lowry Theory
acid a substance that contains a substance from which
hydrogen and dissociates a proton can be removed
+
in water to form H
(aq)
base a substance that contains a substance that can
the hydroxide group and accept a proton from
dissociates in water to an acid
−
form OH
(aq)
Conjugate Acid-Base Pairs
The dissociation of acetic acid in water is represented in Figure 8.2.
This dissociation is an equilibrium reaction because it proceeds in both
directions. Acetic acid is weak, so only a few ions dissociate. The position
of equilibrium lies to the left, and the reverse reaction is favoured. In
the reverse reaction, the hydronium ion gives up a proton to the acetate
ion. Thus, these ions are an acid and a base, respectively, as shown in
Figure 8.3. The acid on the left (CH COOH) and the base on the right
3
−
(CH COO ) differ by one proton. They are called a conjugate acid-base
3
+
pair. Similarly, H O and H O are a conjugate acid-base pair.
2 3
H + −
O H O
CH C + O O H + CH C
3 3
O H H O
H
acid base acid base
(acetic acid) (water) (hydronium ion) (acetate ion)
Figure 8.2 The dissociation of acetic acid, a weak acid, in water
380 MHR • Unit 4 Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
H + −
O H O
CH C + O O H + CH C
3 3
O H H O
H
acid base conjugate acid conjugate base
conjugate pair
conjugate pair
Figure 8.3 Conjugate acid-base pairs in the dissociation of acetic acid in water
Unlike the Arrhenius theory, the Brønsted-Lowry theory of acids and
bases can explain the basic properties of ammonia when it dissolves in
water. See Figure 8.4.
conjugate pair
H + −
H
N + OO N + O H
H H H H H H H
base acid conjugate acid conjugate base
conjugate pair
Figure 8.4 The dissociation of ammonia, a weak base, in water
Aqueous ammonia is a weak base, so relatively few hydroxide ions form.
The position of equilibrium lies to the left. In the forward reaction, the
water molecule gives up a proton and acts as an acid. A substance that
can act as a proton donor (an acid) in one reaction and a proton acceptor
(a base) in another reaction is said to be amphoteric. (Water acts as an
acid in the presence of a stronger base, and as a base in the presence of a
stronger acid.
Sample Problem
Identifying Conjugate Acid-Base Pairs
Problem
Identify the conjugate acid-base pair in each reaction.
(a) H 3 PO 4(aq) + H 2 O ((cid:2)) (cid:3)(cid:4) H 2 PO 4 − (aq) + H 3 O + (aq)
(b) H 2 PO 4 − (aq) + OH − (aq) (cid:3)(cid:4) HPO 4 2− (aq) + H 2 O ((cid:2))
Continued ...
Chapter 8 Acids, Bases, and pH • MHR 381
Continued ...
Solution
On the left side of the equation, the acid is the molecule or ion that
donates a proton. The base is the molecule or ion that accepts the
proton. On the right side of the equation, you can identify the conjugate
acid and base by the difference of a single proton from the base and acid
on the left side.
− +
(a) The conjugate acid-base pairs are H PO /H PO and H O/H O .
3 4 2 4 2 3
conjugate pair
base conjugate acid
H 3 PO 4(aq) + H 2O((cid:2)) H 2 PO 4 − (aq) + H 3 O + (aq)
acid conjugate base
conjugate pair
(b) The conjugate acid-base pairs are H PO
−
/HPO
2−
and OH
−
/H O.
2 4 4 2
conjugate pair
base conjugate acid
H 2 PO 4 − (aq) + OH − (aq) HPO 4 2− (aq) + H 2O((cid:2))
acid conjugate base
conjugate pair
Check Your Solution
In each case, the acid has one more proton than its conjugate base.
Practice Problems
1. Name and write the formula of the conjugate base of each molecule
or ion.
− +
(a) HCl (b) HCO (c) H SO (d) N H
3 2 4 2 5
2. Name and write the formula of the conjugate acid of each molecule
or ion.
− − −
(a) NO (b) OH (c) H O (d) HCO
3 2 3
3. Identify the conjugate acid-base pairs in each reaction.
(a) HS − (aq) + H 2 O ((cid:2)) (cid:3)(cid:4) H 2 S (aq) + OH − (aq)
(b) O2− (aq) + H 2 O ((cid:2)) → 2OH − (aq)
4. Identify the conjugate acid-base pairs in each reaction.
(a) H S + NH (cid:3)(cid:4) NH + + HS −
2 (aq) 3(aq) 4 (aq) (aq)
(b) H 2 SO 4(aq) + H 2 O ((cid:2)) → H 3 O + (aq) + HSO 4 − (aq)
382 MHR • Unit 4 Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
Molecular Structure and the Strength of Acids and Bases
When a strong acid or base dissolves in water, almost every acid or base
molecule dissociates. While there are many acids and bases, most are
weak. Thus, the number of strong acids and strong bases is fairly small.
The binary acids of non-metals exhibit periodic trends in their acid
strength, as shown in Figure 8.5. Two factors are responsible for this
trend: the electronegativity of the atom that is bonded to hydrogen,
and the strength of the bond.
increasing acid strength
increasing electronegativity
18(VIIIA)
13 14 15 16 17
(IIIA) (IVA) (VA) (VIA) (VIIA)
CH NH H O HF
4 3 2
H S HCl
2
H Se HBr
2
HI
Across a period, electronegativity is the most important factor. The acid
strength of hydrides increases as their electronegativity increases. This
happens because an electronegative atom draws electrons away from the
hydrogen atom, making it relatively positive. The negative pole of a water
molecule then strongly attracts the hydrogen atom and pulls it away.
Down a group, bond strength is the most important factor. Acid
strength increases as bond strength decreases. A weaker bond means that
the hydrogen atom is more easily pulled away from the atom to which it
is attached. For example, hydrofluoric acid is a stronger acid than water,
but HF is the weakest of the hydrohalic acids because the H-F bond is
relatively strong.
Chapter 8 Acids, Bases, and pH • MHR 383
decreasing
bond
strength
increasing
acid
strength
Strong Acids
• binary acids that have the general formula HX , where X = Cl,
(aq)
Br, and I (but not F): for example, hydrochloric acid, HCl, and
hydrobromic acid, HBr (HCl and HBr are hydrohalic acids: acids
that have hydrogen bonded to atoms of the halogen elements.)
• oxoacids (acids containing oxygen atoms) in which the number of
oxygen atoms exceeds, by two or more, the number of protons that
can be dissociated: for example, nitric acid, HNO , sulfuric acid,
3
H SO , perchloric acid, HClO , and chloric acid, HClO
2 4 4 3
H Te
2
Figure 8.5 The binary acids
show periodic trends, which are
related to electronegativity and
bond strength.
CHEM Oxoacids increase in strength with increasing numbers of oxygen
FACT atoms, as shown in Figure 8.6. The hydrogen atoms that dissociate
in water are always attached to oxygen atoms. Oxygen is more
You might wonder how HCl ,
(aq)
HBr , and HI can be electronegative than hydrogen, so oxygen atoms draw electrons away from
(aq) (aq)
described as increasing in hydrogen atoms. The more oxygen atoms there are in a molecule, the
strength, since each acid greater is the polarity of the bond between each hydrogen atom and the
dissociates completely in oxygen atom it is attached to, and the more easily the water molecule can
water. This trend becomes
tear the hydrogen atom away.
apparent if you add equal
concentrations of the acids increasing acid strength
to a solvent that is less basic
than water, such as pure
O
acetic acid. You will find
that the acids dissociate to H O Cl H O Cl H O Cl O H O Cl O
different extents.
δ+ δ−
δ+ δ− δ+ δ− δ+ δ−
O O O
hypochlorous chlorous chloric perchloric
acid acid acid acid
Figure 8.6 The relative strength of oxoacids increases with the number of oxygen atoms.
Acids such as HCl, CH COOH, and HF are monoprotic acids. They have
3
only a single hydrogen atom that dissociates in water. Some acids have
more than one hydrogen atom that dissociates. These acids are called
polyprotic acids. For example, sulfuric acid has two hydrogen atoms that
can dissociate.
H 2 SO 4(aq) + H 2 O ((cid:2)) (cid:3)(cid:4) H 3 O + (aq) + HSO 4 − (aq)
HSO 4 − (aq) + H 2 O ((cid:2)) (cid:3)(cid:4) H 3 O + (aq) + SO 4 2− (aq)
Sulfuric acid is a far stronger acid than the hydrogen sulfate ion, because
much more energy is required to remove a proton from a negatively
charged ion. The strength of a polyprotic acid decreases as the number of
hydrogen atoms that have dissociated increases.
Strong bases are confined to the oxides and hydroxides from Groups 1
(IA) and 2 (IIA).
Strong Bases
• all oxides and hydroxides of the alkali metals: for example, sodium
hydroxide, NaOH, and potassium hydroxide, KOH
• alkaline earth (Group 2 (IIA)) metal oxides and hydroxides below
beryllium: for example, calcium hydroxide, Ca(OH) , and barium
2
hydroxide, Ba(OH)
2
The strong basic oxides have metal atoms with low electronegativity.
Thus, the bond to oxygen is ionic and is relatively easily broken by the
attraction of polar water molecules. The oxide ion always reacts with
water molecules to produce hydroxide ions.
O2− (aq) + H 2 O ((cid:2)) → 2OH − (aq)
Magnesium oxide and magnesium hydroxide are not very soluble. They
are strong bases, however, because the small amount that does dissolve
dissociates almost completely into ions. Beryllium oxide is a weak base.
(It is the exception in Group 2 (IIA).) It is a relatively small atom, so the
bond to oxygen is strong and not easily broken by water molecules.
384 MHR • Unit 4 Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
Calculations That Involve Strong Acids and Bases
When a strong acid dissociates completely into ions in water, the
+
concentration of H O is equal to the concentration of the strong
3 (aq)
acid. Similarly, when a strong base dissociates completely in water, the
−
concentration of OH is equal to the concentration of the strong base.
(aq)
Sample Problem
Calculating Ion Concentrations in Acidic and Basic Solutions
Problem
During an experiment, a student pours 25.0 mL of 1.40 mol/L nitric
acid into a beaker that contains 15.0 mL of 2.00 mol/L sodium
hydroxide solution. Is the resulting solution acidic or basic? What is the
concentration of the ion that causes the solution to be acidic or basic?
What Is Required?
You must determine the ion in excess and its concentration.
What Is Given?
You have the following data:
Volume of nitric acid =25.0 mL
[HNO ] = 1.40 mol/L
3
Volume of sodium hydroxide =15.0 mL
[NaOH] =2.00 mol/L
Plan Your Strategy
Step 1 Write the chemical equation for the reaction.
Step 2 Calculate the amount of each reactant using the following equation.
Amount (in mol) =Concentration (in mol/L) ×Volume (in L)
Step 3 Determine the limiting reactant.
Step 4 The reactant in excess is a strong acid or base. Thus, the excess
+ −
amount results in the same amount of H O or OH .
3
Step 5 Calculate the concentration of the excess ion by using the amount
in excess and the total volume of the solution.
Act on Your Strategy
Step 1 HNO 3(aq) + NaOH (aq) → NaNO 3(aq) + H 2 O ((cid:2))
Step 2 AmountofHNO = 1.40mol/L × 0.0250L
3
= 0.0350mol
AmountofNaOH = 2.00mol/L × 0.0150L
= 0.0300mol
Step 3 The reactants combine in a 1:1 ratio. The amount of NaOH is less,
so this reactant must be the limiting reactant.
Step 4 AmountofexcessHNO = 0.0350mol − 0.0300mol
3(aq)
= 0.0050mol
Therefore, the amount of H O + is 5.0 × 10 −3 mol.
3 (aq)
Step 5 Totalvolumeofsolution = 25.0mL + 15.0mL = 40.0mL
[H O + ] = 5.0 × 10 −3mol
3 0.0400L
= 0.12mol/L
Continued ...
Chapter 8 Acids, Bases, and pH • MHR 385
Continued ...
+
The solution is acidic, and [H O ] is 0.12 mol/L.
3
Check Your Solution
The chemical equation has a 1:1 ratio between reactants. The amount of
acid is greater than the amount of base. Therefore, the resulting solution
should be acidic, which it is.
Practice Problems
5. Calculate the concentration of hydronium ions in each solution.
(a) 4.5 mol/L HCl
(aq)
(b) 30.0 mL of 4.50 mol/L HBr diluted to 100.0 mL
(aq)
(c) 18.6 mL of 2.60 mol/L HClO added to 24.8 mL of 1.92 mol/L
4(aq)
NaOH
(aq)
(d) 17.9 mL of 0.175 mol/L HNO added to 35.4 mL of
3(aq)
0.0160 mol/L Ca(OH)
2(aq)
6. Calculate the concentration of hydroxide ions in each solution.
(a) 3.1 mol/L KOH
(aq)
(b) 21.0 mL of 3.1 mol/L KOH diluted to 75.0 mL
(c) 23.2 mL of 1.58 mol/L HCl added to 18.9 mL of 3.50 mol/L
(aq)
NaOH
(aq)
(d) 16.5 mL of 1.50 mol/L H SO added to 12.7 mL of 5.50 mol/L
2 4(aq)
NaOH
(aq)
7. Determine whether reacting each pair of solutions results in an
acidic solution or a basic solution. Then calculate the concentration
of the ion that causes the solution to be acidic or basic. (Assume
that the volumes in part (a) are additive. Assume that the volumes in
part (b) stay the same.)
(a) 31.9 mL of 2.75 mol/L HCl added to 125 mL of 0.0500 mol/L
(aq)
Mg(OH)
2(aq)
(b) 4.87 g of NaOH added to 80.0 mL of 3.50 mol/L HBr
(s) (aq)
8. 2.75 g of MgO is added to 70.0 mL of 2.40 mol/L HNO . Is the
(s) 3(aq)
solution that results from the reaction acidic or basic? What is the
concentration of the ion that is responsible for the character of the
solution?
Section Summary
Strong acids and bases (and strong electrolytes) dissociate completely in
water. Therefore, you can use the concentrations of these compounds to
determine the concentrations of the ions they form in aqueous solutions.
You cannot, however, use the concentrations of weak acids, bases, and
electrolytes in the same way. Their solutions contain some particles
that have not dissociated into ions. Nevertheless, important changes in
+ −
[H O ] and [OH ] take place because dissolved ions affect the dissociation
3
of water.
386 MHR • Unit 4 Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
In the next section, you will focus on the equilibrium of water. You
will discover how the pH scale is related to the concentrations of the ions
that form when water dissociates. As well, you will learn how to calculate
the pH values of solutions of weak acids and bases.
Section Review
1 K/U Phosphoric acid, H 3 PO 4(aq) is triprotic. It has three hydrogen ions
that may be dissociated.
(a) Write an equation to show the dissociation of each proton.
−
(b) Show that H PO can act as either an acid or a base.
2 4 (aq)
−
(c) Which is the stronger acid, H PO orH PO ? Explain
3 4(aq) 2 4 (aq)
your answer.
2 K/U Para-aminobenzoic acid (PABA) is a weak monoprotic acid that is
used in some sunscreen lotions. Its formula is C H NH COOH. What is
6 4 2
the formula of the conjugate base of PABA?
3 K/U Boric acid, B(OH) 3(aq) , is used as a mild antiseptic in eye-wash
solutions. The following reaction takes place in aqueous solution.
B(OH) 3(aq) + 2H 2 O ((cid:2)) (cid:3)(cid:4) B(OH) 4 − (aq) + H 3 O + (aq)
(a) Identify the conjugate acid-base pairs.
(b) Is boric acid strong or weak? How do you know?
4 K/U Classify each compound as a strong acid, weak acid, strong
base, or weak base.
(a) butyric acid, CH CH CH COOH (responsible for the odour of
3 2 2
rancid butter)
(b) hydroiodic acid, HI (added to some cough syrups)
(aq)
(c) potassium hydroxide, KOH (used in the manufacture of soft soaps)
(d) red iron oxide, Fe O (used as a colouring pigment in paints)
2 3
5 C Distinguish between a concentrated solution of a weak base, and
a dilute solution of a strong base. Give an example of each.
Chapter 8 Acids, Bases, and pH • MHR 387
8.2 The Equilibrium of
Weak Acids and Bases
Section Preview/ The dissociation of an acidic or basic compound in aqueous solution
Specific Expectations produces ions that interact with water. The pH of the aqueous solution is
In this section, you will determined by the position of equilibrium in reactions between the ions
that are present in solution and the water molecules. Pure water contains
(cid:2) defineand perform
calculations that involve a few ions, produced by the dissociation of water molecules:
the ion product constant 2H 2 O ((cid:2)) (cid:3)(cid:4) H 3 O + (aq) + OH − (aq)
for water, K , and the acid
w At 25˚C, only about two water molecules in one billion dissociate. This
dissociation constant, K
a
is why pure water is such a poor conductor of electricity. In neutral
(cid:2) comparestrong acids and
water, at 25˚C, the concentration of hydronium ions is the same as the
bases in terms of equilibrium
concentration of hydroxide ions: 1.0 × 10 −7 mol/L. These concentrations
(cid:2) compareweak acids and must be the same because the dissociation of water produces equal num-
bases in terms of equilibrium
bers of hydronium and hydroxide ions. Because this is an equilibrium
(cid:2) communicateyour reaction, and because the position of equilibrium of all reactions changes
understanding of the with temperature, [H O + ] is not 1.0 × 10 −7 mol/L at other temperatures.
following terms: ion product 3
−
The same is true of [OH ].
constant for water(K ),
w
pH, pOH, acid dissociation
constant(K ), percent The Ion Product Constant for Water
a
dissociation
The equilibrium constant, K , for the dissociation of water is given by the
c
following expression.
+ −
K = [H 3 O ][OH ]
c [H O]2
2
So few ions form that the concentration of water is essentially constant.
The product K [H O]2 is equal to the product of the concentrations of
c 2
hydronium ions and hydroxide ions. The equilibrium value of the
+ −
concentration ion product [H O ][OH ] at 25˚C is called the ion product
3
constant for water. It is given the symbol K .
w
K [H O]2 = [H O + ][OH − ]
c 2 3
= 1.0 × 10 −7mol/L × 1.0 × 10 −7mol/L
= 1.0 × 10 −14
= K
w
The units are commonly dropped, as in other equilibrium expressions you
have encountered.
+
The concentration of H O in the solution of a strong acid is equal
3
to the concentration of the dissolved acid, unless the solution is very
+
dilute. Consider [H O ] in a solution of 0.1 mol/L hydrochloric acid.
3
All the molecules of HCl dissociate in water, forming a hydronium ion
+
concentration that equals 0.1 mol/L. The increased [H O ] pushes the
3
dissociation reaction between water molecules to the left, in accordance
with Le Châtelier’s principle. Consequently, the concentration of hydro-
nium ions that results from the dissociation of water is even less than
1 × 10 −7 mol/L. This [H O + ] is negligible compared with the 0.1 mol/L
3
concentration of the hydrochloric acid. Unless the solution is very dilute
(about 1 × 10 −7 mol/L), the dissociation of water molecules can be ignored
+
when determining [H O ] of a strong acid.
3
388 MHR • Unit 4 Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
Similarly, the concentration of hydroxide ions can be determined from
the concentration of the dissolved base. If the solution is a strong base,
you can ignore the dissociation of water molecules when determining
− + −
[OH ], unless the solution is very dilute. When either [H O ] or [OH ] is
3
known, you can use the ion product constant for water, K , to determine
w
the concentration of the other ion. Although the value of K for water is
w
1.0 × 10 −14 at 25˚C only, you can use this value unless another value is
given for a different temperature.
[H O + ] and [OH−] in Aqueous Solutions at 25˚C
3
In an acidic solution, [H O + ] is greater than 1.0 × 10 −7 mol/L and
3
[OH − ] is less than 1.0 × 10 −7 mol/L.
+ −
In a neutral solution, both [H O ] and [OH ] are equal to
3
1.0 × 10 −7 mol/L.
In a basic solution, [H O + ] is less than 1.0 × 10 −7 mol/L and [OH − ]
3
is greater than 1.0 × 10 −7 mol/L.
Sample Problem
Determining [H O+] and [OH–]
3
Problem
+ −
Find [H O ] and [OH ] in each solution.
3
(a) 2.5 mol/L nitric acid
(b) 0.16 mol/L barium hydroxide
Solution
You know that nitric acid is a strong acid and barium hydroxide is a
strong base. Since both dissociate completely in aqueous solutions,
+ −
you can use their molar concentrations to determine [H O ] or [OH ].
3
You can find the concentration of the other ion using K :
w
K = 1.0 × 10 −14
w
= [H O + ][OH − ]
3
(a) [HNO ] = 2.5mol/L, so[H O + ] = 2.5mol/L
3 3
[OH − ] = 1.0 × 10 −14mol/L
2.5
= 4.0 × 10 −15mol/L
H O
(b) Ba(OH) 2 Ba2+ + 2OH −
2 (aq) (aq)
−
Each mole of Ba(OH) in solution forms two moles of OH ions.
2
∴[OH − ] = 2 × 0.16 = 0.32mol/L
[H O + ] = 1.0 × 10 −14mol/L
3 0.32
= 3.1 × 10 −14mol/L
Check Your Solution
+
For a solution of a strong acid, as in part (a), [H O ] should be greater
3
than 1.0 × 10 −14 and [OH − ] should be less than 1.0 × 10 −14. For a solution
− +
of strong base, [OH ] should be greater than, and [H O ] should be less
3
than, 1.0 × 10 −14.
Chapter 8 Acids, Bases, and pH • MHR 389
Practice Problems
Sulfuric acid is the only
+ −
common strong diprotic acid. 9. Determine [H O ] and [OH ] in each solution.
3
Explain why the concentration
(a) 0.45 mol/L hydrochloric acid
of hydronium ions in a solution
(b) 1.1 mol/L sodium hydroxide
of 1.0 mol/L HSO is
2 4(aq)
1.0 mol/L, not 2.0 mol/L. 10. Determine [H O + ] and [OH − ] in each solution.
3
(a) 0.95 mol/L hydrobromic acid
(b) 0.012 mol/L calcium hydroxide
11. [OH − ] is 5.6 × 10 −14 mol/L in a solution of hydrochloric acid. What is
the molar concentration of the HCl ?
(aq)
12. [H O + ] is 1.7 × 10 −14 in a solution of calcium hydroxide. What is the
3
molar concentration of the Ca(OH) ?
2(aq)
pH and pOH
You can describe the acidity of an aqueous solution quantitatively by
Web LINK
stating the concentration of the hydronium ions that are present. [H O +]
3
www.mcgrawhill.ca/links/ is often, however, a very small number. The pH scale was devised by a
chemistry12
Danish biochemist named Søren Sørensen as a convenient way to repre-
Many people, for both personal
sent acidity (and, by extension, basicity). The scale is logarithmic, based
and professional reasons, rely
on 10. Think of the letter p as a mathematical operation representing –log.
on pH meters to provide quick,
The pH of a solution is the exponential power of hydrogen (or hydroni-
reliable pH measurements. Use
um) ions, in moles per litre. It can therefore be expressed as follows:
the Internet to find out how a
pH meter works, and what jobs pH = −log[H O + ]
3
or tasks it is used for. To start
The practical range of the pH scale, shown in Figure 8.7, is from 0 to 14.
your research, go to the web
A solution of a strong acid that is more concentrated than 1.0 mol/L
site above and click on Web
would give a negative pH. Since you can determine [H O +] of such
Links. Prepare a brief report, a 3
web page, or a brochure to solutions directly from the concentration of the acid, the pH scale offers
present your findings. no advantage. Similarly, the pH of a strong base that is more concentrated
than 1.0 mol/L is greater than 14. Note that pH is a dimensionless
quantity. In other words, it has no units.
You can calculate the pOH (the power of hydroxide ions) of a solution
−
from the [OH ].
pOH = −log[OH − ]
K = [H O + ][OH − ] = 1.0 × 10 −14 at 25˚C
w 3
∴pH + pOH = 14
Sample Problem
Calculating pH and pOH
Math LINK
Prove the relationship Problem
pH + pOH = 14as follows.
A liquid shampoo has a hydroxide ion concentration of 6.8 × 10 −5 mol/L
Record the ion product
at 25˚C.
equation and its value at 25˚C.
Take the logarithm of both (a) Is the shampoo acidic, basic, or neutral?
sides. Then reverse the sign
(b) Calculate the hydronium ion concentration.
of each term. What is your
(c) What is the pH and the pOH of the shampoo?
result?
390 MHR • Unit 4 Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
Solution
− −
(a) Compare [OH ] in the shampoo with [OH ] in neutral water at 25˚C.
[OH − ] = 6.8 × 10 −5 mol/L , which is greater than 1 × 10 −7 mol/L.
Therefore, the shampoo is basic.
(b) Use the equation [H O + ] = 1.0 × 10 −14 to find the hydronium ion PROBLEM TIP
3 [OH − ]
concentration. When you work with
[H O + ] = 1.0 × 10 −14 logarithms, the number of
3 6.8 × 10 −5 significant digits in a number
= 1.5 × 10 −10mol/L must equal the number of
(c) Substitute known values into the equations pH = −log[H O + ] digits after the decimal in
3
and pOH = −log[OH − ]. the number’s logarithm. Here
1.5×10−10has two significant
pH = −log(1.5 × 10 −10) digits. Therefore, the calcu-
= 9.83 lated pH, 9.83, must have two
pOH = −log(6.8 × 10 −5) significant digits after the
decimal.
= 4.17
Check Your Solution
pH + pOH = 14
acidic solution
[H O+] >[OH − ]
3
Chapter 8 Acids, Bases, and pH • MHR 391
Hp
14 1mol/L NaOH (14.0)
basic solution
13 lye (sodium hydroxide)
(13.0)
12
household ammonia
(11.9)
11
milk of magnesia
(antacid) (10.5)
10 detergent solution [H O+] <[OH − ]
(approximately 10) 3
9
neutral solution
8 ocean water (7.0–8.3)
blood (7.4)
7 NEUTRAL
milk (6.4)
6 urine (4.8–7.5)
rainwater (5.6)
5 [H O+]=[OH − ]
3
tomatoes (4.2)
4
vinegar (2.4–3.4)
3
lemon juice (2.2–2.4)
2
stomach acid
1 (mainly HCl) (1.0–3.0)
0 1 mol/L HCl (0.0)
CISAB
EROM
CIDICA
EROM
Figure 8.7 The pH scale is
logarithmic. Each change by one
unit on the scale represents a
change of 10 in the hydronium ion
concentration of a solution.
Another Way to Find [H O+] and [OH−]
3
+ −
You can calculate [H O ] or [OH ] by finding the antilog of the pH or pOH.
3
[H O + ] = 10 −pH
3
[OH − ] = 10 −pOH
If you are using a calculator, you can use it to find the antilog of a
number in one of two ways. If the logarithm is entered in the calculator,
you can press the two keys ˆ and l in sequence. (Some calculators
may have a ˛ button instead.) Alternatively, since [H O + ] = 10 −pH and
3
[OH − ] = 10 −pOH, you can enter 10, press the y button, enter the negative
value of pH (or pOH), and then press =.
Sample Problem
Finding pOH, [H O+], and [OH–]
3
Problem
If the pH of urine is outside the normal range of values, this can indicate
medical problems. Suppose that the pH of a urine sample was measured
+ −
to be 5.53 at 25˚C. Calculate pOH, [H O ], and [OH ] for the sample.
3
Solution
You use the known value, pH = 5.53, to calculate the required values.
pOH = 14.00 − 5.53
= 8.47
[H O + ] = 10 −5.53
3
= 3.0 × 10 −6mol/L
[OH − ] = 10 −8.47
= 3.4 × 10 −9mol/L
Check Your Solution
In this problem, the ion product constant is a useful check:
[H O + ][OH − ] = (3.0 × 10 −6) × (3.4 × 10 −9)
3
= 1.0 × 10 −14
This value equals the expected value for K at 25˚C.
w
Practice Problems
13. [H O + ] of a sample of milk is found to be 3.98 × 10 −7 mol/L. Is the
3
−
milk acidic, neutral, or basic? Calculate the pH and [OH ] of the
sample.
14. A sample of household ammonia has a pH of 11.9. What is the pOH
−
and [OH ] of the sample?
15. Phenol, C H OH, is used as a disinfectant. An aqueous solution of
6 5
phenol was found to have a pH of 4.72. Is phenol acidic, neutral, or
+ −
basic? Calculate [H O ], [OH ], and pOH of the solution.
3
16. At normal body temperature, 37˚C, the value of K for water is
w
2.5 × 10 −14. Calculate [H O + ] and [OH − ] at this temperature. Is pure
3
water at 37˚C acidic, neutral, or basic?
392 MHR • Unit 4 Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
17. A sample of baking soda was dissolved in water and the pOH of the
solution was found to be 5.81 at 25˚C. Is the solution acidic, basic,
+ −
or neutral? Calculate the pH, [H O ], and [OH ] of the solution.
3
18. A chemist dissolved some Aspirin™ in water. The chemist then
measured the pH of the solution and found it to be 2.73 at 25˚C.
+ −
What are [H O ] and [OH ] of the solution?
3
The Acid Dissociation Constant
Many common foods (such as citrus fruits), pharmaceuticals (such as CHEM
Aspirin™), and some vitamins (such as niacin, vitamin B3) are weak FACT
acids. When a weak acid dissolves in water, it does not completely disso-
Niacin is found in many foods,
ciate. The concentration of the hydronium ions, and the concentration of including corn. The niacin
the conjugate base of the acid that is formed in solution, depend on the in corn, however, cannot be
initial concentration of the acid and the amount of acid that dissociates. absorbed in the intestinal
You can represent any weak monoprotic acid with the general formula tract. In regions of the world
where corn is a major part
HA. The equilibrium of a weak monoprotic acid in aqueous solution can
of the diet, niacin deficiency
be expressed as follows:
can occur. If you add calcium
HA (aq) + H 2 O (aq) (cid:3)(cid:4) H 3 O + (aq) + A − (aq) oxide or wood ash to the water
in which you boil corn, the
The equilibrium expression for this reaction is
resulting basic solution allows
+ −
K = [H 3 O ][A ] the niacin to be absorbed. The
c [HA][H 2 O] flour for making corn tortillas
In dilute solutions, the concentration of water is almost constant. is commonly prepared using
Multiplying both sides of the equilibrium expression by [H O] gives this method.
2
the product of two constants on the left side. This new constant is called
the acid dissociation constant, K . (Some chemists refer to the acid
a
dissociation constant as the acid ionization constant. With either name,
the symbol is K .)
a
+ −
K [H O] = K = [H 3 O ][A ]
c 2 a [HA]
You can determine the value of K for a particular acid by measuring the
a
pH of a solution. In the following investigation, you will add sodium
hydroxide to acetic acid, which is a weak acid. (See Figure 8.8.) By graph-
ing pH against the volume of sodium hydroxide that you added, you will
be able to calculate the concentration of the acetic acid. Then you will be
able to determine the acid dissociation constant, K , for this acid.
a
O O
C + H O C + H O+
2 3
H C O H H C O −
3 3
Figure 8.8 Acetic acid is a weak monoprotic acid.
Chapter 8 Acids, Bases, and pH • MHR 393
S K I L L F O C U S
Predicting
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
K of Acetic Acid
a
In your previous chemistry course, you learned Procedure
how to determine the molar concentration of
1. Your teacher will give you the molar
an acid by adding a basic solution of known
concentration of the NaOH solution. Record
concentration and measuring the volume of the
this concentration in your notebook, as well
basic solution required to reach the endpoint.
as the volume of the pipette (in mL).
This procedure is called a titration. The endpoint
is the point at which an indicator changes colour. 2. Copy the table below into your notebook, to
In this investigation, you will be given a record your observations. Leave plenty of
sample of acetic acid with an unknown concen- space. You will collect 15 to 30 sets of data,
tration. Instead of measuring the volume of the depending on the concentration of the acid.
basic solution required to reach the endpoint,
Volume of NaOH added (mL) pH
however, you will measure the pH. Then you
0.00
will graph the data you collected and use the
graph to calculate the molar concentration of the
acetic acid and its K .
a
3. Label a clean, dry beaker for each liquid.
Question
Obtain about 40 mL of acetic acid and about
In a solution of acetic acid, how does the 70 mL of NaOH solution.
concentration of hydronium ions compare with
4. Rinse a clean burette with about 10 mL of
the concentration of acetic acid?
NaOH solution. Discard the rinse with plenty
of water. Then set up a retort stand, burette
Materials
clamp, meniscus reader, and funnel. Fill the
25 mL pipette and pipette bulb burette with NaOH solution. Make sure that
retort stand the solution fills the tube below the tap with
burette and burette clamp no air bubbles. Remove the funnel.
2 beakers (150 mL)
Erlenmeyer flask (150 mL)
labels
meniscus reader
sheet of white paper
funnel
acetic acid, CH COOH, solution meniscus
3
reader
sodium hydroxide, NaOH, solution
burette clamp
dropper bottle containing phenolphthalein
pH meter or pH paper
Safety Precautions
Both CH COOH and NaOH are corrosive. Wash
3
any spills on your skin or clothing with plenty
of cool water. Inform your teacher immediately.
394 MHR • Unit 4 Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
5. Obtain a clean 25 mL pipette and a suction 3. Calculate the molar concentration of the
bulb. Rinse the pipette with 5 mL to 10 mL of CH COOH. Use the ratio in which the acid
3
CH COOH, and discard the rinse with plenty and base react, determined from the chemical
3
of water. Pipette 25.00 mL of CH COOH into equation. You can use the following equation
3
an Erlenmeyer flask. Add two or three drops to find the amount of a chemical in solution.
of phenolphthalein indicator. Amount (in mol) = Concentration (in mol/L)
6. Record the initial pH of the solution. Make × Volume (in L)
sure that the glass electrode is immersed Determine the amount of NaOH added, using
deeply enough to get an accurate reading. its concentration (given by your teacher) and
If necessary, tip the flask to one side. Place the volume on your graph (from question 2).
a sheet of white paper under the flask.
4. Write the expression for K for the dissocia-
a
7. Add 2 mL of NaOH from the burette. Record tion of CH COOH in water.
3
the volume carefully, correct to two decimal
5. Use the initial pH of the CH COOH (before
3
places. Swirl the contents of the Erlenmeyer +
you added any base) to find the initial [H O ].
3
flask, then measure the pH of the solution. −
What was the initial [CH COO ]?
3
8. Repeat step 7 until the pH rises above 2.0.
6. Assume that the amount of CH COOH that
3
Add 1 mL amounts until the pH reaches 5.0.
dissociates is small compared with the initial
9. Above pH = 5.0, add NaOH in 0.2 mL or concentration of the acid. If this is true, the
0.1 mL portions. Continue to swirl the con- equilibrium value of [CH COOH] is equal to
3
tents of the flask and take pH readings. Record the initial concentration of the acid. Use your
+ −
the volume at which the phenolphthalein values of [H O ], [CH COO ], and [CH COOH]
3 3 3
changes from colourless to pink. to calculate K for acetic acid. Hint:
a
[H O + ] = [CH COO − ]
10. Above pH = 11, add 1 mL portions until the 3 3
pH reaches at least 12. 7. Refer to the volume of NaOH on your graph
(from question 2). Calculate half this volume.
11. Wash the liquids down the sink with plenty
On your graph, find the pH when the solution
of water. Rinse the pipette and burette with
was half-neutralized.
distilled water. Leave the burette tap open.
+
8. Calculate [H O ] when the CH COOH was
3 3
Analysis half-neutralized. How does this value com-
pare with your value of K for CH COOH?
1. Write the chemical equation for the a 3
neutralization reaction you observed.
Conclusion
2. Plot a graph of your data, with pH on
9. Calculate the percent difference between
the vertical axis and volume of NaOH on
your value for K and the accepted value.
the horizontal axis. Your graph should a
State two sources of error that might account
show a steep rise in pH as the volume of
for any differences.
NaOH becomes enough to neutralize all the
CH COOH. Take the midpoint on the graph
3
Application
(where the graph rises steeply) and read off
+
the volume of NaOH. This is the volume of 10. Do the values you calculated for [H O ] and
3
NaOH that was needed to neutralize all the [CH COOH] prove that CH COOH is a weak
3 3
CH COOH. Compare the volume on your acid? Explain.
3
graph with the volume you recorded when the
phenolphthalein indicator first turned pink.
Chapter 8 Acids, Bases, and pH • MHR 395
pH and K of a Weak Acid
a
Table 8.2 lists the acid dissociation constants for selected acids at 25˚C.
Notice that weak acids have K values that are between 1 and about
a
1 × 10 −16. Very weak acids have K values that are less than 1 × 10 −16.
a
The smaller the value of K , the less the acid ionizes in aqueous solution.
a
Problems that involve the concentrations of ions formed in aqueous
solutions are considered to be equilibrium problems. The steps for solving
acid and base equilibrium problems are similar to the steps you learned in
Chapter 7 for solving equilibrium problems.
Solving Equilibrium Problems That Involve Acids and Bases
The steps that you will use to solve acid and base equilibrium prob-
lems will vary depending on the problem. Below are a few general
steps to guide you.
• Write the chemical equation. Use the chemical equation to set up an
ICE table for the reacting substances. Enter any values that are given
in the problem. (Note: For the problems in this textbook, you can
assume that the concentrations of hydronium ions and hydroxide
ions in pure water are negligible compared with the concentrations
of these ions when a weak acid or weak base is dissolved in water.)
• Let x represent the change in concentration of the substance with
the smallest coefficient in the chemical equation.
• For problems that give the initial concentration of the acid, [HA],
compare the initial concentration of the acid with the acid
dissociation constant, K .
a
• If [HA] > 500, the change in the initial concentration, x, is
K
a
negligible and can be ignored.
• If [HA] < 500, the change in the initial concentration, x, may
K
a
not be negligible. The equilibrium equation will be more complex,
possibly requiring the solution of a quadratic equation.
Table 8.2 Some Acid Dissociation Constants for Weak Acids at 25˚C
Acid Formula Acid dissociation constant, K
a
acetic acid CH COOH 1.8 × 10−5
3
chlorous acid HClO 1.1 × 10−2
2
formic acid HCOOH 1.8 × 10−4
hydrocyanic acid HCN 6.2 × 10−10
hydrofluoric acid HF 6.6 × 10−4
hydrogen oxide (water) H O 1.0 × 10−14
2
lactic acid CH CHOHCOOH 1.4 × 10−4
3
nitrous acid HNO 7.2 × 10−4
2
phenol C H OH 1.3 × 10−10
6 5
396 MHR • Unit 4 Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
Percent Dissociation
The percent dissociation of a weak acid is the fraction of acid molecules
that dissociate compared with the initial concentration of the acid,
expressed as a percent. (Some chemists refer to percent dissociation as
percent of dissociation.) The percent dissociation depends on the value
of K for the acid, as well as the initial concentration of the weak acid.
a
The following Sample Problems show how to solve problems that involve
percent dissociation.
Sample Problem
Determining K and Percent Dissociation
a
Problem
Propanoic acid, CH CH COOH, is a weak monoprotic acid that is used
3 2
to inhibit mould formation in bread. A student prepared a 0.10 mol/L
solution of propanoic acid and found that the pH was 2.96. What is
the acid dissociation constant for propanoic acid? What percent of its
molecules were dissociated in the solution?
What Is Required?
You need to find K and the percent dissociation for propanoic acid.
a
What Is Given?
You have the following data:
Initial [CH CH COOH] = 0.10mol/L
3 2
pH = 2.96
Plan Your Strategy
Step 1 Write the equation for the dissociation equilibrium of propanoic
acid in water. Then set up an ICE table.
Step 2 Write the equation for the acid dissociation constant. Substitute
equilibrium terms into the equation.
Step 3 Calculate [H O + ] using [H O + ] = 10 −pH
3 3
+
Step 4 Use the stoichiometry of the equation and [H O ] to substitute
3
for the unknown term, x, and calculate K .
a
Step 5 Calculate the percent dissociation by expressing the fraction
of molecules that dissociate out of 100.
Act on Your Strategy
Step 1 Use the equation for the dissociation equilibrium of propanoic
acid in water to set up an ICE table.
Concentration (mol/L) CH 3 CH 2 COOH (aq) + H 2 O ((cid:2)) CH 3 CH 2 COO − (aq) + H 3 O + (aq)
Initial 0.10 0 ~0
Change −x +x +x
Equilibrium 0.10 − x +x +x
Continued ...
Chapter 8 Acids, Bases, and pH • MHR 397
Continued ...
− +
Step 2 K = [CH 3 CH 2 COO ][H 3 O ]
a CH CH COOH]
3 2
= (x)(x)
(0.10 − x)
+
Step 3 The value of xis equal to [H O ] and [CH CH COOH].
3 3 2
[H O + ] = 10 −2.96
3
= 1.1 × 10 −3mol/L
Step 4 K = (1.1 × 10 −3)2
a 0.10 − (1.1 × 10 −3)
= 1.2 × 10 −5
Step 5 Percentdissociation= 1.1 × 10 −3mol/L × 100
0.10mol/L
= 1.1%
Check Your Solution
The value of K and the percent dissociation are reasonable for a
a
weak acid.
Sample Problem
Calculating pH
Problem
Formic acid, HCOOH, is present in the sting of certain ants. What is the
pH of a 0.025 mol/L solution of formic acid?
What Is Required?
You need to calculate the pH of the solution.
What Is Given?
You know the concentration of formic acid:
[HCOOH]= 0.025mol/L
The acid dissociation constant for formic acid is listed in Table 8.2:
K = 1.8 × 10 −4
a
Plan Your Strategy
Step 1 Write the equation for the dissociation equilibrium of formic acid
in water. Then set up an ICE table.
Step 2 Write the equation for the acid dissociation constant. Substitute
equilibrium terms into the equation.
[HCOOH]
Step 3 Check the value of to see whether or not the amount
K
a
that dissociates is negligible compared with the initial concentra-
tion of the acid.
Step 4 Solve the equation for x. If the amount that dissociates is not
negligible compared with the initial concentration of acid, you
will need to use a quadratic equation.
Step 5 pH = −log[H O + ]
3
398 MHR • Unit 4 Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
Act on Your Strategy
Step 1
Concentration (mol/L) HCOOH (aq) + H 2 O ((cid:2)) HCOO − (aq) + H 3 O + (aq)
Initial 0.025 0 ~0
Change −x +x +x
Equilibrium 0.025 − x +x +x
− +
Step 2 K = [HCOO ][H 3 O ]
a [HCOOH]
= (x)(x)
(0.025 − x)
= 1.8 × 10 −4
Step 3 [HCOOH] = 0.025
K 1.8 × 10 −4
a
= 139
Since this value is less than 500, the amount that dissociates is
not negligible compared with the initial concentration of the acid.
Step 4 Rearrange the equation into a quadratic equation.
x2 = 1.8 × 10 −4
(0.025 − x)
x2 + (1.8 × 10 −4)x − (4.5 × 10 −6) = 0
√
x = −b ± b2 − 4ac
2a
√
= −(1.8 × 10 −4) ± (1.8 × 10−4)2 − 4 × 1 × (−4.5 × 10−6)
2 × 1
x = 0.0020orx = −0.002
The negative value is not reasonable, since a concentration term
cannot be negative.
∴x = 0.0020mol/L = [H O + ]
3
Step 5 pH = −log0.0020
= 2.70
The pH of a solution of 0.025 mol/L formic acid is 2.70.
Check Your Solution
The pH indicates an acidic solution, as expected. Data that was given
in the problem has two significant digits, and the pH has two digits
following the decimal place. It is easy to make a mistake when solving
a quadratic equation. You can estimate a solution to this problem, by
assuming that (0.025 − x) is approximately equal to 0.025.
x2 = 1.8 × 10 −4
0.025
x2 = 4.5 × 10 −6
x = 2.1 × 10 −3mol/L
This answer is very close to the answer obtained by solving the
quadratic equation. Therefore, the solution is probably correct.
Chapter 8 Acids, Bases, and pH • MHR 399
Practice Problems
19. Calculate the pH of a sample of vinegar that contains 0.83 mol/L
acetic acid. What is the percent dissociation of the vinegar?
20. In low doses, barbiturates act as sedatives. Barbiturates are made
from barbituric acid, a weak monoprotic acid that was first prepared
by the German chemist Adolph von Baeyer in 1864. The formula
of barbituric acid is C H N O . A chemist prepares a 0.10 mol/L
4 4 2 3
solution of barbituric acid. The chemist finds the pH of the solution
to be 2.50. What is the acid dissociation constant for barbituric acid?
What percent of its molecules dissociate?
21. A solution of hydrofluoric acid has a molar concentration of
0.0100 mol/L. What is the pH of this solution?
22. Hypochlorous acid, HOCl, is used as a bleach and a germ-killer.
A chemist finds that 0.027% of hypochlorous acid molecules are
dissociated in a 0.40 mol/L solution of the acid. What is the value
of K for the acid?
a
23. The word “butter” comes from the Greek butyros. Butanoic acid
(common name: butyric acid) gives rancid butter its distinctive odour.
Calculate the pH of a 1.0 × 10 −2mol/L solution of butanoic acid
(K = 1.51 × 10 −5).
a
24. Caproic acid, C H COOH, occurs naturally in coconut and palm oil.
5 11
It is a weak monoprotic acid, with K = 1.3 × 10 −5. A certain aqueous
a
solution of caproic acid has a pH of 2.94. How much acid was
dissolved to make 100 mL of this solution?
Polyprotic Acids
As you know, polyprotic acids have more than one hydrogen atom that
dissociates. Each dissociation has a corresponding acid dissociation
constant. How can you calculate the pH of a solution of a polyprotic acid?
Problems that involve polyprotic acids can be divided into as many
sub-problems as there are hydrogen atoms that dissociate. The ion concen-
trations that are calculated for the first dissociation are substituted as
initial ion concentrations for the second dissociation, and so on. You
can see this in the following Sample Problem.
Sample Problem
Calculations That Involve Polyprotic Acids
Problem
Phosphoric acid, H PO , is one of the world’s most important industrial
3 4
chemicals. It is mainly used to manufacture phosphate fertilizers. It is
also the ingredient that gives cola drinks their tart, biting taste. Calculate
the pH, [H PO
−
], and [HPO
2−
] of a 3.5 mol/L aqueous solution of
2 4 4
phosphoric acid.
What Is Required?
−
You need to find pH and [H PO ].
2 4
400 MHR • Unit 4 Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
What Is Given?
You know that [H PO ] = 3.5mol/L. From data tables, you can find
3 4
K = 7.0 × 10 −3 and K = 6.3 × 10 −8.
a1 a2
Plan Your Strategy
Step 1 Write the equation for the dissociation equilibrium of phosphoric
acid in water. Then set up an ICE table.
Step 2 Write the dissociation equation for K .
a1
Step 3 Determine whether or not the dissociation of H PO is negligible,
3 4
compared with the initial concentration.
Step 4 Solve the equation for x.
−
Step 5 Write the equation for the dissociation equilibrium of H PO
2 4
in water. Set up an ICE table using the concentrations you
calculated for the first dissociation as initial concentrations here.
Step 6 Write the dissociation equation for K .
a2
−
Step 7 Determine whether or not the dissociation of H PO is
2 4
negligible, compared with the initial concentration.
Step 8 Solve the equation for x.
+
Step 9 Calculate [H O ] and pH.
3
−
Step10 Calculate [H PO ].
2 4
Act on Your Strategy
Step 1
Concentration (mol/L) H 3 PO 4(aq) + H 2 O ((cid:2)) H 2 PO 4 − (aq) + H 3 O + (aq)
Initial 3.5 0 ~0
Change −x +x +x
Equilibrium 3.5 − x x x
− +
Step 2 K = [H 2 PO 4 ][H 3 O ]
a1 [H PO ]
3 4
= 7.0 × 10 −3
= (x)(x)
(3.5 − x)
Step 3 [H 3 PO 4 ] = 3.5
K 7.0 × 10 −3
a1
= 500
Therefore, xis probably negligible, compared with 3.5.
Step 4 7.0 × 10 −3 = x2
3.5
x = 0.16mol/L
Step 5
Concentration (mol/L) H 2 PO 4 − (aq) + H 2 O ((cid:2)) (cid:3)(cid:4) HPO 4 2− (aq) + H 3 O + (aq)
Initial 0.16 0 0.16
Change −x +x +x
Equilibrium 0.16 − x x (0.16 + x)
Continued ...
Chapter 8 Acids, Bases, and pH • MHR 401
Step 6 K = [HPO 4
2−
][H 3 O
+
]
a2 [H PO − ]
2 4
= (x)(0.16 + x)
(0.16 − x)
−
Step 7 [H 2 PO 4 ] = 0.16 = 2.5 × 106
K 6.3 × 10 −8
a2
This is much greater than 500, so xis negligible compared
with 0.16.
Step 8 K = 6.3 × 10 −8 = (x)(0.16) = x
a2 (0.16)
x = [HPO 2− ]
4
= 6.3 × 10 −8
Step 9 pH = −log0.16
= 0.80
Step 10 [H PO − ] = 0.16 − x = 0.16 (because xis negligible)
2 4
Check Your Solution
+
[H O ] results from the first dissociation of phosphoric acid, so the
3
second dissociation has a negligible effect on the concentration of
hydronium ions or the pH of the solution. You would expect this,
because the second dissociation is much weaker than the first.
Polyprotic Acids and [H O+]
3
All polyprotic acids, except sulfuric acid, are weak. Their second
dissociation is much weaker than their first dissociation. For this reason,
+
when calculating [H O ] and pH of a polyprotic acid, only the first
3
dissociation needs to be considered. The calculation is then the same as
the calculation for any weak monoprotic acid. In the Sample Problem,
[HPO
2−
] was found to be the same as the second dissociation constant,
4
K . The concentration of the anions formed in the second dissociation
a2
of a polyprotic acid is equal to K .
a2
The only common strong polyprotic acid is sulfuric acid.
Nevertheless, it is strong only for the first dissociation. Like the second
dissociation of other polyprotic acids, the second dissociation of sulfuric
acid is weak.
H 2 SO 4(aq) + H 2 O ((cid:2)) → HSO 4 − (aq) + H 3 O + (aq) 100% dissociation
HSO 4 − (aq) + H 2 O ((cid:2)) (cid:3)(cid:4) SO 4 2− (aq) + H 3 O + (aq) K a = 1.0 × 10 −2
+
[H O ] in a solution of sulfuric acid is equal to the concentration of the
3
acid. Only in dilute solutions (less than 1.0 mol/L) does the second disso-
ciation of sulfuric acid contribute to the hydronium ion concentration.
Practice Problems
25. Carbonated beverages contain a solution of carbonic acid. Carbonic
acid is also important for forming the ions that are present in blood.
CO 2(aq) + H 2 O ((cid:2)) (cid:3)(cid:4) H 2 CO 3(aq)
H 2 CO 3(aq) + H 2 O ((cid:2)) (cid:3)(cid:4) HCO 3 − (aq) + H 3 O + (aq) K a1 = 4.5 × 10 −7
HCO 3 − (aq) + H 2 O ((cid:2)) (cid:3)(cid:4) CO 3 2− (aq) + H 3 O + (aq) K a2 = 4.7 × 10 −11
402 MHR • Unit 4 Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
Calculate the pH of a solution of 5.0 × 10 −4mol/L carbonic acid.
What is [CO
2−
] in the solution?
3
26. Adipic acid is a diprotic acid that is used to manufacture nylon. Its
formula can be abbreviated to H Ad. The acid dissociation constants
2
for adipic acid are K = 3.71 × 10 −5 and K = 3.87 × 10 −6. What is the
a1 a2
pH of a 0.085 mol/L solution of adipic acid?
27. Hydrosulfuric acid, H S , is a weak diprotic acid that is sometimes
2 (aq)
used in analytical work. It is used to precipitate metal sulfides, which
−
tend to be very insoluble. Calculate the pH and [HS ] of a
(aq)
7.5 × 10 −3 mol/L solution.
28. What is the value of K when water acts as a Brønsted-Lowry acid?
a
Write the expression for K if water acts as a diprotic acid.
a2
Section Summary
In this section, you learned about the relationship between the pH scale
and the concentrations of the ions that form when water and weak acids
dissociate. In the next section, you will learn that the equilibrium of weak
bases is similar to the equilibrium of weak acids. As you will see, solu-
tions that contain a mixture of a weak acid and a salt of its conjugate base
have properties with important biochemical and industrial applications.
Section Review
1 K/U Complete the following table by calculating the missing
values and indicating whether each solution is acidic or basic.
[HO+] (mol/L) pH [OH−] (mol/L) pOH Acidic or basic?
3
3.7 × 10 −5 (a) (b) (c) (d)
(e) 10.41 (f) (g) (h)
(i) (j) 7.0 × 10 −2 (k) (l)
(m) (n) (o) 8.9 (p)
2 I Lactic acid, CH 3 CHOHCOOH, is a monoprotic acid that is produced
by muscle activity. It is also produced from milk by the action of
bacteria. What is the pH of a 0.12 mol/L solution of lactic acid?
3 I A 0.10 mol/L solution of a weak acid was found to be 5.0%
dissociated. Calculate K .
a
4 I Oxalic acid, HOOCCOOH, is a weak diprotic acid that occurs
naturally in some foods, including rhubarb. Calculate the pH of a
solution of oxalic acid that is prepared by dissolving 2.5 g in 1.0 L
−
of water. What is the concentration of hydrogen oxalate, HOOCCOO ,
in the solution?
5 I A sample of blood was taken from a patient and sent to a laboratory
for testing. Chemists found that the blood pH was 7.40. They also
found that the hydrogen carbonate ion concentration was 2.6 × 10 −2
mol/L. What was the concentration of carbonic acid in the blood?
Chapter 8 Acids, Bases, and pH • MHR 403
8.3 Bases and Buffers
Many compounds that are present in plants are weak bases. Caffeine
Section Preview/
Specific Expectations in coffee and piperidine in black pepper are two examples. A weak
base, represented by B, reacts with water to form an equilibrium solution
In this section, you will
of ions.
(cid:2) s in o v l o ve lve p r t o h b e l e b m as s e t h d a is t sociation B (aq) + H 2 O ((cid:2)) (cid:3)(cid:4) HB + (aq) + OH − (aq)
constant, K b The equilibrium expression for this general reaction is given as follows:
+ −
(cid:2) describethe properties K = [HB ][OH ]
and components of a buffer c [B][H O]
2
solution The concentration of water is almost constant in dilute solutions.
(cid:2) identifysystems in which Multiplying both sides of the equilibrium expression by [H 2 O] gives the
buffer solutions are found, product of two constants on the left side. The new constant is called the
and explainhow they base dissociation constant, K .
b
function + −
K [H O] = [HB ][OH ] = K
(cid:2) communicateyour c 2 [B] b
understanding of the Table 8.3 lists the base dissociation constants for several weak bases at
following terms: base
25˚C. Nitrogen-containing compounds are Brønsted-Lowry bases, because
dissociation constant (K b ), the lone pair of electrons on a nitrogen atom can bond with H + from
buffer solution, buffer
water. The steps for solving problems that involve weak bases are similar
capacity
to the steps you learned for solving problems that involve weak acids.
Table 8.3 Some Base Dissociation Constants at 25°C
Base Formula Base dissociation constant, K
b
ethylenediamine NH CH CH NH 5.2 × 10−4
2 2 2 2
dimethylamine (CH ) NH 5.1 × 10−4
32
methylamine CH NH 4.4 × 10−4
3 2
trimethylamine (CH ) N 6.5 × 10−5
33
ammonia NH 1.8 × 10−5
3
hydrazine N H 1.7 × 10−6
2 4
pyridine C H N 1.4 × 10−9
5 5
aniline C H NH 4.2 × 10−10
6 5 2
urea NH CONH 1.5 × 10−14
2 2
Sample Problem
Solving Problems Involving K
b
Problem
The characteristic taste of tonic water is due to the addition of quinine.
Quinine is a naturally occurring compound that is also used to treat
malaria. The base dissociation constant, K , for quinine is 3.3 × 10 −6.
b
Calculate [OH − ] and the pH of a 1.7 × 10 −3 mol/L solution of quinine.
What Is Required?
−
You need to find [OH ] and pH.
404 MHR • Unit 4 Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
What Is Given?
K = 3.3 × 10 −6
b
Concentration of quinine =1.7 × 10 −3 mol/L
Plan Your Strategy
Step 1 Let Q represent the formula of quinine. Write the equation
for the equilibrium reaction of quinine in water. Then set up an
ICE table.
Step 2 Write the equation for the base dissociation constant. Substitute
equilibrium terms into the equation.
[Q]
Step 3 Calculate the value of to determine whether or not the
K
b
amount of quinine that dissociates is negligible compared with the
initial concentration.
Step 4 Solve the equation for x. If the amount that dissociates is not neg-
ligible compared with the initial concentration of the base, you
will need to use a quadratic equation.
Step 5 pOH = −log[OH − ]
pH = 14.00 − pOH
Act on Your Strategy
Step 1
Concentration (mol/L) Q (aq) + H 2 O ((cid:2)) (cid:3)(cid:4) HQ + (aq) + OH − (aq)
Initial 1.7 × 10 −3 0 ~0
Change −x +x +x
Equilibrium (1.7 × 10 −3) − x x x
+ −
Step 2 K = [HQ ][OH ]
b [Q]
3.3 × 10 −6 = (x)(x)
(1.7 × 10 −3) − x
Step 3 [Q] = 1.7 × 10 −3
K 3.3 × 10 −6
b
= 515
Since this value is greater than 500, the amount that dissociates is
probably negligible, compared with the initial concentration
of the base.
Step 4 3.3 × 10 −6 = x2
1.7 × 10 −3
x = ±7.5 × 10 −5
The negative root is not reasonable.
∴x = 7.5 × 10 −5mol/L = [OH − ]
Step 5 pOH = −log7.5 × 10 −5
= 4.13
pH = 14.00 − pOH
∴pH = 9.87
Check Your Solution
The pH of the solution is greater than 7, as expected for a basic solution.
Chapter 8 Acids, Bases, and pH • MHR 405
Sample Problem
Calculating K
b
Problem
Pyridine, C H N, is used to manufacture medications and vitamins.
5 5
Calculate the base dissociation constant for pyridine if a 0.125 mol/L
aqueous solution has a pH of 9.10.
What Is Required?
You need to find K .
b
What Is Given?
[C H N] = 0.125mol/L
5 5
pH = 9.10
Plan Your Strategy
Step 1 Write the equation for the equilibrium reaction of pyridine in
water. Then set up an ICE table.
Step 2 Write the equation for the base dissociation constant. Substitute
equilibrium terms into the equation.
Step 3 pOH = 14.0 − pH
Step 4 [OH − ] = 10 −pOH
Step 5 Substitute for xinto the equilibrium equation. Calculate the value
of K .
b
Act on Your Strategy
Step 1
Concentration (mol/L) C 5 H 5 N (aq) + H 2 O ((cid:2)) (cid:3)(cid:4) C 5 H 5 NH + (aq) + OH − (aq)
Initial 0.125 0 ~0
Change −x +x +x
Equilibrium 0.125 − x x x
+ −
Step 2 K = [C 5 H 5 NH ][OH ]
b [C H N]
5 5
= (x)(x)
(0.125 − x)
Step 3 pOH = 14.00 − 9.10 = 4.90
Step 4 [OH − ] = 10 −4.90
= 1.3 × 10 −5mol/L
Step 5 0.125 − (1.3 × 10 −5) = 0.125
K = (1.3 × 10 −5)2
b 0.125
= 1.4 × 10 −9
Check Your Solution
The value of K is reasonable for a weak organic base. The final answer
b
has two significant digits, consistent with the two decimal places in the
given pH.
406 MHR • Unit 4 Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
Practice Problems
29. An aqueous solution of household ammonia has a molar
concentration of 0.105 mol/L. Calculate the pH of the solution.
30. Hydrazine, N H , has been used as a rocket fuel. The concentration
2 4
of an aqueous solution of hydrazine is 5.9 × 10 −2mol/L. Calculate
the pH of the solution.
31. Morphine, C H NO , is a naturally occurring base that is used to
17 19 3
control pain. A 4.5 × 10 −3mol/L solution has a pH of 9.93. Calculate
K for morphine.
b
32. Methylamine, CH NH , is a fishy-smelling gas at room temperature.
3 2
It is used to manufacture several prescription drugs, including
−
methamphetamine. Calculate [OH ] and pOH of a 0.25 mol/L
aqueous solution of methylamine.
33. At room temperature, trimethylamine, (CH ) N, is a gas with a
3 3
−
strong ammonia-like odour. Calculate [OH ] and the percent of
trimethylamine molecules that react with water in a 0.22 mol/L
aqueous solution.
34. An aqueous solution of ammonia has a pH of 10.85. What is the
concentration of the solution?
Acids and Their Conjugate Bases
There is an important relationship between the dissociation constant
for an acid, K , and the dissociation constant for its conjugate base, K .
a b
Consider acetic acid and its dissociation in water.
CH COOH + H O (cid:3)(cid:4) H O + + CH COO −
3 (aq) 2 (aq) 3 (aq) 3 (aq)
K is given by the following expression.
a
− +
K = [CH 3 COO ][H 3 O ]
a [CH COOH]
3
The acetate ion is the conjugate base of acetic acid. A soluble salt of the
conjugate base, such as sodium acetate, forms acetate ions in solution.
The solution acts as a base with water.
CH COO − + H O (cid:3)(cid:4) CH COOH + OH −
3 (aq) 2 (aq) 3 (aq) (aq)
K is given by the expression below.
b
−
K = [CH 3 COOH][OH ]
b [CH COO − ]
3
The product K K gives an interesting result.
a b
+ − −
K K = [H 3 O ][CH 3 COO ] × [CH 3 COOH][OH ]
a b [CH COOH] [CH COO − ]
3 3
= [H O + ][OH − ]
3
= K
w
Thus, for an acid and its conjugate base (or a base and its conjugate acid),
K K = K . One interpretation of the result is the stronger an acid, the
a b w
weaker its conjugate base must be. This makes sense chemically, because
a strong acid gives up a proton from each molecule. Therefore, its conju-
gate base does not bond with the proton. In summary, then, the strength
of an acid and its conjugate base are inversely related. The conjugate of a
strong acid is always a weak base, and, conversely, the conjugate of a
strong base is always a weak acid.
Chapter 8 Acids, Bases, and pH • MHR 407
Sample Problem
Solving Problems Involving K and K
a b
Problem
Sodium acetate, CH COONa, is used for developing photographs. Find
3
the value of K for the acetate ion. Then calculate the pH of a solution
b
that contains 12.5 g of sodium acetate dissolved in 1.00 L of water.
(Only the acetate ion affects the pH of the solution.)
What Is Required?
You need to find K and pH.
b
What Is Given?
K for acetic acid = 1.81 × 10 −5
a
12.5 g of CH COONa is dissolved in 1.00 L of water.
3
Plan Your Strategy
Step 1 Find K using the relationship K K = K
b a b w
−
Step 2 Calculate [CH COO ].
3
Step 3 Write the chemical equation for the acetate ion acting as a base.
Then set up an ICE table.
Step 4 Write the dissociation equation for K , and substitute equilibrium
b
values.
Step 5 Determine whether or not the dissociation of the acetate ions is
negligible compared with its initial concentration.
Step 6 Solve the equation for x.
Step 7 Calculate [H O + ] using K = [H O + ][OH − ].
3 w 3
Step 8 Calculate pH from pH = −log[H O + ]
3
Act on Your Strategy
Step 1 K forCH COO − = K w
b 3 K
a
= 1.0 × 10 −14
1.8 × 10 −5
= 5.6 × 10 −10
Step 2 M(CH COONa) = 82.0g/mol
3
12.5g
Amount =
82.0g/mol
= 0.152mol/L
In aqueous solution,
CH COONa (cid:3)(cid:4) Na + + CH COO −
3 (aq) 3 (aq)
∴[CH COO − ] = 0.152mol/L
3
Step 3
Concentration (mol/L) CH 3 COO − (aq) + H 2 O ((cid:2)) (cid:3)(cid:4) CH 3 COOH (aq) + OH − (aq)
Initial 0.152 0 ~0
Change −x +x +x
Equilibrium 0.152 − x x x
408 MHR • Unit 4 Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
−
Step 4 K = [CH 3 COOH][OH ]
b [CH COO − ]
3
= (x)(x)
0.152 − x
−
Step 5 [CH 3 COO ] = 0.152 > 500
K 5.6 × 10 −10
b
Therefore, xis negligible compared with the initial concentration.
Step 6 5.6 × 10 −10 =
x2
0.152
Solving the equation (since only the positive root is reasonable),
x = 9.2 × 10 −6 = [OH − ]
Step 7 [H O + ] = K w
3 [OH − ]
= 1.0 × 10 −14
9.2 × 10 −6
= 1.1 × 10 −9mol/L
Step 8 pH = −log[H O + ]
3
= −log1.1 × 10 −9
= 8.96
Check Your Solution
The solution is weakly basic. The acetate ion is a very weak base, so the
answer is reasonable.
Practice Problems
35. Use the table of K values in Appendix E to list the conjugate bases of
a
the following acids in order of increasing base strength: formic acid,
HCOOH; hydrofluoric acid, HF ; benzoic acid, C H COOH;
(aq) 6 5
phenol, C H OH.
6 5
36. K for ammonia, NH , is 1.8 × 10 −5. K for trimethylamine, (CH ) N, is
b 3 b 3 3
6.5 × 10 −5. Which is the stronger acid, NH + or (CH ) NH + ?
4 3 3
37. Sodium benzoate is used as a food preservative. Calculate the pH of
a 1.0 mol/L aqueous solution of sodium benzoate. (Only the benzoate
ion affects the pH of the solution.)
−
38. The hydrogen sulfite ion, HSO , is amphoteric. Write chemical
3
equations to show how it acts first as an acid and then as a base.
Buffer Solutions
A solution that contains a weak acid/conjugate base mixture or a weak
base/conjugate acid mixture is called a buffer solution. A buffer solution
resists changes in pH when a moderate amount of an acid or a base is
added to it. (See Figure 8.9.) For example, adding 10 mL of 1.0 mol/L
hydrochloric acid to 1 L of water changes the pH from 7 to about 3, a
difference of 4 units. Adding the same amount of acid to 1 L of buffered
solution might change the pH by only 0.1 unit.
Chapter 8 Acids, Bases, and pH • MHR 409
Figure 8.9 Adding a moderate amount of an acid or a base to a buffer solution causes little
change in pH.
Buffer solutions can be made in two different ways:
1. by using a weak acid and one of its salts: for example, by mixing
acetic acid and sodium acetate
2. by using a weak base and one of its salts: for example, by mixing
ammonia and ammonium chloride
How does a buffer solution resist changes in pH when an acid or a base
is added? Consider a buffer solution that is made using acetic acid and
sodium acetate. Acetic acid is weak, so most of its molecules are not
dissociated and [CH COOH] is high. Sodium acetate is soluble and a
3
−
good electrolyte, so [CH COO ] is also high. Adding an acid or a base has
3
+ −
little effect because the added H O or OH ions are removed by one of
3
the components in the buffer solution. The equilibrium of the reactions
between the ions in solution shifts, as predicted by Le Châtelier’s
principle and described below.
• Adding an acid to a buffer: Acetate ions react with the hydronium
ions added to the solution.
CH 3 COO − (aq) + H 3 O + (aq) (cid:3)(cid:4) CH 3 COOH (aq) + H 2 O ((cid:2))
The position of equilibrium shifts to the right. Here hydronium ions
are removed, by acetate ions, from the sodium acetate component.
• Adding a base to a buffer: Hydroxide ions react with the hydronium
ions that are formed by the dissociation of acetic acid.
H 3 O + (aq) + OH − (aq) (cid:3)(cid:4) 2H 2 O ((cid:2))
The position of this water equilibrium shifts to the right, replacing
hydronium ions.
Buffer solutions have two important characteristics. One of these
characteristics is the pH of the solution. The other is its buffer capacity:
the amount of acid or base that can be added before considerable change
occurs to the pH. The buffer capacity depends on the concentration of
the acid/conjugate base (or the base/conjugate acid) in the buffer solution.
When the ratio of the concentration of the buffer components is close to 1,
the buffer capacity has reached its maximum. As well, a buffer that is
more concentrated resists changes to pH more than than a buffer that is
more dilute. This idea is illustrated in Figure 8.10, with buffer solutions
of acetic acid and acetate of different concentrations.
410 MHR • Unit 4 Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
Hp
Buffer
capacity
Buffer exceeded
capacity Buffer resists
exceeded changes in pH
addition of acid addition of base
1.0
0.30
0.10
0.030
4.8 4.9 5.0 5.1
pH
)L/lom(
noitartnecnoC
stnenopmoc
reffub
fo
(initial
pH = 4.74)
Figure 8.10 These four buffer
solutions have the same initial
pH but different concentrations
(shown by the numbers beside or
on the bars). The pH increases with
the addition of a certain amount of
strong base. The more concentrated
the buffer solution is (that is, the
higher its buffer capacity), the
smaller the change in pH is.
Buffers in the Blood
Buffers are extremely important in biological systems. The pH of arterial
Web LINK
blood is about 7.4. The pH of the blood in your veins is just slightly
www.mcgrawhill.ca/links/
less. If the pH of blood drops to 7.0, or rises above 7.5, life-threatening
chemistry12
problems develop. To maintain its pH within a narrow range, blood
Some aspirin products are
contains a number of buffer systems. The most important buffer system
sold in buffered form. Infer the
in the blood depends on an equilibrium between hydrogen carbonate ions
reasoning behind this practice.
and carbonate ions. Dissolved carbon dioxide reacts with water to form
Is there clinical evidence to
hydrogen carbonate ions.
support it? To find out, go to
CO 2(aq) + 2H 2 O ((cid:2)) (cid:3)(cid:4) HCO − 3(aq) + H 3 O + (aq) the web site above and click
The HCO
−
dissociates in water to form CO
2−
.
on Web Links. Conduct further
3 3 research to investigate
HCO 3 − (aq) + H 2 O ((cid:2)) (cid:3)(cid:4) CO 3 2− (aq) + H 3 O + (aq) whether there is more recent
If metabolic changes add H O + ions to the blood, the excess H O + ions are evidence either in support of
3 3
− or disproving the effectiveness
removed by combining with HCO ions.
3
of buffering aspirin.
H 3 O + (aq) + HCO 3 − (aq) (cid:3)(cid:4) CO 2(aq) + 2H 2 O ((cid:2))
−
If excess OH ions enter the blood, they are removed by reacting with the
−
hydrogen carbonate, HCO , ions.
3
OH − (aq) + HCO 3 − (aq) (cid:3)(cid:4) CO 3 2− (aq) + H 2 O ((cid:2))
Section Summary
In this section, you compared strong and weak acids and bases using
your understanding of chemical equilibrium, and you solved problems
involving their concentrations and pH. Then you considered the effect on
pH of buffer solutions: solutions that contain a mixture of acid ions and
base ions. In the next section, you will compare pH changes that occur
when solutions of acids and bases with different strengths react together.
Section Review
1 I Phenol, C 6 H 5 OH, is an aromatic alcohol with weak basic properties.
It is used as a disinfectant and cleanser. Calculate the molar concen-
− −
tration of OH ions in a 0.75 mol/L solution of phenolate, C H O , ions
6 5
(K = 7.7 × 10 −5). What is the pH of the solution?
b
2 I Potassium sorbate is a common additive in foods. It is used to
inhibit the formation of mould. A solution contains 1.82 g of sorbate,
C H O − , ions (K = 1.7 × 10 −5) dissolved in 250 mL of water. What is
6 7 2 a
the pH of the solution?
3 I Write the chemical formula for the conjugate base of hypobromous
acid, HOBr. Calculate K for this ion.
b
4 K/U Describe how a buffer solution differs from an aqueous acidic or
basic solution.
5 MC Explain the function and importance of buffers in blood.
6 C Explain why an aqueous mixture of NaCl and HCl does not act as a
buffer, but an aqueous mixture of NH and NH Cl does.
3 4
Chapter 8 Acids, Bases, and pH • MHR 411
Acid-Base Titration Curves
In Investigation 8-A, you performed a titration and graphed the changes
in the pH of acetic acid solution as sodium hydroxide solution was added.
A graph of the pH of an acid (or base) against the volume of an added base
(or acid) is called an acid-base titration curve.
Titrations are common analytical procedures that chemists perform,
with the usual goal of determining the concentration of one of the
reactants. The equivalence point is the point in a titration when the acid
and base that are present completely react with each other. If chemists
know the volumes of both solutions at the equivalence point, and the con-
centration of one of them, they can calculate the unknown concentration.
As you can see in Figure 8.11, the equivalence point is the middle of
the steep rise that occurs in a titration curve. The endpoint of a titration
occurs when the indicator changes colour, which happens over a range
of about 2 pH units. The pH changes rapidly near the equivalence point.
Therefore, the change in colour usually takes place in a fraction of a
millilitre, with the addition of a single drop of solution. Chemists have
access to a variety of indicators that change colour at different pH values.
The colour changes and ranges for three common indicators are given
in Table 8.4.
Table 8.4 Data on the Endpoints of Three Common Acid-Base Indicators
Indicator Colour change at endpoint Approximate range
bromocresol green yellow to blue 3.8–5.2
methyl red red to yellow 4.3–6.2
phenolphthalein colourless to pink 8.2–10.0
When an indicator is used in a titration, the range of pH values at which
its endpoint occurs must include, or be close to, the equivalence point.
Some representative acid-base titration curves, shown in Figures 8.11,
8.12, and 8.13, will illustrate this point.
Titration Curve for a
Strong Acid With a Strong Base
These titrations have a pH of 7 at equivlence.
Indicators such as phenolphthalein, methyl red,
and bromocresol green can be used, because
their endpoints are close to the equivalence
point. Many chemists prefer phenolphthalein
because the change from colourless to pink is
easy to see.
Volume of strong base added (mL)
Hp
8.4
Section Preview/
Specific Expectations
In this section, you will
(cid:2) interpretacid-base titration
curves and the pH at the
equivalence point
(cid:2) communicateyour under-
standing of the following
terms: acid-base titration
curve, equivalence point
14
12
10 phenolphthalein
8
pH = 7.00 at
equivalence point 6
4
methyl red
2
Figure 8.11 The curve for a
strong acid-strong base titration
0
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80
412 MHR • Unit 4 Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
Titration Curve for a Weak Acid With a Strong Base
These titrations have pH values that are greater than 7 at equivalence. In the
titration shown in Figure 8.12, the equivalence point occurs at a pH of 8.80.
Therefore, phenolphthalein is a good indicator for this titration. Methyl red
is not, because its endpoint is too far from the equivalence point.
Titration Curve for a Weak Base With a Strong Acid
These titrations have pH values that are less than 7 at the equivalence
point. The equivalence point in the titration shown in Figure 8.13,
involving ammonia and hydrochloric acid, occurs at a pH of 5.27. Either
methyl red or bromocresol green could be used as an indicator, but not
phenolphthalein.
0
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80
Section Summary
In this section, you examined acid-base titration curves for combinations
of strong and weak acids and bases. You may have noticed the absence
of a curve for the reaction of a weak acid with a weak base. A weak
acid-weak base titration curve is difficult to describe quantitatively,
because it has competing equilibria. You may learn about this curve in
future chemistry courses.
Chapter 8 Acids, Bases, and pH • MHR 413
Hp
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80
14
12
10
buffer
region phenolphthalein
8
6
methyl red
4
pH = 5.27 at
equivalence
point
2
Volume of HCl(aq) added (mL)
Hp
phenolphthalein
buffer
region
pH = 8.80 at
equivalence point
Figure 8.12 The curve for a weak
methyl red
acid-strong base titration: The weak
acid here is propanoic acid,
CHCHCOOH.
3 2
Volume of strong base added (mL)
Figure 8.13 The curve for a
weak base-strong acid titration
In the next chapter, you will extend your knowledge of equilibria
involving aqueous ions. You will learn how to calculate the pH at an
equivalence point, so you can select an appropriate indicator for any
acid-base titration. You will also learn why equilibrium is important to
the solubility of compounds that are slightly soluble, and how to predict
whether a precipitate will form as the result of a reaction between ions
in solution.
Section Review
1 K/U In this section, you examined acid-base titration curves.
(a) Distinguish between the equivalence point and the endpoint for
a titration.
(b) When choosing an indicator, do the pH values of the two points
need to coincide exactly? Explain.
2 K/U In a titration, a basic solution is added to an acidic solution, and
measurements of pH are taken. Compare a strong acid-strong base
titration and a strong acid-weak base titration in terms of
(a) the initial pH
(b) the quantity of base that is needed to reach the equivalence point
(c) the pH at the equivalence point
Assume that the concentrations of the two solutions are identical.
3 C Sketch the pH curve for the titration of a weak acid with a strong
base. Show the equivalence point on your sketch. Suggest an indicator
that might be used, and explain your selection.
4 C Suggest an indicator that could be used for the titration of potassi-
um hydroxide with nitrous acid. Explain your suggestion.
5 I Estimate the pH of a solution in which bromocresol green is blue,
and methyl red is orange.
414 MHR • Unit 4 Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
Review
Reflecting on Chapter 8 (b) the conjugate acid of ammonia, NH
3
−
(c) the conjugate acid of HCO
Summarize this chapter in the format of your 3
−
(d) the conjugate base of HCO
choice. Here are a few ideas to use as guidelines: 3
• Relate the microscopic properties of acids and 4. Decide whether each statement is true or false,
bases to their macroscopic properties. and explain your reasoning.
• Identify conjugate acid-base pairs for selected (a) HBr is a stronger acid than HI.
acid-base reactions, and compare their strengths. (b) HBrO 2 is a stronger acid than HBrO.
• State the relationship among K a , K b , and K w . (c) H 2 SO 3 is a stronger acid than HSO 3 − .
• Outline the relationship among [H 3 O + ], pH, 5. Arrange the following aqueous solutions in
−
[OH ], and pOH. order of pH, from lowest to highest:
• Describe two examples of buffer solutions in 2.0 mol/L HClO , 2.0 mol/L NaCl, 0.20 mol/L
4
your daily life, and explain how they function. CH COOH, 0.02 mol/L HCl.
3
6. In each pair of bases, which is the stronger
Reviewing Key Terms
base?
For each of the following terms, write a sentence
(a) HSO
−
or SO
2−
4 (aq) 4 (aq)
that shows your understanding of its meaning.
(b)
S2−
or HS
−
(aq) (aq)
+
hydronium ion (H
3
O
(aq)
) conjugate acid-base
(c) HPO
2−
or H PO
−
4 (aq) 2 4 (aq)
pair
(d) HCO
−
or CO
2−
3 (aq) 3 (aq)
monoprotic acids polyprotic acids
7.(a) Use Appendix E to find the values of K for
a
ion product constant pH −
hydrosulfuric acid, HS , and sulfurous
(aq)
for water (K w ) acid, HSO − .
3 (aq)
acid dissociation pOH
(b) Write equations for the base dissociation
constant (K a ) constants of HS − and HSO − .
(aq) 3 (aq)
percent dissociation base dissociation
(c) Calculate the value of K for each ion.
b
constant (K b ) (d) Which is the stronger base, HS − or
(aq)
buffer solution buffer capacity −
HSO ? Explain.
3 (aq)
acid-base titration curve equivalence point
8. While the pH of blood must be maintained
Knowledge/Understanding within strict limits, the pH of urine can vary.
The sulfur in foods, such as eggs, is oxidized in
1. Give two examples of each of the following
the body and excreted in the urine. Does the
acids and bases.
presence of sulfide ions in urine tend to
(a) Arrhenius acids
increase or decrease the pH? Explain.
(b) Brønsted-Lowry bases
(c) Brønsted-Lowry bases that are not 9. Sodium methanoate, NaHCOO, and methanoic
Arrhenius bases acid, HCOOH, can be used to make a buffer
solution. Explain how this combination resists
2. Classify each compound as a strong acid, strong
changes in pH when small amounts of acid or
base, weak acid, or weak base.
base are added.
(a) phosphoric acid, H PO (used in cola
3 4
beverages and rust-proofing products) 10. Oxoacids contain an atom that is bonded to
(b) chromic acid, H CrO (used in the one or more oxygen atoms. One or more of
2 4
production of wood preservatives) these oxygen atoms may also be bonded to
(c) barium hydroxide, Ba(OH) , a white, toxic hydrogen. Consider the following oxoacids:
2
base (can be used to de-acidify paper) HBrO 3(aq) , HClO 3(aq) , HClO 4(aq) , and H 2 SO 3(aq) .
(d) CH NH , commonly called methylamine (a) What factors are used to predict the
3 2
(is responsible for the characteristic smell strengths of oxoacids?
of fish that are no longer fresh) (b) Arrange the oxoacids above in the order of
increasing acid strength.
3. Write a chemical formula for each acid or base.
−
(a) the conjugate base of OH
Chapter 8 Acids, Bases, and pH • MHR 415
Inquiry solution, what is the acid dissociation constant
for salicylic acid?
11. What is the pH of a mixture of equal
volumes of 0.040 mol/L hydrochloric acid COOH
and 0.020 mol/L sodium hydroxide? OH
12. Suppose that 15.0 mL of sulfuric acid just
neutralized 18.0 mL of 0.500 mol/L sodium
hydroxide solution. What is the concentration
of the sulfuric acid? Communication
13. A student dissolved 5.0 g of vitamin C in 19. List the oxoacids of bromine (HOBr, HBrO 2 ,
250 mL of water. The molar mass of ascorbic HBrO , and HBrO ) in order of increasing
3 4
acid is 176 g/mol, and its K is 8.0 × 10 −5. strength. What is the order of increasing
a
Calculate the pH of the solution. Note: strength for the conjugate bases of these acids?
Abbreviate the formula of ascorbic acid 20. Consider the following acid-base reactions.
to H Asc . HBrO 2(aq) +CH 3 COO − (aq)
14. Benzoic acid is a weak, monoprotic acid (cid:3)(cid:4) CH 3 COOH (aq) + BrO − 2(aq)
(K a = 6.3 × 10 −5). Its structure is shown below. H 2 S (aq) + OH − (aq) (cid:3)(cid:4) HS − (aq) + H 2 O ((cid:2))
Calculate the pH and the percent dissociation HS − +CH COOH
(aq) 3 (aq)
of each of the following solutions of benzoic (cid:3)(cid:4) H S + CH COO −
2 (aq) 3 (aq)
acid. Then use Le Châtelier’s principle to If each equilibrium lies to the right, arrange the
explain the trend in percent dissociation of the following compounds in order of increasing
acid as the solution becomes more dilute. acid strength: HBrO , CH COOH, H S, H O.
2 3 2 2
(a) 1.0 mol/L (b) 0.10 mol/L (c) 0.01 mol/L
21. Discuss the factors that can be used to predict
COOH the relative strength of different oxoacids.
22. The formula of methyl red indicator can be
abbreviated to HMr. Like most indicators,
methyl red is a weak acid.
15. Hypochlorous acid, HOCl, is a weak acid that HMr (aq) + H 2 O ((cid:2)) H3O + (aq) + Mr − (aq)
is found in household bleach. It is made by The change between colours (when the
dissolving chlorine gas in water. indicator colour is orange) occurs at a pH
Cl 2(g) + 2H 2 O ((cid:2)) (cid:3)(cid:4) H 3 O + (aq) + Cl − (aq) + HOCl (aq) of 5.4. What is the equilibrium constant for
(a) Calculate the pH and the percent the reaction?
dissociation of a 0.065 mol/L solution 23. Gallic acid is the common name for
of hypochlorous acid. 3,4,5-trihydroxybenzoic acid.
(b) What is the conjugate base of hypochlorous (a) Draw the structure of gallic acid.
acid? What is its value for K ? (b) K for gallic acid is 3.9 × 10 −5. Calculate K
b a b
16. Calculate the pH of a 1.0 mol/L aqueous for the conjugate base of gallic acid. Then
solution of sodium benzoate. Note: Only the write the formula of the ion.
benzoate ion affects the pH of the solution. 24.(a) Sketch the pH curves you would expect if
17. Calculate the pH of a 0.10 mol/L aqueous solu- you titrated
tion of sodium nitrite, NaNO . Note: Only the • a strong acid with a strong base
2
nitrite ion affects the pH of the solution. • a strong acid with a weak base
• a weak acid with a strong base
18. A student prepared a saturated solution of
salicylic acid and measured the pH of the (b) Congo red changes colour over a pH range of
solution. The student then carefully evaporated 3.0 to 5.0. For which of the above titrations
100 mL of the solution and collected the solid. would Congo red be a good indicator to use?
If the pH of the solution was 2.43, and 0.22 g
was collected after evaporating 100 mL of the
416 MHR • Unit 4 Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
Making Connections (b)O2−/OH−and H
2
O/OH− 4.(a)H
2
S/HS− and NH
3
/NH
4
+
25. Citric acid can be added to candy to give a
(b)H
2
SO
4
/HSO
4
−and H
2
O/H
3
O+ 5.(a)4.5 mol/L (b)1.35 mol/L
(c)0.02 mol/L (d)0.0375 mol/L 6.(a)3.1 mol/L
sour taste. The structure of citric acid is
(b)0.87 mol/L (c)0.701 mol/L (d)0.697 mol/L 7.(a)acidic
shown below.
solution; [H
3
O+]=0.479mol/L(b)acidic solution;
O O H [H 3 O+]=1.98mol/L 8. acidic solution; [H 3 O+]=0.46mol/L
O H C H O 9.(a)[H
3
O+]=0.45mol/L; [OH−]=2.2×10−14mol/L
H O C C C C C O H
(b)[OH−]=1.1mol/L; [H
3
O+]=9.1×10−15mol/L
10.(a)[H
3
O+]=0.95mol/L; [OH−]=1.1×10−14mol/L
H O H (b)[OH−]=0.024mol/L; [H
3
O+]=4.2×10−13mol/L
H
11.[HCl]=0.18mol/L 12.[Ca(OH)
2
]=0.29mol/L 13.acidic;
pH=6.400; [OH−]=2.51×10−8mol/L 14.pOH=2.1;
(a) Identify the acidic hydrogen atoms that are [OH−]=8×10−3mol/L 15.acidic;
removed by water in aqueous solution. Why [H O+]=1.9×10−5mol/L; [OH−]=5.2×10−10; pOH=9.28
3
do water molecules pull these hydrogen 16.[H
3
O+]=[OH−]=1.6×10−7; neutral
atoms away, rather than other hydrogen 17.basic; pH=8.19; [H 3 O+]=6.5×10−9mol/L;
atoms in citric acid? [OH−]=1.5×10−6mol/L 18.[H 3 O+]=1.9×10−3mol/L;
(b) Why does citric acid not form OH
−
ions in
[OH−]=5.4×10−12mol/L 19.pH=2.41; 0.46% dissociation
aqueous solution, and act as a base?
20.K
a
=1.0×10−4; percentdissociation=3.2%
(c) When citric acid and sodium hydrogen car-
21.pH=2.65 22.K
a
=2.9×10−8 23.pH=3.411 24.1.2 g
bonate are used in bubble gum, the bubble
25.pH=4.82; [CO
3
2−]=4.7×10−11mol/L 26.pH=2.74
27.pH=4.59; [HS−]=2.6×10−5mol/L 28.K
a
=1.0×10−14;
gum foams when chewed. Suggest a reason
why this happens. K a2 = [O2 [ − O ][ H H − 3 ] O+] 29.pH=11.14 30.pH=10.50
26.(a) Imagine that you have collected a sample 3 3 1 3 . . K [O b H = − 1 ] . = 6 3 × .8 10 × −6 10 3 − 2 3 . m [O o H l/ − L ] ; = p 1 e . r 0 ce × nt 10 d − i 2 ss m oc o i l a / t L i ; o n pO = H 1. = 7% 1.98
of rainwater in your community. The pH of 34.[NH
3
]=2.8×10−2mol/L
your sample is 4.52. Unpolluted rainwater 35.C
6
H
5
O−>C
6
H
5
COO−>HCOO−>F− 36.NH
4
+
has a pH of about 5.6. How many more 37.pH=9.10 38.as an acid:
hydronium ions are present in your sample, HSO 3 − (aq) +H 2 O ((cid:2)) (cid:3)(cid:4) H 3 O+ (aq) +SO 3 2− (aq) ; as a base:
compared with normal rainwater? Calculate HSO 3 − (aq) +H 2 O ((cid:2)) (cid:3)(cid:4) OH− (aq) +H 2 SO 3(aq)
the ratio of the concentration of hydronium Section Review: 8.1:
ions in your sample to the concentration of 1.(a)H 3 PO 4(aq) +H 2 O (aq) (cid:3)(cid:4) H 2 PO 4 − (aq) +H 3 O+ (aq) ;
hydronium ions in unpolluted rainwater. H 2 PO 4 − (aq) +H 2 O (aq) (cid:3)(cid:4) HPO 4 2− (aq) +H 3 O+ (aq) ;
HPO 2− +H O (cid:3)(cid:4) PO 3− +H O+
(b) You have been invited to a community 4 (aq) 2 (aq) 4 (aq) 3 (aq)
meeting to explain your findings to local
(b)as an acid: H
2
PO
4
−
(aq)
+H
2
O
(aq)
(cid:3)(cid:4) HPO
4
2−
(aq)
+H
3
O+
(aq)
;
as a base: H PO − +H O+ (cid:3)(cid:4) H PO +H O
residents. No one at the meeting has a 2 4 (aq) 3 (aq) 3 4(aq) 2 (aq)
background in chemistry. In a paragraph,
(c)H
3
PO
4(aq)
is much stronger (although it is still a weak
acid) than H
2
PO
4
−
(aq)
. 2.C
6
H
4
NH
2
COO− 3.(a)B(OH)
3
/B(OH)
4
−
write what you would say at this meeting. and H
2
O/H
3
O+ (b)weak 4.(a)weak acid
(c) Suggest at least two possible factors that
(b)strong acid (c)strong base (d)weak base
could be responsible for the pH you meas- 8.2: 1.(a)4.43 (b)2.70×10−10 (c)9.57 (d)acidic (e)3.9×10−11
ured. What observations would you want (f)2.6×10−4(g)3.59 (h)basic (i)1.4×10−13(j)12.85 (k)1.15
to make, and what data would you want to (l)basic (m)8×10−6 (n)5.1 (o)1×10−9 (p)acidic 2.pH=2.39
collect, to help you gain confidence that one 3. K a =2.5×10−4 4. pH=1.70;
of these factors is responsible?
[HOOCCOO−]=5.4×10−5mol/L
5.[H
2
CO
3
]=2.3×10−3mol/L
Answers to Practice Problems and Short Answers to 8.3: 1.[OH−]=7.6×10−3mol/L; pH=11.88 2.pH=8.80
S
Pr
e
a
c
c
t
t
i
i
o
ce
n
P
R
r
e
ob
v
l
i
e
e
m
w
s :
Q
1
u
.(
e
a)
st
c
i
h
o
l
n
o
s
ri de ion, Cl− (b)carbonate ion,
3.OBr−; K
b
=3.6×10−6 8.4: 4.phenolphthalein 5.pH∼5.0
CO
3
2− (c)hydrogen sulfate ion, HSO
4
− (d)hydrazine, N
2
H
4
2.(a)nitric acid, HNO
3
(b)water, H
2
O (c)hydronium ion,
H
3
O+ (d)carbonic acid, H
2
CO
3
3.(a)HS−/H
2
S and H
2
O/OH−
Chapter 8 Acids, Bases, and pH • MHR 417
Aqueous Solutions and
Solubility Equilibria
T
Chapter Preview he kidneys are sometimes called the master chemists of the body. They
work to maintain the constant composition of the blood by helping to bal-
9.1 The Acid-Base
ance water and the various ions that are present in the blood. A very
Properties of Salt
important equilibrium in the blood, which the kidneys help to control,
Solutions
involves calcium ions and phosphate ions.
9.2 Solubility Equilibria
3Ca2+ + 2PO 3− (cid:2)(cid:3) Ca (PO )
(aq) 4 (aq) 3 4 2(s)
9.3 Predicting the
Formation of a This equilibrium sometimes causes problems, however. For example,
Precipitate calcium phosphate helps to give bones their rigidity. If the kidneys remove
too many phosphate ions from the blood due to disease, the position of
equilibrium shifts to the left, as predicted by Le Châtelier’s principle. More
calcium phosphate dissolves in the blood, reducing bone density. The loss
of too much calcium phosphate can lead to osteoporosis.
If the kidneys remove too many calcium ions from the blood, the
equilibrium position in the kidneys shifts to the right. Solid calcium
phosphate can form in the kidneys, producing kidney stones. Kidney
stones, which are painful, can also form as the result of calcium oxalate
precipitating in the kidneys. Precipitates of other compounds can affect
Prerequisite different areas of the body: gallstones in the gall bladder and gout in
Concepts and Skills
the joints are two examples.
Before you begin this chapter, In this chapter, you will continue your study of acid-base reactions.
review the following concepts You will find out how ions in aqueous solution can act as acids or bases.
and skills: Then, by applying equilibrium concepts to ions in solution, you will be
(cid:2) solving equilibrium able to predict the solubility of ionic compounds in water and the forma-
problems (Chapter 7, tion of a precipitate.
section 7.3)
(cid:2) identifying conjugate acid-
base pairs and comparing
This kidney stone formed when potassium oxalate
their strengths (Chapter 8,
precipitated out of solution in a kidney. How can you
section 8.1)
predict whether a precipitate, such as potassium
(cid:2) interpreting acid-base oxalate, will form in an aqueous solution?
titration curves (Chapter 8,
section 8.4)
418 MHR • Unit 4 Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
The Acid-Base Properties of 9.1
Salt Solutions
At the end of Chapter 8, you learned that when just enough acid and Section Preview/
base have been mixed for a complete reaction, the solution can be acidic, Specific Expectations
neutral, or basic. The reaction between an acid and a base forms an In this section, you will
aqueous solution of a salt. The properties of the dissolved salt determine
(cid:2) predictqualitatively whether
the pH of a titration solution at equivalence. Figure 9.1 shows the acidic, a solution of a specific
basic, or neutral properties of three salt solutions. salt will be acidic, basic,
In this section, you will learn how to predict the pH of an aqueous or neutral
solution of a salt. Predicting the pH is useful when you are performing a (cid:2) solveproblems that involve
titration experiment, because you need to choose an indicator that acid-base titration data and
changes colour at a pH value that is close to the pH at equivalence. the pH at the equivalence
point
Acidic and Basic Properties of Salts (cid:2) communicateyour under-
standing of the following
The acidic or basic property of an aqueous solution of a salt results from
terms: equivalence point,
reactions between water and the dissociated ions of the salt. Some ions do end-point
not react with water. They are neutral in solution. Ions that do react with
+ −
water produce a solution with an excess of H O or OH . The extent
3 (aq) (aq)
of the reaction determines the pH of the solution. As you will see, the
reaction between an ion and water is really just another acid-base reaction.
Is there a way to classify salts so that you can predict whether their
solutions in water will be basic, acidic, or neutral? In the following
ExpressLab, you will determine the pH values of solutions of various
salts. Then you will analyze your results to decide if there is a pattern.
002(09)1496
[CATCH PHOTO P 9.1 : TWO SET-UP SHOTS, (A) AND
(B) . (A) FIRST SHOT SHOWS THREE SOLUTIONS IN
250 mL BEAKERS. THE SOLUTIONS ARE:
NH4NO3(acidic), NaNO3 (neutral), NaOCl (basic).
THE BEAKERS ARE CLEARLY LABELLED
NH4NO3(aq), NaNO3(aq), NaOCl(aq). BESIDE THE
BEAKER IS A DROPPER BOTTLE CLEARLY LABELLED
“UNIVERSAL INDICATOR”.
A B
Figure 9.1 Photograph (A) shows three aqueous salt solutions. Photograph (B) shows the
solutions after a some universal indicator solution has been added to each one. The orange
colour indicates an acidic solution, the yellow colour indicates a neutral solution, and the
purple colour indicates a basic solution.
Chapter 9 Aqueous Solutions and Solubility Equilibria • MHR 419
ExpressLab Testing the pH of Salt Solutions
In this ExpressLab, you will measure the pH
Salt pH of aqueous solution
values of solutions of different salts with the same
NH Cl
concentration in mol/L. The pH of a solution gives 4
the relative [H O+], compared with the [OH−]. From NaCl
3
this information, you can infer which ion in the salt NaCH COO
3
reacted with water to the greatest extent. K CO
2 3
unknown
Safety Precaution
3. Pour a small volume of one of the solutions into
the well of a spot plate. Test the solution using
• Some of the salts are irritants. Wear gloves and
universal pH paper. By comparing the colour of
goggles at all times.
the paper, estimate the pH of the solution.
Record your results in you table.
Materials
4. Repeat step 3 for each of the solutions.
dropper bottles containing 0.1 mol/L solutions of
each of the following salts: ammonium chloride,
Analysis
NH Cl ; sodium chloride, NaCl ; sodium
4 (aq) (aq)
acetate, NaCH COO ; potassium carbonate, 1. An ion that does not react with water has no
3 (aq)
K CO effect on the pH of water. If both the cation and
2 3(aq)
unknown salt the anion in a salt do not react with water, a
universal pH paper solution of the salt will be neutral. Which salt
spot plate
consists of cations and anions that do not react
with water? How did you classify this salt in
Procedure
terms of the strength of the acid and base used
1. Copy the following table into your notebook and to form it?
title it. Before you test each salt, write the formula
2. If a salt consists of one ion that does not react
of the salt in the appropriate box. (You will not be
with water, and another ion that does, the pH of
testing any salt that results from the reaction of a
a solution of the salt will be affected by the ion
weak base and a weak acid.)
that reacts with water.
(a) Which salt(s) formed acidic solutions?
Strong acid Weak acid
Which ion accounts for the acidic nature of
Strong base
the solution?
Weak base
(b) Which salt(s) formed basic solutions?
2. Copy the following table into your notebook, Which ion accounts for the basic nature of
to record your observations. Give your table the solution?
a title. 3. Classify your unknown salt in terms of the
strength of the base and the acid from which
the salt was formed.
Salts That Dissolve and Form Neutral Solutions
In the following equation, HA represents a strong acid, which
(aq)
dissociates completely in water.
HA (aq) + H 2 O ((cid:4)) → H 3 O + (aq) + A − (aq)
Interpreting the equation from right to left, the conjugate base of the
−
acid, A , has no tendency to combine with hydronium ions in water.
Therefore, it is a weak base. In fact, the anion that is formed by a strong
acid is a much weaker base than water, so it does not react with water.
Consequently, when a salt that contains the anion of a strong acid is
dissolved in water, the anion has no effect on the pH of the solution.
420 MHR • Unit 4 Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
−
For example, the conjugate base of hydrochloric acid, HCl, is Cl . The
chloride ion is a very weak base, so it does not react significantly with
water. Therefore, the chloride ion, and the conjugate bases of other strong
acids, do not affect the pH of an aqueous solution.
Similarly, the cations that form strong bases (the alkali metals and
the metals below beryllium in Group 2 (IIA)) do not tend to react with
hydroxide ions. These cations are weaker acids than water. Therefore,
+
when a salt contains one of these ions (for example, Na ) the cation has
no effect on the pH of an aqueous solution.
If a salt contains the cation of a strong base and the anion of a strong
acid, neither ion reacts with water. Therefore, the solution has a pH
of 7. Sodium chloride is an example of such a salt. It is formed by the
reaction of sodium hydroxide (a strong base) and hydrochloric acid
(a strong acid). Salts of strong bases and strong acids dissolve in water
and form neutral solutions.
Salts That Dissolve and Form Acidic Solutions
A weak base, such as aqueous ammonia, dissociates very little. Therefore,
the equilibrium lies to the left.
NH 3(aq) + H 2 O ((cid:4)) (cid:2)(cid:3) NH 4 + (aq) + OH −
Interpreting this equation from right to left, the ammonium ion,
(which is the conjugate acid of aqueous ammonia) is a relatively strong
acid, compared to water. In solution, ammonium ions react with water,
resulting in an acidic solution:
NH 4 + (aq) + H 2 O ((cid:4)) (cid:2)(cid:3) NH 3(aq) + H 3 O + (aq)
If a salt consists of the cation of a weak base and the anion of a strong
acid, only the cation reacts with water. The solution has a pH that is less
than 7. Salts of weak bases and strong acids dissolve in water and form
acidic solutions.
Salts That Dissolve and Form Basic Solutions
−
A weak acid, HA, forms a conjugate base, A , that is relatively strong.
CHEM
The reaction of such an anion with water results in a solution that is basic. FACT
For example, consider acetic acid, CH COOH , a weak acid. The conju-
3 (aq) A reaction between an ion
−
gate base of acetic acid, CH COO , is relatively strong, compared to
3 (aq) and water is sometimes called
water. It reacts with water to form a basic solution. a hydrolysisreaction. An
CH 3 COO − (aq) + H 2 O ((cid:4)) (cid:2)(cid:3) CH 3 COOH (aq) + OH − (aq) ammonium ion hydrolyzes, but
a sodium ion does not. An
If a salt consists of the cation of a strong base and the anion of a weak
acetate ion hydrolyzes, but a
acid, such as NaCH COO, only the anion reacts significantly with water.
3 chloride ion does not.
The reaction produces hydroxide ions. Therefore, the solution will have a
pH that is greater than 7. Salts of strong bases and weak acids dissolve in
water and form basic solutions.
Salts of Weak Bases and Weak Acids
If a salt consists of the cation of a weak base and the anion of a weak acid,
both ions react with water. The solution is weakly acidic or weakly basic,
depending on the relative strength of the ions that act as the acid
or the base. You can determine which ion is stronger by comparing the
values of K and K associated with the cation and the anion, respectively.
a b
If K > K , the solution is acidic. If K > K , the solution is basic.
a b b a
Chapter 9 Aqueous Solutions and Solubility Equilibria • MHR 421
Figure 9.2 shows the relationship between acid-base conjugate pairs.
CI− HCI
Figure 9.2 The values of K a HOBr OBr−
and K b are shown for acid-base CH COO− CH COOH
conjugate pairs. A strong acid, such 3 3
as HCl , forms a conjugate base, HCN CN−
(aq)
Cl− (aq) , that is too weak to react NH 4 + NH 3 K a /K b
significantly with water. A weaker
acid, such as CHCOOH , forms a
conjugate base, C 3 HCOO (a − q) , that is 10 −20 10 −16 10 −12 10 −8 10 −4 100 104 108
3 (aq)
strong enough to react significantly
with water. weaker stronger
The following list summarizes the acidic and basic properties of salts.
Table 9.1 shows the acid-base properties of salts in relation to the acids
and bases that react to form them.
Acidic and Basic Properties of Salts
• The salt of a strong acid/weak base dissolves to form an acidic
solution.
• The salt of a weak acid/strong base dissolves to form a basic solution.
• The salt of a weak acid/weak base dissolves to form an acidic
solution if K for the cation is greater than K for the anion.
a b
The solution is basic if K for the anion is greater than K for
b a
the cation.
Table 9.1 The Acid-Base Properties of Various Salts
Anion derived from a strong acid Anion derived from a weak acid
Cation derived Reaction with water: Reaction with water:
from a strong base neither ion only the anion
Solution: neutral Solution: basic
Examples: NaCl, K SO , Examples: NaCH COO, KF,
2 4 3
Ca(NO ) Mg(HSO )
32 42
Cation derived Reaction with water: Reaction with water:
from a weak base only the cation both ions
Solution: acidic Solution: neutral if K = K ,
a b
Examples: NH Cl, NH NO , acidic if K > K ,
4 4 3 a b
NH ClO basic if K > K
4 4 b a
Examples: NH CN (basic),
4
(NH ) S (basic),
42
NH NO (acidic)
4 2
Sodium Fluoride: A Basic Salt That Protects Teeth
Sugar is a common ingredient in prepared foods. When sugar remains on
your teeth, bacteria in your mouth convert it into an acid. The principal
constituent of tooth enamel is a mineral called hydroxyapatite,
Ca (PO ) (OH) . Hydroxyapatite reacts with acids to form solvated ions
10 4 6 2
and water. (Solvated ions are ions surrounded by solvent particles.)
Eventually, a cavity forms in the enamel.
To help prevent acid from damaging tooth enamel, many water treat-
ment plants add small concentrations (about 1 ppm) of salts, such as NaF,
422 MHR • Unit 4 Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
to the water. You may notice that a fluoride salt has also been added to CHEM
−
your toothpaste. Fluoride ions displace OH from hydroxyapatite to form FACT
fluoroapatite, Ca (PO ) F , as shown in the equation below.
10 4 6 2 If you cannot brush your teeth
Ca (PO ) (OH) + 2F − → Ca (PO ) F + 2OH − after a sweet snack, try chew-
10 4 6 2(s) (aq) 10 4 6 2(s) (aq)
ing sugar-free gum. Chewing
The fluoride ion is a much weaker base than the hydroxide ion, and
gum stimulates the production
fluoroapatite is therefore less reactive towards acids.
of saliva, which is usually
The following Sample Problem shows you how to predict the acidity weakly alkaline. The saliva
or basicity of aqueous salt solutions. helps to neutralize acids on
your teeth. Eating cheese for
dessert also helps to neutralize
Sample Problem acid, because cheese is basic.
Predicting the Acidity or Basicity of Salts
Problem
Predict the acid/base property of an aqueous solution of each of the
following salts. If you predict that the solution is not neutral, write the
equation for the reaction that causes the solution to be acidic or basic.
(a) sodium phosphate, Na PO (commonly called trisodium phosphate,
3 4
TSP, used in detergents and dishwashing compounds)
(b) ammonium nitrate, NH NO (used as a fertilizer)
4 3
(c) sodium chloride, NaCl, (used to de-ice winter roads)
(d) ammonium hydrogen carbonate, NH HCO (used in baked foods as a
4 3
leavening agent)
What Is Required?
Predict whether each aqueous solution is acidic, basic, or neutral. Write
equations that represent the solutions that are acidic or basic.
What Is Given?
The formula of each salt is given.
Plan Your Strategy
Determine whether the cation is from a strong or weak base, and whether
the anion is from a strong or weak acid. Ions derived from weak bases or
weak acids react with water and affect the pH of the solution. If both
ions react with water, compare the equilibrium constants (K and K ) to
a b
determine which reaction goes farthest to completion.
Act On Your Strategy
(a) Sodium phosphate, Na PO , is the salt of a strong base (NaOH) and a
3 4
weak acid (HPO
2−
). Only the phosphate ions react with water.
4
PO 4 3− (aq) + H 2 O ((cid:4)) (cid:2)(cid:3) HPO 4 2− (aq) + OH − (aq)
The solution is basic.
(b) Ammonium nitrate, NH NO , is the salt of a weak base (NH ) and a
4 3 3(aq)
strong acid (HNO ). Only the ammonium ions react with water.
3
NH 4 + (aq) + H 2 O ((cid:4)) (cid:2)(cid:3) NH 3(aq) + H 3 O + (aq)
The solution is acidic.
(c) Sodium chloride, NaCl, is the salt of a strong base (NaOH) and
a strong acid (HCl ). Neither ion reacts with water, so the solution
(aq)
is neutral.
Continued ...
Chapter 9 Aqueous Solutions and Solubility Equilibria • MHR 423
Continued ...
(d) Ammonium hydrogen carbonate, NH HCO , is the salt of a weak base
4 3
(NH ) and a weak acid (H CO ). Both ions react with water.
3(aq) 2 3(aq)
NH 4 + (aq) + H 2 O ((cid:4)) (cid:2)(cid:3) NH 3(aq) + H 3 O + (aq)
HCO 3 − (aq) + H 2 O ((cid:4)) (cid:2)(cid:3) H 2 CO 3(aq) + OH − (aq)
The equilibrium that lies farther to the right has the greater influence
on the pH of the solution. The equilibrium constants you need are K
a
+ −
for NH and K for HCO . Each ion is the conjugate of a compound
4 b 3
for which the appropriate constant is given in tables.
From Appendix E, K for NH is 1.8 × 10 −5. Using K K = K ,
b 3(aq) a b w
K for NH + = 1.0 × 10 −14
a 4 1.8 × 10 −5
= 5.6 × 10 −10
Similarly, from Appendix E, K forH CO = 4.5 × 10 −7.
a 2
K forHCO − = 1.0 × 10 −14
b 3 4.5 × 10 −7
= 2.2 × 10 −8
Because K for the hydrogen carbonate reaction is larger than K for
b a
the ammonium ion reaction, the solution is basic.
Check Your Solution
The equations that represent the reactions with water support the
prediction that NH NO dissolves to form an acidic solution and Na PO
4 3 3 4
dissolves to form a basic solution. Calcium chloride is the salt of a strong
base-strong acid, so neither ion reacts with water and the solution is
neutral. Both ions in ammonium hydrogen carbonate react with water.
− +
Because K for HCO is greater than K for NH , the salt dissolves to
b 3 a 4
form a weakly basic solution.
Practice Problems
1. Predict whether an aqueous solution of each salt is neutral, acidic,
or basic.
(a) NaCN (c) Mg(NO )
3 2
(b) LiF (d) NH I
4
2. Is the solution of each salt acidic, basic, or neutral? For solutions that
are not neutral, write equations that support your predictions.
(a) NH BrO (c) NaOBr
4 4
(b) NaBrO (d) NH Br
4 4
3. K for benzoic acid, C H COOH, is 6.3 × 10 −5. K for phenol, C H OH,
a 6 5 a 6 5
is 1.3 × 10 −10. Which is the stronger base, C H COO − or C H O − ?
6 5 (aq) 6 5 (aq)
Explain your answer.
4. Sodium hydrogen sulfite, NaHSO , is a preservative that is used to
3
prevent the discolouration of dried fruit. In aqueous solution, the
hydrogen sulfite ion can act as either an acid or a base. Predict
whether NaHSO dissolves to form an acidic solution or a basic
3
solution. (Refer to Appendix E for ionization data.)
424 MHR • Unit 4 Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
Calculating pH at Equivalence
In an acid-base titration, you carefully measure the volumes of acid and
base that react. Then, knowing the concentration of either the acid or
the base, and the stoichiometric relationship between them, you calculate
the concentration of the other reactant. The equivalence point in the
titration occurs when just enough acid and base have been mixed for a
complete reaction to occur, with no excess of either reactant. As you
learned in Chapter 8, you can find the equivalence point from a graph that
shows pH versus volume of one solution added to the other solution. To
determine the equivalence point experimentally, you need to measure the
pH. Because pH meters are expensive, and the glass electrodes are fragile,
titrations are often performed using an acid-base indicator.
An acid-base indicator is usually a weak, monoprotic organic acid.
The indicator is in equilibrium between the undissociated acid, which is
one colour, and its conjugate base, which is a different colour.
HIn (aq) +H 2 O ((cid:4)) (cid:2)(cid:3) H 3 O + (aq) + In − (aq)
colour 1 colour 2
For example, one indicator, called methyl red, is red when the pH is
below 4.2, and yellow when the pH is above 6.2. The point in a titration
at which an indicator changes colour is called the end-point. The colour
change occurs over a range of about 2 pH units, but the pH of a solution
changes rapidly near the equivalence point. Often a single drop of base
causes the shift from colour 1 to colour 2. For methyl red, the end-point
occurs over the pH range 4.2 to 6.2. Therefore, this indicator is used when
an acid-base titration results in a moderately acidic solution at equiva-
lence. Figure 9.3 shows the colours and end-points of various indicators.
pH
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14
Crystal violet
Thymol blue
2,4-Dinitrophenol
Bromophenol blue
Bromocresol green
Methyl red
Alizarin
Bromothymol blue
Phenol red
Phenolphthalein
Alizarin yellow R
Figure 9.3 A range of indicators are available with different end-points are available.
Thymol blue and alizarin are diprotic. They change colour over two different ranges.
To choose the appropriate indicator for a particular titration, you must
know the approximate pH of the solution at equivalence. As you learned
in Chapter 8, an acid-base titration curve provides this information.
What if you do not have a titration curve? You can calculate the pH at
equivalence using what you know about salts.
Chapter 9 Aqueous Solutions and Solubility Equilibria • MHR 425
For example, suppose that you are titrating a strong acid solution
against a weak base. At the equivalence point, the flask contains an
aqueous solution of the salt that is formed by the reaction. The solution of
a salt of a weak base and a strong acid is acidic, so methyl red may be an
appropriate indicator. The pH at equivalence in a titration is the same as
the pH of an aqueous solution of the salt formed.
Sample Problem
Calculating pH at Equivalence
Problem
2.0 × 101 mL of 0.20 mol/L NH is titrated against 0.20 mol/L HCl .
3(aq) (aq)
Calculate the pH at equivalence. Use Figure 9.3 to select an
appropriate indicator.
What Is Required?
You need to calculate the pH at equivalence. As well, you need to
find an indicator that changes colour at a pH that is close to the same
pH at equivalence.
What Is Given?
You know that 20 mL of 0.20 mol/L NH base reacts with 0.20 mol/L
3(aq)
HCl . Tables of K and K values are in Appendix E. Figure 9.3 shows
(aq) a b
the pH ranges and colour changes for various indicators.
Plan Your Strategy
Step 1 Write the balanced chemical equation for the reaction
Step 2 Calculate the amount (in mol) of NH , using its volume and
3(aq)
concentration. Then, determine the amount (in mol) of HCl that
(aq)
is needed to react with all the NH .
3(aq)
Step 3 Find the volume of HCl , based on the amount and
(aq)
concentration of HCl .
(aq)
Step 4 Calculate the concentration of the salt formed, based on the
amount (in mol) and the total volume of the solution. Decide
which ion reacts with water. Write the equation that represents
the reaction.
Step 5 Determine the equilibrium constant for the ion that is involved
+
in the reaction. Then divide the [NH ] by K to determine
4 a
whether the change in concentration of the ammonium ion can
be ignored.
Step 6 Set up an ICE table for the ion that is involved in the reaction with
water. Let xrepresent the change in the concentration of the ion
that reacts.
Step 7 Write the equilibrium expression. Substitute the equilibrium
concentrations into the expression, and solve for x.
+
Step 8 Use the value of xto determine the [H O ]. Then calculate the pH
3
of the solution. Using Figure 9.3, choose an indicator that changes
colour in a range that includes the pH of the solution.
426 MHR • Unit 4 Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
Act on Your Strategy
Step 1 The following chemical equation represents the reaction.
NH + HCl → NH Cl
3(aq) (aq) 4 (aq)
Step 2 Amount (in mol) of NH = 0.20mol/L × 0.020L
3(aq)
= 4.0 × 10 −3mol
NH and HCl react in a 1:1 ratio. Therefore, 4.0 × 10 −3 mol of
3(aq) (aq)
HCl is needed.
(aq)
Step 3 Amount (in mol) HCl = 4.0 × 10 −3mol
(aq)
= 0.20mol/L × VolumeHCl (inL)
(aq)
VolumeHCl = 4.0 × 10 −3mol
(aq) 0.20mol/L
= 0.020L
Step 4 From the chemical equation, the amount of NH Cl that is
4
formed is equal to the amount of acid or base that reacts.
Therefore, 4.0 × 10 −3mol of ammonium chloride is formed.
Totalvolumeofsolution = 0.020L + 0.020L
= 0.040L
[NH Cl] = 4.0 × 10 −3mol
4 4.0 × 10 −2L
= 0.10mol/L
+ − +
The salt forms NH and Cl in solution. NH is the
4 (aq) (aq) 4 (aq)
−
conjugate acid of a weak base, so it reacts with water. Cl is
(aq)
the conjugate base of a strong acid, so it does not react with water.
The pH of the solution is therefore determined by the extent of the
following reaction.
NH 4 + (aq) + H 2 O ((cid:4)) (cid:2)(cid:3) NH 3(aq) + H 3 O + (aq)
Step 5 From Appendix E, K for NH is 1.8 × 10 −5.
b 3(aq)
+
K for the conjugate acid, NH , can be calculated using the
a 4 (aq)
relationship K K = K .
a b w
K = K w = 1.0 × 10 −14
a K 1.8 × 10 −5
b
= 5.6 × 10 −10
+
[NH 4 ] = 0.10
K 5.6 × 10 −10
a
= 1.8 × 108
+
This is well above 500, so the change in [NH ], x, can be
4
ignored.
Step 6
Concentration (mol/L) NH 4 + (aq) + H 2 O ((cid:4)) (cid:2)(cid:3) NH 3(aq) + H 3 O + (aq)
Initial 0.10 — 0 ~0
Change −x — +x +x
Equilibrium
0.10−x
— x x
(~0.10)
Continued ...
Chapter 9 Aqueous Solutions and Solubility Equilibria • MHR 427
Continued ...
+
Step 7 K a = [NH [N 3 ] H [H + 3 ] O ]
4
5.6 × 10 −10 = (x)(x)
√0.10
x = 5.6 × 10−11
(only the positive value
= ±7.5 × 10 −6mol/L makes sense)
Step 8 x = [H O + ]
3
= 7.5 × 10 −6mol/L
pH = −log[H O + ]
3
= −log7.5 × 10 −6
= 5.13
Methyl red, which changes colour over pH 4.2 to 6.2, is a
good choice for an indicator. If methyl red was not available,
bromocresol green, which changes colour in the pH range 3.8–5.2,
could be used.
Check Your Solution
The titration forms an aqueous solution of a salt derived from a weak base
and a strong acid. The solution should be acidic, which is supported by
the calculation of the pH.
Practice Problems
PROBLEM TIP
5. After titrating sodium hydroxide with hydrofluoric acid, a chemist
When you are determining
determined that the reaction had formed an aqueous solution of
the concentration of ions in
solution, remember to use the 0.020 mol/L sodium fluoride. Determine the pH of the solution.
final volume of the solution. 6. Part way through a titration, 2.0 × 101 mL of 0.10 mol/L sodium
In Practice Problem 6, for hydroxide has been added to 3.0 × 101 mL of 0.10 mol/L
example, the final volume of
hydrochloric acid. What is the pH of the solution?
the solution is 50 mL because
20 mL of base is added to 7. 0.025 mol/L benzoic acid, C H COOH, is titrated with 0.025 mol/L
6 5
30 mL of acid. You can assume sodium hydroxide solution. Calculate the pH at equivalence.
that the total volume is the
8. 50.0 mL of 0.10 mol/L hydrobromic acid is titrated with 0.10 mol/L
sum of the reactant volumes,
aqueous ammonia. Determine the pH at equivalence.
because the reactant solutions
are dilute.
Section Summary
In this section, you learned why solutions of different salts have different
pH values. You learned how to analyze the composition of a salt to
predict whether the salt forms an acidic, basic, or neutral solution.
Finally, you learned how to apply your understanding of the properties
of salts to calculate the pH at the equivalence point of a titration. You
used the pH to determine a suitable indicator for the titration. In section
9.2, you will further investigate the equilibria of solutions and learn how
to predict the solubility of ionic compounds in solution.
428 MHR • Unit 4 Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
Section Review
1 K/U Sodium carbonate and sodium hydrogen carbonate both dissolve
to form basic solutions. Comparing solutions with the same concentra-
tion, which of these salts forms the more basic solution? Explain.
2 K/U Determine whether or not each ion reacts with water. If the ion
does react, write the chemical equation for the reaction. Then predict
whether the ion forms an acidic solution or a basic solution.
− + − −
(a) Br (b) CH NH (c) ClO (d) OCl
3 3 4
3 K/U Predict whether sodium dihydrogen citrate, NaH 2 C 6 H 5 O 7 ,
dissolves to form an acidic or a basic solution. (Refer to Appendix E)
4 I A chemist measures the pH of aqueous solutions of Ca(OH) 2 , CaF 2 ,
NH NO , KNO , and HNO . Each solution has the same concentration.
4 3 3 3
Arrange the solutions from most basic to most acidic.
5 I A student uses a transfer pipette to put 25.00 mL of 0.100 mol/L
acetic acid into an Erlenmeyer flask. Then the student adds sodium
hydroxide from a burette to the flask, and records the following read-
ings of volume and pH.
volume (mL) 0.00 6.00 10.00 12.00 14.00 14.40 14.60 14.80 15.20 15.40 16.00
pH 2.8 4.2 5.1 5.5 6.2 6.5 6.8 7.6 9.8 10.5 11.4
(a) Draw a graph that shows the results. Plot pH on the vertical axis and
the volume of base added on the horizontal axis. Use speadsheet
software if available.
(b) From your graph, what is the pH at the equivalence point?
(c) Determine the initial concentration of the sodium hydroxide.
(d) Use Figure 9.3 to suggest a suitable indicator for this titration.
6 C Congo red is an indicator that changes colour in the pH range 3.0
to 5.0. Suppose that you are titrating an aqueous sodium hydroxide
solution with nitric acid added from a burette. Is congo red a suitable
indicator? If so, explain why. If not, will the end-point occur before or
after the equivalence point? Explain your answer.
7 K/U If you were titrating a strong base with a weak acid, which of
these indicators might be suitable: bromphenol blue, bromthymol blue,
or phenolphthalein? (Refer to Figure 9.3.)
8 I 0.10 mol/L hydrochloric acid is titrated with 0.10 mol/L
methylamine, CH NH . Calculate the pH at the equivalence point.
3 2
9 MC Sodium phosphate, Na 3 PO 4 , is sold at hardware stores as TSP
(trisodium phosphate). Crystals of Na PO are dissolved in water to
3 4
make an effective cleaning solution. TSP can be used, for example, to
prepare a surface before painting.
(a) Explain why TSP is an effective cleaning solution.
(b) Suggest safety precautions you should take when using TSP.
(c) Explain why you should never mix a solution of TSP with other
household cleaning products.
Chapter 9 Aqueous Solutions and Solubility Equilibria • MHR 429
9.2 Solubility Equilibria
In Chapter 7, you learned that a saturated solution containing undissolved
Section Preview/
Specific Expectations solute is an example of a system at equilibrium. Recall from your previous
chemistry course that the solubility of a solute is the amount of solute
In this section, you will
that will dissolve in a given volume of solvent at a certain temperature.
(cid:2) performan experiment to
In other words, the solubility of a solute indicates how much of that
determine the solubility
product constant (K ) for solute is present in a solution at equilibrium. Data tables often express
sp
calcium hydroxide solubility as (g solute)/(100 mL solvent). Molar solubility, on the other
hand, is always expressed in terms of (mol solute/L solvent).
(cid:2) solveequilibrium problems
that involve concentrations The solubility of ionic solids in water covers a wide range of values.
of reactants and products, Knowing the concentration of ions in aqueous solution is important in
and K sp medicine and in chemical analysis. In this section, you will continue to
(cid:2) calculatethe molar solubility study equilibrium. You will examine the solubility equilibria of ionic
of a pure substance in water compounds in water.
or in a solution of a common
ion, given K
sp Solubility as an Equilibrium Process
(cid:2) communicateyour under- In Chapter 7, you learned that three factors—change in enthalpy (∆H),
standing of the following
change in entropy (∆S), and temperature (T)—determine whether or not a
term: solubility product
constant (K ) change is favoured. The same three factors are important for determining
sp
how much of a salt will dissolve in a certain volume of water. These
factors are combined in the following equation, where ∆G is the change
in free energy of the system.
∆G = ∆H − T∆S
As you know from Chapter 7, a change is favoured when ∆G is negative.
When a salt dissolves, the entropy of the system always increases,
because ions in solution are more disordered than ions in a solid crystal.
An increase in entropy favours the formation of a solution because the
term −T∆S is negative. Most solids dissolve to a greater extent at higher
solution temperatures, because the term −T∆S becomes more negative.
Explaining the overall enthalpy change for a dissolving salt is more
complicated because it involves a number of energy changes. Cations
must be separated from anions, which requires energy. Water molecules
then surround each ion in solution, which releases energy. If the overall
enthalpy change is negative, the formation of a solution is favoured. If the
enthalpy increases, the formation of a solution is not favoured because ∆G
is less negative.
Heterogeneous Equilibrium: A Solubility System
Consider barium sulfate, a sparingly soluble salt. X-ray technicians give
patients a barium sulfate suspension to drink before taking an X-ray of the
large intestine. A suspension of barium sulfate is opaque to X-rays, which
helps to define this part of the body. (See Figure 9.4.)
Figure 9.4 Barium sulfate, When you add barium sulfate crystals to water, barium ions and
BaSO 4 , is a sparingly soluble ionic sulfate ions leave the surface of the solid and enter the solution. Initially,
compound that is used to enhance the concentration of these ions is very low. Thus, the forward change,
X-ray imaging.
dissolving, occurs at a greater rate than the reverse change:
BaSO (cid:2)(cid:3) Ba2+ + SO 2−
4(s) (aq) 4 (aq)
430 MHR • Unit 4 Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
As more ions enter the solution, the rate of the reverse change,
recrystallisation, increases. Eventually, the rate of recrystallisation becomes
equal to the rate of dissolving. As you know, when the forward rate and
the backward rate of a process are equal, the system is at equilibrium.
Because the reactants and the products are in different phases, the reaction
is said to have reached heterogeneous equilibrium. For solubility systems
of sparingly soluble ionic compounds, equilibrium exists between the solid
ionic compound and its dissociated ions in solution.
The Solubility Product Constant
When excess solid is present in a saturated solution, you can write the
equilibrium constant expression for the dissolution of the solid in the
same way that you wrote the equilibrium constant expression for a
homogeneous equilibrium in Chapter 7. For example, the equilibrium
constant expression for barium sulfate is written as follows:
[Ba2+
][SO
2−
]
K = (aq) 4 (aq)
[BaSO ]
4(s)
The concentration of a solid, however, is itself a constant at a constant
temperature. Therefore, you can combine the term for the concentration
of the solid with the equilibrium constant to arrive at a new constant:
K[BaSO ] = [Ba2+ ][SO 2− ]
4(s) (aq) 4 (aq)
K = [Ba2+ ][SO 2− ]
sp (aq) 4 (aq)
The new constant is called the solubility product constant, K .
sp
The following Sample Problem shows how to write expressions for K .
sp
Sample Problem
Writing Solubility Product Expressions
Problem
Write the solubility product expression for each compound.
(a) barium carbonate (b) calcium iodate
(c) copper(II) phosphate
Solution
PROBLEM TIP
First write a balanced equation for the equilibrium between excess
Ion concentration terms in
solid and dissolved ions in a saturated aqueous solution. Then use the
solubility product expressions
balanced equation to write the expression for K .
sp
are usually written without
(a) BaCO (cid:2)(cid:3) Ba2+ + CO 2−
3(s) (aq) 3 (aq) their phases, as you see here.
K = [Ba2+ ][CO 2− ]
sp 3
(b) Ca(IO ) (cid:2)(cid:3) Ca2+ + 2IO −
3 2(s) (aq) 3 (aq)
K = [Ca2+ ][IO − ]2
sp 3
(c) Cu (PO ) (cid:2)(cid:3) 3Cu2+ + 2PO 3−
3 4 2(s) (aq) 4 (aq)
K = [Cu2+ ]3[PO 3− ]2
sp 4
Check Your Solution
The K expressions are based on balanced equations for saturated
sp
solutions of slightly soluble ionic compounds. The exponents in the K
sp
expressions match the corresponding coefficients in the chemical equa-
tion. The coefficient 1 is not written, following chemical convention.
Chapter 9 Aqueous Solutions and Solubility Equilibria • MHR 431
Practice Problems
9. Write the balanced chemical equation that represents the dissociation
of each compound in water. Then write the corresponding solubility
product expression.
(a) copper(I) chloride (c) silver sulfate
(b) barium fluoride (d) calcium phosphate
10. Write a balanced dissolution equation and solubility product
expression for silver carbonate, Ag CO .
2 3
11. Write a balanced dissolution equation and solubility product
expression for magnesium ammonium phosphate, MgNH PO .
4 4
12. Iron(III) nitrate has a very low solubility.
(a) Write the solubility product expression for iron(III) nitrate.
(b) Do you expect the value of K of iron(III) nitrate to be larger or
sp
smaller than the K for aluminum hydroxide, which has a slightly
sp
higher solubility?
CHEM You know intuitively that solubility depends on temperature. For
FACT most ionic compounds, more solute can dissolve in a solvent at higher
temperatures. Chemists determine the solubility of an ionic compound by
One compound that becomes
lesssoluble at higher tempera- experiment, and then use the solubility data to determine K sp . Like the
tures is calcium carbonate, equilibrium constant, K is temperature-dependent. Therefore, different
sp
CaCO 3 . If you have an electric experiments must be carried out to determine K sp at different temperatures.
kettle, you have probably Chemical reference books list the solubility of a wide variety of
noticed a build-up of scale on
compounds. In the next Sample Problem, you will learn how to use
the heating element. The scale
measured solubilities to determine K .
is mostly calcium carbonate, sp
which precipitates out of the
water as it heats up.
Sample Problem
Determing K from Measured Solubilities
sp
Problem
A chemist finds that the solubility of silver carbonate, Ag CO , is
2 3
1.3 × 10 −4 mol/L at 25˚C. Calculate K for silver carbonate.
sp
What Is Required?
You need to find the value of K for Ag CO at 25˚C.
sp 2 3
What Is Given?
You know the solubility of Ag CO at 25˚C.
2 3
Plan Your Strategy
Step 1 Write an equation for the dissolution of Ag CO .
2 3
Step 2 Use the equation to write the solubility product expression.
Step 3 Find the concentration (in mol/L) of each ion.
Step 4 Substitute the concentrations into the solubility product
expression, and calculate K .
sp
432 MHR • Unit 4 Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
Act on Your Strategy
Step 1 Ag CO (cid:2)(cid:3) 2Ag + + CO 2−
2 3(s) (aq) 3 (aq)
Step 2 K = [Ag + ]2[CO 2− ]
sp 3
Step 3 [Ag + ] = 2 × [Ag CO ]
2 3
= 2 × 1.3 × 10 −4mol/L
= 2.6 × 10 −4mol/L
[CO 2− ] = [Ag CO ] = 3.2 × 10 −2mol/L
3 2 3
Step 4 K = [Ag + ]2[CO 2− ]
sp 3
= (2.6 × 10 −4)2(1.3 × 10 −4)
= 8.8 × 10 −12
Based on the given solubility data, K for silver carbonate is
sp
8.8 × 10 −12 at 25˚C.
Check Your Solution
The value of K is less than the concentration of the salt, as expected.
sp
It has the correct number of significant digits.
Check that you wrote the balanced chemical equation and the
corresponding K equation correctly. Pay attention to molar relationships
sp
and to the exponent of each term in the K equation.
sp
Practice Problems
13. The maximum solubility of silver cyanide, AgCN, is 1.5 × 10 −8 mol/L
at 25˚C. Calculate K for silver cyanide.
sp
14. A saturated solution of copper(II) phosphate, Cu (PO ) , has a
3 4 2
concentration of 6.1 × 10 −7gCu (PO ) per 1.00 × 102 mL of solution
3 4 2
at 25˚C. What is K for Cu (PO ) at 25˚C?
sp 3 4 2
15. A saturated solution of CaF contains 1.2 × 1020formula units of
2
calcium fluoride per litre of solution. Calculate K for CaF .
sp 2
16. The concentration of mercury(I) iodide, Hg I , in a saturated solution
2 2
at 25˚C is 1.5 × 10 −4 ppm.
(a) Calculate K for Hg I . The solubility equilibrium is written
sp 2 2
as follows:
Hg I (cid:2)(cid:3) Hg 2+ + 2I −
2 2 2
(b) State any assumptions that you made when you converted ppm
to mol/L.
Determining a Solubility Product Constant
In Investigation 9-A, you will collect solubility data and use these data to
determine a K for calcium hydroxide, Ca(OH) . When you calculate K ,
sp 2 sp
you assume that the dissolved ionic compound exists as independent
hydrated ions that do not affect one another. This assumption simplifies
the investigation, but it is not entirely accurate. Ions do interfere with
one another. As a result, the value of K that you calculate will be just
sp
an approximation. K values that are calculated from data obtained
sp
from experiments such as Investgation 9-A are generally higher than the
actual values.
Chapter 9 Aqueous Solutions and Solubility Equilibria • MHR 433
S K I L L F O C U S
MICROSCALE Predicting
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
Determining K for
sp
Calcium Hydroxide
The value of K for a basic compound, such as 3. Place the beaker on the white sheet of paper.
sp
Ca(OH) , can be determined by performing an
2 4. To transfer a small amount of indicator to the
acid-base titration.
acid solution, place one drop of phenolph-
thalein solution on a watch glass. Touch the
Question
drop with the glass rod. Transfer this small
What is the value of K for Ca(OH) ? amount of indicator to the HCl in the beaker.
sp 2
5. Add saturated Ca(OH) solution, drop by
2
Predictions
drop, to the HCl solution until the solution
Look up the solubility of Ca(OH) in a solubility turns a permanent pale pink. Swirl the flask,
2
table. Do you expect a large or a small value of particularly as the pink begins to appear.
K for Ca(OH) ? Record the number of drops of Ca(OH) that
sp 2 2
you added. Conduct as many trials as you can.
Materials
6. Dispose of all solutions as directed by your
50 mL beaker teacher. Do not dispose of any chemicals
white sheet of paper down the drain.
2 identical microscale pipettes
wash bottle that contains distilled water Analysis
phenolphthalein in dropping bottle
1. Determine the average number of drops of
glass stirring rod
Ca(OH) solution that you needed to neutralize
2
Petri dish or watch glass
10 drops of 0.050 mol/L HCl.
10 mL of recently filtered saturated solution of
Ca(OH) 2. Write the balanced chemical equation for the
2
10 mL of 0.050 mol/L HCl dissociation of calcium hydroxide in water.
3. Write the balanced chemical equation that
Safety Precautions
represents the neutralization of aqueous
Ca(OH) with HCl .
2 (aq)
If you get acid or base on your skin, flush with 4. Use the balanced chemical equation for
plenty of cold water. the neutralization of HCl with Ca(OH) 2 to
−
determine [OH ] in mol/L. Hint: Why do you
Procedure not need to know the volume of one drop?
1. Read the Procedure, and prepare an appropri- 5. From [OH
−
], determine
[Ca2+
] in mol/L.
ate data table. Remember to give your table
a title. Conclusion
2. Add exactly 10 drops of 0.050 mol/L HCl to a 6. Calculate K sp for Ca(OH) 2 . If possible, look up
50 mL beaker. To ensure uniform drop size, the accepted value of K sp for Ca(OH) 2 .
use the same type of pipette to dispense the Calculate your percent error.
acid and the base. Also, hold the pipette
vertically when dispensing the solution.
Always record the number of drops added.
434 MHR • Unit 4 Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
Using the Solubility Product Constant
You can use the value of K sp for a compound to determine the concentra- Suppose that two different
tion of its ions in a saturated solution. The following Sample Problem salts, AX and BY , have
2
shows you how to do this. You will use an approach that is similar to the the same K sp . Are the salts
equally soluble at the same
approach you used in section 7.2 to find equilibrium amounts using K for
c
temperature? Explain your
homogeneous equilibria.
answer.
Table 9.2 shows the values of K for selected ionic compounds at
sp
25˚C. The compounds are organized from the largest K to the smallest.
sp
You will find a more comprehensive table of K values in Appendix E.
sp
Table 9.2 Values of K for Some Ionic Compounds at 25˚C
sp
Compound K
sp
magnesium sulfate, MgSO 5.9 × 10−3
4
lead(II) chloride, PbCI 1.7 × 10−5
2
barium fluoride, BaF 1.5 × 10−6
2
cadmium carbonate, CdCO 1.8 × 10−14
3
copper(II) hydroxide, Cu(OH) 2.2 × 10−20
2
silver sulfide, Ag S 8 × 10−48
2
Sample Problem
Calculating Molar Solubility From K
sp
Problem
Lead(II) iodide, PbI , films are being investigated for their usefulness in
2
X-ray imaging. PbI is also used for decorative work, such as mosaics,
2
because of its attractive golden yellow colour. At 25˚C, K for PbI is
sp 2
9.8 × 10 −9. What is the molar solubility of PbI in water at 25˚C?
2
What Is Required?
You need to determine the solubility (in mol/L) of PbI at 25˚C.
2
What Is Given?
At 25˚C, K for PbI is 9.8 × 10 −9.
sp 2
Plan Your Strategy
Step 1 Write the dissociation equilibrium equation.
Step 2 Use the equilibrium equation to write an expression for K .
sp
Step 3 Set up an ICE table. Let xrepresent molar solubility. Use the
stoichiometry of the equilibrium equation to write expressions for
the equilibrium concentrations of the ions.
Step 4 Substitute your expressions into the expression for K , and solve
sp
for x.
Act on Your Strategy
Step 1 PbI (cid:2)(cid:3) Pb2+ + 2I −
2(s) (aq) (aq)
Step 2 K = [Pb2+ ][I − ]2
sp
Continued ...
Chapter 9 Aqueous Solutions and Solubility Equilibria • MHR 435
Continued ...
Step 3
Concentration (mol/L) PbI (cid:2)(cid:3) Pb 2+ + 2I −
2(s) (aq) (aq)
Initial — 0 0
Change — +x +2x
Equilibrium — x 2x
Step 4 K = [Pb2+ ][I − ]2 = 9.8 × 10 −9
sp
= x × (2x)2
= x × 4x2
= 4x3
∴4x3 = 9(cid:2).8 × 10 −9
x = 3 9.8 × 10 −9
4
= 1.3 × 10 −3mol/L
The molar solubility of PbI in water is 1.3 × 10 −3 mol/L.
2
Check Your Solution
Recall that x = [Pb2+ ] and 2x = [I − ] . Substitute these values into the
eq eq
K equation. You should get the given K .
sp sp
Practice Problems
17. K for silver chloride, AgCl, is 1.8 × 10 −10 at 25˚C.
sp
(a) Calculate the molar solubility of AgCl in a saturated solution
at 25˚C.
(b) How many formula units of AgCl are dissolved in 1.0 L of
saturated silver chloride solution?
(c) What is the percent (m/v) of AgCl in a saturated solution at 25˚C?
18. Iron(III) hydroxide, Fe(OH) , is an extremely insoluble compound.
3
K for Fe(OH) is 2.8 × 10 −39 at 25˚C. Calculate the molar solubility
sp 3
of Fe(OH) at 25˚C.
3
19. K for zinc iodate, Zn(IO ) , is 3.9 × 10 −6 at 25˚C. Calculate the
sp 3 2
solubility (in mol/L and in g/L) of Zn(IO ) in a saturated solution.
3 2
20. What is the maximum number of formula units of zinc sulfide,
ZnS, that can dissolve in 1.0 L of solution at 25˚C? K for ZnS
sp
is 2.0 × 10 −22.
The Common Ion Effect
So far, you have considered solubility equilibria for pure substances
dissolved in water. What happens to the solubility of an ionic compound
when it is added to a solution that already contains one of its ions?
Consider a saturated solution of lead(II) chromate. See Figure 9.5(A)
on the next page. The following equation represents this equilibrium.
PbCrO (cid:2)(cid:3) Pb2+ + CrO 2−
4(s) (aq) 4 (aq)
436 MHR • Unit 4 Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
A solution of a salt that contains chromate ions, such as sodium
chromate, Na CrO , is added to the mixture. More yellow lead(II)
2 4(aq)
chromate precipitates out of solution, as shown in Figure 9.5(B).
As you learned in Chapter 8, this phenomenon is called the common
ion effect. The observed result is predicted by Le Châtelier’s principle.
Adding a common ion to a solution increases the concentration of that ion
in solution. As a result, equilibrium shifts away from the ion. In this
example, adding chromate ions causes the equilibrium to shift to the left,
and lead(II) chromate precipitates.
Figure 9.5 Adding chromate ions
A B to an equilibrium system of lead(II)
chromate (A) causes the equilibrium
position to shift to the left. As a
PbCrO 4(s) Pb2+ (aq) + CrO 4 2− (aq) PbCrO 4(s) Pb2+ (aq) + CrO 4 2− (aq) (added) result, more solid lead(II) chromate
precipitates (B).
Analyzing the expression for the solubility product constant gives the
same result.
K = [Pb2+ ][CrO 2− ]
sp 4
= 2.3 × 10 −13at25˚C
Since K is a constant at a given temperature, an increase in the
sp
concentration of one ion must be accompanied by a decrease in the
concentration of the other ion, achieved by the formation of a precipitate.
This explains why solid lead(II) chromate precipitates out of solution.
The next Sample Problem shows how to predict the solubility of an
ionic compound when a common ion is present in solution.
Sample Problem
The Effect of a Common Ion on Solubility
Problem
The solubility of pure PbCrO in water is 4.8 × 10 −7mol/L.
4(s)
(a) Qualitatively predict how the solubility will change if PbCrO is
4(s)
added to a 0.10 mol/L solution of sodium chromate, Na CrO .
2 4
(b) K for PbCrO is 2.3 × 10 −13. Determine the solubility of PbCrO
sp 4(s) 4(s)
in a 0.10 mol/L solution of Na CrO .
2 4
What Is Required?
You need to predict, and then determine, the solubility of PbCrO
4
(in mol/L) in a solution of Na CrO .
2 4
What Is Given?
You know K for PbCrO and the concentration of the salt with the
sp 4
common ion.
Continued ...
Chapter 9 Aqueous Solutions and Solubility Equilibria • MHR 437
Continued ...
Plan Your Strategy
(a) Use Le Châtelier’s principle to make a prediction.
(b)
Step 1 Write the equilibrium equation.
Step 2 Use the equilibrium equation to write an expression for K .
sp
Step 3 Set up an ICE table. Let xrepresent the concentration of chromate
(the common ion) that is contributed by PbCrO . Initial conditions
4
are based on the solution of Na CrO .
2 4
Step 4 Solve for x, and check your prediction.
Act on Your Strategy
(a) Based on Le Châtelier’s principle, the solubility of PbCrO in a
4
solution that contains a common ion (chromate) will be less than
the solubility of PbCrO in water.
4
(b)
Step 1 PbCrO (cid:2)(cid:3) Pb2+ + CrO 2−
4(s) (aq) 4 (aq)
Step 2 K = [Pb2+ ][CrO 2− ] = 2.3 × 10 −13
sp 4
Step 3
Concentration (mol/L) PbCrO (cid:2)(cid:3) Pb2+ + CrO 2−
4(s) (aq) 4 (aq)
Initial — 0 0.10
Change — +x +x
Equilibrium — x 0.10 + x
Step 4 Since K is very small, you can assume that xis much smaller
sp
than 0.10. To check the validity of this assumption, determine
whether or not 0.10 is more than 500 times greater than K :
sp
0.10 = 0.10
K 2.3 × 10 −13
sp
= 4.3 × 1011 > 500
Therefore, in the (0.10 + x) term, xcan be ignored. In other words,
(0.10 + x) is approximately equal to 0.10. Therefore, you can
simplify the equation as follows:
K = [Pb2+ ][CrO 2− ] = 2.3 × 10 −13
sp 4
= (x)(0.10 + x)
≈ (x)(0.10)
∴(x)(0.10) ≈ 2.3 × 10 −13
x ≈ 2.3 × 10 −12mol/L
The molar solubility of PbCrO in a solution of 0.10 mol/L
4
Na CrO is 2.3 × 10 −12mol/L. Your prediction was correct. The
2 4
solubility of PbCrO decreases in a solution of common ions.
4
Check Your Solution
The approximation in step 4 is reasonable. The solubility of xis much
smaller than 0.10. To prove that the approximation works, substitute the
calculated value of xinto the initial expression for K .
sp
438 MHR • Unit 4 Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
Practice Problems
Electronic Learning Partner
Note:Refer to Appendix E, as necessary.
21. Determine the molar solubility of AgCl To learn more about solubility
equilibria, go to the Chemistry
(a) in pure water (b) in 0.15 mol/L NaCl
12 Electronic Learning Partner.
22. Determine the molar solubility of lead(II) iodide, PbI , in
2
0.050 mol/L NaI.
23.Calculate the molar solubility of calcium sulfate, CaSO ,
4
(a) in pure water (b) in 0.25 mol/L Na SO
2 4
24. K for lead(II) chloride, PbCl , is 1.6 × 10 −5. Calculate the molar
sp 2
solubility of PbCl
2
(a) in pure water (b) in 0.10 mol/L CaCl
2
Canadians in Chemistry
Dr. Joseph MacInnis has a medical degree, but in the body, is one of the most profound challenges
he does not work in a clinic, a hospital, or a typical that a diver encounters. As a diver descends, and
doctor’s office. His office is the ocean, and he is an is subjected to increased pressure, gases such as
expert in deep-sea diving. He combines his medical nitrogen dissolve in the blood and tissues. In the
expertise with his knowledge of the properties equilibrium between dissolved nitrogen and gaseous
of gases to study the effects of deep-sea diving nitrogen, increased pressure favours dissolved
on humans. nitrogen, according to Le Châtelier’s principle. As the
diver ascends to the ocean surface and pressure
decreases, equilibrium favours the nitrogen coming
out of solution.
If a diver ascends too quickly, the lungs cannot
remove the nitrogen fast enough. Gas bubbles form
in the blood, causing decompression sickness.
Decompression sickness is also known as “the
bends,” because one of its symptoms is an inability
to bend the joints.
MacInnis was a consultant to the team that dis-
covered the Titanic, and he was the first Canadian to
explore the wreck. In 1991, MacInnis and his team
used small submarines with pressurized hulls to film
the wreck in IMAX format. The wreck is about 4000 m
below sea level, but the pressure inside the sub-
marines was kept similar to the pressure above the
surface of the sea.
MacInnis was born in Barrie, Ontario, in 1937. In
MacInnis is passionate about the environment,
1963, after graduating from the University of
both below and above the sea. Since 1996,
Toronto’s medical school, he received a fellowship
MacInnis has been Chair of the Friends of the
to study diving medicine at the University of
Environment Foundation, a non-profit organization
Pennsylvania. Diving medicine is a specialized field,
that funds projects that help to protect Canada’s
dealing with the challenges that humans face when
environment. In recognition of his accomplishments,
exposed to undersea environments.
MacInnis was made a member of the Order of
For every 10 m below sea level that a diver
Canada in 1976.
descends under water, ambient pressure increases
by one unit of atmospheric pressure. This increase in
pressure, and its effect on heterogeneous equilibria
Chapter 9 Aqueous Solutions and Solubility Equilibria • MHR 439
Buffers and the Common Ion Effect
COURSE
CHALLENGE
In Chapter 8, you learned that buffers resist changes in pH when acids or
How do buffers in human bases are added. Buffers have many uses in a chemistry lab. For example,
blood maintain the blood’s pH? commercial buffers with certified pH values are available. Chemists in
In the Chemistry Course analytical laboratories use these acidic, basic, and neutral buffers to
Challenge, you will learn about
ensure the accuracy of their pH meters across the pH range.
the buffer system in blood.
Recall, from Chapter 8, that a buffer consists of a weak acid/conjugate
How would you design an
base mixture or a weak base/conjugate acid mixture. One buffer that
investigation to demonstrate
you examined previously contains acetic acid and sodium acetate. The
how the system resists
changes in pH? common-ion effect applies to this buffer. The equilibrium of the acetic
acid is affected by the common acetate ion from sodium acetate.
Since buffers are an example of the common-ion effect, the concentra-
tion of ions (hence the pH) of a buffer solution can be calculated using a
method that is similar to the method you used to determine solubility in a
common ion effect problem. You will use K , however, instead of K .
a sp
Also, buffers are in homogeneous equilibria, unlike saturated solubility
systems, which are in heterogeneous equilibria. Therefore, you need to
consider the initial concentration of the reactants. (The reactants are not
solids, so their concentration is not constant.)
Sample Problem
pH of a Buffer and the Common-Ion Effect
Problem
A buffer solution was made by mixing equal volumes of 0.20 mol/L
solutions of acetic acid and sodium acetate at 25˚C. What is the pH
of the buffer solution?
What Is Required?
You need to determine the pH of the buffer solution.
What Is Given?
0.20 mol/L CH COOH and 0.20 mol/L CH COONa are mixed in equal
3 3
volumes. K for CH COOH is 1.8 × 10 −5.
a 3
Plan Your Strategy
−
Step 1 Determine the initial concentrations of CH COOH and CH COO
3 3
in the buffer solution.
Step 2 Write the reaction for the dissociation of CH COOH. Set up an
3
−
ICE table, including the initial concentration of CH COO in
3
the buffer.
Step 3 Write the equation for K , and substitute equilibrium terms into
a
the equation.
Step 4 Solve the equation forx. Assume that xis small compared with
the initial concentrations. Check the validity of this assumption
when you find the value of x.
Step 5 pH = −log[H O + ]
3
440 MHR • Unit 4 Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
Act on Your Strategy
Step 1 When the solutions are mixed, the total volume is twice the
volume of each component volume. Therefore, the concentration
of each component is halved.
[CH COOH] = [CH COO − ] = 0.10mol/L
3 3
Step 2
Concentration (mol/L) CH 3 COOH (aq) + H 2 O ((cid:4)) (cid:2)(cid:3) CH 3 COO− (aq) + H 3 O + (aq)
Initial 0.10 — 0.10 ~0
Change −x — +x +x
Equilibrium 0.10−x — 0.10 + x x
− +
Step 3 K = [CH 3 COO ][H 3 O ]
a CH COOH]
3
= (0.10 + x)(x)
(0.10 − x)
Step 4 Assume that (0.10 + x) ≈ 0.10 and (0.10 − x) ≈ 0.10. PROBLEM TIP
K ≈ (0.10)(x) = 1.8 × 10 −5 You can check whether it rea-
a (0.10) sonable to ignore x by dividing
∴x = 1.8 × 10 −5mol/L 0.10 by K . The value is greater
a
Step 5 pH = −log(1.8 × 10 −5) than 500, so the approximation
is reasonable.
= 4.74
The pH of the buffer solution is 4.74.
Check Your Solution
The value of x(1.8 × 10 −5) is negligible compared with the initial
concentration of each component (0.10). A buffer that is made using a
weak acid and its conjugate base should have a pH that is less than 7.
Practice Problems
25. A buffer solution is made by mixing 250 mL of 0.200 mol/L aqueous
ammonia and 400 mL of 0.150 mol/L ammonium chloride. Calculate
the pH of the buffer solution.
26. A buffer solution is made by mixing 200 mL of 0.200 mol/L aqueous
ammonia and 450 mL of 0.150 mol/L ammonium chloride. Calculate
the pH of the buffer solution.
27. A buffer solution contains 0.200 mol/L nitrous acid, HNO , and
2(aq)
0.140 mol/L potassium nitrite, KNO . What is the pH of the buffer
2(aq)
solution?
28. A buffer solution is prepared by dissolving 1.80 g of benzoic acid,
C H COOH, and 1.95 g of sodium benzoate, NaC H COO, in 800 mL
6 5 6 5
of water. Calculate the pH of the buffer solution.
Chapter 9 Aqueous Solutions and Solubility Equilibria • MHR 441
Section Summary
In this section, you determined the solubility product constant, K , based
sp
on solubility data. You obtained your own solubility data and used these
data to calculate a value for K . You determined the molar solubility of
sp
ionic solutions in pure water and in solutions of common ions, based on
their K values. In section 9.3, you will further explore the implications
sp
of Le Châtelier’s principle. You will use a reaction quotient, Q , to
sp
predict whether a precipitate forms. As well, you will learn how selective
precipitation can be used to identify ions in solution.
Section Review
1 K/U The values of K sp for binary ionic compounds that contain either
sodium, potassium, or ammonium cations are not listed in a K table.
sp
State why.
2 K/U A saturated solution of a slightly soluble ionic compound does not
contain any of the solute in solid form. Is this system at equilibrium?
Explain your answer briefly.
3 C Does a larger value of K sp necessarily mean a greater solubility?
To illustrate your answer, calculate and compare the molar solubility
of silver chloride, AgCl(K = 1.8 × 10 −10), with silver chromate,
sp
Ag CrO (K = 2.6 × 10 −12).
2 4 sp
4 C Explain why there is no simple relationship between K sp for a
given compound and the solubility of the compound in g/L.
5 I The maximum solubility of barium fluoride, BaF 2 , at 25˚C,
is 1.3 g/L.
(a) Calculate K for BaF at 25˚C.
sp 2
(b) Calculate the solubility of BaF in formula units of BaF /L.
2 2
6 I A chemist adds 20.0 g of sodium hydroxide, NaOH, to a 1.0 L
solution of 1.0 mol/L acetic acid.
(a) Explain why the resulting solution resists pH changes when an acid
or a base is added.
(b) Calculate the pH of the solution. Assume that there is no change in
the volume of the solution when NaOH is added.
7 I A buffer solution is prepared by adding 2.1 g of NaF to
5.00 × 102mL of 0.10 mol/L HF . Calculate the pH of the buffer solu-
(aq)
tion. Assume that no change in volume results from the addition of
NaF to the HF solution.
8 I A solution of BaCl 2 is added to a solution of Na 2 SO 4 .
(a) What do you expect to observe? Include a balanced chemical
equation in your answer.
(b) Calculate the solubility (in mol/L and in g/L) of BaSO in pure water.
4
(c) Calculate the solubility (in mol/L and in g/L) of BaSO in
4
0.085 mol/L Na SO .
2 4
9 C Explain why the solubility of nickel(II) carbonate, NiCO 3 , is unaf-
fected by the addition of NaCl to a saturated solution of NiCO .
3
442 MHR • Unit 4 Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
Predicting the Formation 9.3
of a Precipitate
In section 9.2, you worked with concentrations of ions in solutions at Section Preview/
equilibrium. You used K to determine the solubility of ionic substances Specific Expectations
sp
in pure water and in solutions of common ions. The systems you worked In this section, you will
with were saturated solutions that contained excess, undissolved solute.
(cid:2) predictthe formation of
How do you predict whether a given concentration of ions will result precipitates by using the
in the precipitation of an ionic compound? How can you tell if a solution solubility product constant
is saturated? You substitute the concentrations of the ions into an expres-
(cid:2) solveequilibrium problems
sion that is identical to the solubility product expression. Because these involving concentrations
concentrations may not be the same as the concentrations that the of reactants and products
equilibrium system would have, however, the expression has a different and K sp
name: the ion product. (cid:2) communicateyour under-
standing of the following
Comparing the Ion Product With the Solubility Product terms: ion product (Q sp ),
fractional precipitation,
The ion product,Q sp , is an expression that is identical to the solubility qualitative analysis,
product constant, but its value is calculated using concentrations that quantitative analysis
are not necessarily those at equilibrium. (The relationship between the
expression for solubility product, K , and the expression for the ion
sp
product, Q , is analogous to the relationship between the equilibrium
sp
constant, K , and the reaction quotient, Q .)
c c
For example, suppose that you slowly add an ionic compound,
such as magnesium sulfate, MgSO , to water in a beaker. The following
4
equation represents the dissociation.
MgSO (cid:2)(cid:3) Mg2+ + SO 2− K = 5.9 × 10 −3
4(s) (aq) 4 (aq) sp
Initially, all the magnesium sulfate dissolves. The solution is not at
equilibrium as long as more solid can dissolve. As you add more solid,
however, the solution reaches equilibrium. The solution is saturated,
and no more salt will dissolve. If you continue to add magnesium sulfate
to the water, you will see an increasing amount of solid in the beaker.
The ion product expression for magnesium sulfate is written
as follows:
Q = [Mg2+ ][SO 2− ]
sp 4
You calculate Q by substituting the concentration of each ion into
sp
the expression. If Q is larger than K , the product of the concentrations of
sp sp
the ions is greater than it would be at equilibrium. For the system to attain
equilibrium, some of the ions must leave the solution by precipitation.
Conversely, if Q is less than K , the product of the concentration of the
sp sp
ions is smaller than it is at equilibrium. Therefore, the solution is not yet
saturated and more ions can be added to the solution without any
precipitation. The relationship between Q and K for the dissociation of
sp sp
a slightly soluble ionic compound is summarized on the next page. Use the
following general equation as a reference.
Solidioniccompound
(cid:2)(cid:3)
Dissociatedionsinsolution
Chapter 9 Aqueous Solutions and Solubility Equilibria • MHR 443
Q < K • The system attains equilibrium by moving to the right,
sp sp
favouring dissociation.
• More solid can dissolve.
Q = K • The system is at equilibrium.
sp sp
• No more solid can dissolve.
• No precipitate forms.
Q > K • The system attains equilibrium by moving to the left,
sp sp
favouring precipitation.
• A precipitate forms until equilibrium is reached.
Using the Ion Product Expression
You can use the relationship between the ion product expression and the
solubility product expression to predict whether a precipitate will form
in a given system. One common system involves mixing solutions of two
soluble ionic compounds, which react to form an ionic compound with a
very low solubility. If Q > K , based on the initial concentrations of the
sp sp
ions in solution, the sparingly soluble compound will form a precipitate.
How do you know which ionic compounds are soluble and which are
not? In your previous chemistry course, you learned a set of solubility
guidelines. Table 9.3 summarizes these guidelines. Remember: the higher
guideline takes precedence. (For instance, guideline 3 says that carbonates
have very low solubility. Sodium carbonate is soluble, however, because
guideline 1 says that ionic compounds containing sodium are soluble.)
Chemists do not usually work with solubility products for soluble
compounds. Thus, you will not find soluble ionic compounds listed in K
sp
tables. If you see a compound in a K table, you know that it has a low
sp
solubility relative to compounds such as sodium chloride.
Table 9.3 General Solubility Guidelines
Guideline Cations Anions Result Exceptions
+ + + − −
1 Li , Na , K NO , CH COO , soluble Ca(ClO ) is
3 3 32
+ + + −
Rb , Cs , Nh ClO insoluble.
4 3
2 Ag
+
,
Pb2+
, Hg
+
CO
2−
, PO
3− ,O2−
, very low BaO and Ba(OH)
3 4 2
S2−
, OH
−
solubility are soluble. Group 2
(IIA) sulfides tend
to decompose.
− − −
3 Cl , Br , I soluble
4
Ba2+
,
Ca2+
,
Sr2+
very low
solubility
5
Mg2+
,
Cu2+ ,Zn2+
, SO
2−
soluble
4
Fe2+
,
Fe3+
,
Al3+
For example, silver nitrate and sodium chloride are both soluble ionic
compounds. When they are mixed in solution, however, they react to form
silver chloride, as shown in Figure 9.7. The equation for the reaction is:
Figure 9.7 A chemist can test AgNO 3(aq) + NaCl (aq) (cid:2)(cid:3) AgCl (s) + NaNO 3(aq)
for the presence of chloride ions in
Silver chloride has a very low solubility. Therefore, a precipitate will form
a solution by adding silver nitrate
even if the initial concentration of chloride and silver ions is very small.
solution. If a white precipitate
The following Sample Problems show you how to decide whether a
of silver chloride forms, the test
precipitate will form under a given set of conditions.
is positive for chloride.
444 MHR • Unit 4 Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
Sample Problem
Predicting Precipitation I
Problem
A common test for chloride ions in a solution involves adding AgNO
3(ag)
to the solution being tested. If chloride ions are present in sufficient
quantity, the chemist will observe a white cloudiness that indicates the
formation of a precipitate. K for silver chloride is 1.8 × 10 −10.
sp
A drop (0.050 mL) of 6.0 mol/L silver nitrate is added to 1.0 L of
0.10 mol/L sodium chloride. Does a precipitate of silver chloride form?
What Is Required?
Will silver chloride precipitate under the given conditions?
What Is Given?
You know the concentration and volume of the silver nitrate and sodium
chloride solutions. For AgNO , c = 6.0mol/L and V = 0.050mL.
3
For NaCl, c = 0.10mol/L and V = 1.0L. You also know K for silver
sp
chloride.
Plan Your Strategy
Step 1 Determine the concentrations of silver ions and chloride ions in
the reaction mixture.
Step 2 Substitute the ion concentrations into the ion product expression
for silver chloride to determine Q .
sp
Step 3 Compare Q with K , and predict whether or not a precipitate
sp sp
will form.
Act on Your Strategy
Step 1 Because the volume of the AgNO solution is much smaller than
3
the volume of the NaClsolution, you can ignore it. In other words,
assume that the final volume of the reaction mixture is 1.0 L.
NaCl (cid:2)(cid:3) Na + + Cl −
(aq) (aq) (aq)
∴[Cl − ] = [NaCl] = 0.10mol/L
AgNO (cid:2)(cid:3) Ag + + NO −
3(s) (aq) 3 (aq)
[Ag + ] = [AgNO ] = c × V initial
3 V
final
= (6.0mol/L)(0.050mL × 1.0 × 10 −3L/mL
1.0L
= 3.0 × 10 −4mol/L
Step 2 Q = [Ag + ][Cl − ]
sp
= (3.0 × 10 −4)(0.10)
= 3.0 × 10 −5
Step 3 Since Q > K , AgCl will precipitate until Q = 1.8 × 10 −10.
sp sp sp
Check Your Solution
+
The units are correct in the calculation of [Ag ]. It seems reasonable that
a precipitate formed, since K for silver chloride is very small compared
sp
with the concentration of chloride ions and silver ions.
Chapter 9 Aqueous Solutions and Solubility Equilibria • MHR 445
Practice Problems
29. A solution contains 0.15 mol/L of NaCl and 0.0034 mol/L Pb(NO ) .
3 2
Does a precipitate form? Include a balanced chemical equation for the
formation of the possible precipitate. K for PbCl is 1.7 × 10 −5.
sp 2
30. One drop (0.050 mL) of 1.5 mol/L potassium chromate, K CrO , is
2 4
added to 250 mL of 0.10 mol/L AgNO . Does a precipitate form?
3
Include a balanced chemical equation for the formation of the
possible precipitate. K for Ag CrO is 2.6 × 10 −12.
sp 2 4
PROBLEM TIP 31. A chemist adds 0.010 g of CaCl to 5.0 × 102mL of 0.0015 mol/L
2
For Practice Problems 31 and sodium carbonate, Na CO . Does a precipitate of calcium carbonate
2 3
32, you will need to look up form? Include a balanced chemical equation for the formation of the
values of K sp in Appendix E. possible precipitate.
32. 0.10 mg of magnesium chloride, MgCl , is added to 2.5 × 102mL of
2
0.0010 mol/L NaOH. Does a precipitate of magnesium hydroxide
form? Include a balanced chemical equation for the formation of the
possible precipitate.
The next Sample Problem shows how to predict whether or not a precipi-
tate will form when two significant volumes of reactant are mixed together.
You will need to use the solubility guidelines to decide whether or not an
insoluble compound forms.
Sample Problem
Predicting Precipitation II
Problem
A chemist mixes 100.0 mL of 0.25 mol/L Ca(NO ) with 200.0 mL of
3 2
0.070 mol/L NaF. Does a precipitate form?
What Is Given?
You know the initial concentration and volume of the calcium nitrate
and sodium fluoride solutions. For Ca(NO ) , c = 0.25mol/L and
3 2
V = 100.0mL. For NaF, c = 0.070mol/L and V = 200.0mL. As well,
you have the solubility guidelines in Table 9.3.
Plan Your Strategy
Step 1 Decide whether a compound with low solubility forms when
calcium nitrate and sodium fluoride are mixed, using the solubility
guidelines.
Step 2 If an insoluble compound forms, write an equation that represents
the reaction. Look up K for the compound in Appendix E.
sp
Step 3 Determine the concentrations of the ions that make up
the compound.
Step 4 Substitute the concentrations of the ions into the ion product
expression for the compound to determine Q .
sp
Step 5 Compare Q with K , and predict whether or not a precipitate
sp sp
forms.
446 MHR • Unit 4 Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
Act on Your Strategy
Step 1 According to the solubility guidelines, NaF and Ca(NO ) are both
3 2
soluble, because ionic compounds that contain sodium or nitrate
ions are soluble. When you mix the solutions, NaNO , and CaF
3 2
can also form. NaNO is soluble, but CaF is not, according to
3 2
guideline 4.
Step 2 NaF + Ca(NO ) (cid:2)(cid:3) NaNO + CaF
(aq) 3 2(aq) 3(aq) 2(s)
From Appendix E, K for CaF is 3.2 × 10 −11.
sp 2
Step 3 When calculating the volume of the reaction mixture, assume that
it is equal to the sum of the volumes of the solutions. This is a
reasonable assumption, because both solutions are dilute.
[Ca2+ ] = [Ca(NO ) ] = c × V initial
3 2 V
final
= (0.25mol/L)(100.0mL)
(100.0mL + 200.0mL
= 8.3 × 10 −2mol/L
[F − ] = [NaF] = c × V initial
V
final
= (0.070mol/L)(200.0mL)
(100.0mL + 200.0mL)
= 4.7 × 10 −2mol/L
Step 4 Q = [Ca2+ ][F − ]2
sp
= (8.3 × 10 −2)(4.7 × 10 −2)2
= 1.8 × 10 −4
Step 5 Since Q > K , CaF precipitates until Q = 3.2 × 10 −11.
sp sp 2 sp
Check Your Solution
The units in the calculation of the concentrations of the ions are correct.
It seems reasonable that a precipitate formed, since K for calcium
sp
fluoride is very small compared with the concentrations of the chloride
ions and silver ions.
Practice Problems
33. 1.0 × 102mL of 1.0 × 10 −3mol/L Pb(NO ) is added to 40 mL of
3 2
0.040 mol/L NaCl. Does a precipitate form? Include a balanced
chemical equation for the formation of the possible precipitate.
34. 2.3 × 102mL of 0.0015 mol/L AgNO is added to1.3 × 102mL of
3
0.010 mol/L calcium acetate, Ca(CH COO) . Does a precipitate form?
3 2
Include a balanced chemical equation for the formation of the
possible precipitate. K for AgCH COO is 2.0 × 10 −3.
sp 3
35. 25 mL of 0.10 mol/L NaOH is added to 5.0 × 102mL of
0.00010 mol/L cobalt(II) chloride, CoCl . Does a precipitate form?
2
Include a balanced chemical equation for the formation of the
possible precipitate.
36. 250 mL of 0.0011 mol/L Al (SO ) is added to 50 mL of 0.022 mol/L
2 4 3
BaCl . Does a precipitate form? Include a balanced chemical equation
2
for the formation of the possible precipitate.
Chapter 9 Aqueous Solutions and Solubility Equilibria • MHR 447
Analytical Applications of Precipitation Reactions
In the previous Sample Problems, you saw that combining solutions of
soluble ionic compounds can cause the precipitation of a slightly soluble
ionic compound. Analytical chemists use precipitation reactions to
remove ions from solution or to identify ions in an unknown solution.
Fractional Precipitation
Suppose a chemist has a solution that contains several similar ions. The
chemist wants to remove some of these ions, while leaving other ions in
solution. One way to do this is by fractional precipitation: a process in
which ions are selectively precipitated from solution, leaving other ions.
−
For example, consider a solution that contains three halide ions: Cl ,
− −
Br , and I . Since these halides all come from the same group on the
periodic table, they share many properties. When they are the anions in
slightly soluble ionic compounds, however, they have different solubilities.
(See Table 9.4.) Therefore, chemists can use fractional precipitation to
separate them from solution.
Table 9.4 Values of K for Silver Halides
sp
Silver halide K
sp
AgCl 1.8 × 10 −10
AgBr 3.3 × 10 −13
AgI 1.5 × 10 −16
Out of the three compounds, silver chloride is the most soluble and
silver iodide is the least soluble. (You can compare the solubilities of
the compounds based on their solubility products because they are all
the same type. Each formula unit contains two ions.)
To separate the halide ions, a chemist adds silver ions to the solution
until most of the iodide ions precipitate out as AgI. The chemist stops
adding silver ions before AgBr begins to precipitate. The chemist then
removes the solid AgI by filtration or by using a centrifuge, as shown in
Figure 9.8. To remove the bromide ions, the chemist repeats the process
with the remaining solution. The chemist adds silver ions until most of
the bromide ions precipitate out as AgBr, but stops adding ions before
AgCl begins to precipitate. By filtering or centrifuging again, the chemist
obtains a solution that contains only chloride ions.
Figure 9.8 Chemists use a
centrifuge to separate a precipitate
from a solution. The centrifuge
spins the samples quickly, and the
resulting force pushes the precipi-
tate to the bottom of the test tube.
The solution can then be decanted.
448 MHR • Unit 4 Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
Qualitative Analysis
Web LINK
As well as separating similar ions out of solution, chemists can also use
www.mcgrawhill.ca/links/
their understanding of solubility and precipitation reactions to identify
chemistry12
unknown ions in solution. Qualitative analysis is the branch of analytical
Bauxite is the most abundant
chemistry that involves identifying elements, compounds, and ions in
ore of aluminum. The first step
samples of unknown or uncertain composition. The other branch of
in extracting aluminum from
analytical chemistry is quantitative analysis. In quantitative analysis,
bauxite is called the Bayer
analytical chemists determine how much of a compound, element, or ion process. The Bayer process
is in a sample. involves a fractional precipita-
One way to identify cations in solution is by selectively precipitating tion of impurities, including
them out of solution. As you know, cations may form soluble or insoluble iron(III) oxide and titanium
dioxide. Search the Internet to
ionic compounds, depending on the anions that are present. For example,
find the history of the Bayer
copper(II) chloride, CuCl is soluble in water. Copper(II) sulfide, CuS, is
2 process and learn how it
insoluble in an acidic solution. Knowing about the relative solubility of
works. Present your findings
cations when combined with various anions helps chemists identify them.
as a poster. To start your
Using precipitation reactions to identify cations was once a common search, go to the web site
part of qualitative analyses. Today, chemists usually identify and quantify above and click on Web Links.
unknowns using instruments such as spectrophotometers. However,
examining the identification of cations through precipitation reactions
allows you to see how solubility equilibria can be manipulated. It also
provides an opportunity to solve a chemical “mystery”—what is in the
unknown solution?
To find out what cations are in a solution using precipitation reactions,
chemists carry out reactions according to a schemethat incorporates tests
for each component that may be present. One example of such a scheme is
shown in Figure 9.9. This scheme shows how a chemist would analyze an
unknown solution that may contain all, some, or none of the following
ions: silver, Ag
+
; cadmium,
Cd2+
; and aluminium,
Al3+
. The analysis uses
selective, step by step precipitation.
−
add CI
(HCI)
Chapter 9 Aqueous Solutions and Solubility Equilibria • MHR 449
egufirtnec egufirtnec egufirtnec
add
S2−
add OH
−
(H S) (NH )
2 3
+
Ag
Cd2+ Cd2+
AI3+ AI3+ AI3+
AgCI CdS AI(OH)
3
1 2 3 4
Initially, all If silver ion is If cadmium ion is If aluminum is
ions are present, a white present, a yellow present, a white
dissolved. precipitate will form. precipitate will form. precipitate will form.
Figure 9.9 This diagram shows a scheme for identifying silver, Ag+, cadmium, Cd2+, and aluminium, Al3+, ions. After each step, if a
precipitate forms, it is separated by centrifugation. Then the solution is carefully poured into a new test tube and used in the next step.
The scheme that is shown in Figure 9.9 is very simple. More complex
qualitative analyses involve many more steps of isolation and identifica-
tion, including some steps that are not precipitation reactions. For
+ +
example, some ions, such as sodium, Na , and potassium, K , cannot be
precipitated out of an aqueous solution, because the ionic compounds that
contain them are always soluble. Instead, chemists identify these ions
using a flame test. In the following ThoughtLab, you will simulate a
qualitative analysis that includes a flame test.
ThoughtLab A Qualitative Analysis
Suppose that you are an analytical chemist. You 3. Exchange schemes and observations with a
want to test an unknown solution that contains some classmate. Do not tell your classmate which
or all of the following ions: silver, Ag+; arsenic, As3+; ions are in your unknown solution. Based on
chromium, Cr3+; and sodium, Na+. Your laboratory your classmate’s scheme and observations,
assistant has already performed some tests on determine which ions are in your classmate’s
known solutions of these ions and has made the unknown solution.
following observations: 4. Discuss your results with your classmate.
• As3+forms a precipitate when H 2 S (aq) is added. Did you both succeed in identifying the ions
Cr3+ and Na+ do not form a precipitate when in the unknown solution? If not, you or your
H 2 S (aq) is added. classmate may need to modify your schemes
• Ag+ forms a precipitate when HCl (aq) is added. The or observations.
other ions do not form a precipitate when HCl
(aq)
is added. Analysis
• Cr3+ forms a precipitate when a solution of NH is
3
1. Explain how qualitative analysis depends on the
added. (Making the solution basic has the same
different solubilities of ionic compounds.
effect as adding OH−.) Ag+ also forms a precipitate
in a basic solution. 2. Hg 2 2+forms an insoluble chloride, Hg 2 Cl 2 . If
• Na+ produces a bright yellow flame in a flame test. your unknown solution contained a mixture of
all or some of the Hg 2+, Ag+, Cr3+, and As3+ions,
2
Procedure would the scheme you developed be sufficient
to identify all the ions in the solution? Explain
1. Based on these observations, devise a step-by-
your answer.
step scheme for testing an unknown solution.
The solution may contain all, some, or just one 3. If you were performing this analysis in a
of the possible ions. Use Figure 9.9 to help you. laboratory, what safety precautions would you
need to take? Explain your answer.
2. Decide which ions are in the unknown solution.
(Remember, the solution may contain one, two,
three, or all of the possible ions listed above.)
Based on your scheme, write down the observa-
tions that you expect to make for this solution.
Section Summary
In Chapter 9, as in most of Unit 4, you learned about equilibrium reactions.
In this section, you analyzed precipitation reactions. You mainly examined
double-displacement reactions—reactions in which two soluble ionic
compounds react to form a precipitate. You used the solubility product
constant, K , to predict whether or not a precipitate would form for given
sp
concentrations of ions. In Unit 5, you will learn about a class of reactions
that will probably be new to you. You will see how these reactions inter-
convert chemical and electrical energy.
450 MHR • Unit 4 Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
Section Review
1 K/U Answer the following questions about the ion product.
(a) Under what circumstances would a chemist want to determine Q
sp
for a system?
(b) How does Q differ from K ?
sp sp
(c) Why are there no tabulated Q values?
sp
2 I A chemist adds 1.0 mg of NaI to 50 mL of a 0.010 mol/L solution of
Pb(NO ) . Does a precipitate form? K for PbI is 9.8 × 10 −9.
3 2 sp 2
3 I How many milligrams of Na 2 SO 4 will just begin to precipitate
CaSO from 5.0 × 102mL of a 0.10 mol/L solution of CaCl ? K for
4 2 sp
CaSO is 2.4 × 10 −5. Hint: How does Q compare with K at the point
4 sp sp
when precipitation just begins?
4 I How many drops of 0.0010 mol/L silver nitrate solution will just
begin to precipitate AgCl from 5.0 × 104mL of a 0.90% (m/v) solution
of NaCl? (Assume that one drop equals 0.050 mL.) K for AgCl
sp
is 1.8 × 10 −10.
5 I K sp for CaSO 4 is 2.4 × 10 −5, and K sp for SrSO 4 is 3.2 × 10 −7.
Suppose that you have a 1.0 L solution that is 0.20 mol/L in
Ca2+
ions
and 0.20 mol/L in
Sr2+
ions. You slowly begin to add solid Na SO .
2 4
(a) Explain why SrSO precipitates first.
4
(b) How many milligrams of Al (SO ) will just begin to precipitate
2 4 3
SrSO from the solution?
4
6 C Consider a solution that contains
Pb2+
,
Cu2+
, and
Mg2+
cations,
present as their (soluble) nitrate salts. How could you selectively
precipitate these cations, given solutions of NaCl, Na S, and Na PO ?
2 3 4
Present your answer as a flowchart, with a chemical equation
accompanying each step.
7 MC To purify sodium chloride, NaCl, for use as table salt, HCl is
added to a saturated solution of NaCl. Explain how this process works,
using the concept of the ion product. What do you think is the next
step in the process? Explain your answer.
Chapter 9 Aqueous Solutions and Solubility Equilibria • MHR 451
Review
Reflecting on Chapter 9 3. There are many different acid-base indicators.
State two ways in which they are all similar.
Summarize this chapter in the format of your
choice. Here are a few ideas to use as guidelines: 4. What substance can be added to an aqueous
• Explain how to predict whether a solution of a solution of propanoic acid to prepare a buffer
specific salt will be acidic, basic, or neutral. solution?
• Explain how to determine a substance’s 5. Hydrochloric acid is slowly added to a solution
solubility product constant, K sp , based on the of sodium hydroxide. How does the pH of the
molar solubility of the substance. solution change?
• Explain how to calculate the molar solubility of
6. A solution of a certain salt is tested with litmus
a pure substance in water or in a solution of a
paper, and the litmus turns red. What does this
common ion, given K .
sp tell you about the relative strengths of the acid
• Describe how to use K to predict the formation
sp and base from which the salt is derived?
of a precipitate.
• Identify the effects of solubility equilibria in the 7. List the names and formulas of three salts that
dissolve in water to form
human body.
• Describe how chemists use solubility equilibria (a) an acidic solution (b) a basic solution
to remove specific ions from solution and to 8. When performing an acid-base titration, you
identify ions in solution. should add only a few drops of indicator rather
than a few millilitres. Explain why.
Reviewing Key Terms
9. Distinguish between the terms “solubility” and
For each of the following terms, write a sentence “solubility product constant.”
that shows your understanding of its meaning. 10. Why do tables of K values for compounds not
sp
equivalence point include values for soluble compounds?
end-point
11. Values of K are given for a certain tempera-
sp
solubility product constant (K )
sp ture. How do the K values for most salts
sp
ion product (Q )
sp change if the temperature of the solution
fractional precipitation
is increased?
qualitative analysis
12. Write an equation for the dissociation of
quantitative analysis
each compound in water. Then write the
Knowledge/Understanding corresponding K sp expression.
(a) CuBr (d) Mg (PO )
3 4 2
1. Assume that the aqueous solutions in each pair
(b) CaCrO (e) MgNH PO
4 4 4
have the same concentration. For each pair,
(c) Ni(OH)
2
identify which of the two solutions has the
13. For a solubility system to reach equilibrium,
lower pH.
some undissolved solid must be present.
(a) NH Cl and KHSO
4 (aq) 4(aq)
Explain why.
(b) H S and KHSO
2 (aq) 4(aq)
(c) NaHPO and CaBr 14. Compare the solubility of magnesium hydroxide
4(aq) 2(aq)
(d) Al(NO ) and Al(NO ) in a saturated solution of ammonium chloride
3 3(aq) 2 2(aq)
with the solubility of magnesium hydroxide in
2. Suppose that you have the following indicators
pure water. Would you expect magnesium
available: bromphenol blue, methyl red,
hydroxide to be more or less soluble, or to have
bromthymol blue, and phenolphthalein. Use
the same solubility, in the ammonium chloride
Figure 9.3 to suggest an appropriate indicator
solution? Explain your answer.
for each of the following titrations. Do not do
any calculations. 15. In aqueous solution, the dihydrogen phosphate,
−
(a) sulfuric acid with sodium hydroxide H 2 PO 4(aq) , ion can act as either an acid or a
(b) formic acid with sodium hydroxide base. When tested, a solution containing
−
(c) pyridine with nitric acid H 2 PO 4 was found to be acidic. Write the
equation for the reaction that took place.
452 MHR • Unit 4 Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
16. Why must Q usually be much larger than K What is the smallest concentration of Cl −
sp sp (aq)
before you can observe a precipitate forming? in the test water that will cause the formation
17. Silver halide salts are used in black and white of a precipitate?
photography. During the developing process, 23. Design an experiment to determine K for
sp
excess silver halide is removed from the film lead(II) chloride, PbCl , using the following
2
by using a solution of sodium thiosulfate reaction.
(commonly called “hypo”). Pb2+ + Zn (cid:2)(cid:3) Pb + Zn2+
(aq) (s) (s) (aq)
AgBr + 2S O 2− (cid:2)(cid:3) Ag(S O ) 3− + Br −
(s) 2 3 (aq) 2 3 2(aq) (aq) Assume that you have solid PbCl
2
, a strip of
What is the effect on this equilibrium if a more zinc metal, filter paper, an electronic balance,
concentrated solution of hypo is used? and any other standard laboratory equipment.
(a) Write the equation for the dissolution of
Inquiry
PbCl and the corresponding K equation.
2 sp
18. Suppose that you have an aqueous solution of (b) Provide a step-by-step procedure, clearly
copper iodide, CuI , which you must precipitate indicating what needs to be measured
2
and filter before pouring the remaining liquid and/or recorded.
into a disposal beaker. You decide to use the (c) Explain how you would use your empirical
common ion effect to precipitate the CuI 2 . In the data to determine K sp for PbCl 2 .
laboratory, you find stock solutions of Cu(NO 3 ) 2 24. Design an experiment to determine K sp for
and NaI with the same concentrations. You want lead(II) iodide, PbI , using the reaction below.
2
to use the smallest volume possible. Which Pb2+ + CrO 2− (cid:2)(cid:3) PbCrO
(aq) 4 (aq) 4(s)
stock solution will you choose to precipitate the
Assume that you have solid PbCl , a 0.50 mol/L
CuI ? Explain your answer. 2
2
solution of K CrO , filter paper, an electronic
2 4
19. Which has the greater effect on the solubility
balance, and any other standard laboratory
of PbI in 1.0 L of a saturated solution: the
2 equipment.
addition of 0.10 mol of solid Pb(NO ) , or the
3 2 (a) Write the equation for the dissolution of PbI
2
addition of 0.10 mol of solid NaI? Justify your
and the corresponding K equation.
sp
answer with calculations. Assume that you can
(b) Provide a step-by-step procedure, clearly
ignore the volume change when solid Pb(NO )
3 2 indicating what needs to be measured and/or
is added.
recorded.
20. Lead(II) iodide and barium sulfate have almost (c) Explain how you would use your empirical
the same value for K sp . (K sp for PbI 2 is data to determine K sp for PbI 2 .
9.8 × 10 −9, and K sp for BaSO 4 is 1.1 × 10 −10.) (d) If K sp for PbI 2 is 7.9 × 10 −9, explain why the
What is the ratio of
Pb2+
(aq) to
Ba2+
(aq) in satura- solubility of PbCrO 4 can be ignored. (K sp for
ted solutions of the salts? PbCrO is 1.8 × 10 −14.)
4
21. Silver cyanide is used in aqueous solutions 25. A student titrated 25.0 mL of 0.280 mol/L
to plate a coating of silver on ornaments, hydrochloric acid with 0.360 mol/L sodium
jewellery, and silver cutlery. What is the hydroxide solution. The end-point was
+
concentration of Ag (aq) in a saturated solution observed after adding 18.80 mL of NaOH (aq) .
of AgCN? Some of the steps that were followed by the
22. Water with a high chloride ion content is not student are listed below:
safe to drink. The following process is used to 1. A transfer pipette was rinsed with water.
test for the presence of Cl − : Dissolve 5.0 g of The pipette was then used to obtain 25.0 mL
(aq)
AgNO in 500 mL of distilled water. Add 10 of hydrochloric acid, which was placed in
3
drops of the solution to 10 mL of the water an Erlenmeyer flask.
being tested, and look for a cloudy white 2. About 50 mL of water was added to the
precipitate. Erlenmeyer flask.
3. A few drops of phenolphthalein indicator
were added to the Erlenmeyer flask.
Chapter 9 Aqueous Solutions and Solubility Equilibria • MHR 453
4. A burette was rinsed with water, and then copper strip after the reaction.
filled with the sodium hydroxide solution. (c) Why must the saturated AgCH CO solution
3 2
(a) Calculate the volume of NaOH that be free of any solid AgCH CO ?
(aq) 3 2
the student should have used to reach 30. A 0.150 mol/L solution of acetic acid was
equivalence. titrated with 25.0 mL of 0.250 mol/L sodium
(b) What was the percent error in the hydroxide.
titration? (a) Calculate the volume of acetic acid that was
(c) Which step(s) in the titiration could needed at the equivalence point.
account for the error? (b) What is the pH of the solution at equivalence?
26. Assume that you have a solution that is (c) Suggest a suitable indicator for this titration.
+
0.0010 mol/L in Cu (aq) and 0.0010 mol/L in 31. A buffer solution is prepared by adding 30.0 g
+
Ag (aq) . If you begin to add solid NaCl to the of pure acetic acid to 41.0 g of sodium acetate
solution, which compound will precipitate in water, and then diluting the solution to
first? Explain. 1.00 L. What is the pH of the buffer solution?
27. A sample of well water contains
1.0 × 10 −3mol/L calcium sulfate and Communication
1.0 × 10 −4mol/L calcium carbonate ion. 32. Are “insoluble” compounds really insoluble?
A chemist adds barium chloride to the sample. Explain.
Which precipitate forms first, barium sulfate or
33. Why is the concentration of a solid, undissolved
barium carbonate?
compound not included in a K expression?
sp
28. Solutions that contain dissolved ions have been
34. Is a supersaturated solution an example of an
shown to conduct electricity.
equilibrium system? Explain.
(a) Design an experiment in which you use a
35. When a solution of potassium iodide, KI, is
sensitive conductivity meter to determine
added to a solution of lead (II) nitrate,
the K of a slightly soluble compound.
sp
Pb(NO ) , a precipitate forms.
(b) How do you propose to calibrate the 3 2
(a) Write a chemical equation for the reaction.
conductivity meter?
Indicate the physical state of each reactant
(c) If your teacher approves of your experimental
and product.
design, and if you have access to a conduc-
(b) How does the product of the concentration
tivity meter, carry out your experiment to
of the ions that make up the precipitate
determine K for Ca(OH) .
sp 2
compare with the value of K for the precipi-
sp
29. A student performs an experiment to determine
tate immediately before precipitation begins?
K for silver acetate, AgCH CO , using the
sp 3 2 (c) After the precipitate forms, how would
following reaction.
you describe the solution with respect to
2Ag + (aq) + Cu (s) (cid:2)(cid:3) 2Ag (s) + Cu2 (a + q) . the precipitated compound: unsaturated,
The student adds a strip of copper metal, with saturated, or supersaturated?
a known mass, to a saturated solution of 36. Explain “fractional precipitation” in your own
AgCH 3 CO 2 . After the reaction, the copper strip words. On what principle is it based?
is washed, dried, and re-weighed.
37. How is the common ion effect an application of
(a) Write the equilibrium equation that
Le Châtelier’s principle? Illustrate your answer
represents the equilibrium of AgCH CO .
3 2 with an example, including diagrams and
Also write the corresponding K equation.
sp chemical equations.
(b) K for AgCH CO is 2.0 × 10 −3. A strip of
sp 3 2
copper metal, with an initial mass of 23.4 g,
was placed in 1.00 × 102mL of saturated
AgCH CO solution with no solid AgCH CO
3 2 3 2
present. Calculate the expected mass of the
454 MHR • Unit 4 Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
Making Connections 8.(b)1.0×10−5mol/L; 2.4×10−3g/L(c)1.3×10−9mol/L;
38. The concentration of calcium, Ca2+ , ions in a 3.0×10−7g/L 9.3: 2.Q sp =1.7×10−10>K sp , therefore no
precipitate forms. 3.17 mg 4.one drop 5.(b)0.18 mg
city’s water supply is too high.
(a) Explain, with the help of chemical equa-
tion(s), how to use solid sodium carbonate
(washing soda or soda ash), Na CO , to
2 3
reduce
[Ca2+
] in the water.
(b) What challenges would engineers need to
overcome when implementing the system
for reducing
[Ca2+
]?
Answers to Practice Problems and Short Answers to
Section Review Questions
Practice Problems: 1.(a)basic (b)basic (c)neutral (d)acidic
2.(a)acidic; NH 4 + (aq) +H 2 O ((cid:4)) (cid:2)(cid:3) NH 3(aq) +H 3 O+ (aq) (b)neutral
(c)basic; OBr− (aq) +H 2 O ((cid:4)) (cid:2)(cid:3) HOBr (aq) +OH− (aq) (d)acidic;
NH 4 + (aq) +H 2 O ((cid:4)) (cid:2)(cid:3) NH 3(aq) +H 3 O+ (aq) 3.C 6 H 5 O−is the
stronger base because K for its conjugate acid is smaller.
a
4.acidic 5.7.74 6.1.70 7.8.15 8.5.28
9.(a)CuCl
(s)
(cid:2)(cid:3) Cu+
(aq)
+Cl−
(aq)
; K
sp
=[Cu+][Cl−]
(b)BaF
2(s)
(cid:2)(cid:3) Ba2+
(aq)
+2F−
(aq)
; K
sp
=[Ba2+][F−]2
(c)Ag
2
SO
4(s)
(cid:2)(cid:3) 2Ag+
(aq)
+SO
4
2−
(aq)
; K
sp
=[Ag+]2[SO
4
2−]
(d)Ca
3
(PO
4
)
2(s)
(cid:2)(cid:3) 3Ca2+
(aq)
+2PO
4
3−
(aq)
; K
sp
=[Ca2+]3[PO
4
3−]2
10.Ag
2
CO
3(s)
(cid:2)(cid:3) Ag+
(aq)
+CO
3
2−
(aq)
; K
sp
=[Ag+]2[CO
3
2−]
11.MgNH
4
PO
4(s)
(cid:2)(cid:3) Mg2+
(aq)
+NH
4
+
(aq)
+PO
4
3
(a
+
q)
;
K
sp
=[Mg2+][NH
4
+][PO
4
3+] 12.(a)K
sp
=[Fe3+][NO
3
−]3
(b)smaller 13.2.2×10−16 14.1.1×10−37 15.3.2×10−11
16.(a)4.8×10−29(b)1gsolution=1mLsolution
17.(a)1.3×10−5mol/L (b)7.8×1018formulaunitsofAgCl/L
(c)1.9×10−4%(m/v)18.1.0×10−10mol/L
19.9.9×10−3mol/L; 4.1g/L
20. 8.5×1012formulaunitsofZnS/L 21.(a)1.33×10−5mol/L
(b)1.18×10−9mol/L 22.3.9×10−6mol/L
23.(a)7.02×10−3mol/L (b)1.97×10−4mol/L
24.(a)1.6×10−2mol/L (b)4.0×10−4mol/L 25.9.18 26.9.03
27.310 28.4.16
29.Q
sp
=7.5×10−5>K
sp
, therefore a precipitate forms.
30.Q
sp
=3.0×10−6>K
sp
, therefore a precipitate forms.
31.Q
sp
=2.7×10−7>K
sp
, therefore a precipitate forms.
32.Q
sp
=4.2×10−12<K
sp
, therefore no precipitate forms.
33.Q
sp
=8.6×10−8<K
sp
, therefore no precipitate forms.
34.Q
sp
=6.9×10−6<K
sp
, therefore no precipitate forms.
35.Q
sp
=2.2×10−9>K
sp
, therefore a precipitate forms.
36.Q
sp
=1.0×10−5>K
sp
, therefore a precipitate forms.
Section Review: 9.1: 1.sodium carbonate 2.(a)no reaction
(b)CH 3 NH 3 + (aq) +H 2 O ((cid:4)) (cid:2)(cid:3) CH 3 NH 2(aq) +H 3 O+ (aq) ; acidic
(c)no reaction (d)OCl− (aq) +H 2 O ((cid:4)) (cid:2)(cid:3) HOCl (aq) +OH− (aq) ;
basic 3.acidic 4.Ca(OH)
2
, CaF
2
, KNO
3
, NH
4
NO
3
, HNO
3
5.(b)8.7 (c)0.167 mol/L (d)phenolphthalein
7.phenolphthalein 8.5.97 9.2: 5.(a)1.6×10−6(b)9.6×1017
formula units of BaF
2
/L 6.(b)4.74 7.3.17
Chapter 9 Aqueous Solutions and Solubility Equilibria • MHR 455
An Issue to Analyze
UNIT 4
Earth in Equilibrium
Background
Scientists often think about Earth as being composed
of four main systems. The biosphereincludes all
living things on Earth. The geosphereincludes
non-living things, such as rocks and soil. The
hydrosphereincludes all water, such as oceans,
rivers, and even puddles. The atmosphereincludes
gases, vapours, and aerosols. These four systems
overlap in many ways. For example, animals are part
of the biosphere, but they interact with components
in the geosphere (living in a burrow or cave), the
hydrosphere (drinking and excreting water), and the
atmosphere (breathing).
Scientists have noticed various shifts in Earth’s
equilibrium in recent years. Since Earth is in a
dynamic equilibrium, some shifts occur naturally.
There is considerable evidence, however, that the
following shifts have been caused by, or at least
strongly influenced by, human activities. Some of
these shifts may be familiar to you, with names
such as “global warming,” “ozone holes,” and “loss
of biodiversity.”
Earth, with its four spheres, is a good approximation • an increase in CO 2 and CH 4 levels in the
of a closed system. As you learned in Unit 4, a atmosphere
closed system is subject to the principles of equilib- • an increase in the amounts and concentrations
rium. Every change to the system affects the whole of pollutant substances
equilibrium. Elements such as carbon, nitrogen, • a decrease in ozone concentrations in certain
sulfur, and oxygen regularly cycle through Earth’s parts of the atmosphere
four spheres. Thus, Earth is in a constant dynamic • an increase in average global temperature
equilibrium. • a decrease in arable land and a corresponding
increase in desert land
• a loss of plant and animal species, both by
observable causes and by unknown causes
• an increase in extreme weather conditions,
such as hurricanes and tornadoes
For this unit issue, you will research the carbon
cycle, either on your own or as part of a group.
Then, as a class, you will discuss the consequences
of human activities on the carbon cycle.
456 MHR • Unit 4 Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
Assessment
After you have explored this issue, answer the following
questions to assess your work.
(cid:2) Assess your research skills. Was your research on
this issue correct and thorough? Did you use more
Plan and Present than one source? How have your skills improved?
1 Research the carbon cycle. Include a general (cid:2) Assess your presentation of information to the
description of how carbon moves through the class. Did you use visual aids in your explanation?
geosphere, biosphere, hydrosphere, and atmos- Do you think everyone understood what you were
phere. (Your teacher may choose to have some trying to say?
members of the class research different cycles, (cid:2) Assess the class discussion. Was a consensus
such as the phosphorus cycle or the nitrogen reached? Do you think the consensus was based
cycle.) more on scientific research or on popular media
opinion?
2 Identify specific chemical reactions and process-
es that involve the movement of carbon from one
system to another. Write balanced equations for Evaluate the Results
each reaction or process you identify.
1 If your class developed a priority list of five
3 Use the reactions and processes you identified human activities that need changing, list these
in step 2, along with your knowledge of equilib- activities in your notebook. Explain why each
ria, to identify factors that can increase or activity was chosen to be on the list.
decrease the level of carbon in each system.
2 Describe any solutions or suggestions that your
4 Identify human influences on the carbon cycle. class developed. Are these suggestions likely to
work? Why or why not?
5 Choose at least one shift in Earth’s equilibrium
that is listed in “Background.” For each shift 3 Prepare a report that summarizes the results of
you choose, answer the following questions. your own research on the carbon cycle.
(a) Is the carbon cycle involved? Explain your
Extension
answer.
(b) Where on Earth do you think this shift is 4 Do you think any other planets are in dynamic
most visible? Explain why you think so. equilibrium? Do nutrient cycles occur on other
planets? Explain your hypotheses. Then
(c) What are some possible causes of this shift?
research the answers to these questions.
(d) What are some possible consequences?
6 If you come across information about a shift in
Earth’s equilibrium that is not listed in
“Background,” include a description of this
shift with your research.
7 Have a class discussion on the following topics.
(a) To what extent do human activities affect the
carbon cycle? Are the consequences of any
human activities serious enough to consider
changing these activities?
(b) If your answer to the second question in part
(a) is yes, decide on a priority list of five Web LINK
human activities that your class believes
www.mcgrawhill.ca/links/chemistry12
should be changed.
Go to the web site above, and click on Web Linksto find
(c) Come up with an action plan for your school appropriate sites to research this unit issue.
or community to address your concerns.
Unit 4 An Issue to Analyze • MHR 457
Review
Knowledge/Understanding (d) 2H 2 O ((cid:4)) + BaCl 2(s) (cid:2)(cid:3) BaCl 2 + 2H 2 O (g)
(e) 2Na 2 O 2(s) + 2H 2 O ((cid:4)) (cid:2)(cid:3) 4NaOH (aq) + O 2(g)
Multiple Choice
6. A solution of a weak acid is titrated with a
In your notebook, write the letter for the best solution of a strong base. What is the pH at the
answer to each question. end-point?
1. Which reaction represents a heterogeneous (a) 7 (b) >7 (c) <7
equilibrium? (d) Either (b) or (c) may be correct, depending
(a) N O
(cid:2)(cid:3)
2NO on K of the acid.
2 4(g) 2(g) a
(b) 2SO 2(g) + O 2(g) (cid:2)(cid:3) 2SO 3(g) (e) more information about the number of
(c) 3H + N (cid:2)(cid:3) 2NH hydrogen ions is needed
2(g) 2(g) 3(g)
(d) 2NaHCO (cid:2)(cid:3) Na CO + CO + H O
3(s) 2 3(s) 2(g) 2 (g) 7. 10 mL of 1.0 mol/L HCl is diluted by adding
(e) HCO − + H + (cid:2)(cid:3) H CO
3 (aq) (aq) 2 3(aq) 990 mL of water. What is the pH of the new
2. Consider the following equilibrium. solution?
N 2 O 4(g) (cid:2)(cid:3) 2NO 2(g) K c = 4.8 × 10 −3 (a) decrease by 2 pH units
Which set of concentrations represents (b) decrease by 0.5 pH units
equilibrium conditions? (c) increase by 0.5 pH units
(a) [N 2 O 4(g) ] = 4.8 × 10 −1 and (d) increase by 2 pH units
[NO 2(g) ] = 1.0 × 10 −4 (e) increase by a factor of 2 pH units
(b) [N O ] = 1.0 × 10 −1 and
2 4(g) 8. Select the correct statement about the following
[NO ] = 4.8 × 10 −4
2(g) equilibrium.
(c) [N 2 O 4(g) ] = 1.0 × 10 −1 and HBO 2− + HSiO − (cid:2)(cid:3) SiO 2− + H BO −
[NO 2(g) ] = 2.2 × 10 −2 (a) HB 3 O (aq 2 ) − and 3 H ( S aq i ) O − are 3 a ( a c q o ) njug 2 ate 3 (aq)
(d) [N O ] = 2.2 × 10 −2 and 3 (aq) 3 (aq)
2 4(g) acid-base pair.
[NO
2(g)
] = 1.0 × 10 −1
(b) HSiO
−
and SiO
2−
are both acting
(e) [N O ] = 5.0 × 10 −2 and 3 (aq) 3 (aq)
2 4(g) as acids.
[NO
2(g)
] = 1.1 × 10 −2
(c) HBO
2−
and SiO
2−
are both bases.
3 (aq) 3 (aq)
3. Choose the equilibrium in which products (d) HSiO − and H BO − are a conjugate
3 (aq) 2 3 (aq)
are favoured by a decrease in pressure but acid-base pair.
reactants are favoured by a decrease in (e) SiO 2− and H BO − are a conjugate
3 (aq) 2 3 (aq)
temperature. acid-base pair
(a) H + I + 51.8kJ (cid:2)(cid:3) 2HI
2(g) 2(g) (g) 9. Select the equation that correctly represents the
(b) 2NO (cid:2)(cid:3) 2NO + O ∆H = +54kJ
2(g) (g) (g) dissociation of Al S in water.
(c) N 2(g) + 3H 2(g) (cid:2)(cid:3) 2NH 3(g) + 92.3kJ (a) Al S (cid:2)(cid:3) Al 3 2 + 3(s) + S 2−
(d) PCl 3(g) + Cl 2(g) (cid:2)(cid:3) PCl 5(g) ∆H = −84.2kJ (b) Al 2 S 3(s) (cid:2)(cid:3) 2A 2 l2+ (aq) + 2 3 S3− (aq)
(e) 2SO 2(g) + O 2(g) (cid:2)(cid:3) 2SO 3(g) + heat (c) Al 2 S 3(s) (cid:2)(cid:3) 2Al3+ (aq) + 3S2− (aq)
2 3(s) (aq) (aq)
4. A sample of lemon juice has a pH of 2. (d) Al S (cid:2)(cid:3) 3Al3+ + 2S2−
2 3(s) (aq) (aq)
A sample of an ammonia cleaner has a pH (e) Al S (cid:2)(cid:3) 2Al3+ + 6S −
2 3(s) (aq) (aq)
of 10. If the two samples are combined, what
10. A saturated solution of CH COOAg contains
3
ratio by volume of lemon juice to ammonia 2 × 10 −3molAg + per litre of solution. What is
cleaner is needed to yield a neutral solution?
K for CH COOAg?
sp 3
(a) 1:10 (d) 1:1000 (a) 2 × 10 −3 (d) 2 × 10 −6
(b) 1:8 (e) 10:1 (b) 4 × 10 −6 (e) 4 × 10 −3
(c) 1:100 (c) 1 × 10 −3
5. In which reaction is water acting as an acid?
11. In an experiment, a chemist determines that
(a) H 2 O ((cid:4)) + NH 3(aq) (cid:2)(cid:3) OH − (aq) + NH 4 + (aq) PbC O and Ag C O have the same K :
(b) H 2 O ((cid:4)) + H 3 PO 4(aq) (cid:2)(cid:3) H 3 O + (aq) + H 2 PO 4 − (aq) 1.1 × 2 1 4 0 −11. Bas 2 ed 2 on 4 this result, whic s h p
(c) H 2 O ((cid:4)) (cid:2)(cid:3) H 2(g) + 1 2 O 2(g) statement can the chemist make?
458 MHR • Unit 4 Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
−
(a) These compounds have the same molar The initial concentrations of I and I
2(aq) (aq)
solubility. are both 0.002 mol/L. When equilibrium is
(b) [C O 2− ] in saturated solutions of these two established, [I ] = 5.0 × 10 −4mol/L. What is
2 4 2(aq)
compounds is the same. K for this equilibrium?
c
(c) In saturated solutions of these compounds, 20. Solutions of NaHCO and CaHPO
3(aq) 4(aq)
[Ag + ] > [Pb2+ ].
are mixed.
(d) In equal volumes of saturated solutions, a (a) Write the net ionic equation that represents
greater mass of solute is present in PbC 2 O 4 . the equilibrium for this system.
(e) In saturated solutions of each compound, (b) What are the conjugate acid-base pairs?
PbC 2 O 4 contains 1.5 times as many ions. (c) Are reactants or products favoured in this
system? Give a reason for your answer.
Short Answer
21. What is the pH of a 100 mL sample of
In your notebook, write a sentence or a short
0.002 mol/L H SO ?
2 4
paragraph to answer each question.
22. A 1.00 L solution contains 1.04 g of KOH. What
12. Consider the following equilibrium.
2SO + O (cid:2)(cid:3) 2SO ∆H = −198.2kJ is the pH of this solution?
2(g) 2(g) 3(g)
+ −
Indicate if reactants or products are favoured, 23. What is [H (aq) ], [OH (aq) ], pH, and pOH for a
or if no change occurs, when 0.048 mol/L solution of benzoic acid,
(a) the temperature is increased C 6 H 5 COOH?
(b) helium gas is added at constant volume 24. How many moles of phosphate ions are present
(c) helium gas is added at constant pressure in 200 mL of 0.002 mol/L Fe (PO ) ?
3 4 2
13. Explain the reasoning you used to answer 25. Aqueous solutions of 0.2 mol/L Na CO and
2 3
question 12(b). 0.2 mol/L AgNO are mixed. Write a net ionic
3
14. Describe how a decrease in volume will affect equation that represents the overall reaction.
the following equilibrium. 26. What is the highest concentration of Ca2+ that
PCl 3(g) + Cl 2(g) (cid:2)(cid:3) PCl 5(g) can be present in a solution of 0.002 00 mol/L
15. K c for the equilibrium N 2 O 4 (cid:2)(cid:3) 2NO 2 is NH 4 F (aq) ?
4.8 × 10 −3. What is K c for the equilibrium 27. 20.00 mL of 1.100 × 10 −4mol/L Pb(NO 3 ) 2 is
1 N O (cid:2)(cid:3) NO ? mixed with 80.00 mL of 4.450 × 10 −2 mol/L
2 2 4 2
16. For the following equilibrium, K = 1.0 × 10 −15 CaI 2 . Show, using calculations, if a precipitate
c
at 25˚C and K = 0.05 at 2200˚C. will form.
c
N + O (cid:2)(cid:3) 2NO
2(g) 2(g) (g) Inquiry
Based on this information, is the reaction
exothermic or endothermic? Briefly explain 28. A chemist evaporates 100.0 mL of a saturated
your answer. solution of lead chromate to dryness. What
mass of PbCrO remains?
17. K for the equilibrium system 4(s)
c
2SO + 2O (cid:2)(cid:3) SO is 40. What is K for 29. How can a chemist maximize the yield of
2(g) 2(g) 3(g) c
SO 3(g) (cid:2)(cid:3) SO 2(g) + 1 2 O 2(g) ? C C a a O CO (s) in + th h e e a fo t ll (cid:2)(cid:3) ow C in a g O equ + il C ib O rium ? system?
3(s) (s) 2(g)
18. 1.0 mol of NH is placed initially in a 500 mL
3(g)
30. K for the following system is 1.05 at a certain
flask. The following equilibrium is established. c
2NH 3(g) (cid:2)(cid:3) N 2(g) + 3H 2(g) t P e C m l per + at h u e re a . t (cid:2)(cid:3) PCl + Cl
Write an equilibrium expression that describes 5(g) 3(g) 2(g)
After 0.22 mol of PCl and 0.11 mol of Cl
the system at equilibrium. 3(g) 2(g)
are added to a 500 mL flask, equilibrium
19. A mixture is prepared for the following
is established.
equilibrium.
(a) Explain what happens to the rates of the
I + I − (cid:2)(cid:3) I −
2(aq) (aq) 3 (aq) forward and reverse reactions as equilibrium
is established.
Unit 4 Review • MHR 459
(b) Calculate the equilibrium concentration of 2NH + H SO → (NH ) SO
3(g) 2 4(aq) 4 2 4(aq)
each component of this equilibrium. The H SO that is not used up in this reac-
2 4(aq)
31. Cyanide ion, CN − , reacts with Fe3+ to form the tion is titrated to the end-point with 27.9 mL
blue dye that is used in blueprint paper. of 0.230 mol/L NaOH. Use this information to
Hydrocyanic acid, HCN (aq) , is a weak acid, with calculate the percent of (NH 4 ) 2 SO 4 in the 10.0 g
K = 6.2 × 10 −10. sample of washing powder.
a
(a) Calculate K b for the conjugate base of HCN (aq) . 37. Consider the following equilibrium.
(b) Calculate the pH of 0.120 mol/L KCN . 2XO + O (cid:2)(cid:3) 2XO + heat.
(aq) (s) 2 2(g)
32. The following solutions have all been prepared (a) Predict whether reactants or products are
at a concentration of 0.1 mol/L: favoured when the volume of the container
CH COONa , CH COOH , NH , and is increased. Give a reason for your answer.
3 (aq) 3 (aq) 3(aq)
NaOH . Arrange these solutions in order of (b) What do you predict will happen to the
(aq)
decreasing pH. For each solution, write the concentration of each substance when the
balanced equation that supports your answer. volume of the container is increased?
(c) At a certain temperature, K = 1.00 × 10 −4
33. In an experiment to estimate K , a piece of c
sp
and the equilibrium concentrations are
zinc metal was left in 50.0 mL of a saturated
[O ] = 1.99 mol/L and
solution of PbCl . The lead that was produced 2
2 [XO ] = 1.41 × 10 −2mol/L. If the volume of
in the displacement reaction was recovered, 2
the container is now doubled, calculate the
and its mass was found to be 0.17 g.
concentrations of these gases when equilibri-
(a) Use this information to determine the con-
centration of
Pb2+
in the original solution.
um is re-established. Assume that sufficient
XO is present to maintain equilibrium. Are
(b) Write the expression for K . Then calculate (s)
sp
the concentrations you calculate consistent
K for PbCl .
sp 2
with your prediction in part (b)?
34. For the following equilibrium, K = 0.81 at a
c
certain temperature. 38. A sample of Ca(OH) 2(s) is allowed to stand in
1 N + 3 H (cid:2)(cid:3) NH + heat distilled water until a saturated solution forms.
2 2(g) 2 2(g) 3(g) A 50.0 mL sample of this saturated solution is
(a) Explain what will happen to the magnitude
neutralized with 24.4 mL of 0.0500 mol/L HCl.
of K c if the temperature is increased. 2HCl (aq) + Ca(OH) 2(aq) → CaCl 2(aq) + 2H 2 O ((cid:4))
(b) The initial concentrations of the gases are
Use this information to calculate K
[H ] = 0.76mol/L, [N ] = 0.60mol/L, sp
2(g) 2(g) for Ca(OH) .
and [NH ] = 0.48mol/L. Determine if the 2
3(g) −
39. Tap water that contains Cl at a concentration
concentration of [N ] will increase or
2(g)
of 50 ppm is used to prepare a 0.100 mol/L
decrease when equilibrium is established.
AgNO solution. Does a precipitate form?
3
35. 1 L of 0.002 mol/L Pb(NO ) has been prepared.
3 2
Given that K sp for PbCl 2 is 1.7 × 10 −5, what is Communication
the largest number of moles of NaCl that can
40. Under what circumstances is the position of
be added to this solution without causing a
equilibrium not affected by a change in the
precipitate to form?
pressure on the system? Give examples, and
36. A 10.0 g sample of a commercial washing
explain your answer.
powder contains ammonium sulfate,
41. Milk of magnesia is a suspension of Mg(OH)
(NH ) SO . The sample is treated with an 2(s)
4 2 4 that can be used as an antacid. K for
excess of NaOH. sp
Mg(OH) is only 5.6 × 10 −12. If so little of this
(NH ) SO + 2NaOH → 2NH 2(s)
4 2 4(aq) (aq) 3(g) base dissolves, how can it be effective as an
+ Na 2 SO 4(aq) + H 2 O ((cid:4)) antacid? Explain your answer.
The ammonia gas, NH , that forms is dissolved
in 50.0 mL of 0.250 mo 3( l g / ) L H SO . The following 42. For HSO 3 − , K a is 6.2 × 10 −8 and K b is
2 4 7.7 × 10 −13. Your friend is confused because the
reaction occurrs.
460 MHR • Unit 4 Chemical Systems and Equilibrium
product of these two values does not equal K .
w
Write a note that explains to your friend why
this is correct.
43. Use equations to demonstrate how a buffer
− +
system, such as HNO :NO , reacts with H O
2 2 3
−
and OH .
44. Aluminum is a self-protecting metal. It readily
forms an impervious coating of Al O that
2 3
protects the aluminum from further corrosion.
Does this reaction occur spontaneously at all
temperatures? Explain your answer.
45. 3.50 g of CO are dissolved in 375 mL of pop
2
to carbonate the drink. Assuming that no other
factors affect the acidity of the carbonated
drink, explain how this information can be
used to calculate its pH. (You do not need to
do the calculation.)
46. Acid-base indicators are often large organic
molecules. Explain why they are sold in the
form of a sodium salt, for general use as an
acid-base indicator.
Making Connections
47. According to guidelines published by the
Ontario Ministry of the Environment in January
2001, the Maximum Acceptable Concentration
(MAC) for
Pb2+
in drinking water is 0.010 mg/L.
The water in a community is contaminated
with
Pb2+
from an industrial source, at a
concentration of 0.0800 mg/L.
(a) Engineers decide to clean up the water by
increasing its pH. Explain why increasing
the water’s pH will remove the lead ions COURSE
CHALLENGE
from the water.
(b) At what pH is the concentration of lead ions The Chemistry of Human Health
reduced from 0.0800 mg/L to 0.010 mg/L? In the Course Challenge, you will explore buffer systems
in the body.
48. A patient’s kidney stones are composed prima-
• How does the body maintain a constant pH in
rily of calcium oxalate, CaC O . The patient’s
2 4 the blood?
physician prescribes a medicine that is basic,
• How can illness affect the equilibrium in the blood?
and advises the patient to drink plenty of
• How can you model the buffer system in your blood?
water. Explain why this is a suitable treatment.
Unit 4 Review • MHR 461
Electrochemistry
C
UNIT 5 CONTENTS
anadian engineer Dr. John Hopps,
CHAPTER 10
working with a team of medical
Oxidation-Reduction Reactions
researchers in the late 1940s,
CHAPTER 11 developed one of the most significant
Cells and Batteries medical inventions of the twentieth
century: the pacemaker. The photo-
DESIGN YOUR OWN INVESTIGATION
graph on the right shows a pacemaker
Electroplating
embedded in the body of a heart
patient. A modern pacemaker is
UNIT 5 OVERALL EXPECTATIONS essentially a tiny computer that
monitors a person’s heartbeat and
What are oxidation-reduction
corrects irregularities as needed.
reactions? How are they
involved in the interconversion Pacemakers are particularly useful
of chemical and electrical in correcting a heartbeat that is
energy? too slow.
How are galvanic and elec- The pacemaker device is
trolytic cells built, and how do surgically placed in a “pocket” of
they function? What equations tissue near the patient’s collarbone.
are used to describe these
One or more wires, called “leads,”
types of cells? How can you
are connected to the pacemaker and
solve quantitative problems
threaded down through a major vein
related to electrolysis?
to the patient’s heart. By sending
What are the uses of batteries
electrical impulses along the leads to
and fuel cells? How is electro-
the heart, the pacemaker can induce
chemical technology used to
a heartbeat.
produce and protect metals?
How can you assess the A pacemaker obtains electrical
environmental and safety energy from a tiny battery that lasts
issues associated with these for about seven years before it must
technologies? be replaced. But how do batteries
supply electrical energy? The answer
lies in a branch of chemistry known
Unit Issue Prep
as electrochemistry. In this unit,
As you progress through Unit 5,
you will learn about the connection
look for the skills and information
between chemical reactions and
you will need for the investigation
at the end of the unit. electricity. You will also learn about
the chemical reactions that take place
inside batteries.
462
Oxidation-Reduction
Reactions
K
Chapter Preview itchen chemistry is an important part of daily life. Cooks use chemistry
all the time to prepare and preserve food. Even the simplest things you
10.1 Defining Oxidation
do in the kitchen can involve chemical reactions. For example, you have
and Reduction
probably seen a sliced apple turn brown. The same thing happens to pears,
10.2 Oxidation Numbers
bananas, avocados, and several other fruits. Slicing the fruit exposes the
10.3 The Half-Reaction flesh to oxygen in the air. Compounds in the fruit react with oxygen to form
Method for Balancing brown products. An enzyme in the fruit acts as a catalyst, speeding up this
Equations
reaction. How can you stop fruit from turning brown after it is sliced?
10.4 The Oxidation A Waldorf salad uses a simple method to prevent fruit from browning.
Number Method for
This type of salad usually consists of diced apples, celery, and walnuts,
Balancing Equations
covered with a mayonnaise dressing. The dressing keeps the air away
from the food ingredients. Without air, the fruit does not turn brown.
Another way to solve this problem is to prevent the enzyme in the
fruit from acting as a catalyst. Enzymes are sensitive to pH. Therefore,
adding an acid such as lemon juice or vinegar to fruit can prevent the
enzyme from acting. You may have noticed that avocado salad recipes
often include lemon juice. In addition to hindering the enzyme, lemon
Prerequisite
juice contains vitamin C, which is very reactive toward oxygen. The
Concepts and Skills
vitamin C reacts with oxygen before the sliced fruit can do so.
Before you begin this chapter,
In this chapter, you will be introduced to oxidation-reduction
review the following concepts
reactions, also called redox reactions. You will discover how to identify
and skills:
this type of reaction. You will also find out how to balance equations for
(cid:2) balancing chemical, total
a redox reaction.
ionic, and net ionic equa-
tions (Concepts and Skills
Review)
(cid:2) reaction types, including
synthesis, decomposition,
single displacement, and
double displacement reac-
tions (Concepts and Skills
A redox reaction causes
Review)
fruit to go brown. How
(cid:2) the common ionic can you recognize other
charges of metal ions redox reactions?
and non-metal ions, and
the formulas of common
polyatomic ions
(cid:2) drawing Lewis structures
(Concepts and Skills
Review)
(cid:2) electronegativities and
bond polarities (Chapter 4,
section 4.1)
464 MHR • Unit 5 Electrochemistry
Defining Oxidation and Reduction 10.1
The term oxidation can be used to describe the process in which
Section Preview/
certain fruits turn brown by reacting with oxygen. The original, historical Specific Expectations
definition of this term was “to combine with oxygen.” Thus, oxidation
In this section, you will
occurred when iron rusted, and when magnesium was burned in oxygen
(cid:2) describeoxidation and
gas. The term reduction was used historically to describe the opposite
reduction in terms of
of oxidation, that is, the formation of a metal from its compounds. An ore the loss and the gain of
is a naturally occurring solid compound or mixture of compounds from electrons
which a metal can be extracted. Thus, the process of obtaining a metal
(cid:2) writehalf-reactions from
from an ore was known as a reduction. Copper ore was reduced to yield balanced chemical
copper, and iron ore was reduced to yield iron. equations for oxidation-
As you will learn in this chapter, the modern definitions for oxidation reduction systems
and reduction are much broader. The current definitions are based on the (cid:2) investigateoxidation-
idea of electron transfers, and can now be applied to numerous chemical reduction reactions by com-
reactions. In Unit 1, you saw the terms oxidation and reduction used to paring the reactivities of
some metals
describe changes to carbon-hydrogen and carbon-oxygen bonds within
organic compounds. These changes involve electron transfers, so the (cid:2) communicateyour
broader definitions that you will learn in this chapter still apply. understanding of the terms
ore, oxidation, reduction,
In your previous chemistry course, you compared the reactivities of
oxidation-reduction reaction,
metals. You may recall that, when a piece of zinc is placed in an aqueous
redox reaction, oxidizing
solution of copper(II) sulfate, the zinc displaces the copper in a single
agent, reducing agent, half-
displacement reaction. This reaction is shown in Figure 10.1. As the
reaction, disproportionation
zinc dissolves, the zinc strip gets smaller. A dark red-brown layer of
solid copper forms on the zinc strip, and some copper is deposited on
the bottom of the beaker. The blue colour of the solution fades, as blue
copper(II) ions are replaced by colourless zinc ions.
Figure 10.1 A solid zinc strip reacts with a solution that contains blue copper(II) ions.
Chapter 10 Oxidation-Reduction Reactions • MHR 465
The reaction in Figure 10.1 is represented by the following equation.
From your earlier work, you Zn (s) + CuSO 4(aq) → Cu (s) + ZnSO 4(aq)
will recognize the sulfate ion, This equation can be written as a total ionic equation.
SO2−, as a polyatomic ion. To
4 Zn + Cu2+ + SO 2− → Cu + Zn2+ + SO 2−
review the names and formulas (s) (aq) 4 (aq) (s) (aq) 4 (aq)
of common polyatomic ions, The sulfate ions are spectator ions, meaning ions that are not involved
refer to Appendix E, Table E.5. in the chemical reaction. By omitting the spectator ions, you obtain the
following net ionic equation.
Zn + Cu2+ → Cu + Zn2+
(s) (aq) (s) (aq)
Notice what happens to the reactants in this equation. The zinc atoms
lose electrons to form zinc ions. The copper ions gain electrons to form
copper atoms.
gains 2e−
Zn + Cu2+ → Cu + Zn2+
(s) (aq) (s) (aq)
loses 2e−
The following chemical definitions describe these changes.
• Oxidation is the loss of electrons.
• Reduction is the gain of electrons.
CHEM
FACT In the reaction of zinc atoms with copper(II) ions, the zinc atoms lose
electrons and undergo oxidation. In other words, the zinc atoms are
Try using a mnemonic to
oxidized. The copper(II) ions gain electrons and undergo reduction.
remember the definitions for
oxidation and reduction. For In other words, the copper(II) ions are reduced. Because oxidation and
example, in “LEO the lion says reduction both occur in the reaction, it is known as an oxidation-reduction
GER,” LEO stands for “Loss of reactionor redox reaction.
Electrons is Oxidation.” GER Notice that electrons are transferred from zinc atoms to copper(II)
stands for “Gain of Electrons
ions. The copper(II) ions are responsible for the oxidation of the zinc
is Reduction.” The mnemonic
atoms. A reactant that oxidizes another reactant is called an oxidizing
“OIL RIG” stands for
agent. The oxidizing agent accepts electrons in a redox reaction. In this
“Oxidation Is Loss. Reduction
reaction, copper(II) is the oxidizing agent. The zinc atoms are responsible
Is Gain.” Make up your own
mnemonic to help you remem- for the reduction of the copper(II) ions. A reactant that reduces another
ber these definitions. reactant is called a reducing agent. The reducing agent gives or donates
electrons in a redox reaction. In this reaction, zinc is the reducing agent.
A redox reaction can also be defined as a reaction between an
oxidizing agent and a reducing agent, as illustrated in Figure 10.2.
Zn + Cu2+ Cu + Zn2+
(s) (aq) (s) (aq)
•reducing agent •oxidizing agent
•donates electrons •accepts electrons
•undergoes oxidation •undergoes reduction
Figure 10.2 In a redox reaction, the reducing agent is oxidized, and the oxidizing
agent is reduced. Note that the oxidizing agent does notundergo oxidation, and that
the reducing agent does notundergo reduction.
466 MHR • Unit 5 Electrochemistry
Try the following practice problems to review your understanding of net
ionic equations, and to work with the new concepts of oxidation and
reduction.
Practice Problems
1. Write a balanced net ionic equation for the reaction of zinc with
aqueous iron(II) chloride. Include the physical states of the reactants
and products.
2. Write a balanced net ionic equation for each reaction, including
physical states.
(a) magnesium with aqueous aluminum sulfate
(b) a solution of silver nitrate with metallic cadmium
3. Identify the reactant oxidized and the reactant reduced in each
reaction in question 2.
4. Identify the oxidizing agent and the reducing agent in each reaction
in question 2.
Half-Reactions
To monitor the transfer of electrons in a redox reaction, you can
represent the oxidation and reduction separately. A half-reaction is a
balanced equation that shows the number of electrons involved in either
oxidation or reduction. Because a redox reaction involves both oxidation
and reduction, two half-reactions are needed to represent a redox reaction.
One half-reaction shows oxidation, and the other half-reaction shows
reduction.
As you saw earlier, the reaction of zinc with aqueous copper(II) sulfate
can be represented by the following net ionic equation.
Zn + Cu2+ → Cu + Zn2+
(s) (aq) (s) (aq)
Each neutral Zn atom is oxidized to form a
Zn2+
ion. Thus, each Zn atom
You can write separate
must lose two electrons. You can write an oxidation half-reaction to show oxidation and reduction half-
this change. reactions to represent a redox
Zn → Zn2+ + 2e − reaction, but one half-reaction
(s) (aq)
cannot occur on its own.
Each
Cu2+
ion is reduced to form a neutral Cu atom. Thus, each
Cu2+
ion
Explain why this statement
must gain two electrons. You can write a reduction half-reaction to show must be true.
this change.
Cu2+ + 2e − → Cu
(aq) (s)
If you look again at each half-reaction above, you will notice that
the atoms and the charges are balanced. Like other types of balanced
equations, half-reactions are balanced using the smallest possible
whole-number coefficients. In the following equation, the atoms and
charges are balanced, but the coefficients can all be divided by 2 to give
the usual form of the half-reaction.
2Cu2+ + 4e − → 2Cu
(aq) (s)
Chapter 10 Oxidation-Reduction Reactions • MHR 467
In most redox reactions, one substance is oxidized and a different
substance is reduced. In a disproportionation reaction, however, a single
element undergoes both oxidation and reduction in the same reaction.
For example, a copper(I) solution undergoes disproportionation in the
following reaction.
2Cu + → Cu + Cu2+
(aq) (s) (aq)
In this reaction, some copper(I) ions gain electrons, while other copper(I)
ions lose electrons.
gains 1e−
Cu + + Cu + → Cu + Cu2+
(aq) (aq) (s) (aq)
loses 1e−
The two half-reactions are as follows.
Oxidation: Cu + → Cu2+ + 1e −
(aq) (aq)
Reduction: Cu + + 1e − → Cu
(aq) (s)
You have learned that half-reactions can be used to represent oxidation
and reduction separately. Half-reactions always come in pairs: an oxidation
half-reaction is always accompanied by a reduction half-reaction, and vice
versa. Try writing and balancing half-reactions using the following practice
problems.
Practice Problems
5. Write balanced half-reactions from the net ionic equation for the
reaction between solid aluminum and aqueous iron(III) sulfate. The
sulfate ions are spectator ions, and are not included.
Al + Fe3+ → Al3+ + Fe
(s) (aq) (aq) (s)
6. Write balanced half-reactions from the following net ionic
equations.
(a) Fe + Cu2+ → Fe2+ + Cu
(s) (aq) (aq) (s)
(b) Cd + 2Ag + → Cd2+ + 2Ag
(s) (aq) (aq) (s)
7. Write balanced half-reactions for each of the following reactions.
(a) Sn + PbCl → SnCl + Pb
(s) 2(aq) 2(aq) (s)
(b) Au(NO ) + 3Ag → 3AgNO + Au
3 3(aq) (s) 3(aq) (s)
(c) 3Zn + Fe (SO ) → 3ZnSO + 2Fe
(s) 2 4 3(aq) 4(aq) (s)
8. Write the net ionic equation and the half-reactions for the
COURSE disproportionation of mercury(I) ions in aqueous solution to give
CHALLENGE
liquid mercury and aqueous mercury(II) ions. Assume that mercury(I)
The Chemistry Bulletin, on ions exist in solution as Hg 2
2+
.
the next page, introduces
you to the terms oxidant
and antioxidant. How may You already know that some metals are more reactive than others. You
oxidants and antioxidants
may also have carried out an investigation on the metal activity series
affect human health?
in a previous course. In Investigation 10-A, located on page 470, you
Consider this question to
will discover how this series is related to oxidation and reduction. You
prepare for your Chemistry
will write chemical equations, ionic equations, and half-reactions for
Course Challenge.
the single displacement reactions of several metals.
468 MHR • Unit 5 Electrochemistry
Chemistry Bulletin
Aging: Is Oxidation a Factor?
Why do we grow old? Despite advances in
molecular biology and medical research, the
reasons for aging remain mysterious. One
theory suggests that aging may be influenced
by oxidizing agents, also known as oxidants.
Oxidants are present in the environment
and in foods. Nitrogen oxides are oxidants
present in cigarette smoke and urban smog.
Other oxidants include the copper and iron
salts in meat and some plants. Inhaling and
ingesting oxidants such as these can increase
the level of oxidants in our bodies.
Oxidants are also naturally present in
the body, where they participate in important
redox reactions. For example, mitochondria Carotenoids are pigments found in some fruits and
consume oxygen during aerobic respiration, vegetables, including spinach.
and cells ingest and destroy bacteria. Both these
processes involve oxidation and reduction. and plant chemicals. It is hard to disentangle
As you have just seen, redox reactions the effects of antioxidants from the beneficial
are an essential part of your body’s processes. effects of these other substances.
However, these reactions can produce free As a result, the benefits of antioxidant
radicals, which are highly reactive atoms or dietary supplements are under debate.
molecules with one or more unpaired electrons. According to one study, vitamin E supplements
Because they are so reactive, free radicals can may lower the risk of heart disease. Another
oxidize surrounding molecules by robbing study, however, concludes that taking
them of electrons. This process can damage beta-carotene supplements does not reduce
DNA, proteins, and other macromolecules. the risk of certain cancers.
Such damage may contribute to aging, and We can be sure that a balanced diet
to diseases that are common among the aging, including fruits and vegetables is beneficial
such as cancer, cardiovascular disease, and to human health. Whether antioxidants confer
cataracts. these benefits, and whether these benefits
The study of oxidative damage has sparked include longevity, remain to be seen.
a debate about the role that antioxidants
Making Connections
might play in illness and aging. Antioxidants
are reducing agents. They donate electrons to 1. Research vitamins C, E, alpha- and beta-
substances that have been oxidized, decreasing carotenes, and folic acid. How do they
the damage caused by free radicals. Dietary affect our health? What fruits and vegetables
antioxidants include vitamins C and E, contain these vitamins?
beta-carotene, and carotenoids.
2. Lycopene is a carotenoid that has been
Most medical researchers agree that people
linked to a decreased risk of pancreatic,
with diets rich in fruits and vegetables have
cervical, and prostate cancer. Find out what
a lower incidence of cardiovascular disease,
fruits and vegetables contain lycopene.
certain cancers, and cataracts. Although fruits
What colour are these fruits and vegetables?
and vegetables are high in antioxidants, they
also contain fibre and many different vitamins
Chapter 10 Oxidation-Reduction Reactions • MHR 469
S K I L L F O C U S
MICROSCALE Predicting
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
Single Displacement
Reactions
The metal activity series is shown in the table Predictions
below. The more reactive metals are near the top
Predict the relative ease with which the metals
of the series, and the less reactive metals are near
aluminum, copper, iron, magnesium, and zinc
the bottom. In this investigation, you will relate
can be oxidized. Predict the relative ease with
the activity series to the ease with which metals
which the ions of these same metals can be
are oxidized and metal ions are reduced.
reduced. Explain your reasoning in both cases.
Activity Series of Metals
Materials
Metal well plate
lithium Most Reactive test tube rack
4 small test tubes
potassium
4 small pieces of each of these metals:
barium
aluminum foil, thin copper wire or tiny copper
calcium
beads, iron filings, magnesium, and zinc
sodium dropper bottles containing dilute solutions of
magnesium aluminum sulfate, copper(II) sulfate, iron(II)
sulfate, magnesium sulfate, and zinc nitrate
aluminum
zinc
Safety Precautions
chromium
iron
• Wear goggles, gloves, and an apron for all parts
cadmium
of this investigation.
cobalt
nickel Procedure
tin
1. Place the well plate on a white piece of paper.
lead Label it to match the table on the next page.
copper
2. In each well plate, place a small piece of the
mercury appropriate metal, about the size of a grain of
silver rice. Cover each piece with a few drops of the
appropriate solution. Wait 3–5 min to observe
platinum
if a reaction occurs.
gold Least Reactive
3. Look for evidence of a chemical reaction in
each mixture. Record the results, using “y” for
Question
a reaction, or “n” for no reaction. If you are
How is the order of the metals in the activity unsure, repeat the process on a larger scale in
series related to the ease with which metals are a small test tube.
oxidized and metal ions are reduced?
470 MHR • Unit 5 Electrochemistry
Compound
Al (SO ) CuSO FeSO MgSO Zn(NO )
Metal 2 4 3 4 4 4 3 2
Al
Cu
Fe
Mg
Zn
4. Discard the mixtures in the waste beaker 5. List the different reduction half-reactions.
supplied by your teacher. Do not pour Start with the half-reaction for the most
anything down the drain. easily reduced metal ion, and end with the
half-reaction for the least easily reduced
Analysis metal ion. Explain your reasoning. Compare
your list with your second prediction from
1. For each single displacement reaction
the beginning of this investigation.
you observed, write
(a) a balanced chemical equation
Conclusions
(b) a total ionic equation
6. Which list from questions 4 and 5 puts the
(c) a net ionic equation
metals in the same order as they appear in
2. Write an oxidation half-reaction and a the activity series?
reduction half-reaction for each net ionic
7. How is the order of the metals in the activity
equation you wrote in question 1. Use the
series related to the ease with which metals
smallest possible whole-number coefficients
are oxidized and metal ions are reduced?
in each half-reaction.
3. Look at each balanced net ionic equation. Applications
Compare the total number of electrons lost
8. Use the activity series to choose a reducing
by the reducing agent with the total number
agent that will reduce aqueous nickel(II) ions
of electrons gained by the oxidizing agent.
to metallic nickel. Explain your reasoning.
4. List the different oxidation half-reactions.
9. Use the activity series to choose an oxidizing
Start with the half-reaction for the most easily
agent that will oxidize metallic cobalt to
oxidized metal, and end with the half-reaction
form aqueous cobalt(II) ions. Explain your
for the least easily oxidized metal. Explain
reasoning.
your reasoning. Compare your list with your
first prediction from the beginning of this
investigation.
Chapter 10 Oxidation-Reduction Reactions • MHR 471
Section Summary
In this section, you learned to define and recognize redox reactions, and
to write oxidation and reduction half-reactions. In Investigation 10-A,
you observed the connection between the metal activity series and redox
reactions. However, thus far, you have only worked with redox reactions
that involve atoms and ions as reactants or products. In the next section,
you will learn about redox reactions that involve covalent reactants or
products.
Section Review
1 K/U Predict whether each of the following single displacement
reactions will occur. If so, write a balanced chemical equation, a
balanced net ionic equation, and two balanced half-reactions. Include
the physical states of the reactants and products in each case.
(a) aqueous silver nitrate and metallic cadmium
(b) gold and aqueous copper(II) sulfate
(c) aluminum and aqueous mercury(II) chloride
Unit Investigation Prep 2 (a) K/U On which side of an oxidation half-reaction are the electrons?
Why?
In the end-of-unit investigation,
you will be working with the (b) K/U On which side of a reduction half-reaction are the electrons?
metals zinc and copper. Which Why?
metal is more easily oxidized?
3 C Explain why, in a redox reaction, the oxidizing agent undergoes
Which is more easily reduced?
reduction.
4 C In a combination reaction, does metallic lithium act as an oxidizing
agent or a reducing agent? Explain.
5 I Write a net ionic equation for a reaction in which
(a)
Fe2+
acts as an oxidizing agent
(b) Al acts as a reducing agent
(c)
Au3+
acts as an oxidizing agent
(d) Cu acts as a reducing agent
(e)
Sn2+
acts as an oxidizing agent and as a reducing agent
6 MC The element potassium is made industrially by the single
displacement reaction of molten sodium with molten potassium
chloride.
(a) Write a net ionic equation for the reaction, assuming that all
reactants and products are in the liquid state.
(b) Identify the oxidizing agent and the reducing agent in the reaction.
(c) Explain why the reaction is carried out in the liquid state and not in
aqueous solution.
472 MHR • Unit 5 Electrochemistry
Oxidation Numbers 10.2
Redox reactions are very common. Some of them produce light in a
Section Preview/
process known as chemiluminescence. In living things, the production Specific Expectations
of light in redox reactions is known as bioluminescence. You can actually
In this section, you will
see the light from redox reactions occurring in some organisms, such as
(cid:2) describeoxidation and
glowworms and fireflies, as shown in Figure 10.3.
reduction in terms of
changes in oxidation number
(cid:2) assignoxidation numbers
to elements in covalent mol-
ecules and polyatomic ions
(cid:2) identifyredox reactions
using oxidation numbers
(cid:2) communicateyour under-
standing of the terms
oxidation numbers,
oxidation, reduction
Figure 10.3 Fireflies use flashes of light produced by redox reactions to attract a mate.
Not all redox reactions give off light, however. How can you recognize a
redox reaction, and how can you identify the oxidizing and reducing
agents? In section 10.1, you saw net ionic equations with monatomic CHEM
elements, such as Cu and Zn, and with ions containing a single element, FACT
such as
Cu2+
and
Zn2+
. In these cases, you could use ionic charges to
Oxidation numbers are just a
describe the transfer of electrons. However, many redox reactions involve bookkeeping method used to
reactants or products with covalent bonds, including elements that exist keep track of electron trans-
as covalent molecules, such as oxygen, O ; covalent compounds, such fers. In a covalent molecule or
2
as water, H O; or polyatomic ions that are not spectator ions, such as a polyatomic ion, the oxidation
2
− number of each element does
permanganate, MnO . For reactions involving covalent reactants and
4
notrepresent an ionic charge,
products, you cannot use ionic charges to describe the transfer of electrons.
because the elements are not
Oxidation numbers are actual or hypothetical charges, assigned using
present as ions. However, to
a set of rules. They are used to describe redox reactions with covalent
assign oxidation numbers to
reactants or products. They are also used to identify redox reactions, and the elements in a covalent
to identify oxidizing and reducing agents. In this section, you will see molecule or polyatomic ion,
how oxidation numbers were developed from Lewis structures, and then you can pretendthe bonds
learn the rules to assign oxidation numbers. are ionic.
Oxidation Numbers from Lewis Structures
You are probably familiar with the Lewis structure of water, shown in
Figure 10.4A. From the electronegativities on the periodic table in
Figure 10.5, on the next page, you can see that oxygen (electronegativity
3.44) is more electronegative than hydrogen (electronegativity 2.20). The
electronegativity difference is less than 1.7, so the two hydrogen-oxygen
bonds are polar covalent, not ionic. In each bond, the electrons are more
strongly attracted to the oxygen atom than to the hydrogen atom.
−2 Figure 10.4 (A) The Lewis
• • • • structure of water; (B) The formal
A • • O • • H B • • O • • H counting of electrons with the
• • • • +1 more electronegative element
H H assigned a negative charge
+1
Chapter 10 Oxidation-Reduction Reactions • MHR 473
To assign oxidation numbers to the atoms in a water molecule, you
can consider all the bonding electrons to be “owned” by the more elec-
tronegative oxygen atom, as shown in Figure 10.4B. Thus, each hydrogen
atom in a water molecule is considered to have no electrons, as hydrogen
+
would in a hydrogen ion, H . Therefore, the element hydrogen is assigned
an oxidation number of +1 in water. On the other hand, the oxygen atom
in a water molecule is considered to have a filled octet of electrons, as
oxygen would in an oxide ion,
O2−
. Therefore, the element oxygen is
assigned an oxidation number of −2 in water. (Note: These are not ionic
charges, since water is a covalent molecule. Also, note that the plus or
minus sign in an oxidation number, such as −2, is written before the
number. The plus or minus sign in an ionic charge, such as 2−, is written
after the number.)
H He
2.20 -
Li Be B C N O F Ne
0.98 1.57 2.04 2.55 3.04 3.44 3.98 -
Na Mg Al Si P S Cl Ar
0.93 1.31 1.61 1.90 2.19 2.58 3.16 -
K Ca Sc Ti V Cr Mn Fe Co Ni Cu Zn Ga Ge As Se Br Kr
0.82 1.00 1.36 1.54 1.63 1.66 1.55 1.83 1.88 1.91 1.90 1.65 1.81 2.01 2.18 2.55 2.96 -
Rb Sr Y Zr Nb Mo Tc Ru Rh Pd Ag Cd In Sn Sb Te I Xe
0.82 0.95 1.22 1.33 1.6 2.16 2.10 2.2 2.28 2.20 1.93 1.69 1.78 1.96 2.05 2.1 2.66 -
Cs Ba Lu Hf Ta W Re Os Ir Pt Au Hg TI Pb Bi Po At Rn
0.79 0.89 1.0 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.2 2.2 2.2 2.4 1.9 1.8 1.8 1.9 2.0 2.2 -
Fr Ra Lr Rf Db Sg Bh Hs Mt Uun Uuu Uub Uuq Uuh Uuo
- - -
0.7 0.9 - - - - - - - - - - - - -
La Ce Pr Nd Pm Sm Eu Gd Tb Dy Ho Er Tm Yb
1.10 1.12 1.13 1.14 - 1.17 - 1.20 - 1.22 1.23 1.24 1.25 -
Ac Th Pa U Np Pu Am Cm Bk Cf Es Fm Md No
1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.3 1.3 - - - - - - - -
Figure 10.5 The periodic table, showing electronegativity values
In a chlorine molecule, Cl , each atom has the same electronegativity, so
2
the bond is non-polar covalent. Because the electrons are equally shared,
you can consider each chlorine atom to “own” one of the shared elec-
trons, as shown in Figure 10.6. Thus, each chlorine atom in the molecule
is considered to have the same number of electrons as a neutral chlorine
atom. Each chlorine atom is therefore assigned an oxidation number of 0.
A B
• • • • • • • •
• Cl • Cl • • Cl • Cl •
• • • • • •
• • • • • • • •
00 0
Figure 10.6 (A) The Lewis structure of a chlorine molecule; (B) The formal counting of
electrons in a chlorine molecule for oxidation number purposes
474 MHR • Unit 5 Electrochemistry
Figure 10.7 shows how oxidation numbers are assigned for the
−
polyatomic cyanide ion, CN . The electronegativity of nitrogen (3.04) is
greater than the electronegativity of carbon (2.55). Thus, the three shared
pairs of electrons are all considered to belong to the nitrogen atom. As
a result, the carbon atom is considered to have two valence electrons,
which is two electrons less than the four valence electrons of a neutral
−
carbon atom. Therefore, the carbon atom in CN is assigned an oxidation
number of +2. The nitrogen atom is considered to have eight valence
electrons, which is three electrons more than the five valence electrons of
−
a neutral nitrogen atom. Therefore, the nitrogen atom in CN is assigned
an oxidation number of −3.
A B
− −
• C • • • N • • C • • • N •
• • • • • • • • • •
+2 −3
Figure 10.7 (A) The Lewis structure of a cyanide ion; (B) The formal counting of electrons
in a cyanide ion for oxidation number purposes
You have seen examples of how Lewis structures can be used to assign
oxidation numbers for polar molecules such as water, non-polar molecules
such as chlorine, and polar polyatomic ions such as the cyanide ion.
In the following ThoughtLab, you will use Lewis structures to assign
oxidation number values, and then look for patterns in your results.
ThoughtLab Finding Rules for Oxidation Numbers
Procedure Analysis
1. Use Lewis structures to assign an oxidation 1. For each molecule in question 1 of the proce-
number to each element in the following dure, find the sum of the oxidation numbers
covalent molecules. of all the atoms present. What do you notice?
(a) HI (b) O (c) PCl (d) BBr Explain why the observed sum must be true for
2 5 3
a neutral molecule.
2. Use Lewis structures to assign an oxidation
number to each element in the following 2. For each polyatomic ion in question 2 of the
polyatomic ions. procedure, find the sum of the oxidation
(a) OH− (b) NH + (c) CO 2− numbers of all the atoms present. Describe
4 3
and explain any pattern you see.
3. Assign an oxidation number to each of the
following atoms or monatomic ions. Explain
Extension
your reasoning.
(a) Ne (b) K (c) I− (d) Mg2+ 3. Predict the sum of the oxidation numbers of the
atoms in the hypochlorite ion, OCl−.
4. Test your prediction from question 3.
Chapter 10 Oxidation-Reduction Reactions • MHR 475
Using Rules to Find Oxidation Numbers
Drawing Lewis structures to assign oxidation numbers can be a very
time-consuming process for large molecules or large polyatomic ions.
Instead, the results from Lewis structures have been summarized to
produce a more convenient set of rules, which can be applied more
quickly. Table 10.1 summarizes the rules used to assign oxidation
numbers. You may have discovered some of these rules for yourself in
the ThoughtLab you just completed.
Table 10.1 Oxidation Number Rules
Rules Examples
1. A pure element has an oxidation Na in Na (s) , Br in Br 2((cid:2) ) , and P in P 4(s)
number of 0. all have an oxidation number of 0.
2. The oxidation number of an element The oxidation number of Al in Al3+
in a monatomic ion equals the is +3. The oxidation number of Se in
charge of the ion. Se2− is −2.
3. The oxidation number of hydrogen The oxidation number of H in H S or
2
in its compounds is +1, except in CH is +1. The oxidation number of H
4
metal hydrides, where the oxidation in NaH or in CaH is −1.
2
number of hydrogen is −1.
4. The oxidation number of oxygen in The oxidation number of O in Li O or
2
its compounds is usually −2, but in KNO is −2.
3
there are exceptions. These include
peroxides, such as H O , and the
2 2
compound OF .
2
5. In covalent compounds that do not The oxidation number of Cl in PCl is
3
contain hydrogen or oxygen, the −1. The oxidation number of S in CS
2
more electronegative element is is −2.
assigned an oxidation number that
equals the negative charge it usually
has in its ionic compounds.
6. The sum of the oxidation numbers In CF , the oxidation number of F is −1,
4
of all the elements in a compound and the oxidation number of C is +4.
is 0. (+4) + 4(−1) = 0
−
7. The sum of the oxidation numbers In NO , the oxidation number of O is
2
of all the elements in a polyatomic −2, and the oxidation number of N is+3.
ion equals the charge on the ion. (+3) + 2(−2) = −1
Some oxidation numbers found using these rules are not integers. For
example, an important iron ore called magnetite has the formula Fe O .
3 4
Using the oxidation number rules, you can assign oxygen an oxidation
number of −2, and calculate an oxidation number of +8 for iron. However,
3
magnetite contains no iron atoms with this oxidation number. It actually
contains iron(III) ions and iron(II) ions in a 2:1 ratio. The formula of
magnetite is sometimes written as Fe
2
O 3•FeO to indicate that there are
two different oxidation numbers. The value
+8
for the oxidation number
3
of iron is an average value.
2(+3) + (+2) = +8
3 3
Even though some oxidation numbers found using these rules are
averages, the rules are still useful for monitoring electron transfers in
redox reactions.
476 MHR • Unit 5 Electrochemistry
In the following Sample Problem, you will find out how to apply
these rules to covalent molecules and polyatomic ions.
Sample Problem
Assigning Oxidation Numbers
Problem
Assign an oxidation number to each element.
(a)SiBr (b) HClO (c) Cr O
2−
4 4 2 7
Solution
(a) • Because the compound SiBr does not contain hydrogen or oxygen,
4
rule 5 applies. Because SiBr is a compound, rule 6 also applies.
4
• Silicon has an electronegativity of 1.90. Bromine has an
electronegativity of 2.96. From rule 5, therefore, you can assign
bromine an oxidation number of −1.
• The oxidation number of silicon is unknown, so let it be x. You
know from rule 6 that the sum of the oxidation numbers is 0. Then,
x + 4(−1) = 0
x − 4 = 0
x = 4
The oxidation number of silicon is +4. The oxidation number of bromine
is −1.
(b) • Because the compound HClO contains hydrogen and oxygen,
4
rules 3 and 4 apply. Because HClO is a compound, rule 6 also
4
applies.
• Hydrogen has its usual oxidation number of +1. Oxygen has its
usual oxidation number of −2. The oxidation number of chlorine
is unknown, so let it be x. You know from rule 6 that the sum of
the oxidation numbers is 0. Then,
(+1) + x + 4(−2) = 0
x − 7 = 0
x = 7
The oxidation number of hydrogen is +1. The oxidation number
of chlorine is +7. The oxidation number of oxygen is −2.
(c) • Because the polyatomic ion Cr O 2− contains oxygen, rule 4
2 7
applies. Because Cr O
2−
is a polyatomic ion, rule 7 also applies.
PROBLEM TIP
2 7
• Oxygen has its usual oxidation number of −2. When finding the oxidation
numbers of elements in ionic
• The oxidation number of chromium is unknown, so let it be x.
compounds, you can work
You know from rule 7 that the sum of the oxidation numbers is −2.
with the ions separately. For
Then,
example, NaCrO contains
2 2 7
2x + 7(−2) = −2 two Na+ions, and so sodium
2x − 14 = −2 has an oxidation number of +1.
2x = 12 The oxidation numbers of Cr
x = 6 and O can then be calculated
The oxidation number of chromium is +6. The oxidation number of as shown in part (c) of the
oxygen is −2. Sample Problem.
Chapter 10 Oxidation-Reduction Reactions • MHR 477
Practice Problems
9. Determine the oxidation number of the specified element in each of
the following.
(a) N in NF (b) S in S (c) Cr in CrO
2−
3 8 4
(d) P in P O (e) C in C H O (f) C in CHCl
2 5 12 22 11 3
10. Determine the oxidation number of each element in each of the
following.
(a) H SO (b) OH
−
(c) HPO
2−
2 3 4
11. As stated in rule 4, oxygen does not always have its usual oxidation
number of −2. Determine the oxidation number of oxygen in each of
the following.
(a) the compound oxygen difluoride, OF (b) the peroxide ion,O 2−
2 2
12. Determine the oxidation number of each element in each of the
following ionic compounds by considering the ions separately.
Hint:One formula unit of the compound in part (c) contains two
identical monatomic ions and one polyatomic ion.
(a) Al(HCO ) (b) (NH ) PO (c) K H IO
3 3 4 3 4 2 3 6
Applying Oxidation Numbers to Redox Reactions
You have seen that the single displacement reaction of zinc with
copper(II) sulfate is a redox reaction, represented by the following
chemical equation and net ionic equation.
Zn + CuSO → Cu + ZnSO
(s) 4(aq) (s) 4(aq)
Zn + Cu2+ → Cu + Zn2+
(s) (aq) (s) (aq)
Each atom or ion shown in the net ionic equation can be assigned
an oxidation number. Zn has an oxidation number of 0;
Cu2+
has an
oxidation number of +2; Cu has an oxidation number of 0; and Zn2+ has
an oxidation number of +2. Thus, there are changes in oxidation numbers
in this reaction. The oxidation number of zinc increases, while the
oxidation number of copper decreases.
oxidation number increases
(loss of electrons)
Zn + Cu2+ → Zn2+ + Cu
0 +2 +2 0
oxidation number decreases
(gain of electrons)
In the oxidation half-reaction, the element zinc undergoes an increase
in its oxidation number from 0 to +2.
Zn → Zn2+ + 2e −
0 +2
In the reduction half-reaction, the element copper undergoes a decrease
in its oxidation number from +2 to 0.
Cu2+ + 2e − → Cu
+2 0
478 MHR • Unit 5 Electrochemistry
Therefore, you can describe oxidation and reduction as follows. (Also see oxidation
numbers
Figure 10.8.)
• Oxidation is an increase in oxidation number. +5
• Reduction is a decrease in oxidation number.
+4
You can also monitor changes in oxidation numbers in reactions that
+3
involve covalent molecules. For example, oxidation number changes
occur in the reaction of hydrogen and oxygen to form water. +2
2H 2(g) + O 2(g) → 2H 2 O ((cid:2)) +1
0 0 +1 −2
Because hydrogen combines with oxygen in this reaction, hydrogen 0
undergoes oxidation, according to the historical definition given at the
−1
beginning of section 10.1. Hydrogen also undergoes oxidation according
to the modern definition, because the oxidation number of hydrogen −2
increases from 0 to +1. Hydrogen is the reducing agent in this reaction.
−3
The oxygen undergoes reduction, because its oxidation number decreases
from 0 to −2. Oxygen is the oxidizing agent in this reaction. −4
The following Sample Problem illustrates how to use oxidation num-
−5
bers to identify redox reactions, oxidizing agents, and reducing agents.
Sample Problem
Identifying Redox Reactions
Problem
Determine whether each of the following reactions is a redox reaction.
If so, identify the oxidizing agent and the reducing agent.
(a) CH + Cl → CH Cl + HCl
4(g) 2(g) 3 (g) (g)
(b) CaCO 3(s) + 2HCl (aq) → CaCl 2(aq) + H 2 O ((cid:2)) + CO 2(g)
Solution
Find the oxidation number of each element in the reactants and
products. Identify any elements that undergo an increase or a decrease
in oxidation number during the reaction.
(a) The oxidation number of each element in the reactants and products
is as shown.
CH + Cl → CH Cl + HCl
4(g) 2(g) 3 (g) (g)
−4 +1 0 −2 +1 −1 +1−1
• The oxidation number of hydrogen is +1 on both sides of the
equation, so hydrogen is neither oxidized nor reduced.
• Both carbon and chlorine undergo changes in oxidation number, so
the reaction is a redox reaction.
• The oxidation number of carbon increases from −4 to −2. The car-
bon atoms on the reactant side exist in methane molecules, CH ,
4(g)
so methane is oxidized. Therefore, methane is the reducing agent.
• The oxidation number of chlorine decreases from 0 to −1, so
elemental chlorine, Cl , is reduced. Therefore, elemental chlorine
2(g)
is the oxidizing agent.
(b) Because this reaction involves ions, write the equation in its total
ionic form.
CaCO 3(s) + 2H + (aq) + 2Cl − (aq) → Ca2+ (aq) + 2Cl − (aq) + H 2 O ((cid:2)) + CO 2(g)
Chapter 10 Oxidation-Reduction Reactions • MHR 479
noitadixo noitcuder
Figure 10.8 Oxidation and
reduction are directly related to
changes in oxidation numbers.
PROBLEM TIPS
• Use the fact that the sum
of the oxidation numbers
in a molecule is zero to
check the assignment of
the oxidation numbers.
• Make sure that a
reaction does not include
only a reduction or only
an oxidation. Oxidation
and reduction must
occur together in a redox
reaction.
In part (b) of the Sample
Problem, you can assign
oxidation numbers to each
element in the given chemical
equation orin the net ionic
equation. What are the advan-
tages and the disadvantages
of each method?
Continued ...
Continued ...
The chloride ions are spectator ions, which do not undergo oxidation
In your previous chemistry
or reduction. The net ionic equation is as follows.
course, you classified
reactions into four main types: CaCO 3(s) + 2H + (aq) → Ca2+ (aq) + H 2 O ((cid:2)) + CO 2(g)
synthesis, decomposition, For the net ionic equation, the oxidation number of each element in
single displacement, and
the reactants and products is as shown.
double displacement. You
also learned to recognize CaCO 3(s) + 2H + (aq) → Ca2+ (aq) + H 2 O ((cid:2)) + CO 2(g)
+2+4−2 +1 +2 +1−2 +4−2
combustion reactions and
neutralization reactions. You No elements undergo changes in oxidation numbers, so the reaction
have now learned to classify is not a redox reaction.
redox reactions. In addition,
you have also learned about a
special type of redox reaction
known as a disproportionation Practice Problems
reaction.
1. Classify each reaction in 13. Determine whether each reaction is a redox reaction.
two ways.
(a) H O + 2Fe(OH) → 2Fe(OH)
(a) magnesium reacting 2 2 2 3
with a solution of (b) PCl 3 + 3H 2 O → H 3 PO 3 + 3HCl
iron(II) nitrate
14. Identify the oxidizing agent and the reducing agent for the redox
Mg + Fe(NO)
32 reaction(s) in the previous question.
→ Fe + Mg(NO)
32
15. For the following balanced net ionic equation, identify the reactant
(b) hydrogen sulfide
that undergoes oxidation and the reactant that undergoes reduction.
burning in oxygen
2HS + 3O Br + 2ClO − → 2Br − + 2ClO
2 2 2 2 2
→ 2SO + 2HO
2 2
16. Nickel and copper are two metals that are important to the Ontario
(c) calcium reacting with economy, particularly in the Sudbury area. Nickel and copper ores
chlorine
usually contain the metals as sulfides, such as NiS and Cu S. Do the
Ca + Cl → CaCl 2
2 2 extractions of these pure elemental metals from their ores involve
2. Classify the formation of redox reactions? Explain your reasoning.
water and oxygen from
hydrogen peroxide in
three ways.
Section Summary
2HO → 2HO + O
2 2 2 2
In this section, you extended your knowledge of redox reactions to
include covalent reactants and products. You did this by learning how
to assign oxidation numbers and how to use them to recognize redox
reactions, oxidizing agents, and reducing agents. In the next section, you
will extend your knowledge further by learning how to write balanced
equations that represent redox reactions.
Section Review
1 C At the beginning of section 10.1, it was stated that oxidation
originally meant “to combine with oxygen.” Explain why a metal that
combines with the element oxygen undergoes oxidation as we now
define it. What happens to the oxygen in this reaction? Write a bal-
anced chemical equation for a reaction that illustrates your answer.
2 K/U Determine whether each of the following reactions is a redox
reaction.
(a) H + I → 2HI
2 2
(b) 2NaHCO → Na CO + H O + CO
3 2 3 2 2
480 MHR • Unit 5 Electrochemistry
(c) 2HBr + Ca(OH) → CaBr + 2H O
2 2 2
(d) PCl → PCl + Cl
5 3 2
3 K/U Write three different definitions for a redox reaction.
4 C Explain why fluorine has an oxidation number of −1 in all its
compounds.
5 C When an element combines with another element, is the reaction
a redox reaction? Explain your answer.
6 (a) I Use the oxidation number rules to find the oxidation number
of sulfur in a thiosulfate ion, S O
2−
.
2 3
(b) The Lewis structure of a thiosulfate ion is given here. Use the Lewis
structure to find the oxidation number of each sulfur atom.
•• 2−
•O•
• •
•• •• ••
•O• S • S •
• • • •
•• •• ••
•O•
• •
••
(c) Compare your results from parts (a) and (b) and explain any
differences.
(d) What are the advantages and disadvantages of using Lewis
structures to assign oxidation numbers?
(e) What are the advantages and disadvantages of using the oxidation
number rules to assign oxidation numbers?
7 (a) MC The Haber Process for the production of ammonia from
nitrogen and hydrogen is a very important industrial process.
Write a balanced chemical equation for the reaction. Use oxidation
numbers to identify the oxidizing agent and the reducing agent.
(b) When ammonia is reacted with nitric acid to make the common fer-
CHEM
tilizer ammonium nitrate, is the reaction a redox reaction? Explain.
FACT
(Hint: Consider the two polyatomic ions in the product separately.)
Redox reactions are involved
8 MC Historically, the extraction of a metal from its ore was known as in some very important indus-
reduction. One way to reduce iron ore on an industrial scale is to use trial processes, such as iron
a huge reaction vessel, 30 m to 40 m high, called a blast furnace. The and steel production. However,
reactants in a blast furnace are an impure iron ore, such as Fe O , the widespread use of metals
2 3
has occupied a relatively small
mixed with limestone, CaCO , and coke, C, which is made from coal.
3
part of human history. In the
The solid mixture is fed into the top of the blast furnace. A blast of
Stone Age, humans relied
very hot air, at about 900˚C, is blown in near the bottom of the furnace.
on stone, wood, and bone
The following reactions occur. to make tools and weapons.
2C + O → 2CO The Stone Age ended in many
2
parts of the world with the
Fe O + 3CO → 2Fe + 3CO
2 3 2 start of the Bronze Age, which
The limestone is present to convert sand or quartz, SiO , which is was marked by the use of cop-
2
present as an impurity in the ore, to calcium silicate, CaSiO . per and then bronze (an alloy
3
CaCO → CaO + CO of copper and tin). In the Iron
3 2 Age, bronze was replaced by
CaO + SiO 2 → CaSiO 3 the use of iron. The dates of
(a) Which of the four reactions above are redox reactions? the Bronze Age and the Iron
Age vary for different parts of
(b) For each redox reaction that you identified in part (a), name the
the world.
oxidizing agent and the reducing agent.
Chapter 10 Oxidation-Reduction Reactions • MHR 481
10.3 The Half-Reaction Method for
Balancing Equations
Section Preview/ Did you know that redox reactions are an important part of CD
Specific Expectations manufacturing? The CDs you buy at a music store are made of Lexan,
In this section, you will the same plastic used for riot shields and bulletproof windows. The CDs
are coated with a thin aluminum film. They are copies of a single master
(cid:2) investigateoxidation-
reduction reactions by disc, which is made of glass coated with silver, as seen in Figure 10.9.
reacting metals with Silver is deposited on a glass disc by the reduction of silver ions with
acids and by combusting methanal, HCHO, also known as formaldehyde. In the same reaction,
hydrocarbons formaldehyde is oxidized to methanoic acid, HCOOH, also known as
(cid:2) writebalanced equations formic acid. The redox reaction occurs under acidic conditions.
for redox reactions using the
half-reaction method
Figure 10.9 The production of CDs depends on a redox reaction used to coat the master
disc with silver.
You have seen many balanced chemical equations and net ionic equations
that represent redox reactions. There are specific techniques for balancing
these equations. These techniques are especially useful for reactions that
take place under acidic or basic conditions, such as the acidic conditions
used in coating a master CD with silver.
In section 10.1, you learned to divide the balanced equations for some
redox reactions into separate oxidation and reduction half-reactions. You
will now use the reverse approach, and discover how to write a balanced
equation by combining two half-reactions. To do this, you must first
understand how to write a wide range of half-reactions.
482 MHR • Unit 5 Electrochemistry
Balancing Half-Reactions
In the synthesis of potassium chloride from its elements, metallic
potassium is oxidized to form potassium ions, and gaseous chlorine is
reduced to form chloride ions. This reaction is shown in Figure 10.10.
Each half-reaction can be balanced by writing the correct formulas for
the reactant and product, balancing the numbers of atoms, and then
adding the correct number of electrons to balance the charges. For the
oxidation half-reaction,
K → K + + e −
The atoms are balanced. The net charge on each side is 0. For the
reduction half-reaction,
Cl + 2e − → 2Cl −
2
The atoms are balanced. The net charge on each side is −2.
+
K K K Cl − K + Cl −
Cl
2
2K Cl 2KCl
(s) 2(g) (s)
0 + 0 +1 − 1
Potassium Chlorine Potassium chloride
Figure 10.10 Grey potassium metal, which is stored under oil, reacts very vigorously with
greenish-yellow chlorine gas to form white potassium chloride. The changes in oxidation
numbers show that this synthesis reaction is also a redox reaction.
Redox reactions do not always take place under neutral conditions.
Balancing half-reactions is more complicated for reactions that take place
+ −
in acidic or basic solutions. When an acid or base is present, H or OH
ions must also be considered. However, the overall approach is similar.
This approach involves writing the correct formulas for the reactants and
products, balancing the atoms, and adding the appropriate number of
electrons to one side of the half-reaction to balance the charges.
Chapter 10 Oxidation-Reduction Reactions • MHR 483
Balancing Half-Reactions for Acidic Solutions
The following steps are used to balance a half-reaction for an acidic
solution. The Sample Problem that follows applies these steps.
Step 1 Write an unbalanced half-reaction that shows the formulas of
the given reactant(s) and product(s).
Step 2 Balance any atoms other than oxygen and hydrogen first.
Step 3 Balance any oxygen atoms by adding water molecules.
Step 4 Balance any hydrogen atoms by adding hydrogen ions.
Step 5 Balance the charges by adding electrons.
Sample Problem
Balancing a Half-Reaction in Acidic Solution
Problem
Write a balanced half-reaction that shows the reduction of
permanganate ions, MnO −, to manganese(II) ions in an acidic
4
solution.
Solution
Step 1 Represent the given reactant and product with correct formulas.
MnO − → Mn2+
4
Step 2 Balance the atoms, starting with the manganese atoms. Here, the
manganese atoms are already balanced.
Step 3 The reduction occurs in aqueous solution, so add water
molecules to balance the oxygen atoms.
MnO − → Mn2+ + 4H O
4 2
Step 4 The reaction occurs in acidic solution, so add hydrogen ions to
balance the hydrogen atoms.
MnO − + 8H + → Mn2+ + 4H O
4 2
Step 5 The atoms are now balanced, but the net charge on the left side
is 7+, whereas the net charge on the right side is 2+. Add five
electrons to the left side to balance the charges.
MnO − + 8H + + 5e − → Mn2+ + 4H O
4 2
Practice Problems
17. Write a balanced half-reaction for the reduction of cerium(IV) ions
to cerium(III) ions.
The ability to balance a single
half-reaction as a bookkeeping 18. Write a balanced half-reaction for the oxidation of bromide ions to
exercise does not mean that a bromine.
single half-reaction can occur
19. Balance each of the following half-reactions under acidic conditions.
on its own. In a redox reaction,
oxidation and reduction must (a) O → H O (b) H O → O (c) NO − → N
2 2 2 2 2 3 2
both occur.
20. Balance each of the following half-reactions under acidic conditions.
(a) ClO − → Cl − (b) NO → NO − (c) Cr O 2− → Cr3+
3 3 2 7
484 MHR • Unit 5 Electrochemistry
Balancing Half-Reactions for Basic Solutions
The following steps are used to balance a half-reaction for a basic solution.
The Sample Problem that follows applies these steps.
Step 1 Write an unbalanced half-reaction that shows the formulas of
the given reactant(s) and product(s).
Step 2 Balance any atoms other than oxygen and hydrogen first.
Step 3 Balance any oxygen and hydrogen atoms as if the conditions
are acidic.
Step 4 Adjust for basic conditions by adding to both sides the same
number of hydroxide ions as the number of hydrogen ions
already present.
Step 5 Simplify the half-reaction by combining the hydrogen ions
and hydroxide ions on the same side of the equation into water
molecules.
Step 6 Remove any water molecules present on both sides of the
half-reaction.
Step 7 Balance the charges by adding electrons.
Sample Problem
Balancing a Half-Reaction in Basic Solution
Problem
Write a balanced half-reaction that shows the oxidation of thiosulfate
ions, S O
2−
, to sulfite ions, SO
2−
, in a basic solution.
2 3 3
Solution
Step 1 Represent the given reactant and product with correct formulas.
S O 2− → SO 2−
2 3 3
Step 2 Balance the atoms, beginning with the sulfur atoms.
S O 2− → 2SO 2−
2 3 3
Step 3 Balance the oxygen and hydrogen atoms as if the solution
is acidic.
S O 2− + 3H O → 2SO 2−
2 3 2 3
S O 2− + 3H O → 2SO 2− + 6H +
2 3 2 3
Step 4 There are six hydrogen ions present, so adjust for basic
conditions by adding six hydroxide ions to each side.
S O 2− + 3H O + 6OH − → 2SO 2− + 6H + + 6OH −
2 3 2 3
Step 5 Combine the hydrogen ions and hydroxide ions on the right side
into water molecules.
S O 2− + 3H O + 6OH − → 2SO 2− + 6H O
2 3 2 3 2
Step 6 Remove three water molecules from each side.
S O 2− + 6OH − → 2SO 2− + 3H O
2 3 3 2
Step 7 The atoms are now balanced, but the net charge on the left side
is 8−, whereas the net charge on the right side is 4−. Add four
electrons to the right side to balance the charges.
S O 2− + 6OH − → 2SO 2− + 3H O + 4e −
2 3 3 2
Chapter 10 Oxidation-Reduction Reactions • MHR 485
Practice Problems
21. Write a balanced half-reaction for the oxidation of chromium(II) ions
to chromium(III) ions.
22. Write a balanced half-reaction for the reduction of oxygen to oxide
ions.
23. Balance each of the following half-reactions under basic conditions.
(a) Al → Al(OH) − (b) CN − → CNO − (c) MnO − → MnO
4 4 2
(d) CrO 2− → Cr(OH) (e) CO 2− → C O 2−
4 3 3 2 4
24. Balance each of the following half-reactions.
(a) FeO 2− → Fe3+ (acidic conditions)
4
(b) ClO − → Cl − (basic conditions)
2
Half-Reaction Method for Balancing Redox Reactions
Recall that, if you consider a redox reaction as two half-reactions,
electrons are lost in the oxidation half-reaction, and electrons are gained
in the reduction half-reaction. For example, you know the reaction of
zinc with aqueous copper(II) sulfate.
Zn + CuSO → Cu + ZnSO
(s) 4(aq) (s) 4(aq)
Removing the spectator ions leaves the following net ionic equation.
Zn + Cu2+ → Cu + Zn2+
(s) (aq) (s) (aq)
• You can break the net ionic equation into two half-reactions:
Oxidation half-reaction: Zn → Zn2+ + 2e −
Reduction half-reaction: Cu2+ + 2e − → Cu
• You can also start with the half-reactions and use them to produce a net
ionic equation. If you add the two half-reactions, the result is as follows.
Zn + Cu2+ + 2e − → Cu + Zn2+ + 2e −
Removing the two electrons from each side results in the original net
ionic equation.
As shown above, you can use half-reactions to write balanced net
ionic equations for redox reactions. In doing so, you use the fact that
no electrons are created or destroyed in a redox reaction. Electrons
are transferred from one reactant (the reducing agent) to another (the
oxidizing agent).
Balancing a Net Ionic Equation
You know from Investigation 10-A that magnesium metal, Mg , displaces
(s)
aluminum from an aqueous solution of one of its compounds, such as
aluminum nitrate, Al(NO ) . To obtain a balanced net ionic equation
3 3(aq)
for this reaction, you can start by looking at the half-reactions. Magnesium
atoms undergo oxidation to form magnesium ions, which have a 2+
charge. The oxidation half-reaction is as follows.
Mg → Mg2+ + 2e −
Aluminum ions, which have a 3+ charge, undergo reduction to form
aluminum atoms. The reduction half-reaction is as follows.
Al3+ + 3e − → Al
486 MHR • Unit 5 Electrochemistry
To balance the net ionic equation for this redox reaction, you can
Math LINK
combine the two half-reactions in such a way that the number of electrons
The lowest or least common
lost through oxidation equals the number of electrons gained through
multiple (LCM) of two numbers
reduction. In other words, you can model the transfer of a certain number
is the smallest multiple of each
of electrons from the reducing agent to the oxidizing agent.
number. For example, the LCM
For the reaction of magnesium metal with aluminum ions, the two
of 2 and 1 is 2; the LCM of 3
balanced half-reactions include different numbers of electrons, 2 and 3. and 6 is 6; and the LCM of 2
The least common multiple of 2 and 3 is 6. To combine the half-reactions and 5 is 10. One way to find the
and give a balanced net ionic equation, multiply the balanced half- LCM of two numbers is to list
reactions by different numbers so that the results both include six the multiples of each number
and to find the smallest num-
electrons, as shown below.
ber that appears in both lists.
• Multiply the oxidation half-reaction by 3. Multiply the reduction
For the numbers 6 and 8,
half-reaction by 2. • the multiples of 6 are:
3Mg → 3Mg2+ + 6e − 6, 12, 18, 24, 30,…
2Al3+ + 6e − → 2Al • the multiples of 8 are:
8, 16, 24, 32, 40,…
• Add the results.
Thus, the LCM of 6 and 8 is 24.
3Mg + 2Al3+ + 6e − → 3Mg2+ + 2Al + 6e −
What is the LCM of the
• Remove 6e − from each side to obtain the balanced net ionic equation. numbers 4 and 12?
3Mg + 2Al3+ → 3Mg2+ + 2Al What is the LCM of the
numbers 7 and 3?
To produce the balanced chemical equation, you can include the
spectator ions, which are nitrate ions in this example. Include the states,
if necessary. The balanced chemical equation is:
3Mg + 2Al(NO ) → 3Mg(NO ) + 2Al
(s) 3 3(aq) 3 2(aq) (s)
Steps for Balancing by the Half-Reaction Method
You could balance the chemical equation for the reaction of magnesium
with aluminum nitrate by inspection, instead of writing half-reactions.
However, many redox equations are difficult to balance by the inspection
method. In general, you can balance the net ionic equation for a redox
reaction by a process known as the half-reaction method. The preceding
example of the reaction of magnesium with aluminum nitrate illustrates
this method. Specific steps for following the half-reaction method are
given below.
Step 1 Write an unbalanced net ionic equation, if it is not already
given.
Step 2 Divide the unbalanced net ionic equation into an oxidation
half-reaction and a reduction half-reaction. To do this, you
may need to assign oxidation numbers to all the elements in
the net ionic equation to determine what is oxidized and what
is reduced.
Step 3 Balance the oxidation half-reaction and the reduction
half-reaction independently.
Step 4 Determine the least common multiple (LCM) of the numbers
of electrons in the oxidation half-reaction and the reduction
half-reaction.
Continued on the next page
Chapter 10 Oxidation-Reduction Reactions • MHR 487
Step 5 Use coefficients to write each half-reaction so that it includes
the LCM of the numbers of electrons.
Step 6 Add the balanced half-reactions that include the equal num-
bers of electrons.
Step 7 Remove the electrons from both sides of the equation.
Step 8 Remove any identical molecules or ions that are present on
both sides of the equation.
Step 9 If you require a balanced chemical equation, include any
spectator ions in the chemical formulas.
Step 10 If necessary, include the states.
When using the half-reaction method, keep in mind that, in a redox
reaction, the number of electrons lost through oxidation must equal the
number of electrons gained through reduction. Figure 10.11 provides
another example.
Figure 10.11 Lithium displaces
hydrogen from water to form lithium
hydroxide.
Oxidation half-reaction:
Li→Li+ +e−
Reduction half-reaction:
2HO+2e− →H +2OH−
2 2
Multiply the oxidation half-reaction
by 2, add the half-reactions, and
simplify the result to obtain the
balanced net ionic equation. 2Li (s) + 2H 2 O ((cid:2)) 2LiOH (aq) + H 2(g)
0 +1 −2 +1 −2 + 1 0
2Li+2H
2
O→2Li+ +2OH− +H
2 Lithium Water Lithium hydroxide Hydrogen
Balancing Redox Reactions in Acidic and Basic Solutions
The half-reaction method of balancing equations can be more complicated
for reactions that take place under acidic or basic conditions. The overall
approach, however, is the same. You need to balance the two half-reactions,
find the LCM of the numbers of electrons, and then multiply by coefficients
to equate the number of electrons lost and gained. Finally, add the half-
reactions and simplify to give a balanced net ionic equation for the
reaction. The ten steps listed above show this process in more detail.
The Sample Problem on the next page illustrates the use of these
steps for an acidic solution. To balance a net ionic equation for basic
conditions by the half-reaction method, balance each half-reaction for
Explain why a balanced
acidic conditions, adjust for basic conditions, and then combine the
chemical equation or net ionic
half-reactions to obtain the balanced net ionic equation. The following
equation for a redox reaction
does not include any electrons. Concept Organizer summarizes how to use the half-reaction method in
both acidic and basic conditions.
488 MHR • Unit 5 Electrochemistry
Concept Organizer The Half-Reaction Method for Balancing Redox Equations
Write unbalanced net ionic equation
Acidic Conditions Basic Conditions
Balance atoms other Write two half-reactions Balance assuming
than O or H and balance independently acidic conditions
Neutral Conditions
−
Balance O atoms by Add OH ions to
Balance atoms +
adding HO ”neutralize” H ions
2
Balance H atoms by Balance charges by +
Combine H and
adding H + ions adding electrons −
OH ions into HO
2
Write half-reactions with
Remove HO
2
LCM number of electrons.
molecules present
on both sides
Remove electrons, ions, or molecules
Add half-reactions
present on both sides of the equation
Sample Problem
Balancing a Redox Equation in Acidic Solution
Problem
Write a balanced net ionic equation to show the reaction of perchlorate
−
ions, ClO , and nitrogen dioxide in acidic solution to produce chloride
4
ions and nitrate ions.
What Is Required?
You need to write a balanced net ionic equation for the given reaction.
What Is Given?
You know the identities of two reactants and two products, and that the
reaction takes place in acidic solution.
Plan Your Strategy
• Write an unbalanced ionic equation.
• Determine whether the reaction is a redox reaction.
• If it is not a redox reaction, balance by inspection.
• If it is a redox reaction, follow the steps for balancing by the
half-reaction method.
Act on Your Strategy
• The unbalanced ionic equation is: ClO − + NO → Cl − + NO −
4 2 3
• Assign oxidation numbers to all the elements to determine which
reactant, if any, is oxidized or reduced.
ClO − + NO → Cl − + NO −
4 2 3
+7−2 +4−2 −1 +5−2
Continued ...
Chapter 10 Oxidation-Reduction Reactions • MHR 489
Continued ...
The oxidation number of chlorine decreases, so perchlorate ions are
reduced to chloride ions.
The oxidation number of nitrogen increases, so nitrogen dioxide
is oxidized to nitrate ions.
• This is a redox reaction. Use the half-reaction method to balance
the equation.
Step 1 The unbalanced net ionic equation is already written.
ClO − + NO → Cl − + NO −
4 2 3
Step 2 Write two unbalanced half-reactions.
Oxidation: NO → NO −
2 3
Reduction: ClO − → Cl −
4
Step 3 Balance the two half-reactions for acidic conditions.
Oxidation Reduction
NO → NO − ClO − → Cl −
2 3 4
NO + H O → NO − ClO − → Cl − + 4H O
2 2 3 4 2
NO + H O → NO − + 2H + ClO − + 8H + → Cl − + 4H O
2 2 3 4 2
NO + H O → NO − + 2H + + e − ClO − + 8H + + 8e − → Cl − + 4H O
2 2 3 4 2
Step 4 The LCM of 1 and 8 is 8.
Step 5 Multiply the oxidation half-reaction by 8, so that equal numbers of
electrons are lost and gained.
8NO + 8H O → 8NO − + 16H + + 8e −
2 2 3
Step 6 Add the half reactions.
8NO + 8H O → 8NO − + 16H + + 8e −
2 2 3
ClO − + 8H + + 8e − → Cl − + 4H O
4 2
8NO + 8H O + ClO − + 8H + + 8e − → 8NO − + 16H + + 8e − + Cl − + 4H O
2 2 4 3 2
Step 7 Simplify by removing 8 electrons from both sides.
8NO + 8H O + ClO − + 8H + → 8NO − + 16H + + Cl − + 4H O
2 2 4 3 2
Step 8 Simplify by removing 4 water molecules, and 8 hydrogen ions
from each side.
8NO + ClO − + 4H O → 8NO − + 8H + + Cl −
2 4 2 3
(Steps 9 and 10 are not required for this problem.)
Check Your Solution
• The atoms are balanced.
• The charges are balanced.
Practice Problems
25. Balance each of the following redox equations by inspection. Write
the balanced half-reactions in each case.
(a) Na + F → NaF (c) HgO → Hg + O
2 2
(b) Mg + N → Mg N
2 3 2
26. Balance the following equation by the half-reaction method.
Cu2+ + I − → CuI + I −
3
490 MHR • Unit 5 Electrochemistry
27. Balance each of the following ionic equations for acidic conditions.
Identify the oxidizing agent and the reducing agent in each case.
(a) MnO − + Ag → Mn2+ + Ag +
4
(b) Hg + NO − + Cl − → HgCl 2− + NO
3 4 2
(c) AsH + Zn2+ → H AsO + Zn
3 3 4
(d) I − → I − + IO −
3 3
28. Balance each of the following ionic equations for basic conditions.
Identify the oxidizing agent and the reducing agent in each case.
(a) CN − + MnO − → CNO − + MnO (c) ClO − + CrO − → CrO 2− + Cl
4 2 2 4 2
(b) H O + ClO → ClO − + O (d) Al + NO − → NH + AlO −
2 2 2 2 2 2 3 2
In the next investigation, you will carry out several redox reactions,
including reactions of acids with metals, and the combustion of
hydrocarbons.
Tools & Techniques
The Breathalyzer Test: 16H+ (aq) +2Cr 2 O 7 2− (aq) +3C 2 H 5 OH ((cid:2)) →
A Redox Reaction (orange) 4Cr3+ (aq) +3C 2 H 4 O 2(aq) +11H 2 O ((cid:2))
(green)
The police may pull over a driver weaving
This reaction is accompanied by a visible colour
erratically on the highway on suspicion of drunk
change, as orange dichromate ions become green
driving. A police officer must confirm this suspicion
chromium(III) ions. The concentration of alcohol in
by assessing whether the driver has a blood
the blood is determined by measuring the intensity
alcohol concentration over the “legal limit.” The
of the final colour.
“Breathalyzer” test checks a person’s breath
A recent modification of the Breathalyzer test
using a redox reaction to determine blood alcohol
prevents drivers from starting their cars if they have
concentration. This test was invented in 1953 by
been drinking.Alcohol ignition locks involve a type
Robert Borkenstein, a former member of the Indiana
of Breathalyzer test that is linked to the car’s ignition
State Police, and a professor of forensic studies.
system. Until the driver passes the test, the car will
What does a person’s breath have to do with
not start. This test is useful in regulating the driving
the alcohol in his or her blood? In fact, there is a
habits of people who have been previously convicted
direct correlation between the concentration of
of drinking and driving.
alcohol in an exhaled breath and the concentration
of alcohol in the blood.
As blood moves through the lungs, it comes
in close contact with inhaled gases. If the blood
contains alcohol, the concentration of alcohol in
the blood quickly reaches equilibrium with the
concentration of alcohol in each inhaled breath.
Thus, the alcohol content in an exhaled breath is a
measure of the alcohol concentration in the blood
itself. For example, if a person has been drinking
alcohol, every 2100 mL of air exhaled contains
about the same amount of alcohol as 1 mL of blood.
In the Breathalyzer test, the subject blows into a
tube connected to a vial. The exhaled air collects in
the vial, which already contains a mixture of sulfuric
acid, potassium dichromate, water, and the catalyst
silver nitrate. The alcohol reacts with the dichromate
ion in the following redox reaction.
Chapter 10 Oxidation-Reduction Reactions • MHR 491
S K I L L F O C U S
MICROSCALE Predicting
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
Redox Reactions
and Balanced Equations
A redox reaction involves the transfer of • If you accidentally spill a solution on your
electrons between reactants. A reactant that skin, wash the area immediately with copious
loses electrons is oxidized and acts as a reducing amounts of cool water. If you get any acid in
agent. A reactant that gains electrons is reduced your eyes, wash at the eye wash station. Inform
and acts as an oxidizing agent. Redox reactions your teacher.
can be represented by balanced equations.
• Before lighting a Bunsen burner or candle,
make sure that there are no flammable liquids
Questions
nearby. Also, tie back long hair, and confine
How can you tell if a redox reaction occurs when any loose clothing.
reactants are mixed? Can you observe the transfer
of electrons in the mixture? Procedure
Part 1 Reactions of Acids
Predictions
1. Place a small piece of each metal on the
• Predict which of the metals magnesium, well plate. Add a few drops of hydrochloric
zinc, copper, and aluminum can be oxidized acid to each metal. Record your observations.
by aqueous hydrogen ions. Explain your If you are unsure of your observations, repeat
reasoning. the procedure on a larger scale in a small
• Predict whether metals that cannot be oxidized test tube.
by hydrogen ions can dissolve in acids. 2. Place another small piece of each metal on
Explain your reasoning. clean sections of the well plate. Add a few
• Predict whether the combustion of a hydro- drops of sulfuric acid to each metal. Record
carbon is a redox reaction. What assumptions your observations. If you are unsure of your
have you made about the products? observations, repeat the procedure on a larger
scale in a small test tube.
Materials 3. Dispose of the mixtures in the beaker
supplied by your teacher.
well plate
4 small test tubes
Part 2 Combustion of Hydrocarbons
test tube rack
small pieces of each of the metals magnesium, 4. Observe the combustion of natural gas in a
Bunsen burner. Adjust the colour of the flame
zinc, copper, and aluminum
by varying the quantity of oxygen admitted to
dilute hydrochloric acid (1 mol/L)
the burner. How does the colour depend on
dilute sulfuric acid (1 mol/L)
the quantity of oxygen?
Bunsen burner
candle 5. Observe the combustion of a candle. Compare
the colour of the flame with the colour of the
Safety Precautions Bunsen burner flame. Which adjustment of
the burner makes the colours of the two
flames most similar?
• The acid solutions are corrosive. Handle them
with care.
492 MHR • Unit 5 Electrochemistry
Analysis 11. A yellow or orange flame from a Bunsen
burner indicates incomplete combustion and
Part 1 Reactions of Acids
the presence of carbon in the flame. Write a
1. Write a balanced chemical equation for each
balanced chemical equation for this reaction.
of the reactions of an acid with a metal.
12. Name another possible carbon-containing
2. Write each equation from question 1 in net
product from the incomplete combustion of
ionic form.
methane. Write a balanced chemical equation
3. Determine which of the reactions from for this reaction.
question 1 are redox reactions.
13. The fuel in a burning candle is paraffin wax,
4. Write each redox reaction from question 3 as C H . Write a balanced chemical equation
25 52
two half-reactions. for the complete combustion of paraffin wax.
5. Explain any similarities in your answers to 14. Write two balanced equations that represent
question 4. the incomplete combustion of paraffin wax.
6. In the reactions you observed, are the 15. How do you know that at least one of the
hydrogen ions acting as an oxidizing agent, incomplete combustion reactions is taking
a reducing agent, or neither? place when a candle burns?
7. In the neutralization reaction of hydrochloric 16. Are combustion reactions also redox
acid and sodium hydroxide, do the hydrogen reactions? Does your answer depend on
ions behave in the same way as you found in whether the combustion is complete or
question 6? Explain. incomplete? Explain.
8. Your teacher may demonstrate the reaction
Conclusion
of copper with concentrated nitric acid to
produce copper(II) ions and brown, toxic 17. How could you tell if a redox reaction
nitrogen dioxide gas. Write a balanced net occurred when reactants were mixed?
ionic equation for this reaction. Do the Could you observe the transfer of electrons
hydrogen ions behave in the same way in the mixture?
as you found in question 6? Identify the
oxidizing agent and the reducing agent in Applications
this reaction.
18. Gold is very unreactive and does not dissolve
9. From your observations of copper with in most acids. However, it does dissolve in
hydrochloric acid and nitric acid, can you aqua regia (Latin for “royal water”), which is
tell whether hydrogen ions or nitrate ions a mixture of concentrated hydrochloric and
are the better oxidizing agent? Explain. nitric acids. The unbalanced ionic equation
for the reaction is as follows.
Part 2 Combustion of Hydrocarbons Au + NO − + Cl − → AuCl − + NO
3 4 2
10. The main component of natural gas is
Balance the equation, and identify the
methane, CH . The products of the combus-
4 oxidizing agent and reducing agent.
tion of this gas in a Bunsen burner depend
on how the burner is adjusted. A blue flame 19. Natural gas is burned in gas furnaces. Give
indicates complete combustion. What are at least three reasons why this combustion
the products in this case? Write a balanced reaction should be as complete as possible.
chemical equation for this reaction. How would you try to ensure complete
combustion?
Chapter 10 Oxidation-Reduction Reactions • MHR 493
Section Summary
In this section, you learned the half-reaction method for balancing
equations for redox reactions. You investigated the redox reactions
of metals with acids, and the combustion of two hydrocarbons. After
applying the half-reaction method in the following review problems,
you will learn a different method in section 10.4. This method will
make greater use of oxidation numbers.
Section Review
1 K/U Balance each half-reaction. Identify it as an oxidation or
reduction half-reaction.
(a) C → C 2− (c) AsO 3− → As O (acidic conditions)
2 4 4 6
(b) S O 2− → S O 2− (d) Br → BrO − (basic conditions)
2 3 4 6 2 3
2 K/U Balance each equation.
(a) Co3+ + Au → Co2+ + Au3+
(b) Cu + NO − → Cu2+ + NO (acidic conditions)
3
(c) NO − + Al → NH + AlO − (basic conditions)
3 3 2
3 MC This section began with a description of the use of a redox
reaction to make the master disc in the production of CDs. Write a bal-
anced net ionic equation for the reaction of silver ions with methanal
under acidic conditions to form metallic silver and methanoic acid.
4 I In basic solution, ammonia, NH 3 , can be oxidized to dinitrogen
monoxide, N O.
2
(a) Try to balance the half-reaction by adding water molecules,
hydroxide ions, and electrons, without first assuming acidic
conditions. Describe any difficulties you encounter.
(b) Balance the half-reaction by first assuming acidic conditions and
then adjusting to introduce the hydroxide ions. Compare your
findings with those from part (a).
5 MC A mixture of liquid hydrazine, N 2 H 4 , and liquid dinitrogen
tetroxide can be used as a rocket fuel. The products of the reaction
are nitrogen gas and water vapour.
(a) Write a balanced chemical equation for the reaction by inspection.
(b) Identify the oxidizing agent and the reducing agent.
(c) Hydrazine is made in the Raschig Process. In this process, ammonia
reacts with hypochlorite ions in a basic solution to form hydrazine
and chloride ions. Write the balanced net ionic equation.
6 C Ben and Larissa were working together to balance the following
equation for a redox reaction.
Zn + SO 2− + H + → Zn2+ + S + H O
4 2
Ben suggested balancing by inspection, with the following result.
Zn + SO 2− + 8H + → Zn2+ + S + 4H O
4 2
Larissa said: “That’s not balanced.”
(a) Was Larissa right? Explain.
(b) How would you balance the equation, and what would the result be?
494 MHR • Unit 5 Electrochemistry
The Oxidation Number Method 10.4
for Balancing Equations
In section 10.2, you learned that a redox reaction involves changes in Section Preview/
oxidation numbers. If an element undergoes oxidation, its oxidation Specific Expectations
number increases. If an element undergoes reduction, its oxidation In this section, you will
number decreases. When balancing equations by the half-reaction method
(cid:2) writebalanced equations for
in section 10.3, you sometimes used oxidation numbers to determine the redox reactions using the
reactant(s) and product(s) in each half-reaction. oxidation number method
In fact, you can use oxidation numbers to balance a chemical
equation by a new method. The oxidation number method is a method
of balancing redox equations by ensuring that the total increase in the
oxidation numbers of the oxidized element(s) equals the total decrease
in the oxidation numbers of the reduced element(s).
For example, the combustion of ammonia in oxygen produces nitrogen
dioxide and water.
NH + O → NO + H O
3 2 2 2
−3+1 0 +4−2 +1 −2
The oxidation number of nitrogen increases from −3 to +4, an increase
of 7. The oxidation number of oxygen decreases from 0 to −2, a decrease
of 2. The least common multiple of 7 and 2 is 14. In this case, two
nitrogen atoms must react for every seven oxygen atoms so that the total
increase and decrease in oxidation numbers both equal 14.
2NH + 7 O → NO + H O
3 2 2 2 2
Complete the equation by inspection. If necessary, eliminate the fraction.
2NH + 7 O → 2NO + 3H O
3 2 2 2 2
4NH + 7O → 4NO + 6H O
3 2 2 2
A summary of the steps of the oxidation number method is given below.
The following Sample Problem shows how these steps are applied.
Step 1 Write an unbalanced equation, if it is not given.
Step 2 Determine whether the reaction is a redox reaction by
assigning an oxidation number to each element wherever it
appears in the equation.
Step 3 If the reaction is a redox reaction, identify the element(s) that
undergo an increase in oxidation number and the element(s)
that undergo a decrease in oxidation number.
Step 4 Find the numerical values of the increase and the decrease in
oxidation numbers.
Step 5 Determine the smallest whole-number ratio of the oxidized and
reduced elements so that the total increase in oxidation num-
bers equals the total decrease in oxidation numbers.
Step 6 Use the smallest whole-number ratio to balance the numbers of
atoms of the element(s) oxidized and the element(s) reduced.
continued on the next page
Chapter 10 Oxidation-Reduction Reactions • MHR 495
Step 7 Balance the other elements by inspection, if possible.
Step 8 For reactions that occur in acidic or basic solutions, include
water molecules, hydrogen ions, or hydroxide ions as needed to
balance the equation.
Sample Problem
Balancing a Redox Equation in Basic Solution
Problem
Write a balanced net ionic equation to show the formation of iodine by
bubbling oxygen gas through a basic solution that contains iodide ions.
Solution
Step 1 Write an unbalanced equation from the given information.
O + I − → I
2 2
Step 2 Assign oxidation numbers to see if it is a redox reaction.
O + I − → I
2 2
0 −1 0
Because iodide is oxidized to iodine, the reaction is a redox
reaction. Though the product that contains oxygen is unknown
at this stage, oxygen must be reduced.
Step 3 Iodine is the element that undergoes an increase in oxidation
number. Oxygen is the element that undergoes a decrease in
oxidation number.
Step 4 Iodine undergoes an increase in its oxidation number from
−1 to 0, an increase of 1. Assume that the oxidation number of
oxygen after reduction is its normal value, that is, −2. Thus,
oxygen undergoes a decrease in its oxidation number from
0 to −2, a decrease of 2.
Step 5 A 2:1 ratio of iodine atoms to oxygen atoms ensures that the total
increase in oxidation numbers and the total decrease in
oxidation numbers are both equal to 2. This is the smallest
whole-number ratio.
Step 6 Use the ratio to balance the numbers of atoms of iodine and oxy-
gen. Make sure there are two iodine atoms for every oxygen atom.
O + 4I − → 2I
2 2
Step 7 No other reactants or products can be balanced by inspection.
Step 8 The reaction occurs in basic solution. As you learned in section
10.3, for basic conditions, start by assuming that the conditions
Explain why none of the
are acidic. Add water molecules and hydrogen ions as necessary
steps in the oxidation number
method result in equations to balance the atoms.
that include electrons, e−. O 2 + 4I − → 2I 2 + 2H 2 O
O + 4I − + 4H + → 2I + 2H O
2 2 2
Add hydroxide ions to adjust for basic conditions. Simplify the
resulting equation.
O + 4I − + 4H + + 4OH − → 2I + 2H O + 4OH −
2 2 2
O + 4I − + 4H O → 2I + 2H O + 4OH −
2 2 2 2
O + 4I − + 2H O → 2I + 4OH −
2 2 2
496 MHR • Unit 5 Electrochemistry
Practice Problems
29. Use the oxidation number method to balance the following equation
for the combustion of carbon disulfide.
CS + O → CO + SO
2 2 2 2
30. Use the oxidation number method to balance the following equations.
(a) B O + Mg → MgO + Mg B
2 3 3 2
(b) H S + H O → S + H O
2 2 2 8 2
31. Use the oxidation number method to balance each ionic equation in
acidic solution.
(a) Cr O 2− + Fe2+ → Cr3+ + Fe3+
2 7
(b) I + NO − → IO − + NO
2 3 3 2
(c) PbSO → Pb + PbO + SO 2−
4 2 4
32. Use the oxidation number method to balance each ionic equation in
basic solution.
(a) Cl − + CrO 2− → ClO − + CrO −
4 2
(b) Ni + MnO − → NiO + MnO
4 2
(c) I − + Ce4+ → IO − + Ce3+
3
Concept Organizer The Oxidation Number Method for Balancing Redox Equations
Assign oxidation numbers to
Write unbalanced net ionic equation
identify redox reaction
Identify element oxidized and
element reduced
Find increase and decrease in
oxidation numbers
Find smallest whole-number ratio
of oxidized and reduced elements
Acidic Conditions Basic Conditions
+
Include HO and H , as Balance atoms of oxidized and Balance assuming
2
necessary reduced elements acidic conditions
Neutral −
Conditions Add OH to ”neutralize”
+
H ions present
Balance other
elements by inspection
Simplify resulting
equation, if possible
Chapter 10 Oxidation-Reduction Reactions • MHR 497
Section Summary
In this section, you learned how to use the oxidation number method
to balance redox equations. You now know various techniques for
recognizing and representing redox reactions. In Chapter 11, you will
use these techniques to examine specific applications of redox reactions
in the business world and in your daily life.
Section Review
1 K/U Is it possible to use the half-reaction method or the oxidation
number method to balance the following equation? Explain your
answer.
Al S + H O → Al(OH) + H S
2 3 2 3 2
2 I Balance each equation by the method of your choice. Explain your
choice of method in each case.
(a) CH COOH + O → CO + H O
3 2 2 2
(b) O + H SO → HSO − (acidic conditions)
2 2 3 4
3 K/U Use the oxidation number method to balance the following
equations.
(a) NH + Cl → NH Cl + N
3 2 4 2
(b) Mn O + Al → Al O + Mn
3 4 2 3
4 C Explain why, in redox reactions, the total increase in the
oxidation numbers of the oxidized elements must equal the total
decrease in the oxidation numbers of the reduced elements.
5 I The combustion of ammonia in oxygen to form nitrogen dioxide
and water vapour involves covalent molecules in the gas phase. The
oxidation number method for balancing the equation was shown in an
example in this section. Devise a half-reaction method for balancing
the equation. Describe the assumptions you made in order to balance
the equation. Also, describe why these assumptions did not affect the
final result.
498 MHR • Unit 5 Electrochemistry
Review
Reflecting on Chapter 10 5. When a metallic element reacts with a
non-metallic element, which reactant is
Summarize this chapter in the format of your
(a) oxidized?
choice. Here are a few ideas to use as guidelines:
• Give two different definitions for the term (b) reduced?
(c) the oxidizing agent?
oxidation.
• Give two different definitions for the term (d) the reducing agent?
reduction. 6. Use a Lewis structure to assign an oxidation
• Define a half-reaction. Give an example of number to each element in the following
an oxidation half-reaction and a reduction compounds.
half-reaction. (a) BaCl 2
• Compare the half-reaction and oxidation number (b) CS 2
methods of balancing equations. (c) XeF 4
• Practise balancing equations using both methods. 7. Determine the oxidation number of each
• Write an example of a balanced chemical element present in the following substances.
equation for a redox reaction. Assign oxidation (a) BaH
2
numbers to each element in the equation, then (b) Al C
4 3
explain how you know it is a redox reaction. (c) KCN
(d) LiNO
2
Reviewing Key Terms
(e) (NH ) C O
4 2 2 4
For each of the following terms, write a sentence (f) S
8
that shows your understanding of its meaning. (g) AsO
3−
3
+
ore oxidation (h) VO
2
−
reduction oxidation-reduction (i) XeO F
3
redox reaction reaction (j) S O
2−
4 6
oxidizing agent reducing agent
8. Identify a polyatomic ion in which chlorine has
half-reaction disproportionation an oxidation number of +3.
oxidation numbers
9. Determine which of the following balanced
chemical equations represent redox reactions.
Knowledge/Understanding
For each redox reaction, identify the oxidizing
1. For each reaction below, write a balanced
agent and the reducing agent.
chemical equation by inspection. (a) 2C H + 15O → 12CO + 6H O
6 6 2 2 2
(a) zinc metal with aqueous silver nitrate (b) CaO + SO → CaSO
2 3
(b) aqueous cobalt(II) bromide with aluminum (c) H + I → 2HI
2 2
metal (d) KMnO + 5CuCl + 8HCl →
4
(c) metallic cadmium with aqueous tin(II) KCl + MnCl + 5CuCl + 4H O
2 2 2
chloride
10. Determine which of the following balanced net
2. For each reaction in question 1, write the total
ionic equations represent redox reactions. For
ionic and net ionic equations.
each redox reaction, identify the reactant that
3. For each reaction in question 1, identify the undergoes oxidation and the reactant that
oxidizing agent and reducing agent. undergoes reduction.
4. For each reaction in question 1, write the two (a) 2Ag + (aq) + Cu (s) → 2Ag (s) + Cu2+ (aq)
half-reactions. (b) Pb2+ + S2− → PbS
(aq) (aq) (s)
(c) 2Mn2+ + 5BiO − + 14H + →
3
2MnO − + 5Bi3+ + 7H O
4 2
Chapter 10 Oxidation-Reduction Reactions • MHR 499
11.(a) Examples of molecules and ions composed 16. Use the oxidation number method to balance
only of vanadium and oxygen are listed each of the following equations.
below. In this list, identify molecules and (a) SiCl + Al → Si + AlCl
4 3
ions in which the oxidation number of (b) PH + O → P O + H O
3 2 4 10 2
vanadium is the same. (c) I O + CO → I + CO
2 5 2 2
V O (d) SO 2− + O → SO 2−
2 5 3 2 4
V O
2 3 17. Complete and balance a net ionic equation
VO
2 for each of the following disproportionation
VO reactions.
VO 2 + (a) NO 2 → NO 2 − + NO 3 − (acidic conditions),
VO2+
which is one of the reactions involved in
−
VO
3 acid rain formation
VO 4 3− (b) Cl 2 → ClO − + Cl − (basic conditions), which
V O
3−
3 9 is one of the reactions involved in the
(b) Is the following reaction a redox reaction? bleaching action of chlorine in basic solution
2NH VO → V O + 2NH + H O
4 3 2 5 3 2 18. Balance each of the following net ionic
12. The method used to manufacture nitric acid equations. Then include the named spectator
involves the following three steps. ions to write a balanced chemical equation.
Step 1 4NH 3(g) + 5O 2(g) → 4NO (g) + 6H 2 O (g) Include the states.
Step 2 2NO (g) + O 2(g) → 2NO 2(g) (a) Co3+ + Cd → Co2+ + Cd2+ (spectator ions
Step 3 3NO 2(g) + H 2 O ((cid:2)) → 2HNO 3(aq) + NO (g) NO 3 − )
(a) Which of these steps are redox reactions? (b) Ag + + SO → Ag + SO 2− (acidic conditions;
2 4
−
(b) Identify the oxidizing agent and the reducing spectator ions NO )
3
agent in each redox reaction. (c) Al + CrO 2− → Al(OH) + Cr(OH) (basic
4 3 3
+
13. In a synthesis reaction involving elements A conditions; spectator ions Na )
and B, the oxidation number of element A 19. If possible, give an example for each.
increases. What happens to the oxidation (a) a synthesis reaction that is a redox reaction
number of element B? How do you know? (b) a synthesis reaction that is not a redox
14. Balance each of the following half-reactions. reaction
(a) The reduction of iodine to iodide ions (c) a decomposition reaction that is a redox
(b) The oxidation of lead to lead(IV) ions reaction
(c) The reduction of tetrachlorogold(III) ions, (d) a decomposition reaction that is not a redox
AuCl − , to chloride ions and metallic gold reaction
4
(d) C H OH → CH COOH (acidic conditions) (e) a double displacement reaction that is a
2 5 3
(e) S → H S (acidic conditions) redox reaction
8 2
(f) AsO − → AsO 3− (basic conditions) (f) a double displacement reaction that is not a
2 4
redox reaction
15. Use the half-reaction method to balance each of
the following equations. 20. Give an example of a reaction in which sulfur
(a) MnO + Cl − → Mn2+ + Cl (acidic behaves as
2 2
conditions) (a) an oxidizing agent
(b) NO + Sn → NH OH + Sn2+ (acidic (b) a reducing agent
2
conditions) 21. Write a balanced equation for a synthesis
(c) Cd2+ + V2+ → Cd + VO − (acidic reaction in which elemental oxygen acts as
3
conditions) a reducing agent.
(d) Cr → Cr(OH) − + H (basic conditions)
4 2
(e) S O 2− + NiO → Ni(OH) + SO 2− (basic
2 3 2 2 3
conditions)
(f) Sn2+ + O → Sn4+ (basic conditions)
2
500 MHR • Unit 5 Electrochemistry
22. Phosphorus, P , reacts with hot water to 27. Highly toxic phosphine gas, PH , is used in
4(s) 3
form phosphine, PH , and phosphoric acid. industry to produce flame retardants. One
3(g)
(a) Write a balanced chemical equation for this way to make phosphine on a large scale is
reaction. by heating elemental phosphorus with a
(b) Is the phosphorus oxidized or reduced? strong base.
Explain your answer. (a) Balance the following net ionic equation
23. The thermite reaction, which is highly for the reaction under basic conditions.
P → H PO − + PH
exothermic, can be used to weld metals. In 4 2 2 3
the thermite reaction, aluminum reacts with (b) Show that the reaction in part (a) is a
iron(III) oxide to form iron and aluminum disproportionation reaction.
oxide. The temperature becomes so high that (c) Calculate the mass of phosphine that can
the iron is formed as a liquid. theoretically be made from 10.0 kg of
(a) Write a balanced chemical equation for the phosphorus by this method.
reaction.
Communication
(b) Is the reaction a redox reaction? If so, identify
the oxidizing agent and the reducing agent. 28. Explain why, in a redox reaction, the reducing
agent undergoes oxidation.
Inquiry
29. Explain why you would not expect sulfide ions
24. Iodine reacts with concentrated nitric acid to act as an oxidizing agent.
to form iodic acid, gaseous nitrogen dioxide, 30. Why can’t the oxidation number of an element
and water. in a compound be greater than the number of
(a) Write the balanced chemical equation. valence electrons in one atom of that element?
(b) Calculate the mass of iodine needed to
31. Explain why the historical use of the word
produce 28.0 L of nitrogen dioxide at STP.
“reduction,” that is, the production of a metal
25. Describe a laboratory investigation you could from its ore, is consistent with the modern
perform to decide whether tin or nickel is the definitions of reduction.
better reducing agent. Include in your descrip-
32. Organic chemists sometimes describe redox
tion all the materials and equipment you would
reactions in terms of the loss or gain of pairs of
need, and the procedure you would follow.
hydrogen atoms. Examples include the addition
26. The following table shows the average of hydrogen to ethene to form ethane, and the
composition, by volume, of the air we inhale elimination of hydrogen from ethanol to form
and exhale, as part of a biochemical process ethanal.
called respiration. (The values are rounded.) (a) Write a balanced equation for each reaction.
(b) Determine whether the organic reactant is
Inhaled Air Exhaled Air
Gas (% by volume) (% by volume) oxidized or reduced in each reaction.
(c) Write a definition of oxidation and a
Oxygen 21 16
definition of reduction based on an organic
Carbon dioxide 0.04 4
reactant losing or gaining hydrogen.
Nitrogen and other gases 79 80 (d) Would your definitions be valid for the
synthesis and decomposition of a metal
How do the data indicate that at least one
hydride? Explain your answer.
redox reaction is involved in respiration?
Chapter 10 Oxidation-Reduction Reactions • MHR 501
Making Connections 36. One of the most important discoveries in the
history of the chemical industry in Ontario was
33. The compound NaAl(OH) CO is a component
2 3
accidental. Thomas “Carbide” Willson
of some common stomach acid remedies.
(1860–1915) was trying to make the element
(a) Determine the oxidation number of each
calcium from lime, CaO, by heating the lime
element in the compound.
with coal tar. Instead, he made the compound
(b) Predict the products of the reaction of the
calcium carbide, CaC . This compound reacts
compound with stomach acid (hydrochloric 2
with water to form a precipitate of calcium
acid), and write a balanced chemical equa-
hydroxide and gaseous ethyne (acetylene).
tion for the reaction.
Willson’s discovery led to the large-scale use
(c) Were the oxidation numbers from part (a)
of ethyne in numerous applications.
useful in part (b)? Explain your answer.
(a) Was Willson trying to perform a redox
(d) What type of reaction is this?
reaction? How do you know? Why do you
(e) Check your medicine cabinet at home for
not need to know the substances in coal tar
stomach acid remedies. If possible, identify
to answer this question?
the active ingredient in each remedy.
(b) Write a balanced chemical equation for the
34. Two of the substances on the head of a safety
reaction of calcium carbide with water. Is
match are potassium chlorate and sulfur. When
this reaction a redox reaction?
the match is struck, the potassium chlorate
(c) An early use of Willson’s discovery was in
decomposes to give potassium chloride and
car headlights. Inside a headlight, the
oxygen. The sulfur then burns in the oxygen
reaction of calcium carbide and water
and ignites the wood of the match.
produced ethyne, which was burned to
(a) Write balanced chemical equations for the
produce light and heat. Write a balanced
decomposition of potassium chlorate and for
chemical equation for the complete combus-
the burning of sulfur in oxygen.
tion of ethyne. Is this reaction a redox
(b) Identify the oxidizing agent and the reducing
reaction?
agent in each reaction in part (a).
(d) Research the impact of Willson’s discovery
(c) Does any element in potassium chlorate
on society, from his lifetime to the present
undergo disproportionation in the reaction?
day.
Explain your answer.
Answers to Practice Problems and Short Answers to
(d) Research the history of the safety match to
Section Review Questions
determine when it was invented, why it was
invented, and what it replaced.
Practice Problems: 1.Zn
(s)
+Fe2+
(aq)
→Zn2+
(aq)
+Fe
(s)
2.(a)3Mg
(s)
+2Al3+
(aq)
→3Mg2+
(aq)
+2Al
(s)
35. Ammonium ions, from fertilizers or animal (b) 2Ag+ (aq) +Cd (s) →2Ag (s) +Cd2+ (aq)
waste, are oxidized by atmospheric oxygen. 3.(a)Mg oxidized, Al3+reduced
The reaction results in the acidification of soil (b)Cd oxidized, Ag+reduced
on farms and the pollution of ground water 4.(a)Al3+oxidizing agent, Mg reducing agent
with nitrate ions. (b)Ag+oxidizing agent, Cd reducing agent
(a) Write a balanced net ionic equation for this 5.Al (s) →Al3+ (aq) +3e−, Fe3+ (aq) +3e−→Fe (s)
reaction.
6.(a)Fe
(s)
→Fe2+
(aq)
+2e−, Cu2+
(aq)
+2e−→Cu
(s)
(b) Why do farmers use fertilizers? What (b)Cd (s) →Cd2+ (aq) +2e−, Ag+ (aq) +1e− → Ag (s)
alternative farming methods have you heard
7.(a)Sn
(s)
→Sn2+
(aq)
+2e−, Pb2+
(aq)
+2e−→Pb
(s)
(b)Ag
(s)
→Ag++e−, Au3+
(aq)
+3e−→Au
(s)
of? Which farming method(s) do you (c)Zn
(s)
→Zn2+
(aq)
+2e−, Fe3+
(aq)
+3e−→Fe
(s)
support, and why? 8.Hg 2 2+ (aq) →Hg ((cid:2)) +Hg2+ (aq) , Hg 2 2+ (aq) +2e−→2Hg ((cid:2)) ,
Hg 2+ →2Hg2+ +2e−
2 (aq) (aq)
9.(a) +3 (b)0 (c) +6 (d) +5 (e)0 (f) +2
502 MHR • Unit 5 Electrochemistry
10.(a)H, +1; S, +4; O, −2 29.CS 2 +3O 2 → CO 2 +2SO 2
(b)H, +1; O, −2 (c)H, +1; P, +5; O, −2 30.(a)B 2 O 3 +6Mg → 3MgO+Mg 3 B 2
11.(a) +2 (b) −1 12.(a)Al, +3; H, +1; C, +4; O, −2 (b)8H 2 S+8H 2 O 2 → S 8 +16H 2 O
(b)N, −3; H, +1; P, +5; O, −2 (c)K, +1; H, +1; I, +7; O, −2 31.(a)Cr 2 O 7 2−+6Fe2++14H+ → 2Cr3++6Fe3++7H 2 O
13.(a)yes (b)no (b)I 2 +10NO 3 −+8H+ → 2IO 3 −+10NO 2 +4H 2 O
14.(a)H 2 O 2oxidizing agent, Fe2+ reducing agent (c)2PbSO 4 +2H 2 O → Pb+PbO 2 +2SO 4 2−+4H+
15.ClO 2 − oxidized, Br 2reduced 16.yes 32.(a)3Cl−+2CrO 4 2−+H 2 O → 3ClO−+2CrO 2 −+2OH−
17.Ce4++e− → Ce3+ 18.2Br− → Br
2
+2e− (b)3Ni+2MnO
4
−+H
2
O → 3NiO+2MnO
2
+2OH−
19.(a)O
2
+2H++2e− → H
2
O
2
(b)2H
2
O → O
2
+4H++4e− (c)I−+6Ce4++6OH− → IO
3
−+6Ce3++3H
2
O
(c)2NO 3 −+12H++10e− → N 2 +6H 2 O Section Review 10.1: 1.(a)yes;
20.(a)ClO 3 −+6H++6e− → Cl−+3H 2 O 2AgNO 3(aq) +Cd (s) → 2Ag (s) +Cd(NO 3 ) 2(aq);
(b)NO+2H 2 O → NO 3 −+4H++3e− 2Ag+ (aq) +Cd (s) → 2Ag (s) +Cd2+ (aq);
(c)Cr 2 O 7 2−−+14H++6e− → 2Cr3++7H 2 O Ag+ (aq) +e− → Ag (s); Cd (s) → Cd2+ (aq) +2e−
21.Cr2+ → Cr3++e− 22.O 2 +4e− → 2O2− (b)no (c)yes; 2Al (s) +3HgCl 2(aq) → 2AlCl 3(aq) +3Hg ((cid:2));
23.(a)Al+4OH− → Al(OH) 4 −+3e− 2Al (s) +3Hg2+ (aq) → 2Al3+ (aq) +3Hg ((cid:2));
(b)CN−+2OH− → CNO−+H 2 O+2e− Al (s) → Al3+ (aq) +3e− ; Hg2+ (aq) +2e− → Hg ((cid:2))
(c)MnO 4 −+2H 2 O+3e− → MnO 2 +4OH− 2.(a)right side (b)left side 4.reducing agent
(d) CrO 4 2−+4H 2 O+3e− → Cr(OH) 3 +5OH− 6.(a)K++Na ((cid:2)) → Na++K ((cid:2))
(e)2CO 3 2−+2H 2 O+2e− → C 2 O 4 2−+4OH− (b)oxidizing agent, K+ ; reducing agent, Na ((cid:2))
24.(a)FeO 4 2−+8H++3e− → Fe3++4H 2 O 10.2: 2.(a)yes (b)no (c)no (d)yes
(b)ClO 2 −+2H 2 O+4e− → Cl−+4OH− 6.(a) +2 (b) +5 and −1
25.(a)2Na+F 2 → 2NaF 7.(a)N 2 +3H 2 → 2NH 3(0, 0, −3, +1); N 2is oxidizing agent,
ox: Na → Na++e− H 2is reducing agent (b)no
red: F 2 +2e− → 2F− 8.(a)2C+O 2 → 2CO, Fe 2 O 3 +3CO → 2Fe+3CO 2
(b)3Mg+N 2 → Mg 3 N 2 (b)carbon—reducing agent, oxygen—oxidizing agent;
ox: Mg → Mg2++2e− carbon monoxide—reducing agent,
red: N 2 +6e− → 2N3− iron(III) oxide—oxidizing agent
(c)2HgO → 2Hg+O 2 10.3: 1.(a)2C+2e− → C 2 2− , reduction
ox: 2O2− → O 2 +4e− (b)2S 2 O 3 2− → S 4 O 6 2−+2e− , oxidation
red: Hg2++2e− → Hg (c)4AsO 4 3−+20H++8e− → As 4 O 6 +10H 2 O, reduction
26.2Cu2++5I− → 2CuI+I 3 − (d)Br 2 +12OH− → 2BrO 3 −+6H 2 O+10e− , oxidation
27.(a)MnO
4
−+5Ag+8H+ → Mn2++5Ag++4H
2
O 2.(a)3Co3++Au → 3Co2++Au3+
oxidizing agent, MnO 4 − ; reducing agent, Ag (b)3Cu+2NO 3 −+8H+ → 3Cu2++2NO+4H 2 O
(b)Hg+2NO
3
−+4Cl−+4H+ → HgCl
4
2−+2NO
2
+2H
2
O (c)3NO
3
−+8Al+5OH−+2H
2
O → 3NH
3
+8AlO
2
−
oxidizing agent, NO 3 − ; reducing agent, Hg 3.2Ag++HCHO+H 2 O → 2Ag+HCOOH+2H+
(c)AsH 3 +4Zn2++4H 2 O → H 3 AsO 4 +4Zn+8H+ 4.(b) 2NH 3 +8OH− → N 2 O+7H 2 O+8e−
oxidizing agent, Zn2+ ; reducing agent, AsH 3 5.(a)2N 2 H 4 +N 2 O 4 → 3N 2 +4H 2 O
(d)3I 3 −+3H 2 O → 8I−+IO 3 −+6H+ (b)N 2 O 4is oxidizing agent, N 2 H 4is reducing agent
oxidizing agent, I 3 − ; reducing agent, I 3 − (c)2NH 3 +ClO− → N 2 H 4 +Cl−+H 2 O
28.(a)3CN−+2MnO 4 −+H 2 O → 3CNO−+2MnO 2 +2OH− 6.(a)Larissa was right
oxidizing agent, MnO 4 − ; reducing agent, CN− (b)3Zn+SO 4 2−+8H+ → 3Zn2++S+4H 2 O
(b)H 2 O 2 +2ClO 2 +2OH− → 2ClO 2 −+O 2 +2H 2 O 10.4: 1.no, not a redox reaction
oxidizing agent, ClO 2; reducing agent, H 2 O 2 2.(a)CH 3 COOH+2O 2 → 2CO 2 +2H 2 O
(c)6ClO−+2CrO
2
−+2H
2
O → 3Cl
2
+2CrO
4
2−+4OH− (b)O
2
+2H
2
SO
3
→ 2HSO
4
−+2H+
oxidizing agent, ClO− ; reducing agent, CrO 2 − 3.(a)8NH 3 +3Cl 2 → 6NH 4 Cl+N 2
(d)2Al+NO
2
−+H
2
O+OH− → NH
3
+2AlO
2
− (b)3Mn
3
O
4
+8Al → 4Al
2
O
3
+9Mn
oxidizing agent, NO 2 − ; reducing agent, Al
Chapter 10 Oxidation-Reduction Reactions • MHR 503
Cells and Batteries
B
Chapter Preview atteries come in a wide range of sizes and shapes, from the tiny
button battery in a watch, to a large and heavy car battery. Although
11.1 Galvanic Cells
you probably use batteries every day, they may still surprise you. For
11.2 Standard Cell example, did you know that you could make a battery from a lemon
Potentials
and two pieces of metal? To make a lemon battery, you could insert
11.3 Electrolytic Cells two different electrodes, such as copper and zinc strips, into a lemon.
11.4 Faraday’s Law The battery can provide electricity for a practical use. For example,
the battery can power a small light bulb, or turn a small motor.
11.5 Issues Involving
Electrochemistry For obvious reasons, lemon batteries are not a convenient way to
power a portable device, such as a cell phone. Scientists and inventors
have worked to develop a variety of batteries that are inexpensive,
compact, and easy to store and to carry. Our society uses vast numbers
of batteries.
What exactly is a battery, and how does it work? What is the
relationship between batteries and the redox reactions studied in
Prerequisite Chapter 10? You will find out the answers to these questions in
Concepts and Skills this chapter.
Before you begin this chapter,
review the following concepts
and skills: Can other fruits or vegetables
be used to make batteries?
(cid:2) recognizing oxidation,
reduction, and redox
reactions (Chapter 10,
sections 10.1, 10.2)
(cid:2) writing balanced
half-reactions (Chapter 10,
section 10.3)
(cid:2) using half-reactions to
write balanced net ionic
equations (Chapter 10,
section 10.3)
(cid:2) using stoichiometry to
calculate quantities of
reactants and products
in a chemical reaction
(Concepts and Skills
Review)
(cid:2) spontaneous and
non-spontaneous
reactions (Chapter 7,
section 7.2)
504 MHR • Unit 5 Electrochemistry
Galvanic Cells 11.1
You know that redox reactions involve the transfer of electrons from
Section Preview/
one reactant to another. You may also recall that an electric current is Specific Expectations
a flow of electrons in a circuit. These two concepts form the basis of
In this section, you will
electrochemistry, which is the study of the processes involved in
(cid:2) identifythe components in
converting chemical energy to electrical energy, and in converting
galvanic cells and describe
electrical energy to chemical energy. how they work
As you learned in Chapter 10, a zinc strip reacts with a solution
(cid:2) describethe oxidation and
containing copper(II) ions, forming zinc ions and metallic copper. The
reduction half-cells for some
reaction is spontaneous. It releases energy in the form of heat; in other galvanic cells
words, this reaction is exothermic.
(cid:2) determinehalf-cell
Zn + Cu2+ → Zn2+ + Cu reactions, the direction
(s) (aq) (aq) (s)
of current flow, electrode
This reaction occurs on the surface of the zinc strip, where electrons
polarity, cell potential,
are transferred from zinc atoms to copper(II) ions when these atoms and
and ion movement in some
ions are in direct contact. A common technological invention called a
galvanic cells
galvanic cell uses redox reactions, such as the one described above, to
(cid:2) buildgalvanic cells in the
release energy in the form of electricity.
laboratory and investigate
galvanic cell potentials
The Galvanic Cell
(cid:2) communicateyour under-
A galvanic cell, also called a voltaic cell, is a device that converts standing of the following
terms: electric current,
chemical energy to electrical energy. The key to this invention is to
electrochemistry, galvanic
prevent the reactants in a redox reaction from coming into direct contact
cell, voltaic cell, external
with each other. Instead, electrons flow from one reactant to the other
circuit, electrodes,
through an external circuit, which is a circuit outside the reaction vessel.
electrolytes, anode, cathode,
This flow of electrons through the external circuit is an electric current. salt bridge, inert electrode,
electric potential, cell
An Example of a Galvanic Cell: The Daniell Cell voltage, cell potential, dry
cell, battery, primary battery,
Figure 11.1 shows one example of a galvanic cell, called the Daniell cell.
secondary battery
One half of the cell consists of a piece of zinc placed in a zinc sulfate
solution. The other half of the cell consists of a piece of copper placed
in a copper(II) sulfate solution. A porous barrier, sometimes called a
semi-permeable membrane, separates these two half-cells. It stops the
copper(II) ions from coming into direct contact with the zinc electrode.
Figure 11.1 The Daniell cell
is named after its inventor, the
English chemist John Frederic
Daniell (1790–1845). In the photo-
graph shown here, the zinc sulfate
solution is placed inside a porous
cup, which is placed in a larger
container of copper sulfate
solution. The cup acts as the
porous barrier.
Chapter 11 Cells and Batteries • MHR 505
In a Daniell cell, the pieces of metallic zinc and copper act as electrical
Web LINK
conductors. The conductors that carry electrons into and out of a cell
www.mcgrawhill.ca/links/ are named electrodes. The zinc sulfate and copper(II) sulfate act as
chemistry12
electrolytes. Electrolytes are substances that conduct electricity when
Galvanic cells are named after
dissolved in water. (The fact that a solution of an electrolyte conducts
the Italian doctor Luigi Galvani
electricity does not mean that free electrons travel through the solution.
(1737–1798), who generated
electricity using two metals. An electrolyte solution conducts electricity because of ion movements,
These cells are also called and the loss and gain of electrons at the electrodes.) The terms electrode
voltaic cells, after the Italian and electrolyte were invented by the leading pioneer of electrochemistry,
physicist Count Alessandro Michael Faraday (1791–1867).
Volta (1745–1827), who built
The redox reaction takes place in a galvanic cell when an external
the first chemical batteries.
circuit, such as a metal wire, connects the electrodes. The oxidation
To learn more about scientists
half-reaction occurs in one half-cell, and the reduction half-reaction
who made important disco-
occurs in the other half-cell. For the Daniell cell:
veries in electrochemistry,
such as Galvani, Volta, and Oxidation (loss of electrons): Zn → Zn2+ + 2e −
(s) (aq)
Faraday, go to the web site Reduction (gain of electrons): Cu2+ + 2e − → Cu
(aq) (s)
above. Click on Web Links
The electrode at which oxidation occurs is named the anode. In this
to find out where to go next.
example, zinc atoms undergo oxidation at the zinc electrode. Thus, the
zinc electrode is the anode of the Daniell cell. The electrode at which
reduction occurs is named the cathode. Here, copper(II) ions undergo
reduction at the copper electrode. Thus, the copper electrode is the
cathode of the Daniell cell.
Free electrons cannot travel through the solution. Instead, the external
circuit conducts electrons from the anode to the cathode of a galvanic
cell. Figure 11.2 gives a diagram of a typical galvanic cell.
e− voltmeter e−
Figure 11.2 A typical galvanic anode porous barrier cathode
cell, such as the Daniell cell shown − +
here, includes two electrodes,
electrolyte solutions, a porous
barrier, and an external circuit. Zn Cu
Electrons flow through the external
circuit from the negative anode to
the positive cathode.
ZnSO4(aq) CuSO4(aq)
At the anode of a galvanic cell, electrons are released by oxidation.
For example, at the zinc anode of the Daniell cell, zinc atoms release
electrons to become positive zinc ions. Thus, the anode of a galvanic
cell is negatively charged. Relative to the anode, the cathode of a galvanic
cell is positively charged. In galvanic cells, electrons flow through the
external circuit from the negative electrode to the positive electrode.
These electrode polarities may already be familiar to you. An example
is shown in Figure 11.3.
Each half-cell contains a solution of a neutral compound. In a
Daniell cell, these solutions are aqueous zinc sulfate and aqueous
copper(II) sulfate. How can these electrolyte solutions remain neutral
when electrons are leaving the anode of one half-cell and arriving at the
Figure 11.3 Batteries contain
cathode of the other half-cell? To maintain electrical neutrality in each
galvanic cells. The+mark labels
half-cell, some ions migrate through the porous barrier, as shown in
the positive cathode. If there is a−
Figure 11.4, on the next page. Negative ions (anions) migrate toward
mark, it labels the negative anode.
the anode, and positive ions (cations) migrate toward the cathode.
506 MHR • Unit 5 Electrochemistry
−
e
anode porous barrier cathode Figure 11.4 Ion migration in
a Daniell cell. Some sulfate ions
Zn Cu migrate from the copper(II) sulfate
Zn2+ Cu2+ solution into the zinc sulfate
solution. Some zinc ions migrate
SO2− SO2− from the zinc sulfate solution into
4 4
the copper(II) sulfate solution.
Zn2+ Cu2+
SO2− SO2−
4 4
The separator between the half-cells does not need to be a porous barrier.
Figure 11.5 shows an alternative device. This device, called a salt bridge,
contains an electrolyte solution that does not interfere in the reaction.
The open ends of the salt bridge are plugged with a porous material, such
as glass wool, to stop the electrolyte from leaking out quickly. The plugs
allow ion migration to maintain electrical neutrality.
e− voltmeter e−
cathode NH4 + Cl− anode
salt
Figure 11.5 This Daniell cell
bridge
includes a salt bridge instead of
Cu Zn a porous barrier. In a diagram, the
anode may appear on the left or on
the right.
porous
plug
CuSO4(aq) ZnSO4(aq)
Suppose the salt bridge of a Daniell cell contains ammonium chloride
solution, NH Cl . As positive zinc ions are produced at the anode,
4 (aq)
negative chloride ions migrate from the salt bridge into the half-cell that
contains the anode. As positive copper(II) ions are removed from solution
at the cathode, positive ammonium ions migrate from the salt bridge into
the half-cell that contains the cathode.
Other electrolytes, such as sodium sulfate or potassium nitrate, could
be chosen for the salt bridge. Neither of these electrolytes interferes in the
cell reaction. Silver nitrate, AgNO , would be a poor choice for the salt
3(aq)
bridge, however. Positive silver ions would migrate into the half-cell that
contains the cathode. Zinc displaces both copper and silver from solution,
so both copper(II) ions and silver ions would be reduced at the cathode.
The copper produced would be contaminated with silver.
Chapter 11 Cells and Batteries • MHR 507
Galvanic Cell Notation
A convenient shorthand method exists for representing galvanic cells. The
shorthand representation of a Daniell cell is as follows.
Zn
| Zn2+|| Cu2+|
Cu
The phases or states may be included.
Zn
| Zn2+ || Cu2+ |
Cu
(s) (aq) (aq) (s)
As you saw in Figure 11.4 and Figure 11.5, the anode may appear on the
left or on the right of a diagram. In the shorthand representation, however,
the anode is always shown on the left and the cathode on the right. Each
|
single vertical line, , represents a phase boundary between the electrode
and the solution in a half-cell. For example, the first single vertical line
shows that the solid zinc and aqueous zinc ions are in different phases or
||
states. The double vertical line, , represents the porous barrier or salt
bridge between the half-cells. Spectator ions are usually omitted.
Inert Electrodes
The zinc anode and copper cathode of a Daniell cell are both metals, and
can act as electrical conductors. However, some redox reactions involve
substances that cannot act as electrodes, such as gases or dissolved
electrolytes. Galvanic cells that involve such redox reactions use inert
electrodes. An inert electrode is an electrode made from a material that
is neither a reactant nor a product of the cell reaction. Figure 11.6 shows
a cell that contains one inert electrode. The chemical equation, net ionic
equation, and half-reactions for this cell are given below.
Chemical equation: Pb + 2FeCl → 2FeCl + PbCl
(s) 3(aq) 2(aq) 2(aq)
Net ionic equation: Pb + 2Fe3+ → 2Fe2+ + Pb2+
(s) (aq) (aq) (aq)
Oxidation half-reaction: Pb → Pb2+ + 2e −
(s) (aq)
Reduction half-reaction: Fe3+ + e − → Fe2+
(aq) (aq)
The reduction half-reaction does not include a solid conductor of
electrons, so an inert platinum electrode is used in this half-cell. The
platinum electrode is chemically unchanged, so it does not appear in
the chemical equation or half-reactions. However, it is included in the
shorthand representation of the cell.
Pb
| Pb2+|| Fe3+
,
Fe2+|
Pt
A comma separates the formulas
Fe3+
and
Fe2+
for the ions involved in the
reduction half-reaction. The formulas are not separated by a vertical line,
because there is no phase boundary between these ions. The
Fe3+
and
Fe2+
ions exist in the same aqueous solution.
e−
anode cathode
salt
Figure 11.6 This cell uses
bridge
an inert electrode to conduct
electrons. Why do you think that Pb Pt
platinum is often chosen as an inert
electrode? Another common choice
is graphite.
FeCl2(aq)
PbCl2(aq) FeCl3(aq)
508 MHR • Unit 5 Electrochemistry
Practice Problems
1.(a) If the reaction of zinc with copper(II) ions is carried out in a test
tube, what is the oxidizing agent and what is the reducing agent?
(b) In a Daniell cell, what is the oxidizing agent and what is the
reducing agent? Explain your answer.
2. Write the oxidation half-reaction, the reduction half-reaction, and the
overall cell reaction for each of the following galvanic cells. Identify
the anode and the cathode in each case. In part (b), platinum is
present as an inert electrode.
(a) Sn
| Sn2+ ||
Tl
+ |
Tl
(s) (aq) (aq) (s)
(b) Cd
| Cd2+ ||
H
+ |
H
|
Pt
(s) (aq) (aq) 2(g) (s)
3. A galvanic cell involves the overall reaction of iodide ions with
acidified permanganate ions to form manganese(II) ions and iodine.
The salt bridge contains potassium nitrate.
(a) Write the half-reactions, and the overall cell reaction.
(b) Identify the oxidizing agent and the reducing agent.
(c) The inert anode and cathode are both made of graphite. Solid
iodine forms on one of them. Which one?
4. As you saw earlier, pushing a zinc electrode and a copper electrode
into a lemon makes a “lemon cell”. In the following representation
of the cell, C H O is the formula of citric acid. Explain why the
6 8 7
representation does not include a double vertical line.
| |
Zn C H O Cu
(s) 6 8 7(aq) (s)
Introducing Cell Potentials
You know that water spontaneously flows from a higher position to
a lower position. In other words, water flows from a state of higher
gravitational potential energy to a state of lower gravitational potential
energy. As water flows downhill, it can do work, such as turning a water
wheel or a turbine. The chemical changes that take place in galvanic
cells are also accompanied by changes in potential energy. Electrons
spontaneously flow from a position of higher potential energy at the
anode to a position of lower potential energy at the cathode. The moving
electrons can do work, such as lighting a bulb or turning a motor.
The difference between the potential energy at the anode and the
potential energy at the cathode is the electric potential, E, of a cell. The
The cell voltage is sometimes
unit used to measure electric potential is called the volt, with symbol V.
called the electromotive force,
Because of the name of this unit, electric potential is more commonly abbreviated emf. However,
known as cell voltage. Another name for it is cell potential. A cell this term can be misleading.
potential can be measured using an electrical device called a voltmeter. A cell voltage is a potential
A cell potential of 0 V means that the cell has no electric potential, difference, not a force. The
unit of cell voltage, the volt,
and no electrons will flow. You know that you can generate electricity
is not a unit of force.
by connecting a zinc electrode and a copper electrode that have been
inserted into a lemon. However, you cannot generate electricity by
connecting two copper electrodes that have been inserted into the lemon.
The two copper electrodes are the same and are in contact with the same
electrolyte. There is no potential difference between the two electrodes.
Electric potentials vary from one cell to another, depending on various
factors. You will examine some of these factors in the next investigation.
Chapter 11 Cells and Batteries • MHR 509
S K I L L F O C U S
Predicting
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
Measuring Cell Potentials Communicating results
of Galvanic Cells
In this investigation, you will build some gal- Procedure
vanic cells and measure their cell potentials.
1. Use tape or a permanent marker to label the
outside of nine wells of your egg carton with
Question
the nine different half-cells. Each well should
What factors affect the cell potential of correspond to one of the eight different
a galvanic cell? metal/metal ion pairs:
Mg/Mg2+
,
Cu/Cu2+
,
Al/Al3+
,
Ni/Ni2+
,
Zn/Zn2+
,
Sn/Sn2+
,
Fe/Fe3+
,
+ +
Prediction and Ag/Ag . Label the ninth well H /H 2 .
Predict whether the cell potentials of galvanic 2. Prepare a 9 × 9 grid in your notebook. Label
cells depend on the electrodes and electrolytes in the nine columns to match the nine half-cells.
the half-cells. Give reasons for your prediction. Label the nine rows in the same way. You
will use this chart to mark the positive cell
Materials potentials you obtain when you connect two
half-cells to build a galvanic cell. You will
®
25 cm clear aquarium rubber tubing (Tygon ),
also record the anode and the cathode for
internal diameter 4–6 mm
each galvanic cell you build. (You may not
1 Styrofoam or clear plastic egg carton
need to fill out the entire chart.)
with 12 wells
5 cm strip of Mg ribbon 3. Sand each of the metals to remove any oxides.
1 cm × 5 cm strips of Cu, Al, Ni, Zn, Sn,
4. Pour 5 mL of each metal salt solution into the
Fe, and Ag
appropriate well of the egg carton. Pour 5 mL
5 cm of thick graphite pencil lead or a +
of the nitric acid into the well labelled H /H .
2
graphite rod
5 mL of 0.1 mol/L solutions of each of the 5. Prepare your salt bridge as follows.
following: Mg(NO ) , Cu(NO ) , Al(NO ) , (a) Roll a small piece of cotton batting so that
3 2 3 2 3 3
Ni(NO ) , Zn(NO ) , SnSO , Fe(NO ) , it forms a plug about the size of a grain
3 2 3 2 4 3 3
AgNO , HNO of rice. Place the plug in one end of your
3 3
15 mL of 1.0 mol/L KNO aquarium tubing, but leave a small amount
3
5 mL of saturated NaCl solution of the cotton hanging out, so you can
disposable pipette remove the plug later.
cotton batting
(b) Fill a disposable pipette as full as possible
sandpaper
with the 1 mol/L KNO electrolyte solution.
3
black and red electrical leads with alligator clips
Fit the tip of the pipette firmly into the
voltmeter set to a scale of 0 V to 20 V
open end of the tubing. Slowly inject the
paper towel
electrolyte solution into the tubing. Fill the
tubing completely, so that the cotton on the
Safety Precautions other side becomes wet.
(c) With the tubing completely full, insert
another cotton plug into the other end.
Handle the nitric acid solution with care. It is an
There should be no air bubbles. (You may
irritant. Wash any spills on your skin with copi-
have to repeat this step from the beginning
ous amounts of water, and inform your teacher.
if you have air bubbles.)
510 MHR • Unit 5 Electrochemistry
6. Insert each metal strip into the corresponding Analysis
well. Place the graphite rod in the well with
1. For each cell in which you measured a cell
the nitric acid. The metal strips and the
potential, identify
graphite rod are your electrodes.
(a) the anode and the cathode
7. Attach the alligator clip on the red lead to the
(b) the positive and negative electrodes
red probe of the voltmeter. Attach the black
lead to the black probe. 2. For each cell in which you measured a
cell potential, write a balanced equation
8. Choose two wells to test. Insert one end of the
for the reduction half-reaction, the oxidation
salt bridge into the solution in the first well.
half-reaction, and the overall cell reaction.
Insert the other end of the salt bridge into
the solution in the second well. Attach a free 3. For any one cell in which you measured a cell
alligator clip to the electrode in each well. potential, describe
(Note: The graphite electrode is very fragile. (a) the direction in which electrons flow
Be gentle when using it.) You have built a through the external circuit
galvanic cell.
(b) the movements of ions in the cell
9. If you get a negative reading, switch the 4. Use your observations to decide which of the
alligator clips. Once you obtain a positive
metals used as electrodes is the most effective
value, record it in your chart. The black lead
reducing agent. Explain your reasoning.
should be attached to the anode (electrons
5. List all the reduction half-reactions you wrote
flowing into the voltmeter). Record which
in question 2 so that the metallic elements in
metal is acting as the anode and which is
the half-reactions appear in order of their abili-
acting as the cathode in this galvanic cell.
ty as reducing agents. Put the least effective
10. Remove the salt bridge and wipe any excess reducing agent at the top of the list and the
salt solution off the outside of the tubing.
most effective reducing agent at the bottom.
Remove the alligator clips from the electrodes.
6. In which part of your list from question 5 are
11. Repeat steps 8 to 10 for all other combinations the metal ions that are the best oxidizing
of electrodes. Record your results.
agents? Explain.
12. Reattach the leads to the silver and 7.(a) When saturated sodium chloride solution
magnesium electrodes, and insert your salt
was added to the silver nitrate solution,
bridge back into the two appropriate wells.
what reaction took place? Explain.
While observing the reading on the voltmeter,
(b) Does the concentration of an electrolyte
slowly add 5 mL of saturated NaCl solution to
affect the cell potential of a galvanic cell?
+
the Ag/Ag well to precipitate AgCl. Record
How do you know?
any changes in the voltmeter reading. Observe
+
the Ag/Ag well.
Conclusion
13. Rinse off the metals and the graphite rod with
8. Identify factors that affect the cell potential
water. Dispose of the salt solutions into the
of a galvanic cell.
heavy metal salts container your teacher has
set aside. Rinse out your egg carton. Remove
Applications
and discard the plugs of the salt bridge, and
dispose of the KNO solution as directed by 9. Predict any other factors that you think might
3
your teacher. Return all your materials to their affect the voltage of a galvanic cell. Describe
appropriate locations. an investigation you could complete to test
your prediction.
Chapter 11 Cells and Batteries • MHR 511
Disposable Batteries
The Daniell cell is fairly large and full of liquid. Realistically, you could
not use this type of cell to power a wristwatch, a remote control, or a
flashlight. Galvanic cells have been modified, however, to make them
more useful.
The Dry Cell Battery
A dry cell is a galvanic cell with the electrolyte contained in a paste
thickened with starch. This cell is much more portable than the Daniell
cell. The first dry cell, invented by the French chemist Georges Leclanché
in 1866, was called the Leclanché cell.
Modern dry cells are closely modelled on the Leclanché cell, and also
contain electrolyte pastes. You have probably used dry cells in all kinds of
applications, such as lighting a flashlight, powering a remote control, or
ringing a doorbell. Dry cells are inexpensive. The cheapest AAA-, AA-, C-,
and D-size 1.5-V batteries are dry cells.
A battery is defined as a set of galvanic cells connected in series. The
negative electrode of one cell is connected to the positive electrode of the
next cell in the set. The voltage of a set of cells connected in series is the
sum of the voltages of the individual cells. Thus, a 9-V battery contains
six 1.5-V dry cells connected in series. Often, the term “battery” is also
used to describe a single cell. For example, a 1.5-V dry cell battery
contains only a single cell.
A dry cell battery stops producing electricity when the reactants
COURSE
CHALLENGE are used up. This type of battery is disposable after it has run down
completely. A disposable battery is known as a primary battery. Some
How does electrochemistry
affect your life? In the other batteries are rechargeable. A rechargeable battery is known as
Chemistry Course Challenge, a secondary battery. The rest of this section will deal with primary
you will examine some of the batteries. You will learn about secondary batteries in section 11.3.
roles electrochemistry plays A dry cell contains a zinc anode and an inert graphite cathode, as
in the human body. How is
shown in Figure 11.7. The electrolyte is a moist paste of manganese(IV)
electrochemistry important
oxide, MnO , zinc chloride, ZnCl , ammonium chloride, NH Cl, and
in medical applications? Do 2 2 4
“carbon black,” C , also known as soot.
research to find some specific (s)
The oxidation half-reaction at the zinc anode is already familiar to you.
examples.
Zn → Zn2+ + 2e −
(s) (aq)
The reduction half-reaction at the cathode is more complicated. An
approximation is given here.
2MnO 2(s) + H 2 O ((cid:2)) + 2e − → Mn 2 O 3(s) + 2OH − (aq)
Therefore, an approximation of the overall cell reaction is:
2MnO 2(s) + Zn (s) + H 2 O ((cid:2)) → Mn 2 O 3(s) + Zn2+ (aq) + 2OH − (aq)
Figure 11.7 The D-size dry
cell battery is shown whole, and
cut in two. The anode is the zinc zinc anode
container, located just inside the
outer paper, steel, or plastic case.
The graphite cathode runs through
the centre of the cylinder. electrolyte paste
graphite cathode
512 MHR • Unit 5 Electrochemistry
The Alkaline Cell Battery
The more expensive alkaline cell, shown in Figure 11.8, is an improved,
longer-lasting version of the dry cell.
positive button
steel case
MnO2 in KOH paste
Zn (anode)
graphite rod (cathode)
absorbent/separator
negative end cap
Figure 11.8 The structure of an alkaline cell is similar to the structure of a dry cell.
Each type has a voltage of 1.5 V.
Billions of alkaline batteries, each containing a single alkaline cell, are
made every year. The ammonium chloride and zinc chloride used in a dry
cell are replaced by strongly alkaline (basic) potassium hydroxide, KOH.
The half-reactions and the overall reaction in an alkaline cell are given here.
Oxidation (at the anode): Zn (s) + 2OH − (aq) → ZnO (s) + H 2 O ((cid:2)) + 2e −
Reduction (at the cathode):MnO 2(s) +2H 2 O ((cid:2)) +2e −→Mn(OH) 2(s) + 2OH − (aq) Figure 11.9 Button batteries are
Overall cell reaction: Zn (s) + MnO 2(s) + H 2 O ((cid:2)) → ZnO (s) + Mn(OH) 2(s) small and long-lasting.
The Button Cell Battery
A button battery is much smaller than an alkaline battery. Button batteries
are commonly used in watches, as shown in Figure 11.9. Because of its
small size, the button battery is also used for hearing aids, pacemakers, and
some calculators and cameras. The development of smaller batteries has
had an enormous impact on portable devices, as shown in Figure 11.10.
Two common types of button batteries both use a zinc container,
which acts as the anode, and an inert stainless steel cathode, as shown in
Figure 11.11 on the next page. In the mercury button battery, the alkaline
electrolyte paste contains mercury(II) oxide, HgO. In the silver button
battery, the electrolyte paste contains silver oxide, Ag O. The batteries
2
have similar voltages: about 1.3 V for the mercury cell, and about 1.6 V
for the silver cell.
The reaction products in a mercury button battery are solid zinc oxide
and liquid mercury. The two half-reactions and the overall equation are
as follows.
Oxidation half-reaction: Zn (s) + 2OH − (aq) → ZnO (s) + H 2 O ((cid:2)) + 2e − Figure 11.10 With small,
long-lasting batteries, a pacemaker
Reduction half-reaction: HgO (s) + H 2 O ((cid:2)) + 2e − → Hg ((cid:2)) + 2OH − (aq) can now be implanted in a heart
Overall reaction: Zn (s) + HgO (s) → ZnO (s) + Hg ((cid:2)) patient’s chest. Early pacemakers,
such as this one developed at the
University of Toronto in the 1950s,
were so big and heavy that patients
had to wheel them around on a cart.
Chapter 11 Cells and Batteries • MHR 513
Figure 11.11 A common type steel (cathode) zinc container (anode)
of button battery, shown here, (+) (−)
insulation
contains silver oxide or mercury(II)
oxide. Mercury is cheaper than
silver, but discarded mercury
batteries release toxic mercury
metal into the environment.
porous separator
paste of Ag O or HgO
2
in KOH and Zn(OH) electrolyte
2
Careers in Chemistry
Explosives Chemist Redox reactions play an important role in
industrial safety. Explosives are used in controlled
Fortunato Villamagna works as the vice-president of
ways in the mining, highway, and construction
technology for an Australian-owned company with
industries. The use of explosives allows modern
offices worldwide, including Canada. Villamagna’s
workers to break up bedrock and carry out
job has given him the opportunity to invent new
necessary demolitions from a safe distance.
products, build chemical plants, and conduct
Chemists are involved in the development and
projects in Africa and Australia.
production of explosives. They are also involved
in making recommendations for the safe handling
and disposal of explosives.
Many explosives are based on redox reactions.
For example, the decomposition of nitroglycerin
into nitrogen, carbon dioxide, water vapour, and
oxygen is a redox reaction that results in a powerful
explosion. The three nitrate groups of a nitroglycerin
molecule act as powerful oxidizing agents, and the
glycerol portion of the compound acts as a fuel.
Fuels are very easily oxidized.
Nitroglycerin is highly unstable and can
explode very easily. Therefore, it is difficult to
manufacture and transport safely. Ammonium
Born in Italy, Villamagna moved to Canada nitrate, an explosive that can act as both an
when he was eight. He grew up in Montréal, where oxidizing agent and a reducing agent, is often used
his interest in chemistry was sparked by a Grade 10 to modify other explosives such as nitroglycerin.
teacher. Ammonium nitrate is one of the products made
At university, Villamagna gained a greater by Villamagna’s company.
understanding of the value of chemistry research.
“Research creates new technologies and concepts, Making Career Connections
results in new products and services, creates jobs
• The chemical formula of nitroglycerin is C O N H .
and prosperity, and in the end improves people’s 3 9 3 5
Write the balanced chemical equation for the
lives,” he says. Villamagna decided to pursue
decomposition of nitroglycerin, as described in
graduate studies. He obtained a Masters of Science
in physical chemistry at Concordia University, and this feature.
a Ph.D. in physical chemistry at McGill University. • Find out which Canadian companies employ
Today, Villamagna leads a team of researchers chemists who specialize in safe applications of
responsible for developing new products and explosives. Contact those companies for more
techniques involving explosives. information.
514 MHR • Unit 5 Electrochemistry
Section Summary
PROBEWARE
In this section, you learned how to identify the different components of a
If you have access to
galvanic cell. Also, you found out how galvanic cells convert chemical
probeware, do Probeware
energy into electrical energy. You were introduced to several common
Investigation 11-A, or a similar
primary batteries that contain galvanic cells. In the next section, you will investigation from a probeware
learn more about the cell potentials of galvanic cells. company.
Section Review
1 K/U Identify the oxidizing agent and the reducing agent in a dry cell.
2 C Explain why the top of a commercial 1.5-V dry cell battery is
always marked with a plus sign.
3 I The reaction products in a silver button battery are solid zinc oxide
and solid silver.
(a) Write the two half-reactions and the equation for the overall reaction
in the battery.
(b) Name the materials used to make the anode and the cathode.
4 I If two 1.5-V D-size batteries power a flashlight, at what voltage is
the flashlight operating? Explain.
5 I How many dry cells are needed to make a 6-V dry cell battery?
Explain.
6 MC Research the environmental impact of mercury pollution. Describe
the main sources of mercury in the environment, the effects of mercury
on human health, and at least one incident in which humans were
harmed by mercury pollution.
7 K/U When a dry cell produces electricity, what happens to the
container? Explain.
8 C Use the following shorthand representation to sketch a possible
design of the cell. Include as much information as you can. Identify
the anode and cathode, and write the half-reactions and the overall
cell reaction.
Fe
| Fe2+ ||
Ag
+ |
Ag
(s) (aq) (aq) (s)
Chapter 11 Cells and Batteries • MHR 515
11.2 Standard Cell Potentials
In section 11.1, you learned that a cell potential is the difference between
Section Preview/
Specific Expectations the potential energies at the anode and the cathode of a cell. In other
words, a cell potential is the difference between the potentials of two
In this section, you will
half-cells. You cannot measure the potential of one half-cell, because a
(cid:2) describethe use of the
single half-reaction cannot occur alone. However, you can use measured
hydrogen half-cell as a
reference cell potentials to construct tables of half-cell potentials. A table of
standard half-cell potentials allows you to calculate cell potentials, rather
(cid:2) calculateoverall cell
than building the cells and measuring their potentials. Table 11.1 includes
potentials under standard
conditions a few standard half-cell potentials. A larger table of standard half-cell
potentials is given in Appendix E.
(cid:2) communicateyour under-
standing of the following Table 11.1 Standard Half-Cell Potentials (298 K)
terms: reduction potential,
oxidation potential Half-reaction E (V)
F + 2e− (cid:4)(cid:3) 2F− 2.866
2(g) (aq)
Br 2((cid:2)) + 2e− (cid:3)(cid:4) 2Br− (aq) 1.066
I + 2e− (cid:3)(cid:4) 2I− 0.536
2(s) (aq)
Cu2+ + 2e− (cid:4)(cid:3) Cu 0.342
(aq) (s)
2H+ + 2e− (cid:4)(cid:3) H 0.000
(aq) 2(g)
Fe2+ + 2e− (cid:4)(cid:3) Fe −0.447
(aq) (s)
Zn2+ + 2e− (cid:4)(cid:3) Zn −0.762
(aq) (s)
Al3+ + 3e− (cid:4)(cid:3) Al −1.662
(aq) (s)
Na+ + e− (cid:4)(cid:3) Na −2.711
(aq) (s)
Table 11.1 and the larger table in Appendix E are based on the following
conventions.
• Each half-reaction is written as a reduction. The half-cell potential
for a reduction half-reaction is called a reduction potential. Look at
the molecules and ions on the left side of each half-reaction. The most
easily reduced molecules and ions (best oxidizing agents), such as F ,
2
−
MnO , and O , are near the top of the list. The least easily reduced
4 2
molecules and ions (worst oxidizing agents), such as Na
+
,
Ca2+
, and
H O, are near the bottom of the list.
2
• The numerical values of cell potentials and half-cell potentials depend
on various conditions, so tables of standardreduction potentials are true
when ions and molecules are in their standard states. These standard
states are the same as for tables of standard enthalpy changes. Aqueous
molecules and ions have a standard concentration of 1 mol/L. Gases have
a standard pressure of 101.3 kPa or 1 atm. The standard temperature
is 25˚C or 298 K. Standard reduction potentials are designated by the
symbol E˚, where the superscript ˚ indicates standard states.
• Because you can measure potential differences, but not individual
reduction potentials, all values in the table are relative. Each half-cell
reduction potential is given relative to the reduction potential of the
standard hydrogen electrode, which has been assigned a value of zero.
The design of this electrode is shown in Figure 11.12.
516 MHR • Unit 5 Electrochemistry
H at 1 atm
2(g)
1 mol/L HCl Pt electrode
(aq)
Figure 11.12 In a standard hydrogen electrode, which is open to the atmosphere, hydrogen
gas at 1 atm pressure bubbles over an inert platinum electrode. The electrode is immersed in
a solution containing 1 mol/L H+ions.
Calculating Standard Cell Potentials
You can use Table 11.1 to calculate the standard cell potential of the
familiar Daniell cell. This cell has its standard potential when the
solution concentrations are 1 mol/L, as shown in the shorthand
representation below.
Zn
| Zn2+
(1mol/L)
|| Cu2+
(1mol/L)
|
Cu
One method to calculate the standard cell potential is to subtract the
standard reduction potential of the anode from the standard reduction
potential of the cathode.
Method 1: E˚ = E˚ − E˚
cell cathode anode
For a Daniell cell, you know that copper is the cathode and zinc is the
anode. The relevant half-reactions and standard reduction potentials from
Table 11.1 are as follows.
Cu2+ + 2e − (cid:3)(cid:4) Cu E˚ = 0.342V
(aq) (s)
Zn2+ + 2e − (cid:3)(cid:4) Zn E˚ = −0.762V
(aq) (s)
Use these values to calculate the cell potential.
E˚ = E˚ − E˚
cell cathode anode
= 0.342V − (−0.762V)
= 0.342V + 0.762V
= 1.104V
Thus, the standard cell potential for a Daniell cell is 1.104 V.
The standard cell potentials of all galvanic cells have positive values,
as explained in Figure 11.13, on the following page. Figure 11.13 shows
a “potential ladder” diagram. A “potential ladder” diagram models the
potential difference. The rungs on the ladder correspond to the values
of the reduction potentials.
Chapter 11 Cells and Batteries • MHR 517
more positive
cathode (reduction)
E˚ cathode
E˚ = E˚ − E˚ cell cathode anode
E˚
anode
anode (oxidation)
This calculation of the standard cell potential for the Daniell cell used
the mathematical concept that the subtraction of a negative number is
equivalent to the addition of its positive value. You saw that
0.342V − (−0.762V) = 0.342V + 0.762V
In other words, the subtraction of the reduction potential for a
half-reaction is equivalent to the addition of the potential for the reverse
half-reaction. The reverse half-reaction of a reduction is an oxidation.
The half-cell potential for an oxidation half-reaction is called an oxidation
potential. If the reduction half-reaction is as follows,
Zn2+ + 2e − (cid:3)(cid:4) Zn E˚ = −0.762V
(aq) (s)
then the oxidation half-reaction is
Zn (cid:3)(cid:4) Zn2+ + 2e − E˚ = +0.762V
(s) (aq) ox
To summarize, the standard cell potential can also be calculated as the
sum of a standard reduction potential and a standard oxidation potential.
Method 2: E˚ = E˚ + E˚
cell red ox
As shown above, you can obtain the standard oxidation potential from
a table of standard reduction potentials by reversing the reduction half-
reaction, and changing the sign of the relevant potential. The reduction
and oxidation half-reactions for the previous example are as follows.
Cu2+ + 2e − (cid:3)(cid:4) Cu E˚ = 0.342V
(aq) (s) red
Zn (cid:3)(cid:4) Zn2+ + 2e − E˚ = +0.762V
(s) (aq) ox
The calculation of the standard cell potential using these standard
half-reaction potentials is as follows.
E˚ = E˚ + E˚
cell red ox
= 0.342V + 0.762V
= 1.104V
Finding the difference between two reduction potentials, and finding
the sum of a reduction potential and an oxidation potential are exactly
equivalent methods for finding a cell potential. Use whichever method
you prefer. The first Sample Problem includes both methods for finding
cell potentials. The second Sample Problem uses only the subtraction of
two reduction potentials. Practice problems are included after the second
Sample Problem.
518 MHR • Unit 5 Electrochemistry
)V(
˚E
,laitnetop
noitcuder
dradnats
Figure 11.13 For a galvanic cell,
E˚ is more positive (or less
cathode
negative) than E˚ . Thus, E˚ is
anode cell
always positive.
Electronic Learning Partner
Your Chemistry 12 Electronic
Learning Partner has a movie
describing the operation of
a galvanic cell, and the
calculation of its cell potential.
Sample Problem
Calculating a Standard Cell
Potential, Given a Net Ionic Equation
Problem
Calculate the standard cell potential for the galvanic cell in which the
following reaction occurs.
2I − (aq) + Br 2((cid:2)) → I 2(s) + 2Br − (aq)
What Is Required?
You need to find the standard cell potential for the given reaction.
What Is Given?
You have the balanced net ionic equation and a table of standard
reduction potentials.
Plan Your Strategy
PROBLEM TIP
Method 1: Subtracting Two Reduction Potentials
Think of a red catto remember
Step 1 Write the oxidation and reduction half-reactions.
that reduction occurs at the
Step 2 Locate the relevant reduction potentials in a table of standard
cathode. Think of an oxto
reduction potentials. remember that the anode is
Step 3 Subtract the reduction potentials to find the cell potential, using where oxidation occurs.
E˚ = E˚ − E˚
cell cathode anode
Method 2: Adding an Oxidation Potential and a Reduction Potential
Step 1 Write the oxidation and reduction half-reactions.
Step 2 Locate the relevant reduction potentials in a table of standard
reduction potentials.
Step 3 Change the sign of the reduction potential for the oxidation
half-reaction to find the oxidation potential.
Step 4 Add the reduction potential and the oxidation potential, using
E˚ = E˚ + E˚
cell red ox
Act on Your Strategy
Method 1: Subtracting Two Reduction Potentials
Step 1 The oxidation and reduction half-reactions are as follows.
Oxidation half-reaction (occurs at the anode): 2I − → I + 2e −
(aq) 2(s)
Reduction half-reaction (occurs at the cathode): Br 2((cid:2)) + 2e − → 2Br − (aq)
Step 2 The relevant reduction potentials in the table of standard
reduction potentials are:
I + 2e − (cid:3)(cid:4) 2I − E˚ = 0.536V
2(s) (aq) anode
Br 2((cid:2)) + 2e − (cid:3)(cid:4) 2Br − (aq) E˚ cathode = 1.066V
Step 3 Calculate the cell potential by subtraction.
E˚ = E˚ − E˚
cell cathode anode
= 1.066V − 0.536V
= 0.530V
Continued ...
Chapter 11 Cells and Batteries • MHR 519
Continued ...
Method 2: Adding an Oxidation Potential and a Reduction Potential
Step 1 The oxidation and reduction half-reactions are as follows.
Oxidation half-reaction (occurs at the anode): 2I − → I + 2e −
(aq) 2(s)
Reduction half-reaction (occurs at the cathode): Br 2((cid:2)) + 2e − → 2Br − (aq)
Step 2 The relevant reduction potentials in the table of standard
reduction potentials are:
I + 2e − (cid:3)(cid:4) 2I − E˚ = 0.536V
2(s) (aq) anode
Br 2((cid:2)) + 2e − (cid:3)(cid:4) 2Br − (aq) E˚ cathode = 1.066V
Step 3 The standard electrode potential for the reduction half-reaction is
E˚ = 1.066V. Changing the sign of the potential for the
red
oxidation half-reaction gives
2I − (cid:3)(cid:4) I + 2e − E˚ = −0.536V
(aq) 2(s) ox
Step 4 Calculate the cell potential by addition.
E˚ = E˚ + E˚
cell red ox
= 1.066V + (−0.536V)
= 0.530V
Check Your Solution
Both methods give the same answer. The cell potential is positive, as
expected for a galvanic cell.
A standard cell potential depends only on the identities of the reactants
and products in their standard states. As you will see in the next Sample
Problem, you do not need to consider the amounts of reactants or
products present, or the reaction stoichiometry, when calculating a
standard cell potential. Since you have just completed a similar Sample
Problem, only a brief solution using the subtraction method is given here.
Check that you can solve this problem by adding a reduction potential
and an oxidation potential.
Sample Problem
Calculating a Standard Cell
Potential, Given a Chemical Equation
Problem
Calculate the standard cell potential for the galvanic cell in which the
following reaction occurs.
2Na (s) + 2H 2 O ((cid:2)) → 2NaOH (aq) + H 2(g)
520 MHR • Unit 5 Electrochemistry
PROBLEM TIP
Solution A “potential ladder” diagram
models the potential difference.
Step 1 Write the equation in ionic form to identify the half-reactions.
The rungs on the ladder
2Na (s) + 2H 2 O ((cid:2)) → 2Na + (aq) + 2OH − (aq) + H 2(g) correspond to the values of
the reduction potentials. For a
Write the oxidation and reduction half-reactions.
galvanic cell, the half-reaction
Oxidation half-reaction (occurs at the anode): Na → Na + + e −
(s) (aq) at the cathode is always on the
Reduction half-reaction (occurs at the cathode): upper rung, and the subtraction
2H 2 O ((cid:2)) + 2e − → 2OH − (aq) + H 2(g) E˚ cathode − E˚ anode always gives
Step 2 Locate the relevant reduction potentials in a table of standard a positive cell potential.
reduction potentials.
more positive
Na + e − (cid:3)(cid:4) Na + E˚ = −2.711V
(s) (aq) anode
2H 2 O ((cid:2)) + 2e − (cid:3)(cid:4) H 2(g) + 2OH − (aq) E˚ cathode = −0.828V 2H2O ((cid:2)) + 2e− H2(g) + 2OH− (aq)
Step 3 Subtract the standard reduction potentials to calculate the cell
potential.
E˚ = E˚ − E˚
cell cathode anode = −0.828V − (−2.711V)
= 1.883V
The standard cell potential is 1.883 V. The Problem Tip on this page
illustrates this calculation.
Na(s) + e− Na+ (aq)
You have learned that the standard hydrogen electrode has an assigned
standard reduction potential of exactly 0 V, and is the reference for all
half-cell standard reduction potentials. What would happen to cell
potentials if a different reference were used? You will address this
question in the following ThoughtLab.
Chapter 11 Cells and Batteries • MHR 521
828.0−
117.2−
E˚ cell = −0.828 V − (−2.711) V
= 1.883 V
)V(
˚E
Practice Problems
(Note:Obtain the necessary standard reduction potential values from the
table in Appendix E.)
5. Write the two half-reactions for the following redox reaction. Subtract
the two reduction potentials to find the standard cell potential for a
galvanic cell in which this reaction occurs.
Cl 2(g) + 2Br − (aq) → 2Cl − (aq) + Br 2((cid:2))
6. Write the two half-reactions for the following redox reaction. Add the
reduction potential and the oxidation potential to find the standard
cell potential for a galvanic cell in which this reaction occurs.
2Cu + + 2H + + O → 2Cu2+ + H O
(aq) (aq) 2(g) (aq) 2 2(aq)
7. Write the two half-reactions for the following redox reaction. Subtract
the two standard reduction potentials to find the standard cell
potential for the reaction.
Sn + 2HBr → SnBr + H
(s) (aq) 2(aq) 2(g)
8. Write the two half-reactions for the following redox reaction. Add the
standard reduction potential and the standard oxidation potential to
find the standard cell potential for the reaction.
Cr + 3AgCl → CrCl + 3Ag
(s) (s) 3(aq) (s)
Electronic Learning Partner
Go to the Chemistry 12
Electronic Learning Partner
for more information about
aspects of material covered
in this section of the chapter.
ThoughtLab Assigning Reference Values
Many scales of measurement have zero values that 3. Repeat your calculations using the new, adjusted
are arbitrary. For example, on Earth, average sea reduction potentials.
level is often assigned as the zero of altitude. In this
ThoughtLab, you will investigate what happens to Analysis
calculated cell potentials when the reference half-cell
1. Compare your calculations from questions 2 and
is changed.
3 of the procedure. What effect does changing the
Procedure zero on the scale of reduction potentials have on
1. Copy the following table of reduction potentials (a) reduction potentials?
into your notebook. Change the zero on the scale (b) cell potentials?
by adding 1.662 V to each valueto create new,
adjusted reduction potentials. Applications
Reduction half-reaction E (V) E + 1.662 (V) 2. Find the difference between the temperatures at
which water boils and freezes on the following
F + 2e− (cid:4)(cid:3) 2F− 2.866
2(g) (aq) scales. (Assume that a difference is positive,
Fe3+ + e− (cid:4)(cid:3) Fe2+ 0.771
(aq) (aq) rather than negative.)
2H+ + 2e− (cid:4)(cid:3) H 0.000
(aq) 2(g) (a) the Celsius temperature scale
Al3+ + 3e− (cid:4)(cid:3) Al −1.662
(aq) (s) (b) the Kelvin temperature scale
Li+ + e− (cid:4)(cid:3) Li −3.040
(aq) (s) 3. What do your answers for the previous question
tell you about these two temperature scales?
2. Use the given standard reduction potentials to
calculate the standard cell potentials for the 4. The zero on a scale of masses is not arbitrary.
following redox reactions. Why not?
(a) 2Li +2H+ →2Li+ +H
(s) (aq) (aq) 2(g)
(b) 2Al +3F →2Al3+ +6F−
(s) 2(g) (aq) (aq)
(c) 2FeCl +H →2FeCl +2HCl
3(aq) 2(g) 2(aq) (aq)
(d) Al(NO ) +3Li →3LiNO +Al
3 3(aq) (s) 3(aq) (s)
Section Summary
In this section, you learned that you can calculate cell potentials by
using tables of half-cell potentials. The half-cell potential for a reduction
half-reaction is called a reduction potential. The half-cell potential for an
oxidation half-reaction is called an oxidation potential. Standard half-cell
potentials are written as reduction potentials. The values of standard
reduction potentials for half-reactions are relative to the reduction potential
of the standard hydrogen electrode. You used standard reduction potentials
to calculate standard cell potentials for galvanic cells. You learned two
methods of calculating standard cell potentials. One method is to subtract
the standard reduction potential of the anode from the standard reduction
potential of the cathode. The other method is to add the standard reduction
potential of the cathode and the standard oxidation potential of the anode.
In the next section, you will learn about a different type of cell, called an
electrolytic cell.
522 MHR • Unit 5 Electrochemistry
Section Review
1 I Determine the standard cell potential for each of the following
redox reactions.
(a) 3Mg + 2Al3+ → 3Mg2+ + 2Al
(s) (aq) (aq) (s)
(b) 2K + F → 2K + + 2F −
(s) 2(g) (aq) (aq)
(c) Cr 2 O 7 2− (aq) + 14H + (aq) + 6Ag (s) → 2Cr3+ (aq) + 6Ag + (aq) + 7H 2 O ((cid:2))
2 I Determine the standard cell potential for each of the following
redox reactions.
(a) CuSO + Ni → NiSO + Cu
4(aq) (s) 4(aq) (s)
(b) 4Au(OH) 3(aq) → 4Au (s) + 6H 2 O ((cid:2)) + 3O 2(g)
(c) Fe (s) + 4HNO 3(aq) → Fe(NO 3 ) 3(aq) + NO (g) + 2H 2 O ((cid:2))
3 K/U For which half-cell are the values of the standard reduction
potential and the standard oxidation potential equal?
4 I Look at the half-cells in the table of standard reduction potentials
in Appendix E. Could you use two of the standard half-cells to build
a galvanic cell with a standard cell potential of 7 V? Explain your
answer.
5 C Compare the positions of metals in the metal activity series with
their positions in the table of standard reduction potentials. Describe
the similarities and differences.
6 I The cell potential for the following galvanic cell is given.
Zn | Zn2+ (1mol/L) || Pd2+ (1mol/L) | Pd E˚ = 1.750V
cell
Determine the standard reduction potential for the following
half-reaction.
Pd2+ + 2e − (cid:3)(cid:4) Pd
(aq) (s)
Chapter 11 Cells and Batteries • MHR 523
11.3 Electrolytic Cells
For a galvanic cell, you have learned that the overall reaction is
Section Preview/
Specific Expectations spontaneous, and that the cell potential has a positive value. A galvanic
cell converts chemical energy to electrical energy. Electrons flow from a
In this section, you will
higher potential energy to a lower potential energy. As described earlier,
(cid:2) identifythe components
the flow of electrons in the external circuit of a galvanic cell can be
of an electrolytic cell, and
describehow they work compared to water flowing downhill.
Although water flows downhill spontaneously, you can also pump
(cid:2) describeelectrolytic
water uphill. This process requires energy because it moves water from
cells using oxidation and
reduction half-cells a position of lower potential energy to a position of higher potential
energy. You will now learn about a type of cell that uses energy to move
(cid:2) determineoxidation and
reduction half-cell reactions, electrons from lower potential energy to higher potential energy. This
direction of current flow, type of cell, called an electrolytic cell, is a device that converts electrical
electrode polarity, cell energy to chemical energy. The process that takes place in an electrolytic
potential, and ion movement cell is called electrolysis. The overall reaction in an electrolytic cell is
in some electrolytic cells
non-spontaneous, and requires energy to occur. This type of reaction is
(cid:2) buildand investigatean the reverse of a spontaneous reaction, which generates energy when
electrolytic cell in the it occurs.
laboratory
Like a galvanic cell, an electrolytic cell includes electrodes, at least
(cid:2) predictwhether or not redox one electrolyte, and an external circuit. Unlike galvanic cells, electrolytic
reactions are spontaneous, cells require an external source of electricity, sometimes called the
using standard cell
external voltage. This is included in the external circuit. Except for the
potentials
external source of electricity, an electrolytic cell may look just like a
(cid:2) describesome common galvanic cell. Some electrolytic cells include a porous barrier or salt
rechargeable batteries, and
bridge. In other electrolytic cells, the two half-reactions are not separated,
evaluatetheir impact on the
and take place in the same container.
environment and on society
(cid:2) communicateyour under-
Electrolysis of Molten Salts
standing of the following
terms: electrolytic cell, The electrolytic cell shown in Figure 11.14 decomposes sodium chloride
electrolysis, overvoltage, into its elements. The cell consists of a single container with two inert
electroplating
electrodes dipping into liquid sodium chloride. To melt the sodium
chloride, the temperature must be above its melting point of about 800˚C.
As in an aqueous solution of sodium chloride, the ions in molten sodium
chloride have some freedom of movement. In other words, molten sodium
chloride is the electrolyte of this cell.
battery
e− e−
inert anode inert cathode
(+) (−)
cation
Figure 11.14 Molten sodium
Na+
chloride decomposes into sodium
and chlorine in this electrolytic Cl−
cell. The sodium chloride is said anion
to undergo electrolysis, or to be
molten NaCl
electrolyzed.
524 MHR • Unit 5 Electrochemistry
The external source of electricity forces electrons onto one electrode. As a
result, this electrode becomes negative relative to the other electrode. The
“Electrochemical cell” is a
positive sodium ions move toward the negative electrode, where they gain
common term in electrochem-
electrons and are reduced to the element sodium. At this temperature,
istry. Some scientists include
sodium metal is produced as a liquid. The negative chloride ions move both galvanic cells and
toward the positive electrode, where they lose electrons and are oxidized electrolytic cells as types of
to the element chlorine, a gas. As in a galvanic cell, reduction occurs at electrochemical cells. Other
the cathode, and oxidation occurs at the anode of an electrolytic cell. The scientists consider galvanic
cells, but not electrolytic cells,
half-reactions for this electrolytic cell are as follows.
as electrochemical cells. If
Reduction half-reaction (occurs at the cathode): Na + ((cid:2)) + e − → Na ((cid:2)) you meet the term “electro-
Oxidation half-reaction (occurs at the anode): 2Cl − ((cid:2)) → Cl 2(g) + 2e − chemical cell,” always check
its exact meaning.
Because of the external voltage of the electrolytic cell, the electrodes
do not have the same polarities in electrolytic and galvanic cells. In a
galvanic cell, the cathode is positive and the anode is negative. In an
electrolytic cell, the anode is positive and the cathode is negative.
The electrolysis of molten sodium chloride is an important industrial
reaction. Figure 11.15 shows the large electrolytic cell used in the
industrial production of sodium and chlorine. You will meet other
industrial electrolytic processes later in this chapter.
inlet for
NaCl, CaCl2
molten electrolyte
mi
N
xt
a
u
,
r
C
e
a
of Cl2(g)
(NaCl and CaCl2)
Figure 11.15 The large cell
molten Na used for the electrolysis of sodium
chloride in industry is known as a
Downs cell. To decrease heating
Na( )
costs, calcium chloride is added to
lower the melting point of sodium
chloride from about 800˚C to about
600˚C. The reaction produces
(+) (−)
sodium and calcium by reduction at
anode (oxidation) cathode (reduction) the cathode, and chlorine by oxida-
2Cl− ((cid:2)) → Cl2(g) + 2e− Na+ ((cid:2)) + e− → Na((cid:2)) tion at the anode.
Check your understanding of the introduction to electrolytic cells by
completing the following practice problems.
Practice Problems
9. The electrolysis of molten calcium chloride produces calcium and
chlorine. Write
(a) the half-reaction that occurs at the anode
(b) the half-reaction that occurs at the cathode
(c) the chemical equation for the overall cell reaction
Continued ...
Chapter 11 Cells and Batteries • MHR 525
Continued ...
10. For the electrolysis of molten lithium bromide, write
(a) the half-reaction that occurs at the negative electrode
(b) the half-reaction that occurs at the positive electrode
(c) the net ionic equation for the overall cell reaction
11. A galvanic cell produces direct current, which flows in one direction.
The mains supply at your home is a source of alternating current,
which changes direction every fraction of a second. Explain why the
external electrical supply for an electrolytic cell must be a source of
direct current, rather than alternating current.
12. Suppose a battery is used as the external electrical supply for an
electrolytic cell. Explain why the negative terminal of the battery
must be connected to the cathode of the cell.
Electrolysis of Water
The electrolysis of aqueous solutions may not yield the desired products.
Sir Humphry Davy (1778–1829) discovered the elements sodium and
potassium by electrolyzing their molten salts. Before this discovery, Davy
had electrolyzed aqueous solutions of sodium and potassium salts. He
had not succeeded in reducing the metal ions to the pure metals at the
cathode. Instead, his first experiments had produced hydrogen gas. Where
did the hydrogen gas come from?
When electrolyzing an aqueous solution, there are two compounds
present: water, and the dissolved electrolyte. Water may be electrolyzed
as well as, or instead of, the electrolyte. The electrolysis of water produces
oxygen gas and hydrogen gas, as shown in Figure 11.16.
H O
2 2
Figure 11.16 The electrolysis of water produces hydrogen gas
at the cathode and oxygen gas at the anode. Explain why the volume
of hydrogen gas is twice the volume of oxygen gas.
526 MHR • Unit 5 Electrochemistry
The half-reactions for the electrolysis of water are given below.
Oxidation half-reaction (occurs at the anode):
Check that you recall how
2H 2 O ((cid:2)) → O 2(g) + 4H + (aq) + 4e − to combine the two
Reduction half-reaction (occurs at the cathode): half-reactions to obtain the
2H 2 O ((cid:2)) + 2e − → H 2(g) + 2OH − (aq) overall cell reaction. You
learned how to do this in
Because the number of electrons lost and gained must be equal, multiply
section 10.3.
the reduction half-reaction by 2. Then add and simplify to obtain the
overall cell reaction.
Overall cell reaction: 2H 2 O ((cid:2)) → 2H 2(g) + O 2(g)
The standard reduction potentials are as follows.
O 2(g) + 4H + (aq) + 4e − (cid:3)(cid:4) 2H 2 O ((cid:2)) E˚ = 1.229V
2H 2 O ((cid:2)) + 2e − (cid:3)(cid:4) H 2(g) + 2OH − (aq) E˚ = −0.828V
You can use these values to calculate the E˚ value for the
cell
decomposition of water.
E˚ = E˚ − E˚
cell cathode anode
= −0.828V − 1.229V
= −2.057V
Therefore,
2H 2 O ((cid:2)) → 2H 2(g) + O 2(g) E˚ cell = −2.057V
The negative cell potential shows that the reaction is not spontaneous.
Electrolytic cells are used for non-spontaneous redox reactions, so all
electrolytic cells have negative cell potentials.
The standard reduction potentials used to calculate E˚ for the
cell
decomposition of water apply only to reactants and products in their
standard states. However, in pure water at 25˚C, the hydrogen ions and
hydroxide ions each have concentrations of 1 × 10 −7mol/L. This is not
the standard state value of 1 mol/L. The reduction potential values for
the non-standard conditions in pure water are given below. The super-
script zero is now omitted from the E symbol, because the values are no
longer standard.
O 2(g) + 4H + (aq) + 4e − (cid:3)(cid:4) 2H 2 O ((cid:2)) E = 0.815V
2H 2 O ((cid:2)) + 2e − (cid:3)(cid:4) H 2(g) + 2OH − (aq) E = −0.414V
Using these new half-cell potentials, E for the decomposition of
cell
pure water at 25˚C by electrolysis has a calculated value of −1.229 V.
Therefore, the calculated value of the external voltage needed is 1.229.
In practice, the external voltage needed for an electrolytic cell is
always greater than the calculated value, especially for reactions involving
gases. Therefore, the actual voltage needed to electrolyze pure water is
greater than 1.229 V. The excess voltage required above the calculated
value is called the overvoltage. Overvoltages depend on the gases
involved and on the materials in the electrodes.
When electrolyzing water, there is another practical difficulty to
consider. Pure water is a very poor electrical conductor. To increase the
conductivity, an electrolyte that does not interfere in the reaction is added
to the water.
Chapter 11 Cells and Batteries • MHR 527
Electrolysis of Aqueous Solutions
As stated previously, an electrolytic cell may have the same design as a
galvanic cell, except for the external source of electricity. Consider, for
example, the familiar Daniell cell. (This cell was described in section 11.1
and shown in Figure 11.5.) By adding an external electrical supply, with a
voltage greater than the voltage of the Daniell cell, you can push electrons
in the opposite direction. By pushing electrons in the opposite direction,
you reverse the chemical reaction. Figure 11.17 shows both cells, while
their properties are compared in Table 11.2.
battery
e− e− e−
salt bridge salt bridge
anode cathode cathode anode
− + − +
Zn Cu Zn Cu
ZnSO4(aq) CuSO4(aq) ZnSO4(aq) CuSO4(aq)
galvanic cell electrolytic cell
Figure 11.17 Adding an external voltage to reverse the electron flow converts a Daniell cell
from a galvanic cell into an electrolytic cell. The result is to switch the anode and cathode.
Table 11.2 Cell Comparison
Galvanic Cell Electrolytic Cell
Spontaneous reaction Non-spontaneous reaction
Converts chemical energy to electrical energy Converts electrical energy to chemical energy
Anode (negative): Zinc Anode (positive): Copper
Cathode (positive): Copper Cathode (negative): Zinc
Oxidation (at anode): Zn → Zn2+ + 2e− Oxidation (at anode): Cu → Cu2+ + 2e−
(s) (aq) (s) (aq)
Reduction (at cathode): Cu2+ + 2e− → Cu Reduction (at cathode): Zn2+ + 2e− → Zn
(aq) (s) (aq) (s)
Cell reaction: Zn + Cu2+ → Zn2+ + Cu Cell reaction: Cu + Zn2+ → Cu2+ + Zn
(s) (aq) (aq) (s) (s) (aq) (aq) (s)
In the galvanic cell, the zinc anode gradually dissolves. The copper
cathode grows as more copper is deposited onto it. In the electrolytic cell,
the copper anode gradually dissolves. The zinc cathode grows as more
zinc is deposited onto it. The process in which a metal is deposited, or
plated, onto the cathode in an electrolytic cell is known as electroplating.
Electroplating is very important in industry, as you will learn later in
this chapter.
528 MHR • Unit 5 Electrochemistry
Predicting the Products of Electrolysis for an Aqueous Solution
The comparison of the Daniell cell with the electrolytic version of the cell
appears straightforward. One reaction is the reverse of the other. However,
you have just learned that the electrolysis of an aqueous solution may
involve the electrolysis of water. How can you predict the actual products
for this type of electrolysis reaction?
To predict the products of an electrolysis involving an aqueous
solution, you must examine all possible half-reactions and their reduction
potentials. Then, you must find the overall reaction that requires the
lowest external voltage. That is, you must find the overall cell reaction
with a negative cell potential that is closest to zero. The next Sample
Problem shows you how to predict the products of the electrolysis of
an aqueous solution.
In practice, reaction products are sometimes different from the
products predicted, using the method described here. Predictions are least
reliable when the reduction potentials are close together, especially when
gaseous products are expected. However, there are many cases in which
the predictions are correct.
Sample Problem
Electrolysis of an Aqueous Solution
Problem
Predict the products of the electrolysis of 1 mol/L LiBr .
(aq)
What Is Required?
You need to predict the products of the electrolysis of 1 mol/L LiBr .
(aq)
What Is Given?
This is an aqueous solution. You are given the formula and concentra-
tion of the electrolyte. You have a table of standard reduction potentials,
and you know the non-standard reduction potentials for water.
Plan Your Strategy
Step 1 List the four relevant half-reactions and their reduction potentials.
Step 2 Predict the products by finding the cell reaction that requires the
lowest external voltage.
Act on Your Strategy
+ −
Step 1 The Li and Br concentrations are 1 mol/L, so use the standard
reduction potentials for the half-reactions that involve these ions.
Use the non-standard values for water.
Br 2((cid:2)) + 2e − (cid:3)(cid:4) 2Br − (aq) E˚ = 1.066V
O 2(g) + 4H + (aq) + 4e − (cid:3)(cid:4) 2H 2 O ((cid:2)) E = 0.815V
2H 2 O ((cid:2)) + 2e − (cid:3)(cid:4) H 2(g) + 2OH − (aq) E = −0.414V
Li + + e − (cid:3)(cid:4) Li E˚ = −3.040V
(aq) (s)
Continued ...
Chapter 11 Cells and Batteries • MHR 529
Continued ...
There are two possible oxidation half-reactions at the anode:
the oxidation of bromide ion in the electrolyte, or the oxidation
of water.
2Br − (aq) → Br 2((cid:2)) + 2e −
2H 2 O ((cid:2)) → O 2(g) + 4H + (aq) + 4e −
There are two possible reduction half-reactions at the cathode:
the reduction of lithium ions in the electrolyte, or the reduction
of water.
Li + + e − → Li
(aq) (s)
2H 2 O ((cid:2)) + 2e − → H 2(g) + 2OH − (aq)
Step 2 Combine pairs of half-reactions to produce four possible overall
reactions. (You learned how to do this in Chapter 10.)
Reaction 1: the production of lithium and bromine
2Li + (aq) + 2Br − (aq) → 2Li (s) + Br 2((cid:2))
E˚ = E˚ − E˚
cell cathode anode
= −3.040V − 1.066V
= −4.106V
Reaction 2: the production of hydrogen and oxygen
2H 2 O ((cid:2)) → 2H 2(g) + O 2(g)
E = E − E
cell cathode anode
= −0.414V − 0.815V
= −1.229V
PROBLEM TIP
Reaction 3: the production of lithium and oxygen
• Remember that spectator 4Li + (aq) + 2H 2 O ((cid:2)) → 4Li (s) + O 2(g) + 4H + (aq)
ions do not appear in
net ionic equations. In E cell = E˚ cathode − E anode
Reaction 3, the bromide = −3.040V − 0.815V
ions are spectator ions. = −3.855V
In Reaction 4, lithium ions
are spectator ions. Reaction 4: the production of hydrogen and bromine
• As for a galvanic cell, the 2H 2 O ((cid:2)) + 2Br − (aq) → H 2(g) + 2OH − (aq) + Br 2((cid:2))
cell potential for an elec- E = E − E˚
cell cathode anode
trolytic cell is the sum of
= −0.414V − 1.066V
a reduction potential and
an oxidation potential.
= −1.480V
Using E cell = E red + E ox The electrolysis of water requires the lowest external voltage. Therefore,
gives the same predicted the predicted products of this electrolysis are hydrogen and oxygen.
products as using
Check Your Solution
E = E − E
cell cathode anode
Use a potential ladder diagram, such as the one on the next page,
part A, to visualize the cell potentials. For an electrolytic cell, the
half-reaction at the anode is always on the upper rung, and the
subtraction E˚ − E˚ always gives a negative cell potential,
cathode anode
as shown in part B.
530 MHR • Unit 5 Electrochemistry
more positive
anode (oxidation)
E
anode
E = E˚ − E
cell cathode anode
E
cathode
cathode (reduction)
Practice Problems
13. Predict the products of the electrolysis of a 1 mol/L solution of
sodium chloride.
14. Explain why calcium can be produced by the electrolysis of molten
calcium chloride, but not by the electrolysis of aqueous calcium
chloride.
15. One half-cell of a galvanic cell has a nickel electrode in a 1 mol/L
nickel(II) chloride solution. The other half-cell has a cadmium
electrode in a 1 mol/L cadmium chloride solution.
(a) Find the cell potential.
(b) Identify the anode and the cathode.
(c) Write the oxidation half-reaction, the reduction half-reaction, and
the overall cell reaction.
16. An external voltage is applied to change the galvanic cell in question
15 into an electrolytic cell. Repeat parts (a) to (c) for the electrolytic
cell.
In Investigation 11-B, you will build an electrolytic cell for the
electrolysis of an aqueous solution of potassium iodide. You will
predict the products of the electrolysis, and compare the observed
products with your predictions.
Chapter 11 Cells and Batteries • MHR 531
)V(
E
more positive
Br2(aq) + 2e− 2Br − (aq)
O2(g) + 4H+ (aq) + 4e− 2H2O ((cid:2))
Ecell = −1.229 V
2H2O ((cid:2)) + 2e− H2(g) + 2OH − (aq) Ecell = −1.480 V
E˚cell = −4.106 V Ecell = −3.855 V
Li+ (aq) + e− Li(s)
)V(
E
A
1.066
0.815
−0.414
−3.040
B
S K I L L F O C U S
Predicting
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
Electrolysis of Aqueous
Potassium Iodide
When an aqueous solution is electrolyzed, the Safety Precautions
electrolyte or water can undergo electrolysis. In
this investigation, you will build an electrolytic
cell, carry out the electrolysis of an aqueous Make sure your lab bench is dry before carrying
solution, and identify the products. out this investigation.
Questions Procedure
What are the products from the electrolysis of 1. Fold a sheet of paper lengthwise. Curl the
a 1 mol/L aqueous solution of potassium iodide? folded paper so that it fits inside the 600 mL
Are the observed products the ones predicted beaker. Invert the beaker on your lab bench.
using reduction potentials?
2. Use the elastic to strap the aquarium tubing to
the side of the beaker in a U shape, as shown
Predictions in the diagram.
Use the relevant standard reduction
potentials from the table in Appendix E, and
the non-standard reduction potentials you used
previously for water, to predict the electrolysis
products. Predict which product(s) are formed
at the anode and which product(s) are formed
at the cathode. graphite wire
electrode electrode
battery
Materials
9V
®
25 cm clear aquarium rubber tubing (Tygon ),
internal diameter 4–6 mm
1 graphite pencil lead, 2 cm long aquarium tubing
2 wire leads (black and red) with alligator clips elastic band
600 mL or 400 mL beaker
sheet of white paper
KI solution (1 mol/L)
1 elastic band
3 toothpicks
3 disposable pipettes 600 mL beaker
2 cm piece of copper wire (20 gauge)
rolled-up paper
1 drop 1% starch solution inside beaker
10 mL 1 mol/L KI
1 drop 1% phenolphthalein
9-V battery or variable power source set to 9 V
532 MHR • Unit 5 Electrochemistry
3. Fill a pipette as completely as possible with (b) the anode and the cathode
1 mol/L KI solution. Insert the tip of the (c) the positive electrode and the negative
pipette firmly into one end of the aquarium electrode
tubing. Slowly inject the solution into the
(d) the movement of ions in the cell
U-tube until the level of the solution is within
1 cm to 2 cm from the top of both ends. If 2. Use your observations to identify the
air bubbles are present, try to remove them product(s) formed at the anode and the
by poking them with a toothpick. You may product(s) formed at the cathode.
need to repeat this step from the beginning.
3. Write a balanced equation for the half-reaction
4. Attach the black lead to the 2 cm piece of that occurs at the anode.
wire. Insert the wire into one end of the
4. Write a balanced equation for the half-reaction
U-tube. Attach the red electrical lead to the
that occurs at the cathode.
graphite. Insert the graphite into the other end
of the U-tube. 5. Write a balanced equation for the overall cell
reaction.
5. Attach the leads to the 9-V battery or to a
variable power source set to 9 V. Attach the 6. Calculate the external voltage required to carry
black lead to the negative terminal, and the out the electrolysis. Why was the external
red lead to the positive terminal. voltage used in the investigation significantly
higher than the calculated value?
6. Let the reaction proceed for three minutes,
while you examine the U-tube. Record your
Conclusion
observations. Shut off the power source and
remove the electrodes. Determine the product 7. What are the products from the electrolysis
formed around the anode by adding a drop of of a 1 mol/L aqueous solution of potassium
starch solution to the end of the U-tube that iodide? Are the observed products the same
contains the anode. Push the starch solution as the products predicted using reduction
down with a toothpick if there is an air lock. potentials?
Determine one of the products around the
cathode by adding a drop of phenolphthalein Applications
to the appropriate end of the U-tube.
8. If you repeated the electrolysis using aqueous
7. Dispose of your reactants and products sodium iodide instead of aqueous potassium
as instructed by your teacher. Take your iodide, would your observations change?
apparatus apart, rinse out the tubing, Explain your answer.
and rinse off the electrodes. Return your
9. To make potassium by electrolyzing
equipment to its appropriate location.
potassium iodide, would you need to
modify the procedure? Explain your answer.
Analysis
1. Sketch the cell you made in this investigation.
On your sketch, show
(a) the direction of the electron flow in the
external circuit
Chapter 11 Cells and Batteries • MHR 533
Spontaneity of Reactions
You know that galvanic cells have positive standard cell potentials, and
that these cells use spontaneous chemical reactions to produce electricity.
You also know that electrolytic cells have negative standard cell potentials,
and that these cells use electricity to perform non-spontaneous chemical
reactions. Thus, you can use the sign of the standard cell potential to pre-
dict whether a reaction is spontaneous or not under standard conditions.
Sample Problem
Predicting Spontaneity
Problem
Predict whether each reaction is spontaneous or non-spontaneous under
standard conditions.
(a) Cd + Cu2+ → Cd2+ + Cu (b) I + 2Cl − → 2I − + Cl
(s) (aq) (aq) (s) 2(s) (aq) (aq) 2(g)
Solution
(a) The two half-reactions are as follows.
Oxidation (occurs at the anode): Cd → Cd2+ + 2e −
(s) (aq)
Reduction (occurs at the cathode): Cu2+ + 2e − → Cu
(aq) (s)
The relevant standard reduction potentials are:
Cu2+ + 2e − (cid:3)(cid:4) Cu E˚ = 0.342V
(aq) (s)
Cd2+ + 2e − (cid:3)(cid:4) Cd E˚ = −0.403V
(aq) (s)
E˚ = E˚ − E˚
cell cathode anode
= 0.342V − (−0.403V)
= 0.745V
The standard cell potential is positive, so the reaction is spontaneous
under standard conditions.
(b) The two half-reactions are as follows.
Oxidation (occurs at the anode): 2Cl − → Cl + 2e −
(aq) 2(g)
Reduction (occurs at the cathode): I + 2e − → 2I −
2(s) (aq)
The relevant standard reduction potentials are:
Cl + 2e − (cid:3)(cid:4) 2Cl − E˚ = 1.358V
2(g) (aq)
I + 2e − (cid:3)(cid:4) 2I − E˚ = 0.536V
2(s) (aq)
E˚ = E˚ − E˚
cell cathode anode
= 0.536V − 1.358V
= −0.822V
The standard cell potential is negative, so the reaction is
non-spontaneous under standard conditions.
Practice Problems
17. Look up the standard reduction potentials of the following
half-reactions. Predict whether acidified nitrate ions will oxidize
manganese(II) ions to manganese(IV) oxide under standard conditions.
MnO 2(s) + 4H + (aq) + 2e − → Mn2+ (aq) + 2H 2 O ((cid:2))
NO 3 − (aq) + 4H + (aq) + 3e − → NO (g) + 2H 2 O ((cid:2))
534 MHR • Unit 5 Electrochemistry
18. Predict whether each reaction is spontaneous or non-spontaneous
under standard conditions.
(a) 2Cr + 3Cl → 2Cr3+ + 6Cl −
(s) 2(g) (aq) (aq)
(b) Zn2+ + Fe → Zn + Fe2+
(aq) (s) (s) (aq)
(c) 5Ag (s) + MnO 4 − (aq) + 8H + (aq) → 5Ag + (aq) + Mn2+ (aq) + 4H 2 O ((cid:2))
19. Explain why an aqueous copper(I) compound disproportionates
to form copper metal and an aqueous copper(II) compound under
standard conditions. (You learned about disproportionation in
Chapter 10.)
20. Predict whether each reaction is spontaneous or non-spontaneous
under standard conditions in an acidic solution.
(a) H O → H + O
2 2(aq) 2(g) 2(g)
(b) 3H 2(g) + Cr 2 O 7 2− (aq) + 8H + (aq) → 2Cr3+ (aq) + 7H 2 O ((cid:2))
Rechargeable Batteries
In section 11.1, you learned about several primary (disposable)
batteries that contain galvanic cells. One of the most common secondary
(rechargeable) batteries is found in car engines. Most cars contain a
lead-acid battery, shown in Figure 11.18. When you turn the ignition,
a surge of electricity from the battery starts the motor.
When in use, a lead-acid battery partially discharges. In other words,
the cells in the battery operate as galvanic cells, and produce electricity.
The reaction in each cell proceeds spontaneously in one direction. To
recharge the battery, a generator driven by the car engine supplies
electricity to the battery. The external voltage of the generator reverses
the reaction in the cells. The reaction in each cell now proceeds non-
Figure 11.18 A typical car
spontaneously, and the cells operate as electrolytic cells. All secondary battery consists of six 2-V cells.
batteries, including the lead-acid battery, operate some of the time as The cells are connected in series
galvanic cells, and some of the time as electrolytic cells. to give a total potential of 12 V.
As the name suggests, the materials used in a lead-acid battery
include lead and an acid. Figure 11.19 shows that the electrodes in each
cell are constructed using lead grids. One electrode consists of powdered
lead packed into one grid. The other electrode consists of powdered
lead(IV) oxide packed into the other grid. The electrolyte solution is
fairly concentrated sulfuric acid, at about 4.5 mol/L.
(+)
(−)
Figure 11.19 Each cell of a
lead-acid battery is a single
cell connector compartment, with no porous
barrier or salt bridge. Fibreglass or
cell with electrolyte, wooden sheets are placed between
cell spacer Pb H SO the electrodes to prevent them
2 4(aq)
PbO from touching.
2
Chapter 11 Cells and Batteries • MHR 535
When the battery supplies electricity, the half-reactions and overall cell
reaction are as follows.
Oxidation (at the Pb anode): Pb + SO 2− → PbSO + 2e −
(s) 4 (aq) 4(s)
Reduction (at the PbO cathode):
2
PbO 2(s) + 4H + (aq) + SO 4 2− (aq) + 2e − → PbSO 4(s) + 2H 2 O ((cid:2))
Overall cell reaction:
Pb (s) + PbO 2(s) + 4H + (aq) + 2SO 4 2− (aq) → 2PbSO 4(s) + 2H 2 O ((cid:2))
You can see that the reaction consumes some of the lead in the anode,
some of the lead(IV) oxide in the cathode, and some of the sulfuric acid.
A precipitate of lead(II) sulfate forms.
When the battery is recharged, the half-reactions and the overall cell
reaction are reversed. In this reverse reaction, lead and lead(IV) oxide are
redeposited in their original locations, and sulfuric acid is re-formed.
Figure 11.20 Billions of Reduction (at the Pb cathode): PbSO + 2e − → Pb + SO 2−
4(s) (s) 4 (aq)
rechargeable nicad batteries
Oxidation (at the PbO anode):
2
a a r r e e p u r s o e d d u i c n e p d o e rt v a e b r l y e y d e e a v r. i c T e h s e y s uch PbSO 4(s) + 2H 2 O ((cid:2)) → PbO 2(s) + 4H + (aq) + SO 4 2− (aq) + 2e −
as cordless razors and cordless Overall cell reaction:
power tools. 2PbSO 4(s) + 2H 2 O ((cid:2)) → Pb (s) + PbO 2(s) + 4H + (aq) + 2SO 4 2− (aq)
In practice, this reversibility is not perfect. However, the battery can go
through many charge/discharge cycles before it eventually wears out.
Many types of rechargeable batteries are much more portable than a car
battery. For example, there is now a rechargeable version of the alkaline
battery. Another example, shown in Figure 11.20, is the rechargeable
cap
nickel-cadmium (nicad) battery. Figure 11.21 shows a nickel-cadmium cell,
vent ball
which has a potential of about 1.4 V. A typical nicad battery contains three
cells in series to produce a suitable voltage for electronic devices. When
cover
the cells in a nicad battery operate as galvanic cells, the half-reactions and
the overall cell reaction are as follows.
seal
Oxidation (at the Cd anode): Cd + 2OH − → Cd(OH) + 2e −
(s) (aq) 2(s)
core Reduction (at the NiO(OH) cathode):
NiO(OH) (s) + H 2 O ((cid:2)) + e − → Ni(OH) 2(s) + OH − (aq)
positive tab
Overall cell reaction:
KOH or Cd (s) + 2NiO(OH) (s) + 2H 2 O ((cid:2)) → Cd(OH) 2(s) + 2Ni(OH) 2(s)
NaOH Like many technological innovations, nickel-cadmium batteries carry risks
electrolyte
as well as benefits. After being discharged repeatedly, they eventually
wear out. In theory, worn-out nicad batteries should be recycled. In
NiO(OH) practice, however, many end up in garbage dumps. Over time, discarded
electrode
nicad batteries release toxic cadmium. The toxicity of this substance
pressed makes it hazardous to the environment, as cadmium can enter the food
powdered
chain. Long-term exposure to low levels of cadmium can have serious
cadmium
electrode medical effects on humans, such as high blood pressure and heart disease.
separators
insulating
washer
can Figure 11.21 A nicad cell has a cadmium electrode and
another electrode that contains nickel(III) oxyhydroxide, NiO(OH).
When the cell is discharging, cadmium is the anode. When the
cell is recharging, cadmium is the cathode. The electrolyte is a
base, sodium hydroxide or potassium hydroxide.
536 MHR • Unit 5 Electrochemistry
Section Summary
In this section, you learned about electrolytic cells, which convert
electrical energy into chemical energy. You compared the spontaneous
reactions in galvanic cells, which have positive cell potentials, with the
non-spontaneous reactions in electrolytic cells, which have negative cell
potentials. You then considered cells that act as both galvanic cells and
electrolytic cells in some common rechargeable batteries. These batteries
are an important application of electrochemistry. In the next two sections,
you will learn about many more electrochemical applications.
Section Review
1 I Predict the products of the electrolysis of a 1 mol/L aqueous
solution of copper(I) bromide.
2 I In this section, you learned that an external electrical supply
reverses the cell reaction in a Daniell cell so that the products are
zinc atoms and copper(II) ions.
(a) What are the predicted products of this electrolysis reaction?
(b) Explain the observed products.
3 I Predict whether each reaction is spontaneous or non-spontaneous
under standard conditions.
(a) 2FeI → 2Fe + 3I
3(aq) (s) 2(s)
(b) 2Ag + (aq) + H 2 SO 3(aq) + H 2 O ((cid:2)) → 2Ag (s) + SO 4 2− (aq) + 4H + (aq)
4 K/U Write the two half-reactions and the overall cell reaction for
the process that occurs when a nicad battery is being recharged.
5 K/U What external voltage is required to recharge a lead-acid
car battery?
6 K/U The equation for the overall reaction in an electrolytic cell
does not include any electrons. Why is an external source of electrons
needed for the reaction to proceed?
7 (a) I Predict whether aluminum will displace hydrogen from water.
(b) I Water boiling in an aluminum saucepan does not react with the
aluminum. Give possible reasons why.
8 MC Research the impact of lead pollution on the environment. Do
lead-acid batteries contribute significantly to lead pollution?
9 C Lithium batteries are increasingly common. The lithium anode
undergoes oxidation when the battery discharges. Various cathodes
and electrolytes are used to make lithium batteries with different
characteristics. Research lithium batteries. Prepare a report describing
the designs, cell reactions, and uses of lithium batteries. Include a
description of the advantages and disadvantages of these batteries.
Chapter 11 Cells and Batteries • MHR 537
11.4 Faraday’s Law
As mentioned earlier in this chapter, Michael Faraday (1791–1867) was
Section Preview/
Specific Expectations the leading pioneer of electrochemistry. One of Faraday’s major contribu-
tions was to connect the concepts of stoichiometry and electrochemistry.
In this section, you will
(cid:2) describethe relationship
between time, current, and
the amount of substance
produced or consumed in
an electrolytic process
(cid:2) solveproblems using
Faraday’s law
(cid:2) investigateFaraday’s law by
performing an electroplating
process in the laboratory
(cid:2) explainhow electrolytic
processes are used to
refine metals
(cid:2) researchand assesssome
environmental, health, and
safety issues involving
electrochemistry
(cid:2) communicateyour under-
standing of the following
Figure 11.22 A depiction of Faraday’s laboratory.
terms: quantity of electricity,
electric charge, Faraday’s
law, extraction, refining You know that a balanced equation represents relationships between
the quantities of reactants and products. For a reaction that takes place
in a cell, stoichiometric calculations can also include the quantity of
electricity produced or consumed. Stoichiometric calculations in electro-
chemistry make use of a familiar unit—the mole.
As a first step, you need information about measurements in
electricity. You know that the flow of electrons through an external circuit
is called the electric current. It is measured in a unit called the ampere
(symbol A), named after the French physicist André Ampère (1775–1836).
The quantity of electricity, also known as the electric charge, is the
product of the current flowing through a circuit and the time for which it
flows. The quantity of electricity is measured in a unit called the coulomb
(symbol C). This unit is named after another French physicist, Charles
Coulomb (1736–1806). The ampere and the coulomb are related, in that
one coulomb is the quantity of electricity that flows through a circuit in
one second if the current is one ampere. This relationship can be written
mathematically.
charge(incoulombs) = current(inamperes) × time(inseconds)
For example, suppose a current of 2.00 A flows for 5.00 min. You can use
this information to find the quantity of electricity, in coulombs.
5.00min = 300s
2.00A × 300s = 600C, or 6.00 × 102C
538 MHR • Unit 5 Electrochemistry
For stoichiometric calculations, you also need to know the electric charge
on a mole of electrons. This charge can be calculated by multiplying
the charge on one electron and the number of electrons in one mole
(Avogadro’s number). The charge on a mole of electrons is known as
one faraday (1 F), named after Michael Faraday.
Chargeononemoleofelectrons = 1.602 × 10 −19C × 6.022 × 1023e −
−
1e 1mol
= 9.647 × 104C/mol
A rounded value of 96 500 C/mol is often used in calculations. Note that
this rounded value has three significant digits.
The information you have just learned permits a very precise
control of electrolysis. For example, suppose you modify a Daniell cell
to operate as an electrolytic cell. You want to plate 0.1 mol of zinc onto
the zinc electrode. The coefficients in the half-reaction for the reduction
represent stoichiometric relationships. Figure 11.23 shows that two
moles of electrons are needed for each mole of zinc deposited. Therefore,
to deposit 0.1 mol of zinc, you need to use 0.2 mol of electrons.
−
0.1molZn × 2mole = 0.2mole −
1molZn
Zn2+ + 2e − → Zn
1 ion 2 electrons 1 atom
1 × 6.02 × 1023 ions 2 × 6.02 × 1023 electrons 1 × 6.02 × 1023 atoms
1 mol of ions 2 mol of electrons 1 mol of atoms
Figure 11.23 A balanced half-reaction shows relationships between the amounts of
reactants and products and the amount of electrons transferred.
In the next Sample Problem, you will learn to apply the relationship
between the amount of electrons and the amount of an electrolysis product.
Sample Problem
Calculating the Mass of an Electrolysis Product
Problem
Calculate the mass of aluminum produced by the electrolysis of molten
aluminum chloride, if a current of 500 mA passes for 1.50 h.
What Is Required?
You need to calculate the mass of aluminum produced.
What Is Given?
You know the name of the electrolyte, the current, and the time.
electrolyte: AlCl 3((cid:2))
current: 500 mA
time: 1.50 h
From the previous calculation, you know the charge on one mole
of electrons is 96 500 C/mol.
Continued ...
Chapter 11 Cells and Batteries • MHR 539
Continued ...
Plan Your Strategy
Step 1 Use the current and the time to find the quantity of electricity
used.
Step 2 From the quantity of electricity, find the amount of electrons
that passed through the circuit.
Step 3 Use the stoichiometry of the relevant half-reaction to relate
the amount of electrons to the amount of aluminum produced.
Step 4 Use the molar mass of aluminum to convert the amount of
aluminum to a mass.
Act on Your Strategy
Step 1 To calculate the quantity of electricity in coulombs, work in
amperes and seconds.
1000mA = 1A
500mA = 500mA × 1A
1000mA
= 0.500A
1.50h = 1.50h × 60min × 60s
1h 1min
= 5400s, or5.40 × 103s
Quantityofelectricity= 0.500A × 5400s
= 2700C, or2.70 × 103C
Step 2 Find the amount of electrons. One mole of electrons has a charge
of 96 500 C.
−
Amountofelectrons= 2700C × 1mole
96500C
= 0.0280mole −
Step 3 The half-reaction for the reduction of aluminum ions to aluminum
is Al3+ + 3e − → Al.
Amountofaluminumformed = 0.0280mole − × 1molAl
−
3mole
= 0.00933molAl
Step 4 Convert the amount of aluminum to a mass.
27.0gAl
MassofAlformed = 0.00933molAl ×
1molAl
= 0.252g
Check Your Solution
The answer is expressed in units of mass. To check your answer, use
estimation. If the current were 1 A, then 1 mol of electrons would pass
in 96 500 s. In this example, the current is less than 1 A, and the time is
much less than 96 500 s. Therefore, much less than 1 mol of electrons
would be used, and much less than 1 mol (27 g) of aluminum would
be formed.
540 MHR • Unit 5 Electrochemistry
Practice Problems
21. Calculate the mass of zinc plated onto the cathode of an electrolytic
cell by a current of 750 mA in 3.25 h.
22. How many minutes does it take to plate 0.925 g of silver onto the
cathode of an electrolytic cell using a current of 1.55 A?
23. The nickel anode in an electrolytic cell decreases in mass by 1.20 g
in 35.5 min. The oxidation half-reaction converts nickel atoms to
nickel(II) ions. What is the constant current?
24. The following two half-reactions take place in an electrolytic cell
with an iron anode and a chromium cathode.
Oxidation: Fe → Fe2+ + 2e −
(s) (aq)
Reduction: Cr3+ + 3e − → Cr
(aq) (s)
During the process, the mass of the iron anode decreases by 1.75 g.
(a) Find the change in mass of the chromium cathode.
(b) Explain why you do not need to know the electric current or the
time to complete part (a).
The preceding Sample Problem gave an example of the mathematical use
of Faraday’s law. Faraday’s law states that the amount of a substance
produced or consumed in an electrolysis reaction is directly proportional
to the quantity of electricity that flows through the circuit.
To illustrate this statement, think about changing the quantity of
electricity used in the Sample Problem. Suppose this quantity were
doubled by using the same current, 500 mA, for twice the time, 3 h.
As a result, the amount of electrons passing into the cell would also be
doubled.
500mA = 0.500A
3h = 2 × 1.5h
= 2 × 5400s
Quantityofelectricity = 0.500A × (2 × 5400s)
= 2 × 2700C
= 5400C, or5.40 × 103C
−
Amountofelectrons = 5400C × 1mole
96500C
= 0.0560mole −
Then, as you can see from the relevant half-reaction, the mass of
aluminum produced would be doubled. The mass of aluminum produced
is clearly proportional to the quantity of electricity used.
In Investigation 11-C, you will apply Faraday’s law to an electrolytic
cell that you construct.
Chapter 11 Cells and Batteries • MHR 541
S K I L L F O C U S
Predicting
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
Electroplating Communicating results
You have learned that electroplating is a Safety Precautions
process in which a metal is deposited, or plated,
onto the cathode of an electrolytic cell. In this
investigation, you will build an electrolytic cell • Nitric acid is corrosive. Also, note that the
and electrolyze a copper(II) sulfate solution to CuSO 4 solution contains sulfuric acid and
plate copper onto the cathode. You will use hydrochloric acid. Wash any spills on your
Faraday’s law to relate the mass of metal skin with plenty of cold water. Inform your
deposited to the quantity of electricity used. teacher immediately.
• Avoid touching the parts of the electrodes
Question that have been washed with nitric acid.
Does the measured mass of copper plated onto • Acetone is flammable. Use acetone in the
the cathode of an electrolytic cell agree with the fume hood.
mass calculated from Faraday’s law? • Make sure your hands and your lab bench are
dry before handling any electrical equipment.
Prediction
Procedure
Predict whether the measured mass of copper
plated onto the cathode of an electrolytic cell 1. Clean off any tarnish on the copper strip
will be greater than, equal to, or less than the by sanding it gently. Dip the bottom of
mass calculated using Faraday’s law. the copper strip in the nitric acid for a few
seconds, and then rinse off the strip carefully
Materials with deionized water. Avoid touching the
section that has been cleaned by the acid.
150 mL 1.0 mol/L HNO in a 250 mL beaker
3
120 mL acidified 0.50 mol/L CuSO solution 2. Place the copper strip in the beaker, with
4
(with 5 mL of 6 mol/L H SO and 3 mL of the clean part of the strip at the bottom. Bend
2 4
0.1 mol/L HCl added) the top of the strip over the rim of the beaker
drying oven, or acetone in a wash bottle so that the copper strip is secured in a vertical
3 cm × 12 cm × 1 mm Cu strip position. This copper strip will serve as
50 cm 16-gauge bare solid copper wire the anode.
250 mL beaker
3. Wrap the copper wire around a pencil to
adjustable D.C. power supply with ammeter
make a closely spaced coil. Leave 10 cm of
deionized water in a wash bottle
the wire unwrapped. Measure and record the
fine sandpaper
mass of the wire. Dip the coil in the nitric
2 electrical leads with alligator clips
acid, and rinse the coil with water. Use the
electronic balance
10 cm of uncoiled wire to secure the coil on
the opposite side of the beaker from the
anode, as shown in the diagram. This copper
wire will serve as the cathode.
542 MHR • Unit 5 Electrochemistry
Analysis
1. Write a balanced equation for the half-reaction
that occurs at the cathode.
2. Use the measured current and the time for
which the current passed to calculate the
(−) (+)
quantity of electricity used.
3. Use your answers to questions 1 and 2 to
calculate the mass of copper plated onto
the cathode.
4. Compare the calculated mass from question 3
D.C. with the measured increase in mass of the
power source
cathode. Give possible reasons for any
difference between the two values.
copper strip copper wire
(anode) (cathode) Conclusion
5. How did the mass of copper electroplated
acidified onto the cathode of the electrolytic cell
CuSO
4(aq) compare with the mass calculated using
Faraday’s law? Compare your answer with
your prediction from the beginning of this
4. Pour 120 mL of the acidified CuSO 4 solution investigation.
into the beaker. Attach the lead from the
negative terminal of the power supply to
Applications
the cathode. Attach the positive terminal
6. Suppose you repeated this investigation using
to the anode.
iron electrodes, and 0.5 mol/L iron(II) sulfate
5. Turn on the power supply and set the current solution as the electrolyte. If you used the
to 1 A. Maintain this current for 20 min by
same current for the same time, would you
adjusting the variable current knob as needed.
expect the increase in mass of the cathode
6. After 20 min, turn off the power. Remove to be greater than, less than, or equal to the
the cathode and rinse it very gently with increase in mass that you measured? Explain
deionized water. Place the cathode in a your answer.
drying oven for 20 min. Alternatively, rinse
7. Suppose you repeated the investigation
the cathode gently with acetone, and let the
with the copper(II) sulfate solution, but you
acetone evaporate in the fume hood for 5 min.
passed the current for only half as long as
7. Measure and record the new mass of the before. How would the masses of copper
cathode. plated onto the cathode compare in the two
investigations? Explain your answer.
8. Dispose of all materials as instructed by
your teacher. 8. Could you build a galvanic cell without
changing the electrodes or the electrolyte
solution you used in this investigation?
Explain your answer.
Chapter 11 Cells and Batteries • MHR 543
Industrial Extraction and Refining of Metals
Many metals, and their alloys, are widely used in modern society. The
enormous variety of metal objects ranges from large vehicles, such as cars
and aircraft, to small items, such as the pop cans shown in Figure 11.24.
Extraction is a process by which a metal is obtained from an ore.
Some metals are extracted in electrolytic cells. In section 11.3, you saw
the extraction of sodium from molten sodium chloride in a Downs cell.
Other reactive metals, including lithium, beryllium, magnesium, calcium,
and radium, are also extracted industrially by the electrolysis of their
molten chlorides.
One of the most important electrolytic processes is the extraction
of aluminum from an ore called bauxite. This ore is mainly composed
of hydrated aluminum oxide, Al
2
O 3•xH
2
O. (The “x” in the formula
indicates that the number of water molecules per formula unit is variable.)
Figure 11.24 The alloy used In industry, the scale of production of metals is huge. The electrolytic
to make pop cans contains about
production of aluminum is over two million tonnes per year in Canada
97% aluminum, by mass. The other
alone. As you know from Faraday’s law, the amount of a metal produced
elements in the alloy are
by electrolysis is directly proportional to the quantity of electricity used.
magnesium, manganese, iron,
silicon, and copper. Therefore, the industrial extraction of aluminum and other metals by
electrolysis requires vast quantities of electricity. The availability and
cost of electricity greatly influence the location of industrial plants.
In industry, the process of purifying a material is known as refining.
After the extraction stage, some metals are refined in electrolytic cells.
For example, copper is about 99% pure after extraction. This copper
is pure enough for some uses, such as the manufacture of copper pipes
for plumbing. However, the copper is not pure enough for one of its
principal uses, electrical wiring. Therefore, some of the impure copper is
refined electrolytically, as shown in Figure 11.25. Nickel can be refined
electrolytically in a similar way. You refined copper on a small scale in
Investigation 11-C.
Figure 11.25 This electrolytic cell is used to refine copper. The anode is impure copper,
and the cathode is pure copper. During electrolysis, the impure copper anode dissolves, and
pure copper is plated onto the cathode. The resulting cathode is 99.99% pure metal. Most
impurities that were present in the anode either remain in solution or fall to the bottom of
the cell as a sludge.
544 MHR • Unit 5 Electrochemistry
Section Summary
In this section, you learned how stoichiometry relates the quantities
of reactants and products to the quantity of electricity consumed in an
electrolytic cell. You used Faraday’s law to solve problems relating to
electrolysis. You also learned that the extraction and refining of some
metals are carried out electrolytically. In the next section, you will see
several other important applications of electrochemistry to modern society.
Section Review
1 I In Section 10.3, you learned about a redox reaction used in the Unit Investigation Prep
production of compact discs. In another step of this production
Electroplating is a complex
process, nickel is electroplated onto the silver-coated master disc.
process. If you wish to work
The nickel layer is removed and used to make pressings of the CD on your Unit 5 Investigation
onto plastic discs. The plastic pressings are then coated with now, do some research on
aluminum to make the finished CDs. electroplating. What are the
most important factors in
(a) When nickel is plated onto the silver master disc, is the master
this process? How can you
disc the anode or the cathode of the cell? Explain.
improve the quality of the
(b) Calculate the quantity of electricity needed to plate each gram of final product?
nickel onto the master disc. Assume that the plating process
involves the reduction of nickel(II) ions.
2 I Most industrial reactions take place on a much larger scale than
reactions in a laboratory or classroom. The voltage used in a Downs
cell for the industrial electrolysis of molten sodium chloride is not
very high, about 7 V to 8 V. However, the current used is 25 000 A
to 40 000 A. Assuming a current of 3.0 × 104 A, determine the mass
of sodium and the mass of chlorine made in 24 h in one Downs cell.
Express your answers in kilograms.
3 I An industrial cell that purifies copper by electrolysis operates at
2.00 × 102 A. Calculate the mass, in tonnes, of pure copper produced
if the cell is supplied with raw materials whenever necessary, and if
it works continuously for a year that is not a leap year.
4 MC Canada is a major producer of aluminum by the electrolysis of
bauxite. However, there are no bauxite mines in Canada, and all the
ore must be imported. Explain why aluminum is produced in Canada.
5 MC Research the extraction of aluminum by the electrolysis of
bauxite. Write a report on your findings. Include a description of the
electrolytic cell and how it operates. Indicate where aluminum is
produced in Canada. Also include any environmental concerns
associated with aluminum production by electrolysis.
6 MC Nickel and copper are both very important to the Ontario
economy. Before they can be refined by electrolysis, they must be
extracted from their ores. Both metals can be extracted from a sulfide
ore, NiS or Cu S. The sulfide is roasted to form an oxide, and then the
2
oxide is reduced to the metal. Research the extraction processes for
both nickel and copper, and write balanced equations for the redox
reactions involved. One product of each extraction process is sulfur
dioxide. Research the environmental effects of this compound.
Describe any steps taken to decrease these effects.
Chapter 11 Cells and Batteries • MHR 545
11.5 Issues Involving Electrochemistry
You have probably seen many examples of rusty objects, such as the one
Section Preview/
Specific Expectations in Figure 11.26. However, you may not realize that rusting costs many
billions of dollars per year in prevention, maintenance, and replacement
In this section, you will
costs. You will now learn more about rusting and about other issues
(cid:2) explaincorrosion as an
involving electrochemistry.
electrochemical process,
and describesome
techniques used to
prevent corrosion
(cid:2) evaluatethe environmental
and social impact of some
common cells, including the
hydrogen fuel cell in electric
cars
(cid:2) explainhow electrolytic
processes are used in the
industrial production of
chlorine, and how this
element is used in the
purification of water
(cid:2) researchand assesssome
environmental, health, and
Figure 11.26 Rust is a common sight on iron objects.
safety issues connected to
electrochemistry
Corrosion
(cid:2) communicateyour under-
standing of the following Rusting is an example of corrosion, which is a spontaneous redox
terms: corrosion, galvanizing, reaction of materials with substances in their environment. Figure 11.27
sacrificial anode,cathodic
shows an example of the hazards that result from corrosion.
protection, fuel cell,
Many metals are fairly easily oxidized. The atmosphere contains a
chlor-alkali process
powerful oxidizing agent: oxygen. Because metals are constantly in
contact with oxygen, they are vulnerable to corrosion. In fact, the term
“corrosion” is sometimes defined as the oxidation of metals exposed
to the environment. In North America, about 20% to 25% of iron and
steel production is used to replace objects that have been damaged or
destroyed by corrosion. However, not all corrosion is harmful. For
example, the green layer formed by the corrosion of a copper roof is
considered attractive by many people.
Figure 11.27 On April 28, 1988,
this Aloha Airlines aircraft was
flying at an altitude of 7300 m when
a large part of the upper fuselage
ripped off. This accident was
caused by undetected corrosion
damage. The pilot showed tremen-
dous skill in landing the plane.
546 MHR • Unit 5 Electrochemistry
Rust is a hydrated iron(III) oxide, Fe
2
O 3•xH
2
O. The electrochemical
formation of rust occurs in small galvanic cells on the surface of a piece
of iron, as shown in Figure 11.28. In each small cell, iron acts as the
anode. The cathode is inert, and may be an impurity that exists in the iron
or is deposited onto it. For example, the cathode could be a piece of soot
that has been deposited onto the iron surface from the air.
Water, in the form of rain, is needed for rusting to occur. Carbon
dioxide in the air dissolves in water to form carbonic acid, H CO .
2 3(aq)
This weak acid partially dissociates into ions. Thus, the carbonic acid is
an electrolyte for the corrosion process. Other electrolytes, such as road
salt, may also be involved. The circuit is completed by the iron itself,
which conducts electrons from the anode to the cathode.
air O
2
water rust
Fe2+
iron
e−
anode cathode
Figure 11.28 The rusting of iron involves the reaction of iron, oxygen, and water in a
naturally occurring galvanic cell on the exposed surface of the metal. There may be many
of these small cells on the surface of the same piece of iron.
The rusting process is complex, and the equations may be written in
various ways. A simplified description of the half-reactions and the
overall cell reaction is given here.
Oxidation half-reaction (occurs at the anode):
Fe → Fe2+ + 2e −
(s) (aq)
Reduction half-reaction (occurs at the cathode):
O 2(g) + 2H 2 O ((cid:2)) + 4e − → 4OH − (aq)
Multiply the oxidation half-reaction by two and add the half-reactions
to obtain the overall cell reaction.
2Fe (s) + O 2(g) + 2H 2 O ((cid:2)) → 2Fe2+ (aq) + 4OH − (aq)
There is no barrier in the cell, so nothing stops the dissolved
Fe2+
and
−
OH ions from mixing. The iron(II) ions produced at the anode and the
hydroxide ions produced at the cathode react to form a precipitate of
iron(II) hydroxide, Fe(OH) . Therefore, the overall cell reaction could
2
be written as follows.
2Fe (s) + O 2(g) + 2H 2 O ((cid:2)) → 2Fe(OH) 2(s)
The iron(II) hydroxide undergoes further oxidation by reaction with the
oxygen in the air to form iron(III) hydroxide.
4Fe(OH) 2(s) + O 2(g) + 2H 2 O ((cid:2)) → 4Fe(OH) 3(s)
Chapter 11 Cells and Batteries • MHR 547
Iron(III) hydroxide readily breaks down to form hydrated iron(III) oxide,
Fe
2
O 3•xH
2
O, more commonly known as rust. As noted earlier, the “x”
signifies a variable number of water molecules per formula unit.
2Fe(OH)
3(s)
→ Fe
2
O 3•3H
2
O
(s)
Both Fe(OH)
3
and Fe
2
O 3•xH
2
O are reddish-brown, or “rust coloured.”
A rust deposit may contain a mixture of these compounds.
Fortunately, not all metals corrode to the same extent as iron. Many
metals do corrode in air to form a surface coating of metal oxide.
However, in many cases, the oxide layer adheres, or sticks firmly, to the
metal surface. This layer protects the metal from further corrosion. For
example, aluminum, chromium, and magnesium are readily oxidized in
air to form their oxides, Al O , Cr O , and MgO. Unless the oxide layer is
2 3 2 3
broken by a cut or a scratch, the layer prevents further corrosion. In con-
trast, rust easily flakes off from the surface of an iron object and provides
little protection against further corrosion.
Corrosion Prevention
Corrosion, and especially the corrosion of iron, can be very destructive.
For this reason, a great deal of effort goes into corrosion prevention. The
simplest method of preventing corrosion is to paint an iron object. The
protective coating of paint prevents air and water from reaching the metal
surface. Other effective protective layers include grease, oil, plastic, or a
metal that is more resistant to corrosion than iron. For example, a layer
of chromium protects bumpers and metal trim on cars. An enamel coating
is often used to protect metal plates, pots, and pans. Enamel is a shiny,
hard, and very unreactive type of glass that can be melted onto a metal
surface. A protective layer is effective as long as it completely covers the
iron object. If a hole or scratch breaks the layer, the metal underneath
can corrode.
It is also possible to protect iron against corrosion by forming an alloy
with a different metal. Stainless steel is an alloy of iron that contains at
least 10% chromium, by mass, in addition to small quantities of carbon
and occasionally metals such as nickel. Stainless steel is much more
resistant to corrosion than pure iron. Therefore, stainless steel is often
used for cutlery, taps, and various other applications where rust-resistance
is important. However, chromium is much more expensive than iron. As
a result, stainless steel is too expensive for use in large-scale applications,
such as building bridges.
Galvanizingis a process in which iron is covered with a protective
layer of zinc. Galvanized iron is often used to make metal buckets and
chain-link fences. Galvanizing protects iron in two ways. First, the zinc
acts as a protective layer. If this layer is broken, the iron is exposed to
air and water. When this happens, however, the iron is still protected.
Zinc is more easily oxidized than iron. Therefore, zinc, not iron, becomes
the anode in the galvanic cell. The zinc metal is oxidized to zinc ions. In
this situation, zinc is known as a sacrificial anode, because it is destroyed
(sacrificed) to protect the iron. Iron acts as the cathode when zinc is pres-
ent. Thus, iron does not undergo oxidation until all the zinc has reacted.
548 MHR • Unit 5 Electrochemistry
Cathodic protection is another method of preventing rusting, as
shown in Figure 11.29. As in galvanizing, a more reactive metal is
attached to the iron object. This reactive metal acts as a sacrificial anode,
and the iron becomes the cathode of a galvanic cell. Unlike galvanizing,
the metal used in cathodic protection does not completely cover the iron.
Because the sacrificial anode is slowly destroyed by oxidation, it must be
replaced periodically.
If iron is covered with a protective layer of a metal that is less reactive
than iron, there can be unfortunate results. A “tin” can is actually a steel
can coated with a thin layer of tin. While the tin layer remains intact, it
provides effective protection against rusting. If the tin layer is broken or
scratched, however, the iron in the steel corrodes faster in contact with
the tin than the iron would on its own. Since tin is less reactive than
iron, tin acts as a cathode in each galvanic cell on the surface of the can.
Therefore, the tin provides a large area of available cathodes for the small
Figure 11.29 Magnesium, zinc,
galvanic cells involved in the rusting process. Iron acts as the anode of
or aluminum blocks are attached to
each cell, which is its normal role when rusting. ships’ hulls, oil and gas pipelines,
Sometimes, the rusting of iron is promoted accidentally. For example, underground iron pipes, and
by connecting an iron pipe to a copper pipe in a plumbing system, an gasoline storage tanks. These
inexperienced plumber could accidentally speed up the corrosion of the reactive metals provide cathodic
protection by acting as a sacrificial
iron pipe. Copper is less reactive than iron. Therefore, copper acts as the
anode.
cathode and iron as the anode in numerous small galvanic cells at the
intersection of the two pipes.
Build on your understanding of corrosion by completing the following
practice problems.
Practice Problems
25.(a) Use the two half-reactions for the rusting process, and a table
of standard reduction potentials. Determine the standard cell
potential for this reaction.
(b) Do you think that your calculated value is the actual cell potential
for each of the small galvanic cells on the surface of a rusting iron
object? Explain.
26. Explain why aluminum provides cathodic protection to an iron
object.
27. In the year 2000, Transport Canada reported that thousands of cars
sold in the Atlantic Provinces between 1989 and 1999 had corroded
engine cradle mounts. Failure of these mounts can cause the steering
shaft to separate from the car. The manufacturer recalled the cars
so that repairs could be made, where necessary. The same cars
were sold across the country. Why do you think that the corrosion
problems showed up in the Atlantic Provinces?
28.(a) Use a table of standard reduction potentials to determine whether
elemental oxygen, O , is a better oxidizing agent under acidic
2(g)
conditions or basic conditions.
(b) From your answer to part (a), do you think that acid rain promotes
or helps prevent the rusting of iron?
Chapter 11 Cells and Batteries • MHR 549
Automobile Engines
The internal combustion engine found in most automobiles uses
gasoline as a fuel. Unfortunately, this type of engine produces pollutants,
such as carbon dioxide (CO ), nitrogen oxides (NO ), and volatile
2 x
organic compounds (VOCs). These pollutants contribute to health and
environmental problems, such as smog and the greenhouse effect. In
addition, the internal combustion engine is very inefficient. It converts
only about 25% of the chemical energy of the fuel into the kinetic
energy of the car. Electric cars, such as those shown in Figure 11.30,
may provide a more efficient and less harmful alternative.
Figure 11.30 Many electric cars
are currently under development.
In fact, the idea of electric cars is
not new. In the early days of the
automobile, electric cars were more
common than gasoline-powered
cars. The production of electric cars
peaked in 1912, but then completely
stopped in the 1930s.
Manufacturers and researchers have attempted to power
electric cars with rechargeable batteries, such as modified lead-acid
and nickel-cadmium batteries. However, rechargeable batteries run
down fairly quickly. The distance driven before recharging a battery
may be 250 km or less. The battery must then be recharged from an
external electrical source. Recharging the lead-acid battery of an electric
car takes several hours. Cars based on a version of the nickel-cadmium
battery can be recharged in only fifteen minutes. However, recharging
the batteries of an electric car is still inconvenient.
A new type of power supply for electric cars eliminates the need for
recharging. A fuel cellis a battery that produces electricity while reactants
are supplied continuously from an external source. Because reactants
continuously flow into the cell, a fuel cell is also known as a flow battery.
Unlike the fuel supply of a more conventional battery, the fuel supply in a
fuel cell is unlimited. As in the combustion of gasoline in a conventional
engine, the overall reaction in a fuel cell is the oxidation of a fuel by oxygen.
The space shuttle uses a fuel cell as a source of energy. This cell
depends on the oxidation of hydrogen by oxygen to form water. The
fuel cell operates under basic conditions, so it is sometimes referred to
as an alkaline fuel cell. Figure 11.31, on the next page, shows the design
of the cell. The half-reactions and the overall reaction are as follows.
Reduction (occurs at the cathode): O 2(g) + 2H 2 O ((cid:2)) + 4e − → 4OH − (aq)
Oxidation (occurs at the anode): H 2(g) + 2OH − (aq) → 2H 2 O ((cid:2)) + 2e −
Multiply the oxidation half-reaction by 2, add the two half-reactions, and
simplify to obtain the overall cell reaction.
2H 2(g) + O 2(g) → 2H 2 O ((cid:2))
Notice that the overall equation is the same as the equation for the
combustion of hydrogen. The combustion of hydrogen is an exothermic
reaction. In the fuel cell, this reaction produces energy in the form of
electricity, rather than heat.
550 MHR • Unit 5 Electrochemistry
e− e−
anode cathode
H O
2 2
inert carbon electrode inert carbon electrode
containing Ni containing Ni and NiO
hot KOH solution
Figure 11.31 In an alkaline fuel cell, the half-reactions do not include solid conductors of
electrons. Therefore, the cell has two inert electrodes.
The hydrogen fuel cell produces water vapour, which does not contribute
to smog formation or to the greenhouse effect. This product makes the
hydrogen fuel cell an attractive energy source for cars. Also, the hydrogen
fuel cell is much more efficient than the internal combustion engine. A
hydrogen fuel cell converts about 80% of the chemical energy of the fuel
into the kinetic energy of the car.
There is a possible problem with the hydrogen fuel cell. The cell
requires hydrogen fuel. Unfortunately, uncombined hydrogen is not found
naturally on Earth. Most hydrogen is produced from hydrocarbon fuels,
such as petroleum or methane. These manufacturing processes may
contribute significantly to pollution problems. However, hydrogen can
also be produced by the electrolysis of water. If a source such as solar
energy or hydroelectricity is used to power the electrolysis, the overall
quantity of pollution is low.
The following practice problems will allow you to test your
understanding of fuel cells.
Practice Problems
29. Calculate E˚ for a hydrogen fuel cell.
cell
30. In one type of fuel cell, methane is oxidized by oxygen to form
carbon dioxide and water.
(a) Write the equation for the overall cell reaction.
(b) Write the two half-reactions, assuming acidic conditions.
31. Reactions that occur in fuel cells can be thought of as being
“flameless combustion reactions.” Explain why.
32. If a hydrogen fuel cell produces an electric current of 0.600 A for
120 min, what mass of hydrogen is consumed by the cell?
Chapter 11 Cells and Batteries • MHR 551
Canadians in Chemistry
Dr. Viola Birss Magnesium alloys are very lightweight, and are
being used in the aerospace industry. Because they
are very reactive, these alloys need to be protected
from corrosion. Dr. Birss holds a patent on a new
approach to the electrochemical formation of protec-
tive oxide films on magnesium alloys. Dr. Birss also
works on developing new catalysts for fuel cells,
and studies the factors that lead to the breakdown
of fuel cells.
After finishing an undergraduate degree at the
University of Calgary, Dr. Birss went on to complete
her doctoral degree as a Commonwealth Scholar at
the University of Auckland in New Zealand. During
her postdoctoral studies at the University of Ottawa,
she worked with Dr. Brian Conway, a famous
Canadian electrochemist. Dr. Conway’s work in
electrochemistry has led to progress in a range of
As a science student, Viola Birss decided to focus electrochemical devices including fuel cells,
on chemistry. “I have always had a concern for advanced batteries, and electrolytic cells.
the environment,” she says. “I am particularly Dr. Birss takes pride in her team of undergradu-
interested in identifying new, non-polluting ways ate, graduate, and post-doctoral students. She works
of converting, storing, and using energy.” Dr. Birss’s hard to provide a creative and inspiring environment
interest in non-polluting energy narrowed her field for them. Together, they go on wilderness hiking
of interest to electrochemistry. and cross country ski trips. In addition to creating
Today, Dr. Birss is a chemistry professor at the a sense of community within her team, Birss feels
University of Calgary. Her research focuses on that sports and nature help to recharge her internal
developing films to coat metal surfaces. Among “battery.” Dr. Birss comments, “These activities
other uses, these films can serve as protective seem to provide me with mental and physical rest,
barriers against corrosion, and as catalysts in so that my creativity and energy are catalyzed.”
fuel cells.
Water Treatment and the Chlor-Alkali Process
In many countries, water is not safe to drink. Untreated water is
sometimes polluted with toxic chemicals. It may also carry numerous
water-borne diseases, including typhoid fever, cholera, and dysentery.
In Canada, the water that comes through your tap has been through an
elaborate purification process. This process is designed to remove solid
particles and toxic chemicals, and to reduce the number of bacteria
to safe levels. Adding chlorine to water is the most common way to
destroy bacteria.
You have already seen that chlorine gas can be made by the
electrolysis of molten sodium chloride. In industry, some chlorine is
produced in this way using the Downs cell described earlier. However,
more chlorine is produced in Canada using a different method, called
the chlor-alkali process. In this process, brine is electrolyzed in a cell
like the one shown in Figure 11.32. Brine is a saturated solution of
sodium chloride.
552 MHR • Unit 5 Electrochemistry
battery
e− e−
asbestos
diaphragm
inert anode inert cathode
brine
NaOH solution
Figure 11.32 The chlor-alkali cell in this diagram electrolyzes an aqueous solution of
sodium chloride to produce chlorine gas, hydrogen gas, and aqueous sodium hydroxide.
The asbestos diaphragm stops the chlorine gas produced at the anode from mixing with the
hydrogen gas produced at the cathode. Sodium hydroxide solution is removed from the cell
periodically, and fresh brine is added to the cell.
The half-reactions and the overall cell reaction in the chlor-alkali process
are as follows.
Oxidation: 2Cl − → Cl + 2e −
(aq) 2(g)
Reduction: 2H 2 O ((cid:2)) + 2e − → H 2(g) + 2OH − (aq)
Overall: 2Cl − (aq) + 2H 2 O ((cid:2)) → Cl 2(g) + H 2(g) + 2OH − (aq)
Note that the sodium ion is a spectator ion, and does not take part in this
−
reaction. However, it combines with OH to produce sodium hydroxide,
as shown by the balanced chemical equation below.
2NaCl (aq) + 2H 2 O ((cid:2)) → Cl 2(g) + H 2(g) + 2NaOH (aq)
The products of the chlor-alkali process are all useful. Sodium hydroxide
is used to make soaps and detergents. It is widely used as a base in many
other industrial chemical reactions, as well. The hydrogen produced by
the chlor-alkali process is used as a fuel. Chlorine has many uses besides
water treatment. For example, chlorine is used as a bleach in the pulp and
paper industry. Chlorine is also used in the manufacture of chlorinated
organic compounds, such as the common plastic polyvinyl chloride (PVC).
The chlorination of water is usually carried out by adding chlorine
gas, sodium hypochlorite, or calcium hypochlorite to the water in low
concentrations. The active antibacterial agent in each case is hypochlorous
acid, HClO . For example, when chlorine gas is added to water,
(aq)
hypochlorous acid is formed by the following reaction.
Cl 2(g) + H 2 O ((cid:2)) → HClO (aq) + HCl (aq)
Some people object to the chlorination of water, and prefer to drink
bottled spring water. There is controversy over the level of risk associated
with chlorination, and over the possible benefits of spring water. For
example, hypochlorous acid reacts with traces of organic materials in
the water supply. These reactions can produce toxic substances, such as
chloroform. Supporters of chlorination believe that these substances are
present at very low, safe levels, but opponents of chlorination disagree.
Complete the following practice problems to help you decide on your
own opinion of chlorination.
Chapter 11 Cells and Batteries • MHR 553
Practice Problems
33. Show that the reaction of chlorine gas with water is a
disproportionation reaction.
34. Would you predict the products of the chlor-alkali process to be
hydrogen and chlorine? Explain.
35. Research and assess the most recent information you can find on
the health and safety aspects of the chlorination of water. Are you
in favour of chlorination, or opposed to it? Explain your answer.
36. Some municipalities use ozone gas rather than chlorine to kill
bacteria in water. Research the advantages and disadvantages of
using ozone in place of chlorine.
Electronic Learning Partner
Section Summary
Go to the Chemistry 12
In this section, you learned about some important electrochemical
Electronic Learning Partner
for more information about processes. You had the opportunity to weigh some positive and negative
aspects of material covered effects of electrochemical technologies. The questions that follow in the
in this section of the chapter. section review and chapter review will encourage you to think further
about the science of electrochemistry, and about its impact on society.
Section Review
1 MC Why does the use of road salt cause cars to rust faster than they
otherwise would?
2 MC Aluminum is a more reactive metal than any of the metals
present in steel. However, discarded steel cans disintegrate much
more quickly than discarded aluminum cans when both are left open
to the environment in the same location. Give an explanation.
3 K/U Explain why zinc acts as a sacrificial anode in contact with iron.
4 (a) C Identify two metals that do not corrode easily in the presence
of oxygen and water. Explain why they do not corrode.
(b) C How are these metals useful? How do the uses of these metals
depend on their resistance to corrosion?
5 I A silver utensil is said to tarnish when its surface corrodes to
form a brown or black layer of silver sulfide. Research and describe
a chemical procedure that can be used to remove this layer. Write
balanced half-reactions and a chemical equation for the process.
6 I In a chlor-alkali cell, the current is very high. A typical current
would be about 100 000 A. Calculate the mass of sodium hydroxide,
in kilograms, that a cell using this current can produce in one minute.
7 MC Research the advances made in the development of fuel cells
since this book was written. Describe how any new types of fuel cells
operate. Evaluate their advantages and disadvantages, as compared to
the internal combustion engine and other fuel cells.
554 MHR • Unit 5 Electrochemistry
Review
Reflecting on Chapter 11 Knowledge/Understanding
Summarize this chapter in the format of your 1. Explain the function of the following parts of
choice. Here are a few ideas to use as guidelines: an electrolytic cell.
• Represent one example of a galvanic cell, (a) electrodes (c) external voltage
and one example of an electrolytic cell, (b) electrolyte
using chemical equations, half-reactions, 2. In a galvanic cell, one half-cell has a cadmium
and diagrams. electrode in a 1 mol/L solution of cadmium
• Calculate a standard cell potential using a nitrate. The other half-cell has a magnesium
table of standard reduction potentials. electrode in a 1 mol/L solution of magnesium
• Compare primary and secondary batteries. nitrate. Write the shorthand representation.
• Predict the products of the electrolysis of
3. Write the oxidation half-reaction, the reduction
molten salts and aqueous solutions.
half-reaction, and the overall cell reaction for
• Perform a sample stoichiometric calculation
the following galvanic cell.
involving the quantity of electricity used in | | − + || − |
Pt NO NO , H I I , Pt
(g) 3 (aq) (aq) (aq) 2(s)
electrolytic processes.
• Describe some electrolytic processes involved 4. What is the importance of the hydrogen
electrode?
in extracting and refining metals.
• Describe the process of corrosion. Explain some 5. Lithium, sodium, beryllium, magnesium,
methods used to prevent it. calcium, and radium are all made industrially
• Describe the design of fuel cells, and their by the electrolysis of their molten chlorides.
potential use in automobiles. These salts are all soluble in water, but aqueous
• Describe the industrial production of chlorine, solutions are not used for the electrolytic
and its use in the purification of water. process. Explain why.
• Give some examples of how electrochemistry 6. Use the following two half-reactions to
affects the environment, human health, and write balanced net ionic equations for one
safety. spontaneous reaction and one non-spontaneous
reaction. State the standard cell potential for
Reviewing Key Terms
each reaction.
For each of the following terms, write a sentence N 2 O (g) + 2H + (aq) + 2e − (cid:3)(cid:4) N 2(g) + H 2 O ((cid:2)) E˚= 1.770V
that shows your understanding of its meaning. CuI + e − (cid:3)(cid:4) Cu + I − E˚= −0.185V
(s) (s) (aq)
electric current electrochemistry
7. Identify the oxidizing agent and the reducing
galvanic cell voltaic cell
agent in a lead-acid battery that is
external circuit electrodes
(a) discharging (b) recharging
electrolytes anode
8. Rank the following in order from most
cathode salt bridge
effective to least effective oxidizing agents
inert electrode electric potential
under standard conditions.
cell voltage cell potential
dry cell battery
Zn2+
(aq) ,
Co3+
(aq) , Br 2((cid:2)) , H
+
(aq)
primary battery secondary battery 9. Rank the following in order from most
reduction potential oxidation potential effective to least effective reducing agents
electrolytic cell electrolysis under standard conditions.
−
overvoltage electroplating H 2(g) , Cl (aq) , Al (s) , Ag (s)
quantity of electricity electric charge 10. The ions Fe2+ , Ag + , and Cu2+ are present
(aq) (aq) (aq)
Faraday’s law extraction in the half-cell that contains the cathode of an
refining corrosion electrolytic cell. The concentration of each of
galvanizing sacrificial anode these ions is 1 mol/L. If the external voltage is
cathodic protection chlor-alkali process very slowly increased from zero, in what order
fuel cell will the three metals Fe, Ag, and Cu be plated
onto the cathode? Explain your answer.
Chapter 11 Cells and Batteries • MHR 555
Inquiry 16. Use the half-cells shown in a table of standard
reduction potentials. Could you build a battery
11. Write the half-reactions and calculate the
with a potential of 8 V? If your answer is yes,
standard cell potential for each reaction.
give an example.
Identify each reaction as spontaneous or
non-spontaneous. 17. Suppose you produce a kilogram of sodium
(a) Zn + Fe2+ → Zn2+ + Fe and a kilogram of aluminum by electrolysis.
(s) (aq) (aq) (s)
(b) Cr + AlCl → CrCl + Al Compare your electricity costs for these two
(s) 3(aq) 3(aq) (s)
(c) 2AgNO + H O → processes. Assume that electricity is used for
3(aq) 2 2(aq)
2Ag + 2HNO + O electrolysis only, and not for heating.
(s) 3(aq) 2(g)
12. Calculate the mass of magnesium that can be
Communication
plated onto the cathode by the electrolysis of
molten magnesium chloride, using a current of 18. Research the following information. Prepare
3.65 A for 55.0 min. a short presentation or booklet on the early
history of electrochemistry.
13.(a) Describe a method you could use to measure
(a) the contributions of Galvani and Volta to
the standard cell potential of the following
the development of electrochemistry
galvanic cell.
Sn
| Sn2+
(1mol/L)
|| Pb2+
(1mol/L)
|
Pb
(b) how Humphry Davy and Michael Faraday
explained the operation of galvanic and
(b) Why is this cell unlikely to find many
electrolytic cells. (Note that these scientists
practical uses?
could not describe them in terms of electron
14. The two half-cells in a galvanic cell consist of
transfers, because the electron was not
one iron electrode in a 1 mol/L iron(II) sulfate
discovered until 1897.)
solution, and a silver electrode in a 1 mol/L
19. How rapidly do you think that iron would
silver nitrate solution.
corrode on the surface of the moon? Explain
(a) Assume the cell is operating as a galvanic
your answer.
cell. State the cell potential, the oxidation
half-reaction, the reduction half-reaction, 20. Reactions that are the reverse of each other
and the overall cell reaction. have standard cell potentials that are equal
(b) Repeat part (a), but this time assume that in size but opposite in sign. Explain why.
the cell is operating as an electrolytic cell. 21. Use a labelled diagram to represent each of
(c) For the galvanic cell in part (a), do the mass the following.
of the anode, the mass of the cathode, and (a) a galvanic cell in which the hydrogen
the total mass of the two electrodes increase, electrode is the anode
decrease, or stay the same while the cell is (b) a galvanic cell in which the hydrogen
operating? electrode is the cathode
(d) Repeat part (c) for the electrolytic cell in
part (b). Making Connections
15.(a) Describe an experiment you could 22. A D-size dry cell flashlight battery is much
perform to determine the products from bigger than a AAA-size dry cell calculator
the electrolysis of aqueous zinc bromide. battery. However, both have cell potentials
How would you identify the electrolysis of 1.5 V. Do they supply the same quantity
products? of electricity? Explain your answer.
(b) Zinc and bromine are the observed products 23.(a) Would you use aluminum nails to attach an
from the electrolysis of aqueous zinc
iron gutter to a house? Explain your answer.
bromide solution under standard conditions.
(b) Would you use iron nails to attach
They are also the observed products from the
aluminum siding to a house? Explain your
electrolysis of molten zinc bromide. Explain
answer
why the first observation is surprising.
556 MHR • Unit 5 Electrochemistry
24. Research the aluminum-air battery, and the 2H+
(aq)
+2e−→H
2(g)
, E˚
cell
=0.138V 8.ox:
sodium-sulfur battery. Both are rechargeable Cr (s) →Cr3+ (aq) +3e−, red: AgCl (s) +e−→Ag (s) +Cl− (aq) ,
batteries that have been used to power electric E˚ cell =0.966V 9.(a) 2Cl−→Cl 2 +2e− (b)Ca2++2e−→Ca
cars. In each case, describe the design of the (c)CaCl 2 →Ca+Cl 2 10.(a)cathode: Li++e−→Li (b)anode:
battery, the half-reactions that occur at the
2Br−→Br
2
+2e− (c)2Li++2Br−→2Li+Br
2
11.direct
current: reaction proceeds steadily in one direction
electrodes, and the overall cell reaction. Also,
12.reduction (gain of electrons) at cathode of electrolytic
describe the advantages and disadvantages of
cell; electrons come from negative electrode (anode) of
using the battery as a power source for a car.
battery 13.hydrogen and oxygen 14.hydrogen, not calcium,
25. Explain why the recycling of aluminum is more produced at cathode 15.(a)0.146 V (b)Cd anode, Ni cathode
economically viable than the recycling of many (c)ox: Cd→Cd2++2e−, red: Ni2++2e−→Ni, overall:
other metals. Cd+Ni2+→Cd2++Ni 16.(a)−0.146 V (b)Ni anode,
Cd cathode (c)ox: Ni→Ni2++2e−, red: Cd2++2e−→Cd,
26. Suppose you live in a small town with high
overall: Cd2++Ni→Cd+Ni2+ 17. No 18.(a)spontaneous
unemployment. A company plans to build a
(b)non-spontaneous (c)spontaneous
smelter there to produce copper and nickel by 19.2Cu+
(aq)
→Cu2+
(aq)
+Cu
(s)
, E˚
cell
=0.368V
roasting their sulfide ores and reducing the
20.(a)non-spontaneous (b)spontaneous 21.2.97 g 22.8.90 min
oxides formed. Would you be in favour of the
23.1.85 A 24.(a)increases by 1.09 g (b)You can use the
plant being built, or opposed to it? Explain and stoichiometry of the equations. 25.(a)0.848 V (b) no;
justify your views. conditions are not standard 26.aluminum is more easily
27. Many metal objects are vulnerable to damage oxidized than iron 27.higher levels of salt (an electrolyte)
and moisture 28.(a)acidic conditions (b)promotes it
from corrosion. A famous example is the Statue
of Liberty. Research the history of the effects of 29.1.229 V 30.(a) overall: CH 4(g) +2O 2(g) →CO 2(g) +2H 2 O ((cid:2))
corrosion on the Statue of Liberty. Give a chem- (b)ox: CH 4(g) +2H 2 O ((cid:2)) →CO 2(g) +8H+ (aq) +8e−, red:
O 2(g) +4H+ (aq) +4e−→2H 2 O ((cid:2)) , 31.same equation as
ical explanation for the processes involved.
combustion, but fuel does not burn 32. 0.0451 g
Describe the steps taken to solve the problem 33.oxidation number of Cl increases from 0 to +1 in forming
and the chemical reasons for these steps. HClO, decreases from 0 to −1 in forming HCl; chlorine
28.(a) Estimate the number of used batteries undergoes both oxidation and reduction 34.hydrogen and
you discard in a year. Survey the class to oxygen, but conditions are far from standard
determine an average number. Now estimate Section Review: 11.1: 1.ox: manganese(IV) oxide, red: zinc
the number of used batteries discarded by all 3.(a) ox: Zn (s) +2OH− (aq) →ZnO (s) +H 2 O ((cid:2)) +2e−, red:
the high school students in Ontario in a year. Ag 2 O (s) +H 2 O ((cid:2)) +2e−→2Ag (s) +2OH− (aq) , overall:
(b) Prepare an action plan suggesting ways of
Zn
(s)
+Ag
2
O
(s)
→ZnO
(s)
+2Ag
(s)
(b)zinc anode, stainless
steel cathode 4.3 V, two cells connected in series
decreasing the number of batteries discarded
5. four dry cells (4×1.5V=6V) 7.it dissolves; inner
each year.
container is zinc anode 8.Fe anode, Ag cathode, ox:
Answers to Practice Problems and Short Answers to Fe →Fe2+ +2e−, red: Ag+ +e−→Ag ,
(s) (aq) (aq) (s)
Section Review Questions overall: Fe (s) +2Ag+ (aq) →Fe2+ (aq) +2Ag (s) 11.2: 1.(a) 0.710 V
Practice Problems: 1.(a)oxidizing agent, Cu(II); (b)5.797 V (c)0.432 V 2.(a)0.599 V (b)1.097 V (c)0.994 V
reducing agent, Zn (b)same as previous 2.(a)ox: 3.standard hydrogen electrode 4.no; biggest difference in
Sn (s) →Sn2+ (aq) +2e−, red: Tl+ (aq) +e−→Tl (s) , overall: E˚ red is less than 7 V 6.0.987 V 11.3:1. copper, oxygen
Sn (s) +2Tl+ (aq) →Sn2+ (aq) ++2Tl (s) , tin anode, thallium 2.(a)copper(II) ions, hydrogen (b)hydrogen gas production
cathode (b)ox: Cd (s) →Cd2+ (aq) +2e−, red: requires overvoltage, so zinc forms at cathode
2H+ (aq) +2e−→H 2(g) , overall: 3.(a) non-spontaneous(b)spontaneous
Cd (s) +2H+ (aq) →Cd2+ (aq) +H 2(g) , cadmium anode, 4.ox: Ni(OH) 2(s) +OH− (aq) →NiO(OH) (s) +H 2 O ((cid:2)) +e−,
platinum cathode 3.(a)ox: 2I− (aq) →I 2(s) +2e−, red: red: Cd(OH) 2(s) +2e−→Cd (s) +2OH− (aq) , overall:
MnO− 4(aq) +8H+ (aq) +5e−→Mn2+ (aq) +4H 2 O ((cid:2)) , overall: Cd(OH) 2(s) +2Ni(OH) 2(s) →Cd (s) +2NiO(OH) (s) +2H 2 O ((cid:2))
10I− (aq) +2MnO− 4(aq) +16H+ (aq) →5I 2(s) +2Mn2+ (aq) +8H 2 O ((cid:2)) 5.over 12 V 7.(a)yes 11.4: 1.(a)cathode (b)3.29×103C
(b)oxidizing agent, MnO 4 −, reducing agent, I − (c)the anode 2.618 kg Na, 952 kg Cl 2 3.2.08 t 4.plentiful and
4.one electrolyte, no barrier 5.ox: 2Br− (aq) →Br 2((cid:2)) +2e−, inexpensive electricity 11.5: 1.salt acts as electrolyte
red: Cl 2(g) +2e−→2Cl− (aq) , E˚ cell =0.292V 6.ox: 2.aluminum protected by oxide layer 4.(a) e.g., gold,
Cu+ (aq) →Cu2+ (aq) +e−, red: 2H+ (aq) +O 2(g) +2e−→H 2 O 2(aq) , platinum 6.2.49 kg
E˚
cell
=0.542V 7.ox: Sn
(s)
→Sn2+
(aq)
+2e−, red:
Chapter 11 Cells and Batteries • MHR 557
S K I L L F O C U S
Initiating and planning
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
Electroplating Communicating results
Background Pre-Lab Focus
The most beautiful metals, such as silver and In this investigation, you will design an
gold, can also be the most expensive. electrolytic cell to plate zinc onto a metal object
Unfortunately, pure gold is soft, and pure silver of your choice. You will repeat your procedure
tarnishes quickly. using three different currents, and then compare
Electroplating is a common method used to your final products. When designing your proce-
produce beautiful and durable metal objects. dure, consider questions such as the following.
Jewellery and other metal objects can be made •How will you clean the pieces of metal you
cheaper, stronger, and more durable by coating a want to plate?
strong, cheaper metal with a thin layer of a more •What concentration of electrolyte will you use?
expensive metal. For example, cheaper jewellery •What external voltage will you use?
can be made from copper or nickel, and then •What three current values will you try?
coated with silver. More expensive jewellery can •What will you use for the anode in your cell?
be made from silver, and then coated with gold. •What will you use for the cathode in your cell?
Industry also uses electroplating for many •What time limit will you set for the electro-
applications. Chromium, an extremely hard plating process?
surface metal, is commonly electroplated over
steel cores for heavy duty applications. Worn or Question
damaged metal machine parts may be restored by
What conditions work best for electroplating zinc
re-plating the worn sections.
onto a metal object? Does changing the current
affect the quality of the finished object?
Hypothesis
Predict whether the value of the current used
to carry out the plating affects the quality of the
finished object.
Materials
beaker or plastic egg carton
adjustable D.C. power supply (9 V max)
ammeter wires with alligator clips
metal objects to electroplate, such as copper
wire, iron nails, nickel objects, paperclips,
bronze objects
anode materials such as a zinc strip
zinc nitrate solution, provided by your
teacher (0.5–1.0 mol)
steel wool
any other materials required for your procedure
The bumper of this car is plated with chromium.
558 MHR • Unit 5 Electrochemistry
Assessment
After you complete this investigation:
(cid:2) Compare your own procedure with procedures
used by your classmates. In what ways did your
procedure work better than others? How could
Safety Precautions you improve your procedure?
(cid:2) Evaluate the quality of your resulting electroplated
pieces.
•Wear gloves, safety goggles, and an apron while
you carry out the investigation.
•If you use an acid or base to clean your 7. Write up a full laboratory report of your
electrodes, treat both the acid or base and the procedure and results. Include:
electrode with caution. Wash any spills on • a diagram of your experimental set-up
your skin with plenty of cool water. Inform • appropriate balanced redox equations
your teacher. • answers to the Analysis questions below
•If you use acetone to clean your electrodes,
make sure there are no open flames in the Analysis
laboratory. Acetone is flammable.
1. What problems did you encounter when
•Use the power supply and electrical connections
carrying out your investigation? How did
with care.
you solve these problems?
•Be sure that all materials are properly disposed
of after your experiment. 2. Compare the three finished objects that you
•Do not use currents greater than 1.0 amp. electroplated. What conditions worked best
•Do not use a voltage greater than 9 V. to electroplate zinc onto a metal object?
3. Were you satisfied with your procedure?
Procedure
What improvements would you make if you
1. Design a rubric, an assessment checklist, did the experiment again?
or some other means of assessing your
4. Could you build a galvanic cell using the
experimental design and procedure.
same materials that you used in your
2. Decide on a piece of metal or a metal object procedure? If your answer is yes, explain
to be plated. You will need three identical how the galvanic cell would differ from
metal objects. You may wish to use the copper the electrolytic cell that you made in this
wire to form a piece of jewellery to plate. investigation.
3. Design a procedure to electroplate zinc onto
Conclusion
the metal object you have chosen. You will
repeat your procedure three times, using 5. Write a statement summarizing the results
three different values for the current, and of your investigation.
three different metal objects.
Extension
4. Make a list of all the materials you will use.
Check that all are available. In this investigation, you plated a coating of zinc
onto metal objects. As you learned in Unit 5,
5. Do not start your procedure until you have
Chapter 11, iron objects are sometimes coated
shown it to your teacher for approval.
with zinc, or galvanized, to protect the objects
6. When you have finished your laboratory
from corrosion. Research the processes used to
procedure, dispose of your materials as
galvanize an iron object. Compare the industrial
recommended by your teacher. Record
processes to the process you carried out in this
your disposal methods in your report.
investigation.
Unit 5 Design Your Own Investigation • MHR 559
Review
Knowledge/Understanding (e) equals the decrease in mass of the electrolyte
Multiple Choice 7. A fuel cell
(a) does not form any products
In your notebook, write the letter for the best
(b) has a negative cell potential
answer to each question.
(c) uses a spontaneous reaction to generate
1. The oxidation number of carbon in a
electricity
compound cannot be
(a) +4 (d) is not very efficient
(b) +2 (e) produces its own fuel
(c) 0 8. A metal anode in a cell always
(d) +6 (a) decreases in mass while the cell is in
(e) −4 operation
(b) conducts electrons out of the cell
2. Rusting is
(c) has a positive polarity
(a) a decomposition reaction
(d) undergoes oxidation
(b) a combustion reaction
(e) consists of a different metal than the metal
(c) a redox reaction
cathode in the same cell
(d) a neutralization reaction
(e) a double displacement reaction 9. In both a galvanic cell and an electrolytic cell,
(a) reduction occurs at the cathode
3. Of the following, the most effective reducing
(b) the cell potential is positive
agent is
(c) the overall reaction is spontaneous
(a) Na
(d) an external voltage is required
(b) Pb
− (e) chemical energy is converted to electrical
(c) Cl
energy
(d) H
2
(e) H O 10. A type of reaction that is always a redox
2
reaction is
4. Primary batteries contain
(a) synthesis
(a) rechargeable cells
(b) decomposition
(b) no cells
(c) single displacement
(c) fuel cells
(d) double displacement
(d) electrolytic cells
(e) neutralization
(e) galvanic cells
11. The sum of the oxidation numbers of all the
5. The following net ionic equation is
elements in a compound
unbalanced.
MnO + H + + Cl − → Mn2+ + Cl + H O (a) depends on the formula of the compound
2 2 2
(b) is positive
The set of coefficients that, used in order,
(c) is negative
balances the equation is
(d) is zero
(a) 1, 4, 4, 1, 2, 2
(e) depends on the type(s) of chemical bonds in
(b) 2, 8, 2, 2, 1, 4
the compound
(c) 2, 8, 2, 3, 1, 4
(d) 1, 4, 2, 1, 1, 2 12. While a lead-acid battery is being recharged,
(e) 1, 2, 2, 1, 1, 1 (a) the mass of lead(II) sulfate in the battery
in increasing
6. In an electroplating experiment, the mass of
(b) the number of electrons in the battery
metal plated onto the cathode
is increasing
(a) doubles, if the external voltage is doubled
(c) chemical energy is being converted to
(b) doubles, if the current is doubled
electrical energy
(c) depends on the material used to make the
(d) no chemical reaction is taking place
cathode
(e) the cell potential is increasing
(d) depends only on the time for which the
current flows
560 MHR • Unit 5 Electrochemistry
13. The oxidation number of oxygen (c) Write a balanced chemical equation for the
(a) is always negative reaction of iron with concentrated nitric acid
(b) is usually negative to form iron(III) nitrate.
(c) is never zero (d) How are the equations in parts (a), (b), and
(d) is never positive (c) related?
(e) is never −1 21. For the following galvanic cell,
C ,I |I − ||Ag + |Ag
(s) 2(s) (aq) (aq) (s)
Short Answer (a) identify the anode, the cathode, the positive
In your notebook, write a sentence or a short electrode, and the negative electrode
paragraph to answer each question. (b) write the two half-reactions and the overall
14. Determine the oxidation number of cell reaction
(a) N in N O (c) identify the oxidizing agent and the
2 3
(b) P in H P O reducing agent
4 2 7
(c) Si in SiF 2− (d) determine the standard cell potential
6
(d) each element in (NH 4 ) 2 SO 4 22. State whether the reaction shown in each of
15. Does the fact that you can assign oxidation the following unbalanced equations is a redox
numbers of +1 to hydrogen and −2 to oxygen in reaction. If so, identify the oxidizing agent and
water mean that water is an ionic substance? the reducing agent. Balance each equation.
Explain. (a) Cl O + H O → HClO
2 7 2 4
16.(a) Limewater, Ca(OH) 2(aq) , turns cloudy in the (b) I 2 + ClO − 3 → IO 3 − + Cl − (acidic conditions)
presence of carbon dioxide. Write a balanced (c) S2− + Br 2 → SO 4 2− + Br − (basic conditions)
chemical equation for the reaction. Include (d) HNO 3 + H 2 S → NO + S + H 2 O
the states of the substances. 23. Determine the standard cell potential for each
(b) Is this reaction a redox reaction? of the following reactions. State whether each
17. Balance each of the following half-reactions. reaction is spontaneous or non-spontaneous.
(a) Hg 2 2+ → Hg (a) 2Fe2+ (aq) + I 2(s) → 2Fe3+ (aq) + 2I − (aq)
(b) TiO 2 → Ti2+ (acidic conditions) (b) Au(NO 3 ) 3(aq) + 3Ag (s) → 3AgNO 3(aq) + Au (s)
(c) I 2 → H 3 IO 6 3− (basic conditions) (c) H 2 O 2(aq) + 2HCl (aq) → Cl 2(g) + 2H 2 O ((cid:2))
18. Explain why you cannot use the table of
Inquiry
standard reduction potentials in Appendix E
to calculate the external voltage required to 24. Predict the products from the electrolysis of
electrolyze molten sodium chloride. a 1 mol/L solution of hydrochloric acid.
19. Why is the density of the electrolyte solution 25. Suppose you decide to protect a piece of iron
in a lead-acid battery greatest when the battery from rusting, by covering it with a layer of lead.
is fully recharged? (a) Would the iron rust if the lead layer
20. Some metals can have different oxidation completely covered the iron? Explain.
numbers in different compounds. In the (b) Would the iron rust if the lead layer partially
following reactions of iron with concentrated covered the iron? Explain.
nitric acid, assume that one of the products in 26. When aqueous solutions of potassium
each case is gaseous nitrogen monoxide. permanganate, KMnO , and sodium oxalate,
4
Include the states of all the reactants and Na C O , react in acidic solution, the intense
2 2 4
products in the equations. purple colour of the permanganate ion fades
(a) Write a balanced chemical equation for the and is replaced by the very pale pink colour
reaction of iron with concentrated nitric acid of manganese(II) ions. Gas bubbles are observed
to form iron(II) nitrate. as the oxalate ions are converted to carbon
(b) Write a balanced chemical equation for the dioxide. If the redox reaction is carried out as
reaction of iron(II) nitrate with concentrated a titration, with the permanganate being added
nitric acid to form iron(III) nitrate. to the oxalate, the permanganate acts as both
Unit 5 Review • MHR 561
reactant and indicator. The persistence of the 32. An industrial method for manufacturing
purple colour in the solution with the addition fluorine gas is the electrolysis of liquid
of one drop of permanganate at the end-point hydrogen fluoride.
shows that the reaction is complete. 2HF ((cid:2)) → H 2(g) + F 2(g)
(a) Complete and balance the equation for acidic If the current supplied to the electrolytic cell is
conditions. 5000 A, what mass of fluorine, in tonnes, is
MnO − + C O 2− → Mn2+ + CO produced by one cell in one week?
4 2 4 2
(b) If 14.28 mL of a 0.1575 mol/L potassium 33. Describe how you could build a galvanic
permanganate solution reacts completely cell and an electrolytic cell in which the two
with 25.00 mL of a sodium oxalate solution, electrodes are made of lead and silver. Include
what is the concentration of the sodium a list of the materials you would require.
oxalate solution? 34. It is possible to use the standard reduction
27. Redox titrations can be used for chemical potentials for the reduction of hydrogen
analysis in industry. For example, the percent ions and the reduction of water molecules to
by mass of tin in an alloy can be found by show that the dissociation of water molecules
dissolving a sample of the alloy in an acid into hydrogen ions and hydroxide ions is
to form aqueous tin(II) ions. Titrating with non-spontaneous under standard conditions.
cerium(IV) ions produces aqueous tin(IV) and Describe how you would do this. How is
cerium(III) ions. A 1.475 g sample of an alloy this result consistent with the observed
was dissolved in an acid and reacted complete- concentrations of hydrogen ions and hydroxide
ly with 24.38 mL of a 0.2113 mol/L cerium(IV) ions in pure water?
nitrate solution. Calculate the percent by mass
of tin in the alloy. Communication
28. Design and describe a procedure you could use 35. List all the information you can obtain from a
to galvanize an iron nail. Explain your choice balanced half-reaction. Give two examples to
of materials. illustrate your answer.
29. Suppose you build four different half-cells 36.(a) If one metal (metal A) displaces another
under standard conditions in the laboratory. metal (metal B) in a single displacement
(a) What is the greatest number of different reaction, which metal is the more effective
galvanic cells you could make from the reducing agent? Explain. Give an example
four half-cells? to illustrate your answer.
(b) What is the smallest number of standard (b) If one non-metal (non-metal A) displaces
cell potentials you would need to measure another non-metal (non-metal B) in a single
to rank the half-cells from greatest to least displacement reaction, which non-metal is
standard reduction potentials? Explain. the more effective oxidizing agent? Explain.
30. In a galvanic cell, the mass of the magnesium Give an example to illustrate your answer.
anode decreased by 3.38 g while the cell 37.(a) Sketch a cell that has a standard cell
produced electricity. potential of 0 V.
(a) Calculate the quantity of electricity produced (b) Can the cell be operated as an electrolytic
by the cell. cell? Explain.
(b) If the constant current flowing through the
38. If a redox reaction cannot create or destroy
external circuit was 100 mA, for how many
electrons, how is it possible that the
hours did the cell produce electricity?
balanced half-reactions for a redox reaction
31. Calculate the mass of aluminum plated onto may include different numbers of electrons?
the cathode by a current of 2.92 A that is
supplied for 71.0 min to an electrolytic cell
containing aqueous aluminum nitrate as the
electrolyte.
562 MHR • Unit 5 Electrochemistry
39.(a) A friend in your class has difficulty 44. The two rocket booster engines used in a
recognizing disproportionation reactions. space shuttle launch contain a solid mixture
Write a clear explanation for your friend of aluminum and ammonium perchlorate.
on how to recognize a disproportionation The products of the reaction after ignition are
reaction. aluminum oxide and ammonium chloride.
(b) Write a balanced chemical equation that (a) Write a balanced chemical equation for this
represents a disproportionation reaction. reaction, and identify the oxidizing agent
40.(a) An electrolytic cell contains a standard and reducing agent.
hydrogen electrode as the anode and another (b) The other four engines used in a space
standard half-cell. Is the standard reduction shuttle launch use the redox reaction of
potential for the half-reaction that occurs in liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen to form
the second half-cell greater than or less than water vapour. Write a balanced chemical
0 V? Explain how you know. equation for this reaction.
(b) Will your answer for part (a) change if the (c) Which of the reactions described in parts
hydrogen electrode is the cathode of the (a) and (b) do you think is the more
electrolytic cell? Explain. environmentally friendly reaction? Explain.
41. Write a descriptive paragraph to compare the 45. Every year, corrosion is responsible for the
reactions that occur in a Downs cell and a failure of many thousands of water mains.
chlor-alkali cell. Describe the similarities and These are the pipes that transport water to
differences. Canadian homes and businesses. Research and
describe the economic, environmental, health,
42. One of your classmates is having trouble
and safety issues associated with rupture and
understanding some of the main concepts in
repair of water mains. Describe the methods
this unit. Use your own words to write an
that are being used to improve the situation.
explanation for each of the following concepts.
Include any diagrams or examples that will 46. Since the corrosion of iron is such an
help to make the concepts clear to your expensive problem, why do you think that
classmate. iron is still used for so many purposes?
(a) oxidation and reduction 47. Industrial plants that make use of
(b) galvanic and electrolytic cells electrochemical processes are often located
close to sources of hydroelectricity. Research
Making Connections and identify an example in Ontario. Write a
43. Black-and-white photographic film contains brief description of what the plant produces
silver bromide. When exposed to light, silver and how it produces it.
bromide decomposes in a redox reaction. Silver
ions are reduced to silver metal, and bromide
ions are oxidized to bromine atoms. The
brighter the light that hits the film, the greater
is the decomposition. When the film is
COURSE
developed, the parts of the film that contain CHALLENGE
the most silver metal produce the darkest
The Chemistry of Human Health
regions on the negative. In other words, the
Consider the following points as you plan your Chemistry
brightest parts of the photographed scene give
Course Challenge:
the darkest parts of the image on the negative. • How have improvements in battery technology
High-speed black-and-white film uses silver benefitted people with heart problems?
iodide in place of silver bromide. Do you think • How can titration be used to monitor a redox
that silver iodide is more sensitive or less reaction?
sensitive to light than silver bromide? Explain.
Unit 5 Review • MHR 563
Assessment
Before beginning this performance task, work with
COURSE CHALLENGE
your class to design a process rubric and a product
rubric. (Alternatively, your teacher may provide you
with rubrics.)
(cid:2) Assess yourself on your ability to transfer the
concepts you learned in this course to the new
contexts of the Course Challenge.
(cid:2) Assess yourself on your ability to apply the skills
and strategies of scientific inquiry, objective
observation, and research reporting.
(cid:2) Assess yourself on how well you present and
communicate your experimental and research
results to your audience.
(cid:2) Assess your ability to propose practical solutions
to problems, based on science and technology.
The Chemistry of Human Health
I
t is tempting to think of science as a clearly dieticians develop healthy dietary guidelines.
defined set of disciplines, such as chemistry, Knowing the properties of materials helps
physics, and biology. This is not wholly accurate, researchers develop new materials and devices—
however. Scientific disciplines blend and overlap. such as titanium joints, plastic heart valves, and
Therefore, scientists need to know what is hap- artificial skin—to repair, maintain, and replace
pening in relevant areas of different disciplines. parts of the human body.
For example, if you are studying physics, you The developments just described, and many
have probably noticed that both chemists and others, are possible because health scientists
physicists contributed to the development of and chemists communicate by writing books,
the atomic theory. The physicists built on the journal articles, and letters. They use the Internet
discoveries of the chemists, and vice versa. to post results and hold discussions. They also
The health sciences are a group of disciplines communicate face-to-face by giving presentations
that draw upon chemistry, physics, and biology. and lectures, and by chatting over coffee. A
How does chemistry relate to the health sciences? scientific conference is the perfect place for such
Knowing about molecular structure and function face-to-face interactions.
allows biochemists to synthesize medicinal com- In this Course Challenge, you will investigate
pounds on a large scale, and even to design new different facets of the intersection of chemistry
molecules to fight diseases and their symptoms. with the health sciences. Then you will share your
Understanding the chemical role of nutrients, findings and learn from your peers in a conference
vitamins, and minerals in the body helps about the chemistry of human health.
564 MHR • Course Challenge
Part 1: The Citric Acid Cycle
Metabolism is a complex series of interdependent organic reactions that
Preview
power the body by breaking down food molecules to provide energy. An
Part 1 draws upon the skills and
important part of human metabolism is the breakdown of glucose to pro-
concepts you learned in Unit 1.
vide energy for the body. First, a metabolic process called glycolysis
You will use your understanding
breaks down glucose into two molecules of pyruvate, C H O . The
3 4 3 of organic molecules and their
pyruvate molecules then react with a chemical species called coenzyme reactions to analyze a metabolic
A, CoA, to form acetyl CoA. Acetyl CoA reacts with oxaloacetic acid cycle.
to begin the metabolic cycle called the citric acid cycle, shown in the
diagram below. The citric acid cycle is also called the Krebs cycle, after its
discoverer, Hans Krebs.
acetyl CoA
CoA
citric acid
O
COOH
COOH
CH C CoA
3
CH
C O 2
NAD+ NADH CH 2 HO C COOH
1
CH
COOH 2
isocitric acid
oxaloacetic COOH
COOH acid COOH
8 2
HO C H CH 2
CH H C COOH
2
COOH HO C H
malic 7 Citric Acid Cycle COOH
acid
COOH
CH fumaric
keto
a
g
c
l
i
u
d
taric NAD+
acid
HC COOH 3
H2O COOH
succinyl CoA CH
2
6 COOH O CoA CH 2
NADH
CH 2 C S CoA C O
FADH2
CH 2 CoA CH 2 COOH CO 2
FAD COOH 5 CH 2 4
su
a
c
c
c
i
i
d
nic COOH NAD+
CO
GTP 2
GDP + P NADH
This diagram shows the citric acid cycle. For simplicity, the molecules in the citric
PROBLEM TIP
acid cycle are represented here as acids. In the body, they are actually present as ions.
For example, citric acid is present as citrate ions. You may have learned about
NAD+, GDP, and FAD in a
biology course. For your
Challenge
purposes, assume that they
Use the diagram of the citric acid cycle to answer the following questions. represent chemical species
used as electron acceptors,
1 K/U Examine the acids that are formed in each step of the citric acid
which are later used by the
cycle (do not include succinyl CoA). Redraw the acids. Then circle and
body to produce energy.
identify the functional groups that are present on each acid.
The Chemistry of Human Health • MHR 565
PROBLEM TIP
2 K/U Identify the steps in the citric acid cycle that fit the following
Recall, from your previous descriptions.
courses, that isomers are
(a) steps that are oxidations
molecules that have the
same formula but different (b) one step that combines addition, reduction, and condensation
arrangements of atoms. An reactions
isomerism occurs when a
(c) steps that are elimination reactions
molecule reacts to form one
of its isomers. (d) one step that is an isomerism
(e) one step that involves the addition of water
3 I Think about the mechanism of the reaction of acetyl CoA with
oxaloacetate. Which carbons in the citric acid molecule do you think
are likely the carbons that were added from acetyl CoA? Justify your
answer.
4 K/U In the citric acid cycle, every step that is an oxidation reaction
also produces energy, until the most oxidized form of carbon leaves
the cycle as carbon dioxide. Which steps in the cycle produce energy?
5 C Create a large version of the citric acid cycle. You may want to
create a large bulletin-board display or a hanging mobile, using
three-dimensional molecular models. Whatever the format of your cit-
ric acid cycle, make sure that it is completely and accurately labelled.
Think and Research
1 MC Ketoacidosis is a dangerous condition that is characterized by the
acidification of the blood and an acetone odour on the breath. The
condition occurs when levels of oxaloacetic acid for the citric acid
cycle are low. This leads to a buildup of acetyl CoA molecules,
which the liver metabolizes to produce acidic ketone bodies. Since
carbohydrates are the main source of oxaloacetic acid in the body,
high-protein, low-carbohydrate diets have been linked to ketoacidosis.
(a) Why do people follow these diets? Do you think the benefits of these
diets justify the risks?
(b) Research the connections between the citric acid cycle, ketoacidosis,
and high-protein, low-carbohydrate diets. Present your findings as a
web page or poster.
Part 2: Materials for Replacing Human Body Parts
Science has come a long way since wooden “pegs” were used to replace
Preview
lost legs. Prosthetics are now made of lightweight, long-lasting materials.
Part 2 draws upon the skills and
Engineers have developed replacement joints that function in much the
concepts you learned in Unit 2.
same way as the original human joints. Understanding the properties of
You will use your understanding
of molecular structure and materials is key to developing prosthetics that function well with living
properties to suggest appropriate human bodies, are relatively comfortable, and last a long time.
materials for human prosthetics
(artificial body parts). Challenge
Design a replacement joint or bone, or a prosthetic limb, using the
following questions to guide you.
1 K/U Titanium is a metal that is often used in joint and bone
replacement.
566 MHR • Course Challenge
(a) Write the electron configuration of titanium.
(b) What are some properties of titanium?
(c) Why is titanium a suitable metal for replacing human joints and
bones?
(d) A titanium alloy, rather than pure titanium, is often used as the
material for replacement joints and bones. Suggest a reason why
an alloy is used.
2 I Build a replacement joint or bone out of household materials.
Create an information kit that explains why you chose the materials
you did. For example, you will want to describe each material’s
reactivity, strength, and density, as well as other properties. Describe
any problems you foresee with your replacement part. Will it react
with fluids in the body? Will it wear out quickly? (Instead of building a
This photo shows the components
replacement bone or joint, you may choose to create a prosthetic limb.)
of an artificial hip joint.
3 I Conduct some tests on the materials you used for your replacement
part to determine or confirm their physical properties. Relate the
properties of each material to the type of bonding present. Obtain
your teacher’s permission before conducting your tests.
4 MC Use print and electronic resources to find out what kinds of
Technology LINK
materials are being used and developed for use as prosthetic limbs.
Use print and electronic
Be sure to explain what properties make each material suitable for its
resources to study the histori-
use. How does the chemical bonding in each material relate to its prop-
cal use of prosthetic limbs.
erties? What are the risks and benefits associated with the materials?
Why were certain materials
chosen in the past? What
Think and Research
problems did people have with
1 C Engineers use the macroscopic properties of matter when they materials that were used as
design prosthetic limbs. Designing instruments for medical diagnosis, prosthetics? How did they
on the other hand, depends on knowing about the structure of matter attempt to overcome these
problems?
at the atomic level. Use print and electronic resources to research the
development, use, underlying theory, and function of the instruments
that are used for medical diagnosis. Use your knowledge of atomic
structure to explain how each instrument works. Choose one of the
following areas of medical diagnosis: infrared spectroscopy, nuclear
magnetic resonance spectroscopy, X-rays, nuclear medicine,
optometrists’ instruments, or magnetic resonance imaging. What
contributions have Canadian scientists made to this area of medical
diagnosis? Present your findings as a talk, supported by a slide show
or overhead transparencies.
Part 3: The Enzyme Catalase
Enzymes control the rate of nearly every reaction in your body. They are
Preview
absolutely essential for the efficient functioning of the chemical processes
Part 3 draws upon the skills and
that take place continuously and keep the human body alive and healthy.
concepts you learned in Unit 3.
You will use your understanding
Challenge of catalysis and energy to analyze
a reaction that is catalyzed by an
The enzyme catalase is contained in human, animal, and plant tissues.
enzyme.
Investigate catalase, and compare its action with the actions of several
inorganic catalysts.
1 K/U Catalase is the enzyme that is responsible for the decomposition
of hydrogen peroxide into water and oxygen gas.
The Chemistry of Human Health • MHR 567
(a) Write the balanced chemical equation for this reaction.
(b) What is the enthalpy change for this reaction? Write a
thermochemical equation.
(c) How does catalase affect the enthalpy change of this reaction? Use a
diagram to illustrate your answer.
(d) How does catalase affect the activation energy of this reaction? Use a
diagram to illustrate your answer.
2 I Design an experiment that uses the technique of downward
displacement to test the efficiency of enzymes and inorganic catalysts
in the decomposition of 6% hydrogen peroxide, H O . (If 6% H O
2 2 2 2
is unavailable, use 3% H O ). Test the catalytic ability of the following
2 2
materials: manganese(IV) oxide, iron(III) chloride, potato, apple,
banana, papaya, and pineapple, as well as uncooked meat, fish,
and liver. Conduct several trials. For the manganese(IV) oxide and
iron(III) chloride catalysts, determine the rates of reaction and graph
the results. Do both catalyzed reactions have the same rate law?
CAUTION 6% hydrogen peroxide is reactive and can burn your skin.
Outline safety precautions in your procedure, and get your teacher’s
permission before proceeding.
3 I Perform the investigation a second time, but boil the foods for
10 min before adding the hydrogen peroxide. (Do not boil the inorganic
catalysts or the hydrogen peroxide.) Get your teacher’s approval before
proceeding. Explain your results.
4 C Prepare a detailed report to share your findings.
Think and Research
1 MC Hydrogen peroxide is often used to sterilize wounds. The fizzing
that occurs is caused by catalase in the blood acting on the hydrogen
peroxide. Bacteria that do not have catalase to disable the hydrogen
peroxide are killed by this chemical. Humans are protected by the
presence of catalase. Not all bacteria are killed by hydrogen peroxide,
however, because some bacteria do have catalase.
(a) Suggest a laboratory procedure that a researcher could use to classify
species of bacteria as catalase-positive or catalase-negative.
(b) Use print and electronic resources to find three dangerous species of
bacteria that are catalase-positive and three dangerous species that
are catalase-negative. Propose safe ways to guard against both types.
Part 4: Blood and Le Châtelier’s Principle
In Unit 4, you learned that buffers resist changes in pH. Buffer systems are
Preview
extremely important to human health, since many of the life-sustaining
Part 4 draws upon the skills and
reactions in the body depend on a narrow pH range to proceed effectively.
concepts you learned in Unit 4.
The principal buffer system in blood serum is based on the equilibri-
You will use your understanding of
equilibrium to analyze the buffer um between carbonic acid, H 2 CO 3(aq) , and the hydrogen carbonate ion,
−
system in blood serum. HCO 3 . Carbonic acid is unstable, however. It is also in equilibrium with
carbon dioxide. Therefore, a second equilibrium reaction is involved in
the hydrogen carbonate buffer system in the blood: the reaction between
carbon dioxide and water to produce carbonic acid, and its reverse. The
two equilibrium reactions are summarized below.
CO 2(aq) + 2H 2 O ((cid:2)) (cid:3)(cid:4) H 2 CO 3(aq) + H 2 O ((cid:2)) (cid:3)(cid:4) HCO 3 − (aq) + H 3 O + (aq)
568 MHR • Course Challenge
Challenge
Refer to the description of the hydrogen carbonate buffer system in blood
serum to answer questions 1 and 2. Then use questions 3 and 4 to design
an investigation to find out how a buffer system resists changes in pH.
1 K/U One of the differences between a buffer system in the body and a
simple buffer system in a lab is that the body can enhance the buffer’s
power to resist pH changes. For example, the lungs regulate the amount
of carbon dioxide that enters and leaves the body. The kidneys help
to regulate the pH of blood in several ways, such as increasing or
CHEM
+
decreasing excretion of hydronium ions, H O , in urine. Explain how
3 FACT
the kidneys might respond to the following conditions.
Chemists sometimes simplify
(a) The blood pH rises to 7.48. calculations that involve
(b) The blood pH sinks to 7.33. complex systems in order to
make an estimate. They do
2 I Healthy blood has a pH of 7.4. Estimate the ratio of [CO 2 ] to this by making simplifying
−
[HCO 3 ] in the blood. Use the following assumptions and information assumptions. You will try
to help you. this technique for yourself in
• Assume that carbonic acid and hydrogen carbonate ions are the only Challenge question 2.
contributors to blood pH.
• Use K = 4.3 × 10 −7 for H CO .
a 2 3
• To express your answer in terms of CO , assume that all
2
undissociated carbonic acid is present as dissolved CO .
2
3 I Because blood is buffered, it resists changes in pH. To model
blood’s resistance to changes in pH, design an investigation that
compares the effects of adding an acid or a base to buffered and
non-buffered systems. Your teacher will tell you what materials you
may use. The following tips and suggestions will help you get started.
• You can prepare a simple buffer system by mixing equal volumes
of 0.1 mol/L acetic acid, CH COOH, and 0.1 mol/L sodium acetate,
3
NaCH COO. Alternatively, you may wish to try more closely
3
simulating the buffer system in blood. Use soda water, which
contains dissolved CO , and sodium hydrogen carbonate (baking
2
soda), NaHCO . Your teacher may suggest other buffer systems.
3
• Consider carrying out your investigation on the microscale. Panic attacks or illness can
• You will need to decide how to monitor pH changes. You may bring on hyperventilation—
fast and heavy breathing.
choose to use a pH meter or a universal indicator, for example.
• Decide what type and concentration of acid and base you will add to • When hyperventilation
occurs, large quantities
your systems. Dilute solutions of strong acids and bases work well.
of carbon dioxide are
• Include a step in which you determine the initial pH of your buffer
removed from the blood.
solution and the unbuffered system.
What effect does
• Include all appropriate safety precautions. hyperventilation have on
Obtain your teacher’s approval for your procedure, and carry out your the pH of the blood?
investigation. • Suppose that your friend
is hyperventilating. You
4 C Prepare a detailed report to communicate your findings. Be sure to
tell your friend to breathe
compare and contrast the system you used in your investigation with
from a paper bag. Explain
the carbonic acid/carbonate buffer system in the blood. How are the
why this technique helps.
systems similar? How are they different?
The Chemistry of Human Health • MHR 569
Think and Research
1 MC Respiratory acidosis occurs when someone has difficulty
breathing, as in an asthma attack, or when someone is in an area
with insufficient ventilation. Symptoms of acidosis include fainting
and depression of the nervous system.
(a) Based on the name of the condition, what do you think happens to
the pH of the blood in respiratory acidosis?
(b) Explain why insufficient ventilation or breathing difficulties lead to
respiratory acidosis. Refer to the carbonic acid/hydrogen carbonate
buffer system in your answer.
(c) To help maintain the pH of the blood, the kidneys can increase
−
or decrease reabsorption of HCO into the blood. They can also
3
+
decrease or increase the excretion of H O ions. How would the
3
kidneys respond to respiratory acidosis? Explain your answer.
(d) Suggest ways that you could help someone who was suffering from
respiratory acidosis as a result of having been in an area with
insufficient ventilation.
Part 5: Vitamin C—An Important Antioxidant
Oxygen and other oxidizing agents can react harmfully with your body.
Preview
Vitamin C acts as an antioxidant. It is very easily oxidized, so it reacts
Part 5 draws upon the skills and
with oxidizing agents, preventing them from reacting with other
concepts you learned in Unit 5.
important molecules in the body. Vitamin C is relatively stable when
You will use your understanding
of redox reactions to design a it is oxidized. Therefore, it does not propagate a harmful series of oxida-
titration for vitamin C, an tion reactions. The Chemistry Bulletin in Unit 5 explains the possible
antioxidant. connection between oxidizing agents and aging.
One way to determine the vitamin C content of a sample is to titrate
it with an iodine/iodide solution. The diagram below shows the reaction
involved.
O H O H
O O
C C OH C C OH
CH + I 3 − CH + 2H + + 3I −
C C C C
CH OH CH OH
2 2
OH HO O O
ascorbic acid (vitamin C) dehydroascorbic acid
CHEM
FACT In the iodine solution, iodine, I , and iodide, I − , ions are in equilibrium
2
Often, to make the endpoint with triiodide, as shown below.
of an iodine titration more I + I − (cid:3)(cid:4) I −
obvious, an indicator solution 2 3
that contains starch is added Molecular iodine is a deep violet-red colour. Iodine ions are colourless.
to the solution being titrated. Thus, when an antioxidant reduces the iodine molecules in a solution, the
Starch forms a deep blue com- iodine colour disappears completely.
plex with triiodide, I−, but it is
3
colourless with I−. As long as
Challenge
there is unreacted vitamin C in
solution, no triiodide ions will In this Challenge, you will design a titration to compare the vitamin C
be present in solution. content of various samples. Your teacher will tell you what reactants are
Therefore, the blue colour will
available for you to use in your titration.
appear only at the endpoint.
570 MHR • Course Challenge
1 I Iodine solutions may be used to titrate solutions that contain
antioxidants, such as vitamin C.
(a) In storage, the concentration of iodine in solution decreases fairly
quickly over time. Why do you think this happens?
(b) Because the iodine solution’s concentration is not stable, it should be
standardized frequently. To standardize an iodine solution, use it to
titrate a solution that contains a known quantity of vitamin C. Then
determine what volume of iodine solution is needed to react with
the known quantity of vitamin C. Explain how you would stand-
ardize a solution of iodine using vitamin C tablets from a pharmacy.
(c) To standardize iodine using vitamin C tablets, you should use fresh
tablets. Explain why.
2 I Design a titration that uses an iodine solution to determine and
compare the concentration of vitamin C in a variety of fresh fruit
juices. You may find it helpful to research appropriate procedures on
the Internet. Include a method for standardizing the iodine solution.
(See Challenge question 1.) Make sure that you list all the safety
precautions you will use in your titration. Check your procedure
with your teacher, and then carry out your titration.
3 C Prepare a detailed report to communicate your results. Include the
half-reaction for iodine in your discussion of the titration.
4 K/U If you titrate orange juice that has been exposed to the air for
a week, will the vitamin C concentration be different from the vitamin
C concentration in fresh juice? If so, will it decrease or increase?
Explain your prediction, in terms of redox reactions.
5 I If time permits, extend your investigation to compare the vitamin C
content of fresh juice and juice that has been left exposed to air for
varying periods of time. Ask your teacher to approve your procedure
before carrying out this extension.
6 C A chemist adds a few drops of deep violet-red iodine solution to
a vitamin C tablet. The iodine solution quickly becomes colourless.
Then the chemist adds a solution that contains chlorine, Cl . The
2
chemist observes that the violet-red colour of the iodine reappears. Web LINK
Explain the chemist’s observations, in terms of redox reactions.
www.mcgrawhill.ca/links/
chemistry12
Think and Research
Strong oxidizing agents create
1 MC A reliable supply of fresh, nutritious food is essential to human
chemical species called free
health. To this end, the food industry has developed different types radicals. Researchers suggest
of food additives to keep food fresh longer. Numerous reactions are that free radicals are responsi-
responsible for food spoilage. For example, a food may become stale ble for reactions that lead to
and rancid due to the oxidation of the molecules in the food by oxygen food spoilage, aging, and can-
cer. Antioxidants work by
in the air.
“deactivating” free radicals.
(a) Based on the information above, explain why vitamin C (ascorbic
Find out more about the
acid) is often added to foods, such as bread. chemical nature of free
(b) Butylated hydroxyl toluene (BHT) is another compound that is added radicals and their reactions.
Also find out how antioxidants
to food to prevent spoilage. Find out about BHT in a library or on the
interact with them. To begin
Internet. Draw its structure. How does BHT work to preserve food?
your research, go to the web
What type of spoilage does it prevent? Are there risks or drawbacks
site above and click on Web
to using BHT? How does adding BHT to products such as bread Links.
affect the cost of the product? Present your findings as a poster.
The Chemistry of Human Health • MHR 571
Part 6: Final Presentation
Present your research and laboratory investigation reports for one or more
sections of this Course Challenge at a conference called “The Chemistry of
Human Health.” Use various media to show your audience how chemical
processes affect each aspect of human health that you studied. Make sure
that you understand your topic well, and be prepared to answer questions
about your presentations and displays. As a class, discuss the following
questions before creating your presentations and displays.
• What purposes do professional conferences serve?
• How are conferences run?
• Who is your audience? For example, your audience might include
health professionals, the general public, or science students. Will you
invite other classes, your parents and guardians, and/or the public to
your conference?
• What form should the presentations take? The conference could include
some or all of the following:
– information booths
– posters, pamphlets, and handouts
– models, laboratory reports, and computer simulations
– formal presentations with slides or overhead transparencies
– demonstrations of experiments
–round-table discussions
– formal debates
– a conference web site
– a schedule brochure with presentation summaries
– a post-conference publication to summarize the information presented
Additional Topics
What other health-related challenges has chemistry helped scientists to
understand or solve? You may wish to go beyond the challenges listed in
Parts 1 to 5 of the Course Challenge and investigate other areas of human
health. Some suggestions are listed below.
Unit 1
• Researchers can use computer programs to test the geometry of many
molecular structures and determine their suitability for specific applica-
tions. For example, a specialized screen saver can check the shape of
hypothetical molecules based on their suitability for cancer treatment.
Anyone can upload the screen saver and use a computer’s idle time
to test molecules. Research this method, and write an article on the
success of computer-assisted research.
• Pyruvate carboxylase (also called PC) is an enzyme that converts
pyruvate to oxaloacetate (shown as oxaloacetic acid in the citric acid
cycle diagram). Pyruvate carboxylase deficiency is a genetic disorder
that is characterized by insufficient quantities of pyruvate carboxylate in
the body. How do you think this disorder affects the citric acid cycle?
Use print and electronic resources to research pyruvate carboxylase
deficiency. Find out what its symptoms are, and how it affects the body
at the molecular level. Also find out what percent of the population is
affected, and how the deficiency can be relieved. Present your findings
as an informative pamphlet. If possible, conduct an e-mail interview
with an expert on the disorder.
572 MHR • Course Challenge
• Use print and electronic resources to study compounds that have been
produced as diet aids, such as aspartame and olestra. How do these
compounds work? Are there drawbacks or risks involved in using these
compounds? Choose one compound, and conduct a risk-benefit analysis.
Unit 2
• Watson and Crick’s discovery of the structure of DNA revolutionized
scientists’ understanding of heredity and genetics. Find out how Watson
and Crick showed that the structure of DNA is a double helix. How did
Rosalind Franklin’s work in X-ray crystallography play a role? Present
your findings as an annotated, illustrated time line.
• It is relatively straightforward to extract DNA from animal matter.
Research a procedure on the Internet. Obtain your teacher’s approval,
and then carry out the extraction. Use the concept of intermolecular
forces to explain how the extraction works.
Unit 3
• Human disorders and conditions are sometimes caused by the lack
of an enzyme. For example, lactose intolerance is caused by low
concentrations of lactase, an enzyme that breaks down lactose (the
sugar in milk). Find out about lactose intolerance or another condition
that is caused by a missing enzyme. How are the conditions diagnosed?
Have treatments been developed? How effective are the treatments?
Who suffers from the condition? How harmful is it?
• Researchers have used a specially designed calorimeter, called a human
calorimeter, to monitor the heat that is produced by metabolic reactions
in humans. Research the human calorimeters that are used to study
metabolic reactions. What are the design features of these calorimeters?
What factors do researchers need to take into account? Why are the
experiments with human calorimeters important? Design an investiga-
tion that incorporates the results of your research.
Unit 4
• In Part 4 of the Course Challenge, you looked at the carbonic acid/
hydrogen carbonate buffer system in the blood. Another important
buffer system in the body depends on the equilibrium between dihydro-
gen phosphate, H PO
−
, and hydrogen phosphate, HPO
2−
. Use print and
2 4 4
electronic resources to learn where this buffer system is found in the
body and how the body regulates concentrations of H PO
−
andH PO
2−
.
2 4 2 4
• Acid indigestion, also known as “heartburn,” is caused by the excess
production of stomach acid. Eating a large meal may bring on acid
indigestion. Commercial antacids contain basic salts that neutralize the
excess acids. Design a titration experiment to test the effectiveness of
various brands of antacids.
Unit 5
• Using only materials that are available in your school chemistry
laboratory, design a pacemaker battery. Find out what voltage is appro-
priate for a pacemaker. Be sure to outline all design considerations.
For example, how large will the battery need to be? How long will it
last? Have your teacher approve your design. Then build your battery.
• Using print and electronic resources, research the work of Wilson
Greatbatch, the inventor of the implantable pacemaker. What
chemistry-related technological challenges did he face and overcome
as he perfected his device?
The Chemistry of Human Health • MHR 573
Appendix A
Answers to Selected and Numerical Chapter and Unit Review Questions
UNIT 1 30.(a) 3-ethyl-4-methyl-1-hexene
(b) methoxypropane
Chapter 1
(c) 3-methyl-1-pentanamine
15.(a) 2-bromopropane (b) cyclopentanol (d) 5-ethyl-3,7,9-trimethyl-2-decanol
(c) pentanoic acid (d) ethyl propanoate (e) butyl propanoate
(e) 5-ethyl-5,6-dimethyl-3-heptanone
31.(a) 5-methyloctanoic acid
16.(a) 3,5,7-trimethylcycloheptene (b) N-ethyl-1-butanamine
(b) 3-ethyl-2-hexanol (c) 6-ethyl-5-methyl-2-octyne
(c) 1-ethyl-4-methylbenzene (d) butanamide
(d) 2-methylpentanoic acid (e) 6-ethyl-7-methyl-4-decanone
(e) N-ethyl-N-methyl-1-butanamine (f) 2-ethyl-3-methylcyclohexanol
(f) N-butylpropanamide (g) 4,4,6,6-tetramethylheptanal
22.(a) either 2-methylhexanal or pentanal (h) 4-ethyl-3,5-dimethylcyclopentene
(b) pentane (i) N-ethyl-N-methylethanamide
(c) 1,2-dimethylbenzene (j) 3,6,7-trimethylcyclononanone
(d) N-ethyl-N-methylpentanamide 32.(a) 4-methyl-2-heptanone (b) 3,3-dimethylhexane
(e) 2-methylpropanoic acid (c) 2,5-octanediol
23. 1-butanol, 2-butanol, 2-methyl-1-propanol, 36.(d) propyl methanoate +water
1,1-dimethylethanol, 1-methoxypropane, (e) 1-heptene +water
1-ethoxyethane, 2-methoxypropane
37.(b) decanoic acid +1-propanol
24. butanoic acid, 2-methylpropanoic acid,
38.(a) ethyne
methyl propanoate, ethyl ethanoate,
(b) 1-chloro-2-methylpentane
1-propyl methanoate, 2-propyl methanoate
(c) heptanoic acid +1-butanol
(Note:Other isomers are possible that contain
(d) 2-methylpropanoic acid
hydroxyl and carbonyl groups, or alkoxy and
(e) 3-ethyl-4,4-dimethyl-2-pentanol
carbonyl groups, but these are beyond the scope
of this course.)
UNIT 2
Chapter 2 Chapter 3
10.(b) 1-bromopropane, 2-bromopropane 7. 3porbital in third energy level
(c) 2-bromopropane
8. S ground state: 1s22s22p63s23p4;
13.(a) propene excited: 1s22s22p63s23p34s1
18.(a) 2,3-dibromobutane (b) 1-bromopentane +water 9.(a) Na, smaller Z (b) K, more energy levels
eff
(c) propanoic acid (d) propene +water (c) Sr, more energy levels (d) Ga more energy levels
(e) 3-methyl-2-butanone (f) methyl propanoate + (e) O, smaller Z (f) Br, more energy levels
eff
water
10. U, fblock, inner transition; Zr, dblock, transition;
(g) pentane (h) ethanoic acid +ethanol
Se, pblock, main group; Dy, fblock, inner transition;
20.(a) ethene (b) 1-propanol Kr, pblock, main group; Rb, sblock, main group;
(c) bromine (d) 3-methyl-2-butanone Re, dblock, transition; Sr, sblock, main group
(e) propanoic acid +1-butanol
11. Na O,K O,MgO,CaO,Al O ,Ga O ,SiO ,GeO
2 2 2 3 2 3 2 2
(f) butanal (g) 2-ethyl-1-butanol,
12.(a) 18 (b) 15 (c) 4 (d) infinite
2-ethylbutanal
15.(a) Mg: 1s22s22p63s2 (b) Cl: 1s22s22p63s23p5
(h) cyclobutanol (i) 1-butene
(c) Mn:1s22s22p63s23p64s23d5
Unit 1 Review (d) Y: 1s22s22p63s23p64s23d104p65s24d1
25. ethanoic acid 18. 8s2, n=8, l =0
27. 3-ethyl-4-methylhexanal, 19.(a) Sr has greater nbut K has a smaller Z
eff
3-ethyl-4-methylhexanoic acid (b) both have 4s2valence energy level
28.(a) butanoic acid (b) methanol (c) Ca has a greater nbut also a greater IE 1 .
(c) methyl pentanoate (d) 2-butanone 21.(a) Rb (b) Ti (c) Mg (d) As
(e) N-methylethanamine (f) 4,5-dimethylheptanal 23.(a) Al: 1s22s22p63s23p1; Sc: 1s22s22p63s23p64s23d1
(b) 3+
574 MHR • Appendix A
Chapter 4 •• − 2+ •• −
•• 39. • • OO H Ba • • OO H
•Br• •••• ••••
• •
•O•
•• •• − • •
3.(a) H C B •• r• • (b) H SS •• • • • F •• P F •• •
40. dipole; • •
•Br• •• ••
• •
•• • F •
• •
6.(a) dipole-dipole and dispersion forces ••
(b) ionic bonds 41. tetrahedral; bond dipoles for C(cid:2)H shorter than for
(c) metallic bonds C(cid:2)Cl
(d) dispersion forces
42. neither has expanded valence level;
7. Cs, S, Kr, O 2 •• − ••
•O• •O•
• • • •
8. H O because of large ENdifference between atoms
2
and small size of O •• •• ••
•O Cl O• • S Cl•
• • • •
•• •• ••
9.
•O• •O•
• • • •
•• ••
13. C H (dispersion forces), C H OH (dispersion forces
3 8 2 5
43. 1s22s22p63p1
and hydrogen bonding), K (metallic bonding), SiO
2 44.(a) n=2,l =0,m =0,m =+ 1
(network solid) l s 2
14. all tetrahedral; CCl 4 is non-polar; CH 3 Cl and CH 2 Cl 2 (b) n=3,l =1,m l =1,m s =− 1 2
both polar with dipole-dipole forces. 48.(a) shiny, malleable, conductor of heat and elec-
16.(a) bent (b) octahedral tricity, fairly high melting (or boiling) point
(c) trigonal pyramidal (b) form cations by giving up electrons, form basic
oxides when dissolved in water
17.(a) Cl (b) BrCl
2
49.(b) K (difference between I.E. and I.E. ); can infer the
19. linear with VSEPR notation AX E (e.g.,XeF ) or 1 2
2 3 2
number of valence electrons because of the size of
square planar with notation AX E (e.g.,XeF ).
4 2 4
the I.E. difference)
20. non-polar
24. no; 7 pairs of electrons in the valence shell UNIT 3
26. SF : seesaw shape and polar; SiF : tetrahedral shape
4 4 Chapter 5
and non-polar
8.(a) 60.0˚C (b) 50.0˚C
31. N H hydrogen bonding, greater dispersion forces
(1 2 8 e 4 lectrons) higher boiling point; C H lower 9.(a) −2225 kJ/mol
2 4
dispersion forces (10 electrons) 10. −14.5 kJ/g; − 869 kJ/mol
11. +336.6 kJ
Unit 2 Review
12. 466 kJ
13. N: 1s22s22p3; P: [Ne]3s23p3; As: [Ar]3d104s24p3
13. 228 kJ
14. Mg, Na, Ca, K 14.(b) −188 kJ/mol
15. AX E or AX E
2 2 2 15. 256 kJ
17.(a) Rb < K < Na < Li (b) Li < Be < B < C 16.(a) −2657 kJ (c) 4.6×102 kJ
29. titanium (b) −1428.4 kJ/mol; −47.5 kJ/g
30. group 14 (IVA) 21.(b) 2 kJ
31. LiBr
Chapter 6
32.(a) As (b) P (c) Be 7.(a) 4.00×10−4mol/(L•s) (b) 3.40×10−2g
36.(a) N more electrongative (b) F more electronegative 8.(a) k =0.010s−1;t =69s
1/2
(c) Cl more electronegative
10. 14.2 s
37.(
(
a
b
)
)
C
Si
l
(cid:2)
(cid:2)C
Si
l <
<
B
S(cid:2)
r(cid:2)
C
C
l
l
<
<
P
C
(cid:2)
l(cid:2)
C
F
l < Si(cid:2)Cl (except for
11.(b) k =2.58×10−28L/(mol•s)
non-polar Cl(cid:2)Cl and Si(cid:2)Si, left atom in each 12.(a) rate=k[A]2[B] (b) third order
bond pair has partial positive charge, and right (c) k =625L2/(s•mol2)
atom has partial negative charge) 13.(a) rate=k[Hg Cl ][C O 2−]2
2 2 2 4
38. trigonal pyramidal or T-shaped, but not trigonal (b) k =1.34×10−3L2/(mol2 •s)
planar
(c) rate=1.20×10−6mol/(L•s)
Appendix A • MHR 575
14.(a) 0.80 (b) 0.20 14.(a) pH=2.10; 0.79% dissociation
15.(a) 0.20 (b) 0.80 (b) pH=2.60; 2.5% dissociation
(c) pH=3.12; 7.6% dissociation
16.(a) −12.1 kJ/mol
15.(a) pH=4.36; 0.067% (b) OCl−, 3.45×10−7
Unit 3 Review 16. pH=9.10
27.(a) 47 kJ/mol 17. pH=8.07
29. 3.6 L 18. K a =1.1×10−3
30.(b) 82.5 kJ 19. HBrO<HBrO 2 <HBrO 3 <HBrO 4 ; opposite order for
31. −747.6 kJ conjugate bases
38.(b) ~−6800 kJ/mol 20. H 2 O<H 2 S<CH 3 COOH<HBrO 2
22. 4.0×10−6
UNIT 4 23.(b) 2.6×10−10
Chapter 7 26. 2.5×10−6mol/L; 12:1
7. decrease in temperature Chapter 9
8. left 1.(a) NH 4 Cl (b) KHSO 4 (c) NaHPO 4 (d) Al(NO 3 ) 3
10. [H 2 ]=5.6×10−4mol/L; [HI]=1.12×10−3mol/L 7.(a) (NH 4 ) 2 SO 4 ; NH 4 Br; Cu(NO 3 ) 2
11. [SO ]=0.13mol/L (b) KHS;LiCN; Ca(NO 2 ) 2
3
12.(a) K =[Cu+][Br−] (b) K =[Ca2+][CrO 2−]
12. 37.4 g ethyl propanoate sp sp 4
(c) K =[Ni2+][OH−]2 (d) K =[Mg2+]3[PO 3−]2
13. [CO]=[H 2 O]=0.013mol/L; (e) K sp =[Mg2+][NH +][PO 3−] sp 4
[H ]=[CO ]=0.037mol/L sp 4 4
2 2 15. H PO − +H O ↔H O+ +HPO 2−
14. K =2.5×10−4 2 4 (aq) 2 (l) 3 (aq) 4 (aq)
c 18. NaI since [I−]2
16.(a) O +4HCl →2H O +2Cl
(b) 1. 2 7 (g × ) 10−2 (g) 2 (g) 2(g) 20. [Pb2+]:[Ba2+]=130:1
17.(a) SO +6HF →SF +3H O 21. 7.7×10−9mol/L
3(g) (g) 6(g) 2 (g)
19.(a) 4NH +5O →4NO +6H O 22. 6.1×10−9mol/L
3(g) 2(g) (g) 2 (g)
(b) 0.26 25.(a) 19.44 mL (b) 3.29% (c) steps 1 and 4
24. 1.1×10−17mol/L; pollution sources 26. AgCl, lower K sp
26. left; right; left; no effect; at constant volume, no effect 27. BaSO 4
29.(a) CH COOAg (cid:3)(cid:4)Ag+ +CH COO−
3 (s) (aq) 3 (aq)
Chapter 8
(b) 23.3 g
2.(a) weak acid (b) weak acid (c) as Cu reacts, solid dissolves to replace the Ag+
(c) weak base (d) weak base 30.(a) 41.7 mL (b) 8.86
3.(a) O2− (b) NH + (c) phenolphthalein
4
(c) H 2 CO 3 (d) CO 3 2− 31. 4.74
4.(a) F (b) T (c) T
5. 2.0mol/LHClO <0.02mol/LHCl< Unit 4 Review
4
0.20mol/LCH 3 COOH<2.0mol/LNaCl 15. 6.9×10−2
6.(a) SO 4 2− (b) S2− 17. 0.16
(c) HPO 4 2− (d) CO 3 2− 18. [N 2(g) ][H 2(g) ]3
7.(a) HS− =1.0×10−19; HSO 3 − =6.5×10−8 [NH 3(g) ]2
(b) HS− +H 2 O ((cid:2)) (cid:3)(cid:4)H 2 S (aq) +OH− (aq) ; 19. 6×103
( ( c d ) ) H K H b S S− O fo 3 r − ( H aq S ) − + = H 1 2 O .1 ((cid:2) × ) (cid:3)(cid:4) 10− H 7; 2 S K O b 3 f ( o aq r ) H + S O O H − 3 − =7.7×10−13 20. ( ( b a ) ) A H 1 CO = 3 H − ( C aq O ) + 3 − ( H aq P ) O B 1 4 2 = − (a C q) O (cid:3)(cid:4) 3 2− C (a O q) 3 A 2− 2 (a = q) H + 2 H P B O 2 P 4 = O − ( H a 4 q − P ) (a O q) −
2 4 (aq)
10.(a) number of O atoms bonded to central atom; (c) reactants since K a forH 2 PO 4 − (aq) >K a forHCO 3 − (aq)
number of H 21. 2.4
(b) HBrO 3 ,H 2 SO 3 ,HClO 3 ,HClO 4 22. 12.268
11. 2 23. [H O+ ]=1.74×10−3mol/L,
3 (aq)
12. 0.300 mol/L [OH−]=5.75×10−12mol/L, pH=2.76, pOH=11.24
13. 2.52 24. 0.0008
576 MHR • Appendix A
25. 2Ag+ +CO 2− →Ag CO 7.(a) Ba +2; H −1 (f) S 0
(aq) 3 (aq) 2 3(s)
26. 8.62×10−6mol/L (b) Al +3; C −4 (g) As +3; O −2
(c) K +1; C +2; N −3 (h) V +5; O −2
28. 1.6×10−5g (d) Li +1; N +3; O −2 (i) Xe +6; O −2; F −1
29. remove CO 2 , increase temperature (e) N −3; H +1; C +3; O −2 (j) S +2.5; O −2
30.(b) [PCl 5 ]=0.060mol/L.[PCl 3 ]=0.38mol/L, 8. ClO 2 −
[Cl ]=0.16mol/L
2 9.(a) yes; oxidizing agent: O ; reducing agent: C H
31.(a) 1.6×10−5 (b) 11.14 2 6 6
(b) no
32. NaOH (s) →Na+ (aq) +OH− (aq) ; NH 3(aq) +H 2 O ((cid:2)) → (c) yes; oxidizing agent: I 2 ; reducing agent: H 2
NH 4 + (aq) +OH− (aq) ; CH 3 COO− (aq) +H 2 O ((cid:2)) → (d) yes; oxidizing agent: KMnO 4 ; reducing agent:
CH 3 COOH (aq) +OH− (aq) ; CH 3 COOH ((cid:2)) +H 2 O ((cid:2)) → CuCl.
CH 3 COO− (aq) +H 3 O+ (aq) 10.(a) yes; Cu undergoes oxidation; Ag+ undergoes
33. K sp =[Pb2+][Cl−]2 =1.6×10−5 reduction.
34.(a) decrease (b) no
(b) Q c >K c , [NH 3 ] decreases (c) yes; Mn2+ undergoes oxidation; BiO 3 − undergoes
reduction.
35. 0.091 mol
11.(a) +5 in V O ,VO +,VO −,VO 3−,V O 3−; +4 in
36. 12.3% 2 5 2 3 4 3 9
VO ,VO2+
37.(c) [XO ]=0.00985mol/L; [O ]=0.992mol/L 2
2(g) 2(g) (b) no
38. 7.26×10−6
12.(a) all three steps
39. 50ppm=1.4×10−3mol/L; precipitation occurs (b) Step 1: oxidizing agent: O ; reducing agent: NH
2 3
47.(b) 7.74 Step 2: oxidizing agent: O 2 ; reducing agent: NO
Step 3: oxidizing agent: NO ; reducing agent: NO
2 2
UNIT 5 14.(a) I +2e− →2I−
2
(b) Pb→Pb4+ +4e−
Chapter 10
(c) AuCl − +3e− →Au+4Cl−
4
1.(a) Zn (s) +2AgNO 3(aq) →Zn(NO 3 ) 2(aq) +2Ag (s) (d) C 2 H 5 OH+H 2 O→CH 3 COOH+4H+ +4e−
(b) 3CoBr 2(aq) +2Al (s) →3Co (s) +2AlBr 3(aq) (e) S 8 +16H+ +16e− →8H 2 S
(c) Cd (s) +SnCl 2(aq) →CdCl 2(aq) +Sn (s) (f) AsO 2 − +4OH− →AsO 4 3− +2H 2 O+2e−
2. ( ( Z 3 ( b a c C ) ) n ) o ( Z 3 C s 2 ) C n d + + ( o ( ( a s s 2 q ) ) 2 + ) + + A ( + aq 2 S g ) 2 + A n + ( A a 2 g q + 6 l + ) ( ( ( a B s → a ) q q r ) → ) − + ( + Z aq 2 n 3 2 ) C 2 C N + + l o ( − O 2 a ( ( q s a A 3 ) ) q − ) Z + l + (a ( 3 → s n q 2 ) 2 C ) 2 C A → A + → o ( d ( a g l s q 3 2 ( ) ) s + + ) + (a + q 2 ) 2 A + N l3 2 O + C ( 3 a l − q − ( ) aq + ) + 6 + B 2A S r− n g (a ( q s ) ) 15. ( ( ( ( ( ( b c d e a f ) ) ) ) ) ) 2 3 2 S 2 M N C C S 2 n O n d r O O 2 3 2 + + 2 + 2 + − 6 + + + + 3 H O 2 S 2 2 2 V C n 2 O N 2 l + + + − i + O 2 + + 6 2 2 H H 6 4 O + 2 H H + O H H → 2 + − O 2 → → O → 2 → N 2 + M 2 S H 3 C 2 n n C 2 O r 2 4 O ( + + d H O H + + − + H C 4 + → ) 2 2 4 O l V − 3 2 N H S O + + i n − ( 3 3 O 2 − 2 H + H H + 2 2 ) O 1 2 2 + H 2 + SO 3 2−
(aq) (aq) (s) 16.(a) 3SiCl +4Al→3Si+4AlCl
Cd +Sn2+ →Cd2+ +Sn 4 3
(s) (aq) (aq) (s) (b) 4PH +8O →P O +6H O
3.(a) oxidizing agent: Ag+; reducing agent: Zn (c) I O 3 +5CO 2 →I 4 +5 10 CO 2
(b) oxidizing agent: Co2+; reducing agent: Al (d) 2 2 SO 5 2− +O → 2 2SO 2− 2
(c) oxidizing agent: Sn2+; reducing agent: Cd 17.(a) 2NO 3 +H O 2 →NO 4 − +NO − +2H+
4.(a) oxidation half-reaction: Zn→Zn2+ +2e− (b) Cl + 2 2OH 2 − →ClO− 2 +Cl− + 3 H O
reduction half-reaction: Ag+ +e− →Ag 18.(a) 2C 2 o3+ +Cd→2Co2+ +Cd2+ 2
(b) oxidation half-reaction: Al→Al3+ +3e−
2Co(NO ) +Cd →
reduction half-reaction: Co2+ +2e− →Co 3 3(aq) (s)
2Co(NO ) +Cd(NO )
(c) oxidation half-reaction: Cd→Cd2+ +2e− (b) 2Ag+ +SO +2H O→2Ag+S 3 O 2( 2 a − q) +4H+ 3 2(aq)
reduction half-reaction: Sn2+ +2e− →Sn 2 2 4
2AgNO 3(aq) +SO 2(g) +2H 2 O ((cid:2)) →
5.(a) metallic element 2Ag +H SO +2HNO
(s) 2 4(aq) 3(aq)
(b) non-metallic element (c) Al+CrO 2− +4H O→Al(OH) +Cr(OH) +2OH−
(c) non-metallic element 4 2 3 3
(d) metallic element Al (s) +Na 2 CrO 4(aq) +4H 2 O ((cid:2)) →
Al(OH) +Cr(OH) +2NaOH
3(s) 3(s) (aq)
6.(a) Ba=+2;Cl=−1
21. O +2F →2OF
(b) C=+4;S=−2 2 2 2
(c) Xe=+4;F=−1 22.(a) 2P 4 +12H 2 O→5PH 3 +3H 3 PO 4
(b) reduced
Appendix A • MHR 577
23.(a) 2Al+Fe O →2Fe+Al O Unit 5 Review
2 3 2 3
(b) yes; oxidizing agent: Fe 2 O 3 ; reducing agent: Al 14.(a) +3
24.(a) I 2 +10HNO 3 →2HIO 3 +10NO 2 +4H 2 O (b) +5
(b) 31.7 g (c) +4
27.(a) P +3H O+3OH− →3H PO − +PH (d) N −3; H +1; S +6; O −2
4 2 2 2 3
(c) 2.74 kg 15. no
32.(a) C 2 H 4 +H 2 →C 2 H 6 16.(a) Ca(OH) 2(aq) +CO 2(g) →CaCO 3(s) +H 2 O ((cid:2))
C 2 H 5 OH→CH 3 CHO+H 2 17.(a) Hg 2+ +2e− →2Hg
33.(a) Na +1; Al +3; O −2; H +1; C +4 (b) TiO 2 +4H+ +2e− →Ti2+ +2H O
(b) NaAl(OH) 2 CO 3 +4HCl→ (c) I + 2 18OH− →2H IO 3− +6H O 2 +12e−
NaCl+AlCl +3H O+CO 2 3 6 2
34.(a) 2KClO →2KCl+3O 3 2 2 20.(a) 3Fe (s) +8HNO 3(aq) →
S+O 3 →SO 2 3Fe(NO 3 ) 2(aq) +2NO (g) +4H 2 O ((cid:2))
2 2 (b) 3Fe(NO ) +4HNO →
(b) oxidizing agent and reducing agent: KClO ; 3 2(aq) 3(aq)
oxidizing agent: O ; reducing agent: S 3 3Fe(NO 3 ) 3(aq) +NO (g) +2H 2 O ((cid:2))
2 (c) 3Fe +12HNO →
35. NH + +2O →NO − +H O+2H+ (s) 3(aq)
36.(b) C 4 aC +2 2 H O→ 3 Ca(OH 2 ) +C H ; not redox 3Fe(NO 3 ) 3(aq) +3NO (g) +6H 2 O ((cid:2))
(c) 2C H 2 +5O 2 →4CO +2 2 H O 2 ; r 2 edox 21.(b) oxidation: 2I− →I 2 +2e−
2 2 2 2 2 reduction: Ag+ +e− →Ag
Chapter 11 overall: 2I− +2Ag+ →I +2Ag
2
2. Mg |Mg2+ (1mol/L)||Cd2+ (1mol/L)|Cd (d) 0.264 V
(s) (aq) (aq) (s)
3. o re x d id u a c t t i i o o n n : : N I O (g + ) + 2e 2 − H → 2 O 2 ((cid:2) I ) − →NO 3 − (aq) +4H+ (aq) +3e− 22.(a) C no l 2 O 7 +H 2 O→2HClO 4
6. s o p v o e n ra t l a l n : e 2 o N u O s 2( : ( s g ) N ) + O 4H 2 + O 2 ((cid:2) H ) + + ( 3 a 2 q I ) N 2( + s O ) 2 3 → − C (a u q) + + 8 2 H I + − (aq) + → 6I− (aq) ( ( b c) ) 3 y y I e e 2 s s ; ; + o o 5 x x C i i d d lO i i z z 3 i i − n n + g g a a 3 g g H e e 2 n n O t t : : → B C r lO 2 6 ; 3 I r − O e ; − 3 d re u + d c 5 u in C c g l i − n a g + g e a 6 n g H e t: + n S t: 2 − I 2
2 N 2 ( ( g g ) ) +H 2 O ( ( a (cid:2) q ) ) +2CuI ( ( s s ) ) E˚ cell (a = q) 1.955V S2− +4Br 2 +8OH− →SO 4 2− +8Br− +4H 2 O
non-spontaneous: N 2(g) +H 2 O ((cid:2)) +2CuI (s) → (d) yes; oxidizing agent: HNO 3 ; reducing agent: H 2 S
N O +2H+ +2Cu +2I− E˚ =−1.955V 2HNO +3H S→2NO+3S+4H O
2 (g) (aq) (s) (aq) cell 3 2 2
7.(a) oxidizing agent: PbO ; reducing agent: Pb 23.(a) −0.235 V; non-spontaneous
2
(b) 0.698 V; spontaneous
(b) oxidizing agent: PbSO ; reducing agent: PbSO
4 4
(c) 0.418 V; spontaneous
8. Co3+ ,Br , H+ , Zn2+
9. Al (s) ,
(aq
H
)
2(g) ,
2(a
A
q)
g (s) , C
(a
l
q
−
)
(aq)
(aq) 26.(a) 2MnO
4
− +5C
2
O
4
2− +16H+ →
2Mn2+ +10CO +8H O
2 2
11.(a) oxidation: Zn (s) →Zn2+ (aq) +2e− (b) 0.2249 mol/L
reduction: Fe2+ +2e− →Fe
(aq) (s) 27. 20.73%
cell potential: 0.315 V; spontaneous
(b) oxidation: Cr →Cr3+ +3e− 29.(a) 6
(s) (aq)
reduction: Al3+ +3e− →Al (b) 3
(aq) (s)
cell potential: −0.918 V; non-spontaneous 30.(a) 2.68×104C
(c) oxidation: H O →2H+ +O +2e− (b) 74.5 h
2 2(aq) (aq) 2(g)
reduction: Ag+ (aq) +e− →Ag (s) 31. 1.16 g
cell potential: 0.105 V; spontaneous
32. 0.595 t
12. 1.52 g
44.(a) 8Al+3NH ClO →4Al O +3NH Cl
4 4 2 3 4
14.(a) E r o e x ˚ d c i e d u ll a c = t t i i o o 1 n n .2 : : 4 F A 7 e g ( V + s) → + F e e − 2+ → (aq) A + g 2e− (b) 2 o H xi 2 d ((cid:2) i ) z + in O g 2 a ((cid:2) g ) en → t: N 2 H H 4 2 C O l ( O g) 4 ; reducing agent: Al
(aq) (s)
overall: Fe +2Ag+ →Fe2+ +2Ag
(s) (aq) (aq) (s)
(b) E˚ =−1.247V
cell
oxidation: Ag →Ag+ +e−
(s) (aq)
reduction: Fe2+ +2e− →Fe
(aq) (s)
overall: Fe2+ +2Ag →2Ag+ +Fe
(aq) (s) (aq) (s)
17. The cost for Al would be 2.56 times the cost for Na.
578 MHR • Appendix A
Appendix B
Supplemental Practice Problems
UNIT 1 5. Name each compound.
O
Chapter 1
1. Identify the type of organic compound in each (a) C 3 H 7 C O C 5 H 11
diagram.
O CH 3
(a) (b) HC CH 2 CH 3 (b) O
O CH
3 Cl
CH
3
O (c) Cl
6. Draw a condensed structural diagram for each
(c) (d) H C CH
2 3 molecule.
2. How are amines structurally different from amides? (a) 1,3-difluoro-4-methyl-1-pentyne
3. The following compound has the IUPAC name (b) trans-7,7-dimethyl-2-octene
3-oxa-1,5-pentanediol. (c) pentanamide
HO OH 7. What is the IUPAC name for each molecule?
O CH
H C CH O CH CH 3
2 2 2 2
(a) Based on its IUPAC name, is this compound (a) C H CH C(CH ) C O CH
2 5 2 32
classed as an ether or an alcohol?
(b) List the attractive forces between molecules of CH 3
this compound, in order of strength. C H
2 5
(c) In which solvent, water or hexane, would this
(b) H N CH C H
compound be more soluble? 2 5
4. Oxalic acid has the following structural formula. CH
3
O O O
C C (c) C H C C H
3 7 3 7
HO OH 8. How does a tertiary alcohol differ from a tertiary
This carboxylic acid is found in the leaves of amine?
rhubarb. Its IUPAC name is ethanedioic acid.
9. Draw and name all possible structural isomers
(a) Name the intermolecular forces that occur
of trichlorobenzene.
between molecules of oxalic acid.
(b) Is this acid soluble in water? 10.(a) Draw and name the carboxylic acid that is a
(c) Tartaric acid is a dicarboxylic acid that is used structural isomer of ethyl pentanoate.
in baking powder. It has the following structural (b) Name the ether that is a structural isomer of
formula. 1-propanol.
(c) Name the ketone that is a structural isomer of
O OH O
propanal.
CC CH CH C 11. Consider the molecule below.
HO OH
OH
To name a hydroxyl group as a side-chain, use
x-hydroxy- as a prefix, where x is the position
(a) Write the molecular formula of this molecule.
number. Follow the example for naming oxalic
(b) Draw two structural isomers, one cyclic and one
acid, as well as the rules for naming the hydroxyl
non-cyclic, for this molecule.
groups as side chains, to give the IUPAC name for
12. The following names are not correct. Identify the
tartaric acid.
mistake in each name, and write the correct IUPAC
name.
(a) methyl ethanoate, C H COOCH
2 5 3
(b) ethoxymethane
(c) 4-hexanol
Appendix B • MHR 579
(d) N-pentylethylethanamide (d) The carboxylic acid that is used in this reaction is
(e) 2-bromobenzene called linolenic acid. Compare the formulas of
linolenic acid and stearic acid, and suggest how
Chapter 2
the two acids differ in structure.
13. Name the product(s) formed in each addition (e) The ester that is made in this reaction is an oil. If
reaction. stearic acid had been used instead, the product
(a) CH 3 (cid:2)C(cid:3)C(cid:2)CH 2 (cid:2)CH 3 +1Br 2 → would have been a fat. Which of these two prod-
(b) 1-methylcyclopentene +H 2 → ucts has the lower melting point?
(c) C H (cid:2)CH(cid:4)CH +H O→
5 11 2 2 21. When PCBs burn, polychlorinated dibenzofurans
(d) 1,3-dimethylcyclobutene +HCl→
(PCDFs) are among the products that may form.
14. Identify the alcohol that is oxidized to prepare each Examine the structure shown below, and circle and
compound. name the functional groups.
(a) 2-pentanone
Cl
(b) pentanal
Cl
15. Complete each substitution reaction.
(a) 1-butanol +HBr→
(b) CH CH CH + Cl → Cl O Cl
3 2 2
(c) benzene +Br → 22. Name three types of molecules that are capable of
2
(d) 2-chloropentane+NaOH → forming polymers.
16. Complete each elimination reaction. 23. Name the alkene that is formed by the elimination
(a) C H (cid:2)CH (cid:2)CH Br→HBr+? of 2-methyl-2-propanol.
16 33 2 2
(b) 3,3-dimethyl-2-butanol H2SO4 24. Polyurethane can be made by the reaction of a diol,
such as HO(CH ) OH and toluene 2,4-diisocyanate,
17. Name the product that is formed in each oxidation. 2 4
shown below.
(a) 3-pentanol to a ketone
(b) ethanal to a carboxylic acid O C N N C O
(c) 2-ethyl-2-methyl-1-butanol to an C H
6 3
aldehyde
CH
(d) cyclooctanol to a ketone 3
Is this reaction going to be an addition or a conden-
18. Name the product that is formed in each reduction. sation polymerization?
(a) propanoic acid to an alcohol
25. What two classes of monomers are used to make the
(b) 3-hexanone to an alcohol
polymer below?
(c) ethene to an alkane
(d) formic acid to an alcohol N N C C
19. For each reaction, name the ester that forms and
H H O O
draw its condensed structural diagram.
(a) methanol +heptanoic acid →
(b) octanoic acid +ethanol → UNIT 2
(c) propanoic acid +isopropyl alcohol →
Chapter 3
(d) 2-butanol +pentanoic acid →
26. A sample of a comet has not yet been captured, but
20. Examine the reaction below, and answer the
the elemental composition of a comet has been pre-
questions that follow.
dicted. How do you think scientists can determine
H 2 C OH the composition of a distant celestial body, such as a
comet?
HC OH + 3C H COOH →
17 29
27. Rank the elements Cs, Sr, and Rb in order of increas-
H 2 C OH ing IE 1 . Then give a brief explanation for your order.
H 2 C O CO C 17 H 29 28. Compounds of Xe, but not He, have been synthe-
sized. What properties of these two elements help to
3H O + HC O CO C H
2 17 29 explain why?
H 2 C O CO C 17 H 29 29.(a) How many electrons must Sn lose to attain the
(a) State two names for the reaction as it proceeds electron configuration of Kr?
from left to right. (b) Why does this not happen?
(b) If this reaction occurs in the reverse direction, (c) The stable ions of Sn are Sn2+and Sn4+. Write the
what name is given to the reverse reaction? electron configuration for these two ions.
(c) Stearic acid, C H COOH, is a saturated (d) Suggest a reason why these ions are stable.
17 35
carboxylic acid. What does this mean? (e) Which of these two ions has the larger radius?
580 MHR • Appendix B
(f) Sn is closer to the noble gas Xe than to the noble (a) C HCl
2
gas Kr. What charge would ions of Sn acquire if (b) CF Cl
3
the electron configuration of Xe was attained? (c) CdI
2
(g) This negative ion of Sn does not exist. Suggest an (d) SnO
2
explanation for this observation.
40. Sodium nitrite is used as a preservative in processed
30. According to the order of filling atomic orbitals meats, such as bacon, ham, and sausage. The nitrite
predicted by the aufbau principle, the 3dorbitals are ion, NO −, may enter the ground water in rural areas
2
filled after the 4sorbital. Explain why the 4sorbital where manure is stored and be a serious health
is filled first, even though it has a higher pincipal threat for infants. Draw a Lewis structure, and
quantum number than the 3dorbitals. predict the shape of NO −. Indicate any resonance
2
31. What type of atomic orbital is described by the structures.
following pairs of quantum numbers? 41. Trisodium phosphate (TSP), Na PO , is used as a
3 4
(a) n=3, l =0 paint stripper and grease remover. Disodium hydro-
(b) n=6, l =3 gen phosphate, Na HPO , can be found in some lax-
2 4
(c) n=3, l =2 atives. Draw a Lewis structure for each molecule,
32. For each grouping below, arrange the energy sub- and determine the shape of the phosphate ion,
levels in order from lowest energy to highest energy. PO 4 3−, and the hydrogen phosphate ion, HPO 4 2−.
(a) 3p, 3d, 4s 42. For a given atom, what is the maximum number of
(b) 4f, 6s, 6d electrons that can have the following quantum num-
(c) 5f, 6s, 7s bers?
33. A road flare contains a salt of strontium to give a red (a) n=3
colour to the flame. Write the electron configuration (b) n=2, l =1, m l =0, m s =+1 2
of the strontium ion, with an electron in the least (c) n=4, l =2
excited energy state. 43. Comment on the validity of the following statement:
34. In what ways are the 4d and 5d orbitals in an atom “Dispersion forces are weak in comparison to other
the same, and in what ways are they different? intermolecular forces.”
35. The energy of an electron in its ground state in a 44. Compare the molecules CH 3 F and NH 2 F with respect
hydrogen atom is −2.18×10−18J. to their
(a) Lewis structures
(a) What is the significance of the negative sign given
(b) dispersion forces
to this energy?
(c) hydrogen bonding
(b) How does the energy of the electron change if it is
excited to the 2sorbital? 45. From the information in the table, classify each
(c) Would the energy change be larger, smaller, or the compound as metallic, network, ionic, or molecular.
same if the electron is excited to a 2porbital,
Electrical conductivity
rather than the 2sorbital?
36. Select the largest ion in each grouping. Compound Melting point (˚C) Solid Liquid
(a) Sr2+, Ba2+, Ca2+ A 848 no yes
(b) N−, N2−, N3−
(c) Se2−Rb+, Br− B 2300 no no
(d) N1−, O1−, F− C 1675 yes yes
37.(a) Arrange the elements As, Sb, and Sn in order of D 182 no no
decreasing IE .
1
(b) Arrange the elements Ba, Mg, and Sr in order of 46. Explain why the melting points of sodium halides
increasing IE . (NaCl, NaBr, and NaI) decrease as the molar masses
2
(c) Arrange the elements Br, Te, and I in order of increase, whereas the melting points of hydrogen
increasing electronegativity. halides (HCl, HBr, and HI) increase as the molar
masses increase.
Chapter 4
47. You have used an iodine solution to test for the
38. Use VSEPR theory to determine the shape of each
presence of starch in many laboratory activities.
molecule.
Iodine has a very low solubility in water. When the
(a) SO Cl (compound used to make some drugs
2 2 iodide ion is present, however, the triiodide ion,
and polymers) I − , forms. Draw the Lewis structure for I − ,
3 (aq) 3 (aq)
(b) ClF (oxidizing agent, mentioned in Chapter 10)
3 and predict the shape of this ion.
(c) XeO F (rare stable compound of Xe)
2 2
39. Determine whether or not each molecule is polar.
Appendix B • MHR 581
48. Elements from different groups can form ions that 58. Use the enthalpies of combustion for the burning
have the same shape. Show that the ions SbCl 4 + and of CO (g) , H 2(g) , andC (s) to determine ∆H˚ for the
BeCl 4 2− have the same shape. reaction C (s) +H 2 O (g) →H 2(g) +CO (g) .
49. Lead(IV) oxide, PbO 2 , is used as the cathode in a CO (g) + 1 2 O 2(g) →CO 2(g) ∆H˚ comb =−238kJ/mol
lead storage battery. Lead(IV) fluoride, PbF , is a
4 H + 1O →H O ∆H˚ =−241kJ/mol
strong oxidizing agent (Chapter 10). Determine if 2(g) 2 2(g) 2 (g) comb
either of these lead compounds is a polar molecule. C (s) +O 2(g) →CO 2(g) ∆H˚ comb =−393kJ/mol
50. Ozone, O 3 , is an essential molecule in the ozone 59. ∆H comb for ethene is −337 kJ/mol.
layer. It filters out some of the UV radiation that (a) Write the balanced equation for the complete
would otherwise destroy life on Earth. At ground combustion of ethene in air. Include the heat term
level, ozone is a component in photochemical smog. in your balanced equation.
Draw the Lewis structure for ozone, and indicate (b) The heat that is produced by burning 1.00 kg of
whether or not ozone is polar. Can ozone exist in ethene warms a quantity of water from 15.0˚C to
resonance forms? 85.0˚C. What is the mass of the water if the heat
transfer is 60.0% efficient?
UNIT 3 60. Determine ∆H˚ for
Chapter 5 Ca2+ (aq) +2OH− (aq) +CO 2(g) →CaCO 3(s) +H 2 O ((cid:2)) , given
the following information.
51. Using the compound ethanol, C H OH, write
2 5
equations to distinguish between ∆H˚ f and ∆H comb . CaO (s) +H 2 O ((cid:2)) →Ca(OH) 2(s) ∆H˚=−65.2kJ/mol
52. Glass has a specific heat capacity of 0.84J/g˚C. CaCO →CaO +CO ∆H˚=+178.1kJ
3(s) (s) 2(g)
A certain metal has a specific heat capacity of
Ca(OH) →Ca2+ +2OH− ∆H˚=−16.2kJ
0.500 J/g˚C. A metal tray and a glass tray have the 2(s) (aq) (aq)
same mass. They are placed in an oven at 80˚C. 61. Calculate the enthalpy of formation of
(a) After 1 h, how does the temperature of the two manganese(IV) oxide, based on the following
trays compare? information.
(b) How does the quantity of heat absorbed by the 4Al (s) +3MnO 2(s) →3Mn (s) +2Al 2 O 3(s) ∆H˚=−1790kJ
two trays compare? 2Al + 3O →Al O ∆H˚ =−1676kJ
(s) 2 2(g) 2 3(s) f
(c) Does either tray feel hotter to the touch? 62. ∆H comb for toluene, C 7 H 8((cid:2)) , is −3904 kJ/mol.
53. A 20.00 g sample of metal is warmed to 165˚C in an (a) Write the equation for the complete combustion
oil bath. The sample is then transferred to a coffee- of toluene.
cup calorimeter that contains 125.0 g of water at (b) Use the combustion equation and ∆H˚ values to
f
5.0˚C. The final temperature of the water is 8.8˚C. determine the enthalpy of formation of toluene.
(a) Calculate the specific heat capacity of the metal.
63. An impure sample of zinc has a mass of 7.35 g. The
(b) What are three sources of experimental error that
sample reacts with 150.0 g of dilute hydrochloric
occur in this experiment?
acid solution inside a calorimeter. The calorimeter
54. ∆H˚ f of HI (g) is + 25.9 kJ. has a mass of 520.57 g and a specific heat capacity
(a) Write the equation that represents this reaction. of 0.400 J/g˚C. ∆H˚ for the following reaction is
f
(b) Which has more enthalpy, the elements H 2(g) and −153.9 kJ.
I 2(g) , or the product HI (g) ? Zn (s) +2HCl (aq) →ZnCl 2(aq) +H 2(g)
(c) What does the positive value of ∆H˚ f indicate When the reaction occurs, the temperature of the
about the energy that is needed to break bonds in hydrochloric acid rises from 14.5˚C to 29.7˚C. What
H 2(g) and I 2(g) , compared with the energy released is the percentage purity of the sample? Assume that
when H(cid:2)I bonds form? the specific heat capacity of the hydrochloric acid is
55. Use ∆H˚ data to determine the heat of reaction for 4.184 J/g˚C. Also assume that all of the zinc in the
f
each reaction. impure sample reacts.
(a) 4NH 3(g) +3O 2(g) →2N 2(g) +6H 2 O ((cid:2)) Chapter 6
(b) 2H O +CS →2H S +CO
2 (g) 2(g) 2 (g) 2(g)
(c) 4NO +6H O →4NH +5O 64. Butane is burned in a lighter at a rate of
(g) 2 (g) 3(g) 2(g)
0.240 mol/min in the following reaction.
56. A 120.0 g sample of water at 30.0˚C is placed in the
C H + 13O →4CO +5H O
freezer compartment of a refrigerator. How much 4 10(g) 2 2(g) 2(g) 2 (g)
heat has the sample lost when it changes completely (a) What is the rate at which O 2(g) is consumed and
to ice at 0˚C? CO 2(g) is produced?
57. ∆H˚ is +106.9 kJ for the reaction (b) How long does 15.0 g of C 4 H 10(g) take to burn?
C +PbO →Pb +CO . How much heat is
(s) (s) (s) (g)
needed to convert 50.0 g of PbO to Pb ?
(s) (s)
582 MHR • Appendix B
65.(a) The rate law equation for a reaction is The rate constant for the reaction is
rate=k[A]2[B]. How does the rate change if [A] is 1.02×107L/(mol•s) at 22˚C. The reaction is first
halved and [B] is doubled? order with respect to O and NO . Calculate the
3(g) (g)
(b) A reaction is zero order for one reactant and sec- rate at which NO forms when
2(g)
ond order for another. What happens to the rate of [O ]=1.0×10−8mol/L and
3(g)
the reaction if the concentrations of both reactants [NO ]=3.5×10−8mol/L.
(g)
are doubled? 71. For reactions in the gaseous phase, a general guide-
66. At 22˚C, the rate constant is 1.02×107L/mol•s for line in chemistry is that the rate of reaction doubles
the following elementary reaction. for every 10˚C rise in temperature.
O +NO →O +NO (a) A 10˚C rise in temperature does not double the
3(g) (g) 2(g) 2(g)
kinetic energy of the molecules. Account for the
(a) What is the order of the reaction?
increase in reaction rate.
(b) Do you expect the reaction to proceed quickly or
(b) If the reaction rate does double for every 10˚C rise
slowly at this temperature?
in temperature, how does the rate at 40˚C and at
(c) What is the molecularity of the reaction?
80˚C compare with the rate at 20˚C?
(d) Based on the information that has been given, is it
reasonable to predict that the rate law equation 72. A cube of zinc metal, measuring 1.0 cm on each
for this reaction is rate=k[O ][NO]? Explain your side, reacts completely with dilute hydrochloric acid
3
answer. in 4 min. An identical cube of zinc is cut into four
equal pieces. How long should it take for the pieces
67. Rate data are collected for the following reaction.
2ClO 2(aq) +2OH− (aq) →ClO 3 − (aq) +ClO 2 − (aq) +H 2 O ((cid:2)) of zinc to react?
73. For the following reaction, a chemist determines
[ ClO 2(aq) ] (mol/L) [ OH− (aq) ] (mol/L) Initial rate (mol/(L • s) by experiment that the rate law equation is
0.060 0.060 2.60 × 10−2 rate=k[H 2(g) ][NO (g) ]2.
2H +2NO →N +2H O
0.12 0.060 1.04 × 10−1 2(g) (g) 2(g) 2 (g)
The chemist proposes three mechanisms for the
0.12 0.12 2.08 × 10−1 reaction. The slow step in each mechanism is listed
below. Which of these steps matches the rate law for
(a) What is the order with respect to each reactant? the reaction? Explain your reasoning.
(b) What is the overall order of the reaction? Slow step for mechanism I:
(c) What is the rate law equation for the reaction? 2NO →N O
(g) 2 2(g)
(d) Calculate the rate constant for the reaction. Slow step for mechanism II:
68. The data below were collected for the following H 2(g) +NO (g) →H 2 O (g) +N (g)
reaction. Slow step for mechanism III:
A (aq) +2B (aq) →2C (aq) +D (aq) H 2(g) +2NO (g) →H 2 O (g) +N 2 O (g)
74. The mechanism for the decomposition of ethenal,
[A] (mol/L) [B] (mol/L) Initial rate (mol/(L • s)
CH CHO, in the presence of iodine vapour
0.050 0.040 6.2 × 10−3 3
is written as follows:
0.050 0.020 3.1 × 10−3 Step 1 CH 3 CHO (g) +I 2(g) →CH 3 I (g) +HI (g) +CO (g)
0.10 0.080 1.2 × 10−2 (slow)
Step 2 CH I +HI →CH +I (fast)
3 (g) (g) 4(g) 2(g)
(a) Identify any intermediates in this reaction
(a) Determine the rate law equation for the reaction.
mechanism.
(b) Determine the rate constant for the reaction.
(b) Which step has the higher activation energy?
(c) What is the overall order of the reaction?
(c) What is the role of I in this reaction?
2(g)
69. At a temperature that is suitable for sucrose to be
(d) What is the overall reaction?
fermented, the concentration of a solution of sucrose
75. A reaction proceeds in three elementary reactions.
changes from 0.20 mol/L to 0.10 mol/L in 12 h. After
Sketch a potential energy diagram (using a reason-
24 h, the concentration is reduced to 0.050 mol/L.
able scale) to show the following activation energies
(a) What is the order of the reaction?
and enthalpies of reaction:
(b) What is the half-life of the reaction?
Step 1 E =50kJ∆H =−30kJ
(c) What is the rate constant for the reaction? a1 1
Step 2 E =30kJ∆H =+20kJ
a2 2
70. The following reaction is involved in the formation Step 3 E =20kJ∆H =−40kJ
a3 3
of photochemical smog.
Mark the positions where activated complexes are
NO (g) +O 3(g) →O 2(g) +NO 2(g) expected. What is ∆H for the overall reaction?
rxn
Appendix B • MHR 583
UNIT 4 Chapter 8
83. A blood sample has a pH of 7.32. What is the hydro-
Chapter 7
nium ion concentration, [H O+]? How can hydroni-
76. Consider the equilibrium below. 3
um ions exist in this basic solution?
S +8O (cid:3)(cid:4)8SO +heat
8(s) 2(g) 2(g)
84. Hydrated metal ions act as weak acids by donating a
What is the effect on the concentration of each sub-
proton. For example, Fe2+becomes hydrated with six
stance when the equilibrium is altered as follows.
water molecules, [Fe(OH ) ]2+. Write an equation to
(a) More S is added. 2 6
8(s)
illustrate how the hydrated iron(II) ion acts as an
(b) The temperature is lowered.
acid in aqueous solution.
(c) The volume of the container is increased.
(d) More SO is injected into the system. 85. Imagine that you are asked to design a chemistry kit
2
for young children to use. In one of the experiments,
77. At 2000 K, the concentration of the components in
the properties of acids and bases are studied. What
the following equilibrium system are
[CO ]=0.30mol/L, [H ]=0.20mol/L, and chemicals are appropriate for this experiment? What
2(g) 2(g)
[H O ]=[CO ]=0.55mol/L. safety precautions would you include?
2 (g) (g)
CO 2(g) +H 2(g) (cid:3)(cid:4)H 2 O (g) +CO (g) 86. A toilet bowl cleaner contains NaHSO 4 as the active
(a) What is the value of the equilibrium constant? ingredient.
(b) When the temperature is lowered, 20.0% of the (a) Write an equation to show how this salt produces
CO is converted back to CO . Calculate the an acidic solution.
(g) 2(g)
equilibrium constant at the lower temperature. (b) What is the pH of a 0.203 mol/L solution of
(c) Rewrite the equilibrium equation, and indicate on NaHSO 4 ?
which side of the equation the heat term should 87. A solution is made by combining 200.0 mL of
be placed. 0.23 mol/L H SO , 600.0 mL of 0.16 mol/L KOH,
2 4
78. After 5.00 g of SO Cl are placed in a 2.00 L flask, and 200.0 mL of water. What is the pH of this
2 2
the following equilibrium is established. solution?
SO 2 Cl 2(g) (cid:3)(cid:4)SO 2(g) +Cl 2(g) 88. K a for CH 3 COOH is 1.8×10−5, and K a for
K c for this equilibrium is 0.0410. Determine the mass HNO 2 is7.2×10−4. When the conjugate bases of
of SO 2 Cl 2(g) that is present at equilibrium. these two acids are compared, which has the larger
79. For the equilibrium below, K c =6.00×10−2. K b ? What is the value of this larger K b ?
N 2(g) +3H 2(g) (cid:3)(cid:4)2NH 3(g) 89. K a for hydrazoic acid, HN 3 , is2.80×10−5.
Explain why this value of K does not apply when
c (a) Write the equation for the ionization of this acid
the equation is written as follows.
in water.
1N + 3H (cid:3)(cid:4)NH
2 2(g) 2 2(g) 3(g) (b) What is the K b for the conjugate base of this acid?
(c) Compare the pH of 0.100 mol/L HN with the pH
80. A 11.5 g sample of I is sealed in a 250 mL flask. 3
2(g)
of a sample of the same volume in which 0.600 g
An equilibrium, shown below, is established as this
of sodium azide, NaN , has been dissolved.
molecular form of I dissociates into iodine atoms. 3
2
I 2(g) (cid:3)(cid:4)2I (g) 90. A 250.0 mL sample of 0.100 mol/L NaHCO 3 contains
K c for the equilibrium is 3.80×10−5. Calculate the 3.800 g of Na 2 CO 3 . What is the pH of the sample?
equilibrium concentration of both forms of the 91. 10.0 mL of NH , with a concentration of
3(aq)
iodine. 5.70×10−2mol/L, is titrated to the endpoint with
81. The greenhouse effect warms the surface of Earth. 2.85 mL of HBr solution. What is the concentration
The increase of CO in the environment is one of of the HBr solution?
2(g)
the factors that contributes to this process. Many 92. Name the conjugate base and the conjugate acid of
older buildings are made of limestone, CaCO 3(s) . HPO 4 2−. What determines if HPO 4 2− will act as an
Consider the following equilibrium. acid or a base?
CaCO (cid:3)(cid:4)CaO +CO ∆H =+175kJ
3(s) (s) 2(g) Chapter 9
(a) In theory, how can the greenhouse effect affect
this equilibrium? 93. K sp for silver chromate, Ag 2 CrO 4 , is1.12×10−12. K sp
(b) Discuss the likelihood that this equilibrium can for silver chloride, AgCl, is 1.77×10−10. Does this
be altered by the greenhouse effect. mean that the molar solubility of Ag 2 CrO 4 is less
than the molar solubility of AgCl? Use a calculation
82. When iron rusts, is entropy increasing or decreasing?
to illustrate your answer.
4Fe +3O →2Fe O
(s) 2(g) 2 3(s)
Why is the rusting of iron a spontaneous reaction at 94. The solubility of a compound can be affected by the
room temperature? presence of a common ion.
(a) What does this statement mean?
(b) Compare the effect of dissloved Pb2+ to the effect
of dissolved OH− on the solubility of Pb(OH) .
2
584 MHR • Appendix B
95. What mass of NaOH is needed to start the precipita- (c) If C is the reducing agent, and if it is an element,
tion of Mg(OH) 2 from 100 mL of a solution that then its oxidation number will increase.
contains 0.100 g of MgCl 2 ? (d) If D is oxidized, then C must be a reducing agent.
96. A warm saturated solution of SrSO , with a volume (e) If C is reduced, then D must lose electrons.
4
of 850 mL, is evaporated to dryness. The residue that 106. Consider the following reaction.
remains has a mass of 0.160 g. 3SF +4BCl →4BF +3SCl +3Cl
4 3 3 2 2
(a) Use this information to calculate the K for (a) Why is this reaction classified as a redox
sp
SrSO . reaction?
4
(b) A reference book gives a K value of 2.8×10−7. (b) What is the oxidizing agent in this reaction?
sp
What could account for the difference between 107. The metals Ga ,In ,Mn ,andNp , and their salts,
(s) (s) (s) (s)
the value in the reference book and the experi- react as follows:
mental value for this K
sp
? 3Mn2+
(aq)
+2Np
(s)
→3Mn
(s)
+2Np3+
(aq)
97. 0.800Lof2.00×10−4mol/LBa(NO 3 ) 2 is added to In3+ (aq) +Ga (s) →In (s) +Ga3+ (aq)
200.0 mL of 5.00×10−4mol/LLi 2 SO 4 . Show, by Mn2+ +Ga (s) →noreaction
calculation, whether or not a precipitate forms. Analyze this information, and list the reducing
agents from the worst to the best.
98. A radioactive form of barium, in the compound
BaSO , is used to diagnose intestinal ailments. Why 108. The following redox reactions occur in basic
4
is a more soluble compound, such as BaCl , not used solution. Balance the equations using the oxidation
2
in this procedure? number method.
99. A solution has a lead concentration, [Pb2+ ], of (a) Ti3+ +RuCl 5 2− →Ru+TiO2+ +Cl−
(aq) (b) ClO →ClO − +ClO −
0.100 mol/L. 0.100 mol of NaI are added to 1.00 L 2 2 3
of this solution. How much of the original Pb2+ 109. The following redox reactions occur in basic
(aq)
precipitates? solution. Use the half-reaction method to balance
the equations.
100. In many parts of Ontario, the water is “hard”
because of the presence of Ca2+ and Mg2+ ions. (a) NO 2 →NO 2 − +NO 3 −
(b) CrO − +HSnO − →CrO − +HSnO −
(a) Does hardness affect the F−content of a fluoridat- (c) Al+ 4 NO − →A 2 l(OH)− + 2 NH 3
3 4 3
ed municipal water supply?
(b) What is the maximum Ca2+ concentration that can 110. The following redox reactions occur in acidic solu-
be present if the F− concentration is 80 ppm? tion. Balance the equations using the half-reaction
method.
(a) ClO − +I →IO − +Cl−
UNIT 5 3 2 3
(b) C H +MnO − →CO +Mn2+
2 4 4 2
Chapter 10 (c) Cu+SO 2− →Cu2+ +SO
4 2
101. Identify the redox reactions. 111. The following redox reactions occur in acidic
(a) CCl +HF→CFCl +HCl solution. Use oxidation numbers to balance the
4 3
(b) Al O +3H SO →Al (SO ) +3H O equations.
2 3 2 4 2 4 3 2
(c) CH +2O →CO +2H O (a) Se+NO − →SeO +NO
4 2 2 2 3 2
(d) P +3OH− +3H O→PH +3H PO − (b) Ag+Cr O 2− →Ag+ +Cr3+
4 2 3 2 2 2 7
102. Consider the following reaction. 112. Balance each equation for a redox reaction.
S +8Na SO →8Na S O (a) P +NO − →H PO +NO (acidic)
8 2 3 2 2 3 4 3 3 4
(a) Assign oxidation numbers to all the elements. (b) MnO +NO − →NO − +Mn2+ (acidic)
2 2 3
(b) Identify the reactant that undergoes reduction. (c) TeO 2− +N O →Te+NO − (basic)
3 2 4 3
(c) Identify the reactant that is the reducing agent. (d) MnO − +N H →MnO +N (basic)
4 2 4 2 2
103. Find the oxidation number for each element. (e) S 2 O 3 2− + OCl− →SO 4 2− +Cl− (basic)
( ( b a ) ) b su o l r f o u n r i i n n B H 4 S O −, 7 2 S − 8 , , B S O O 3 3 − 2 , − B ,S O 2 2 O −, 3 B 2− 2 , H an 6 , d an S d 4 O B 6 2 2 O − 3 ( ( ( g h f ) ) ) B P M b r n 2 O O + 2 S + − O + C 2 l H − → → O B P r → − bC + M l S 2 n O + 2 4 + C 2− + l 2 ( O a (a c c id ( i a d i c c ic i ) d ) ic)
104. List the following oxides of nitrogen in order of 4 2 2 2
113. The following reaction takes place in acidic solution.
decreasing oxidation number of nitrogen:
NO 2 ,N 2 O 5 ,NO,N 2 O 3 ,N 2 O,N 2 O 4 . CH 3 OH (aq) +MnO 4 − (aq) →HCOOH (aq) +Mn2+ (aq)
(a) Balance the equation.
105. For the following redox reaction, indicate which
(b) How many electrons are gained by the oxidizing
statements, if any, are true.
agent when ten molecules of methanol are
C+D→E+F
oxidized?
(a) If C is the oxidizing agent, then it loses electrons. (c) What volume of 0.150 mol/L MnO − solution is
(b) If D is the reducing agent, then it is reduced. 4
needed to react completely with 20.0 g of
methanol?
Appendix B • MHR 585
Chapter 11 123. A current of 3.0 A flows for 1.0 h during an electrol-
114. Consider the galvanic cell represented as ysis of copper(II) sulfate. What mass of copper is
Al|Al3+||Ce4+|Ce3+|Pt. deposited?
(a) What is the cathode? 124. To recover aluminum metal, Al O is first converted
2 3
(b) In which direction do electrons flow through the to AlCl . Then an electrolysis of molten AlCl is
3 3
external circuit? performed using inert carbon electrodes.
(c) What is the oxidizing agent? (a) Write the half-reaction that occurs at the anode
(d) Will the aluminum electrode increase or decrease and at the cathode.
in mass as the cell operates? (b) Can the standard reduction potentials be used
115.(a) Which is a better oxidizing agent in acidic solu- to calculate the external voltage needed for this
tion, MnO −orCr O 2−? From what information process? Explain your answer.
4 2 7
did you determine your answer? 125. Summarize the differences between a hydrogen fuel
(b) Suppose that you have the metals Ni, Cu, Fe, and cell and a dry cell.
Ag, as well as 1.0 mol/L aqueous solutions of the
nitrates of these metals. Which metals should be
paired in a galvanic cell to produce the highest
standard cell potential? (Use the most common
ion for each metal.)
116. E˚ for the cell No|No3+||Cu2+|Cu is 2.842 V. Use
cell
this information, as well as the standard reduction
potential for the Cu2+/Cu half-reaction given in
tables, to calculate the standard reduction potential
for the No/No3+ half-cell.
117. A galvanic cell is set up using tin in a 1.0 mol/L Sn2+
solution and iron in a 1.0 mol/L Fe2+solution.
(a) Write the equation for the overall reaction that
occurs in this cell.
(b) What is the standard cell potential?
(c) Which electrode is positive in this cell?
(d) What change in mass will occur at the anode
when the cathode undergoes a change in mass
of 1.50 g?
118. Predict the products that would be expected from
the electrolysis of 1.0 mol/L NaI. Use the non-
standard Evalues for water.
119. Given the half reactions below, determine if the
thiosulfate ion, S O 2−, can exist in an acidic
2 3
solution under standard conditions.
S O 2− +H O→2SO +2H+ +4e−E˚=0.40V
2 3 2 2
2S+H O→S O 2− +6H+ +4e−E˚=−0.50V
2 2 3
120. Refer to the table of half-cell potentials to determine
if MnO can oxidize Br−toBr in acidic solution
2 2
under standard conditions.
121. A galvanic cell contains 50.0 mL of 0.150 mol/L
CuSO . If the Cu2+ ions are completely used up,
4
what is the maximum quantity of electricity that the
cell can generate?
122. Determine the standard cell potential for each redox
reaction.
(a) IO − +6ClO − +6H+ →I− +3H O+6ClO
3 2 2 2
(b) 2Cu2+ +Hg 2+ →2Hg2+ +2Cu+
2
(c) Ba2+ +Pb→Pb2+ +Ba
(d) Ni+I →Ni2+ +2I−
2
586 MHR • Appendix B
Appendix C
Alphabetical List of Elements
Element Symbol Atomic Number Element Symbol Atomic Number
Actinium Ac 89 Neodymium Nd 60
Aluminum Al 13 Neon Ne 10
Americium Am 95 Neptunium Np 93
Antimony Sb 51 Nickel Ni 28
Argon Ar 18 Niobium Nb 41
Arsenic As 33 Nitrogen N 7
Astatine At 85 Nobelium No 102
Barium Ba 56 Osmium Os 76
Berkelium Bk 97 Oxygen O 8
Beryllium Be 4 Palladium Pd 46
Bismuth Bi 83 Phosphorus P 15
Bohrium Bh 107 Platinum Pt 78
Boron B 5 Plutonium Pu 94
Bromine Br 35 Polonium Po 84
Cadmium Cd 48 Potassium K 19
Calcium Ca 20 Praseodymium Pr 59
Californium Cf 98 Promethium Pm 61
Carbon C 6 Protactinium Pa 91
Cerium Ce 58 Radium Ra 88
Cesium Cs 55 Radon Rn 86
Chlorine Cl 17 Rhenium Re 75
Chromium Cr 24 Rhodium Rh 45
Cobalt Co 27 Rubidium Rb 37
Copper Cu 29 Ruthenium Ru 44
Curium Cm 96 Rutherfordium Rf 104
Dubnium Db 105 Samarium Sm 62
Dysprosium Dy 66 Scandium Sc 21
Einsteinium Es 99 Seaborgium Sg 106
Erbium Er 68 Selenium Se 34
Europium Eu 63 Silicon Si 14
Fermium Fm 100 Silver Ag 47
Fluorine F 9 Sodium Na 11
Francium Fr 87 Strontium Sr 38
Gadolinium Gd 64 Sulfur S 16
Gallium Ga 31 Tantalum Ta 73
Germanium Ge 32 Technetium Tc 43
Gold Au 79 Tellurium Te 52
Hafnium Hf 72 Terbium Tb 65
Hassium Hs 108 Thallium Tl 81
Helium He 2 Thorium Th 90
Holmium Ho 67 Thulium Tm 69
Hydrogen H 1 Tin Sn 50
Indium In 49 Titanium Ti 22
Iodine I 53 Tungsten W 74
Iridium Ir 77 Ununbium Uub 112
Iron Fe 26 Ununhexium Uuh 116
Krypton Kr 36 Ununnilium Uun 110**
Lanthanum La 57 Ununquadium Uuq 114
Lawrencium Lr 103 Unununium Uuu 111
Lead Pb 82 Uranium U 92
Lithium Li 3 Vanadium V 23
Lutetium Lu 71 Xenon Xe 54
Magnesium Mg 12 Ytterbium Yb 70
Manganese Mn 25 Yttrium Y 39
Meitnerium Mt 109 Zinc Zn 30
Mendelevium Md 101 Zirconium Zr 40
Mercury Hg 80
Molybdenum Mo 42
**The names and symbols for elements 110 through 118 have not yet been chosen
Appendix C • MHR 587
MAIN-GROUP Periodic Table of the Elements
ELEMENTS
1
Atomic number 6 12.01 Average atomic mass*
(IA) Electronegativity 2.5 + 4 Common ion charge
First ionization energy (kJ/mol) 1086 +2 Other ion charges
1 1.01 C
Melting point (K) 4765
2.20 1+ Boiling point (K) 4098
1 1 1 3 3 1 .8 2 1 H 1- 2 carbon
20.28
(IIA)
hydrogen metals (main group)
3 6.94 4 9.01 metals (transition)
0.98 1+ 1.57 2+ Gases metals (inner transition)
520 899
2 453.7 Li 1560Be Liquids metalloids
1615 2744 Synthetics nonmetals
lithium beryllium
11 22.99 12 24.31 TRANSITION ELEMENTS
0.93 1+ 1.31 2+
496 738
3 371 Na 923.2Mg 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
1156 1363
(IIIB) (IVB) (VB) (VIB) (VIIB) (VIIIB)
sodium magnesium
19 39.10 20 40.08 21 44.96 22 47.87 23 50.94 24 52.00 25 54.94 26 55.85 27 58.93
0.82 1+ 1.00 2+ 1.36 3+ 1.54 4+ 1.63 5+ 1.66 3+ 1.55 4+ 1.83 3+ 1.88 2+
419 590 631 658 2+ 650 2+ 653 2+ 717 2+ 759 2+ 760 3+
4 336.7 K 1115Ca 1814Sc 1941 Ti 3+ 2183 V 3+ 2180 Cr 6+ 1519Mn 3+ 1811Fe 1768Co
1032 1757 3109 3560 3680 4+ 2944 2334 7+ 3134 3200
potassium calcium scandium titanium vanadium chromium manganese iron cobalt
37 85.47 38 87.62 39 88.91 40 91.22 41 92.91 42 95.94 43 (98) 44 101.07 45 102.91
0.82 1+ 0.95 2+ 1.22 3+ 1.33 4+ 1.6 5+ 2.16 6+ 2.10 7+ 2.2 3+ 2.28 3+
403 549 616 660 664 3+ 685 702 4+ 711 720
5 312.5Rb 1050 Sr 1795 Y 2128 Zr 2750Nb 2896Mo 2430Tc 6+ 2607Ru 2237Rh
941.2 1655 3618 4682 5017 4912 4538 4423 3968
rubidium strontium yttrium zirconium niobium molybdenum technetium ruthenium rhodium
55 132.91 56 137.33 57 138.91 72 178.49 73 180.95 74 183.84 75 186.21 76 190.23 77 192.22
0.79 1+ 0.89 2+ 1.10 3+ 1.3 4+ 1.5 5+ 1.7 6+ 1.9 4+ 2.2 4+ 2.2 4+
6 376 503 538 642 761 770 760 6+ 840 3+ 880 3+
301.7Cs 1000Ba 1191La 2506Hf 3290 Ta 3695 W 3459Re 7+ 3306Os 2719 Ir
944 2170 3737 4876 5731 5828 5869 5285 4701
cesium barium lanthanum hafnium tantalum tungsten rhenium osmium iridium
87 (223) 88 (226) 89 (227) 104 (261) 105 (262) 106 (266) 107 (264) 108 (269) 109 (268)
0.7 1+ 0.9 2+ 1.1 3+ – 4+ – – – – – – – – – –
7 ~375 509 499 – – – – – –
300.2Fr 973.2Ra 1324Ac – Rf – Db – Sg – Bh – Hs – Mt
– – 3471 – – – – – –
francium radium actinium rutherfordium dubnium seaborgium bohrium hassium meitnerium
INNER TRANSITION ELEMENTS
58 140.12 59 140.91 60 144.24 61 (145) 62 150.36 63 151.96 64 157.25
1.12 3+ 1.13 3+ 1.14 3+ – 3+ 1.17 3+ – 3+ 1.20 3+
6 Lanthanoids 5 1 2 0 7 71Ce 4+ 5 1 2 2 3 04 Pr 5 1 3 2 0 94Nd 5 1 3 3 6 15Pm 5 1 4 3 3 47Sm 2+ 5 1 4 0 7 95Eu 2+ 5 1 9 5 3 86Gd
3716 3793 3347 3273 2067 1802 3546
cerium praseodymium neodymium promethium samarium europium gadolinium
90 232.04 91 231.04 92 238.03 93 237.05 94 (244) 95 (243) 96 (247)
1.3 4+ 1.5 5+ 1.7 6+ 1.3 5+ 1.3 4+ – 3+ – 3+
7 Actinoids 587 568 4+ 584 3+ 597 3+ 585 3+ 578 4+ 581
2023Th 1845Pa 1408 U 4+ 917 Np 4+ 913.2Pu 5+ 1449Am 5+ 1618Cm
5061 – 4404 5+ – 6+ 3501 6+ 2284 6+ 3373
thorium protactinium uranium neptunium plutonium americium curium
*Average atomic mass data in brackets indicate atomic mass of most stable isotope of the element.
588 MHR • Appendix C
MAIN-GROUP
ELEMENTS
18
(VIIIA)
2 4.00
– –
2372
13 14 15 16 17 5.19 He
5.02
(IIIA) (IVA) (VA) (VIA) (VIIA)
helium
5 10.81 6 12.01 7 14.01 8 16.00 9 19.00 10 20.18
2.04 – 2.55 – 3.04 3– 3.44 2– 3.98 1– – –
800 1086 1402 1314 1681 2080
2348 B 4765 C 63.15 N 54.36 O 53.48 F 24.56Ne
4273 4098 77.36 90.2 84.88 27.07
boron carbon nitrogen oxygen fluorine neon
13 26.98 14 28.09 15 30.97 16 32.07 17 35.45 18 39.95
1.61 – 1.90 – 2.19 – 2.58 2– 3.16 1– – –
577 786 1012 999 1256 1520
10 11 12 933.5Al 1687 Si 317.3 P 392.8 S 171.7Cl 83.8 Ar
2792 3538 553.7 717.8 239.1 87.3
(IB) (IIB) aluminum silicon phosphorus sulfur chlorine argon
28 58.69 29 63.55 30 65.39 31 69.72 32 72.61 33 74.92 34 78.96 35 79.90 36 83.80
1.91 2+ 1.90 2+ 1.65 2+ 1.81 3+ 2.01 – 2.18 – 2.55 2– 2.96 1– – –
737 3+ 745 1+ 906 579 761 947 941 1143 1351
1728Ni 1358Cu 692.7Zn 302.9Ga 1211Ge 1090As 493.7Se 266 Br 115.8Kr
3186 2835 1180 2477 3106 876.2 958.2 332 119.9
nickel copper zinc gallium germanium arsenic selenium bromine krypton
46 106.42 47 107.87 48 112.41 49 114.82 50 118.71 51 121.76 52 127.60 53 126.90 54 131.29
2.20 2+ 1.93 1+ 1.69 2+ 1.78 3+ 1.96 4+ 2.05 – 2.1 – 2.66 1– – –
805 3+ 731 868 558 708 2+ 834 869 1009 1170
1828Pd 1235Ag 594.2Cd 429.8In 505 Sn 903.8Sb 722.7Te 386.9 I 161.4Xe
3236 2435 1040 3345 2875 1860 1261 457.4 165
palladium silver cadmium indium tin antimony tellurium iodine xenon
78 195.08 79 196.97 80 200.59 81 204.38 82 207.20 83 208.98 84 (209) 85 (210) 86 (222)
2.2 4+ 2.4 3+ 1.9 2+ 1.8 1+ 1.8 2+ 1.9 3+ 2.0 4+ 2.2 1– – –
870 2+ 890 1+ 1107 1+ 589 3+ 715 4+ 703 5+ 813 2+ (926) 1037
2042 Pt 1337Au 234.3Hg 577.2Tl 600.6Pb 544.6Bi 527.2Po 575 At 202.2Rn
4098 3129 629.9 1746 2022 1837 1235 – 211.5
platinum gold mercury thallium lead bismuth polonium astatine radon
110 (271) 111 (272) 112 (277) 113 114 (285) 115 116 (289)
– – – – – – – – – –
– – – – –
– Uun – Uuu – Uub – Uuq – Uuh
– – – – –
ununnilium unununium ununbium ununquadium ununhexium
65 158.93 66 162.50 67 164.93 68 167.26 69 168.93 70 173.04 71 174.97
– 3+ 1.22 3+ 1.23 3+ 1.24 3+ 1.25 3+ – 3+ 1.0 3+
565 572 581 589 597 603 2+ 524
1629Tb 1685Dy 1747Ho 1802 Er 1818Tm 1092Yb 1936Lu
3503 2840 2973 3141 2223 1469 3675
terbium dysprosium holmium erbium thulium ytterbium lutetium
97 (247) 98 (251) 99 (252) 100 (257) 101 (258) 102 (259) 103 (262)
– 3+ – 3+ – 3+ – 3+ – 3+ – 3+ – 3+
601 4+ 608 619 627 635 2+ 642 2+ –
1323Bk 1173 Cf 1133Es 1800Fm 1100Md 1100No 1900 Lr
– – – – – – –
berkelium californium einsteinium fermium mendelevium nobelium lawrencium
Appendix C • MHR 589
Appendix D
Math and Chemistry
Rule 2 Adding and Subtracting
The value with the fewest number of decimal
Significant Digits places, going into a calculation, determines the
number of decimal places that you should report
All measurements involve uncertainty. One source
in your answer.
of this uncertainty is the measuring device itself.
Another source is your ability to perceive and interpret Rule 3 Rounding
a reading. In fact, you cannot measure anything with To get the appropriate number of significant
complete certainty. The last (farthest right) digit in digits (rule 1) or decimal places (rule 2), you
any measurement is always an estimate. may need to round your answer.
The digits that you record when you measure • If your answer ends in a number that is greater
something are called significant digits. Significant than 5, increase the preceding digit by 1. For
digits include the digits that you are certain about, example, 2.346 can be rounded to 2.35.
anda final, uncertain digit that you estimate. Follow • If your answer ends with a number that is less
the rules below to identify the number of significant than 5, leave the preceding number unchanged.
digits in a measurement. For example, 5.73 can be rounded to 5.7.
• If your answer ends with 5, increase the
Rules for Determining Significant Digits
preceding number by 1 if it is odd. Leave the
Rule 1 All non-zero numbers are significant. preceding number unchanged if it is even. For
• 7.886 has four significant digits. example, 18.35 can be rounded to 18.4, but
• 19.4 has three significant digits. 18.25 is rounded to 18.2.
• 527.266 992 has nine significant digits.
Sample Problem
Rule 2 All zeros that are located between two non-zero
Using Significant Digits
numbers are significant.
• 408 has three significant digits. Problem
• 25 074 has five significant digits.
Suppose that you measure the masses of four
Rule 3 Zeros that are located to the left of a measure- objects as 12.5 g, 145.67 g, 79.0 g, and 38.438 g.
ment are notsignificant. What is the total mass?
• 0.0907 has three significant digits: the 9, the
What Is Required?
third 0 to the right, and the 7.
You need to calculate the total mass of the objects.
Rule 4 Zeros that are located to the right of a measure-
ment may or may not be significant. What Is Given?
• 22 700 may have three significant digits, if the
You know the mass of each object.
measurement is approximate.
Plan Your Strategy
• 22 700 may have five significant digits, if the
measurement is taken carefully. • Add the masses together, aligning them at the
decimal point.
When you take measurements and use them to calculate
• Underline the estimated (farthest right) digit in
other quantities, you must be careful to keep track of
each value. This is a technique you can use to
which digits in your calculations and results are signifi-
help you keep track of the number of estimated
cant. Why? Your results should not imply more certainty
digits in your final answer.
than your measured quantities justify. This is especially
• In the question, two values have the fewest
important when you use a calculator. Calculators usually
decimal places: 12.5 and 79.0. You need to
report results with far more digits than your data warrant.
round your answer so that it has only one
Always remember that calculators do not make decisions
decimal place.
about certainty. You do. Follow the rules given below to
report significant digits in a calculated answer. Act on Your Strategy
Rules for Reporting Significant Digits in 12.5
145.67
Calculations
79.0
Rule 1 Multiplying and Dividing
The value with the fewest number of significant
+38.438
digits, going into a calculation, determines the 275.608
number of significant digits that you should Totalmass=275.608g
report in your answer. Therefore, the total mass of the objects is 275.6 g.
590 MHR • Appendix D
Figure D.3 shows you how to calculate the mass of one
Check Your Solution mole of water using a scientific calculator. When you
• Your answer is in grams. This is a unit of mass. enter an exponent on a scientific calculator, you do not
• Your answer has one decimal place. This is the have to enter (×10).
same as the values in the question with the
fewest decimal places. Keystrokes Display
6.02¨23
6.02 23
≠2.99¨23— 2.99 −23
Practice Problems = 17.998
Significant Digits
Round to three significant
1. Express each answer using the correct number digits and express in scientific
of significant digits. notation:1.80×101g/mol
a) 55.671g+45.78g
b) 1.9mm+0.62mm Figure D.3 On some scientific calculators, the ¨key
c) 87.9478L−86.25L is labelled ´. Key in negative exponents by entering the
d) 0.350mL+1.70mL+1.019mL exponent, then striking the —key.
e) 5.841cm×6.03cm
17.51g
f)
2.2cm3 Rules for Scientific Notation
Rule 1 To multiply two numbers in scientific notation,
add the exponents.
Scientific Notation
(7.32×10 −3)×(8.91×10 −2)
One mole of water, H 2 O, contains =(7.32×8.91)×10( −3+−2)
602 214 199 000 000 000 000 000 molecules. =65.2212×10 −5
Each molecule has a mass of →6.52×10 −4
0.000 000 000 000 000 000 000 029 9 g. As you can see,
it would be very awkward to calculate the mass of one Rule 2 To divide two numbers in scientific notation,
mole of water using these values. To simplify large subtract the exponents.
numbers when reporting them and doing calculations, (1.842×106g)÷(1.0787×102g/mol)
you can use scientific notation. =(1.842÷1.0787)×10(6−2)
Step 1 Move the decimal point so that only one =1.707611×104g
non-zero digit is in front of the decimal point. →1.708×104g
(Note that this number is now between 1.0 and
Rule 3 To add or subtract numbers in scientific notation,
9.99999999.) Count the number of places that the
first convert the numbers so they have the same
decimal point moves to the left or to the right.
exponent. Each number should have the same
Step 2 Multiply the value by a power of 10. Use the exponent as the number with the greatest power
number of places that the decimal point moved of 10. Once the numbers are all expressed to the
as the exponent for the power of 10. If the deci- same power of 10, the power of 10 is neither
mal point moved to the right, exponent is nega- added nor subtracted in the calculation.
tive. If the decimal point moved to the left, the (3.42×106cm)+(8.53×103cm)
exponent is positive. =(3.42×106cm)+(0.00853×106cm)
=3.42853×106cm
6.02 000 000 000 000 000 000 000.
→3.43×106cm
23 21 18 15 12 9 6 3 (9.93×101L)−(7.86×10 −1L)
6.02×1023 =(9.93×101L)−(0.0786×101L)
Figure D.1 The decimal point moves to the left.
=9.8514×101L
→9.85×101L
Practice problems are given on the following page.
0.000 000 000 000 000 000 000 02.9 9 g
3 6 9 12 15 18 21 23
2.99×10−23
Figure D.2 The decimal point moves to the right.
Appendix D • MHR 591
Practice Problems There are logarithms for all numbers, not just whole
multiples of 10. What is the pH of a solution if
Scientific Notation [H O+]=0.00476mol/L? Enter 0.00476. Press the
3
[LOG] key and then the [±] key. The answer is 2.322.
1. Convert each value into correct scientific
This result has three significant digits—the same
notation.
number of significant digits as the concentration.
(a) 0.000 934
(b) 7 983 000 000
(c) 0.000 000 000 820 57
(d) 496×106
(e) 0.00006×101 For logarithmic values, only the digits to the right of the
(f) 30972×10−8 decimal point count as significant digits. The digit to the
2. Add, subtract, multiply, or divide. Round off left of the decimal point fixes the location of the decimal
point of the original value.
your answer, and express it in scientific notation
to the correct number of significant digits.
(a) (3.21×10−3)+(9.2×102)
(b) (8.1×103)+(9.21×102) What if you want to find [H 3 O+]from the pH? You
(c) (1.0101×101)−(4.823×10−2) would need to find 10−pH. For example, what is [H 3 O+]
(d) (1.209×106)×(8.4×107) if the pH is 5.78? Enter 5.78, and press the [±] key. Then
(e) (4.89×10−4)÷(3.20×10−2) use the [10x] function. The answer is 10−5.78. Therefore,
[H O+]is 1.7×10−6mol/L.
3
Remember that the pH scale is a negative log scale.
Thus, a decrease in pH from pH 7 to pH 4 is an increase
Logarithms
of 103, or 1000, in the acidity of a solution. An increase
Logarithms are a convenient method for communicating from pH 3 to pH 6 is a decrease of 103, or 1000, in
large and small numbers. The logarithm, or “log,” of a acidity.
number is the value of the exponent that 10 would
have to be raised to, in order to equal this number.
Every positive number has a logarithm. Numbers that Practice Problems
are greater than 1 have a positive logarithm. Numbers
that are between 0 and 1 have a negative logarithm. Logarithms
Table D1 gives some examples of the logarithm values
1. Calculate the logarithm of each number. Note
of numbers.
the trend in your answers.
(a) 1 (c)10 (e)100 (g)50 000
Table D.1 Some Numbers and Their Logarithms
(b) 5 (d)50 (f)500 (h) 100 000
Scientific
2. Calculate the antilogarithm of each number.
Number notation As a power of 10 Logarithm
(a) 0 (c) −1 (e) −2 (g) −3
1 000 000 1 × 106 106 6 (b) 1 (d) 2 (f) 3
7 895 900 7.8590 × 105 105.8954 5.8954 3.(a) How are your answers for question 2, parts
1 1 × 100 100 0 (b) and (c), related?
(b) How are your answers for question 2, parts
0.000 001 1 × 10−6 10−6 −6 (d) and (e), related?
0.004 276 4.276 × 10−3 10−2.3690 −2.3690 (c) How are your answers for question 2, parts
(f) and (g), related?
Logarithms are especially useful for expressing values (d) Calculate the antilogarithm of 3.5.
that span a range of powers of 10. The Richter scale for (e) Calculate the antilogarithm of –3.5.
earthquakes, the decibel scale for sound, and the pH (f) Take the reciprocal of your answer for
scale for acids and bases all use logarithmic scales. part (d).
(g) How are your answers for parts (e) and (f)
Logarithms and pH related?
The pH of an acid solution is defined as −log[H O+]. 4.(a) Calculate log 76 and log 55.
3
(The square brackets mean “concentration.”) For (b) Add your answers for part (a).
example, suppose that the hydronium ion concentration (c) Find the antilogarithm of your answer for
in a solution is 0.0001 mol/L (10−4mol/L). The pH is part (b).
−log(0.0001). To calculate this, enter 0.0001 into your (d) Multiply 76 and 55.
calculator. Then press the [LOG] key. Press the [±] key. (e) How are your answers for parts (c) and (d)
The answer in the display is 4. Therefore, the pH of the related?
solution is 4.
592 MHR • Appendix D
The Unit Analysis Method of Problem Sample Problem
Solving Active ASA
The unit analysis method of problem solving is
Problem
extremely versatile. You can use it to convert between
In the past, pharmacists measured the active ingre-
units or to solve some formula problems. If you forget a
dients in many medications in a unit called grains
formula during a test, you may still be able to solve the
(gr). A grain is equal to 64.8 mg. If one headache
problem using unit analysis.
tablet contains 5.0 gr of active acetylsalicylic acid
The unit analysis method involves analyzing the
(ASA), how many grams of ASA are in two tablets?
units and setting up conversion factors. You match
and arrange the units so that they divide out to give What Is Required?
the desired unit in the answer. Then you multiply
You need to find the mass in grams of ASA in
and divide the numbers that correspond to the units.
two tablets.
Steps for Solving Problems Using Unit What Is Given?
Analysis There are 5.0 gr of ASA in one tablet. A conversion
Step 1 Determine which data you have and which factor for grains to milligrams is given.
conversion factors you need to use. (A conver-
Plan Your Strategy
sion factor is usually a ratio of two numbers
Multiply the given quantity by conversion factors
with units, such as 1000 g/1 kg. You multiply
until all the unwanted units cancel out and only
the given data by the conversion factor to get
the desired units remain.
the desired units for the answer.) It is often
convenient to use the following three categories
Have Need Conversion factors
to set up your solution: Have, Need, and
5.0 gr ? g 64.8 mg/1 gr and 1 g/1000 mg
Conversion factor.
Step 2 Arrange the data and conversion factors so that Act on Your Strategy
you can cross out the undesired units. Decide
whether you need any additional conversion
5.0gr × 64.8mg × 1g ×2tablets
1tablet 1gr 1000mg
factors to get the desired units for the answer.
=
5.0×64.8×1×2g
Step 3 Multiply all the numbers on the top of the ratio. 1000
Then multiply all the numbers on the bottom of =0.648g
the ratio. Divide the top result by the bottom =0.65g
result.
There are 0.65 g of active ASA in two headache
Step 4 Check that you have cancelled the units correct-
tablets.
ly. Also check that the answer seems reasonable,
and that the significant digits are correct. Check Your Solution
There are two significant digits in the answer.
This is the least number of significant digits in the
given data.
Remember that counting numbers for exact quantities are Notice how conversion factors are multiplied
considered to have infinite significant digits. For example, until all the unwanted units are cancelled out,
if you have 3 apples, the number is exact, and has an leaving only the desired unit in the answer.
infinite number of significant digits. Conversion factors
for unit analysis are a form of counting or record keeping.
Therefore, you do not need to consider the number of The sample problem on the next page will show you
significant digits in conversion factors, such as 1000 mL/ how to solve a stoichiometric problem.
1 L, when deciding on the number of significant digits in
the answer.
Appendix D • MHR 593
Sample Problem
Therefore, 2.0 g of oxygen are produced by the
Stoichiometry and Unit Analysis
decomposition of 5.0 g of potassium chlorate.
Problem As you become more familiar with this type of
What mass of oxygen, O , can be obtained by the question, you will be able to complete more than
2
decomposition of 5.0 g of potassium chlorate, one step at once. Below, you can see how the con-
KClO ? The balanced equation is given below. version factors we used in each step above can be
3
2KClO → 2KCl+3O combined. Set these conversion ratios so that the
3 2
units cancel out correctly.
What Is Required? massO = 5.0gKClO × (cid:2) 1mol (cid:3) ×
You need to calculate the mass of oxygen, in grams, 2 3 122.6gKClO
3
(cid:2) (cid:3) (cid:2) (cid:3)
that is produced by the decomposition of 5.0 g of 3molO 2 × 32.0g
potassium chlorate. 2molKClO 3 1molO 2
= 1.96g
What Is Given?
= 2.0g
You know the mass of potassium chlorate that
decomposes. Check Your Solution
=
Mass 5.0 g The oxygen makes up only part of the potassium
From the balanced equation, you can obtain the chlorate. Thus, we would expect less than 5.0 g
molar ratio of the reactant and the product. of oxygen, as was calculated.
The smallest number of significant digits in the
3molO
2
2molKClO question is two. Thus, the answer must also have
3
Plan Your Strategy two significant digits.
Calculate the molar masses of potassium chlorate
and oxygen. Use the molar mass of potassium
chlorate to find the number of moles in the sample. Practice Problems
Use the molar ratio to find the number of moles of
Unit Analysis
oxygen produced. Use the molar mass of oxygen to
Use the unit analysis method to solve each
convert this value to grams.
problem.
Act on Your Strategy 1. The molar mass of cupric chloride is
The molar mass of potassium chlorate is 134.45 g/mol. What is the mass, in grams,
1×M = 39.10 of 8.19×10−3 mol of this compound?
K
1 3 × × M M Cl = = 4 3 8 5 . . 0 4 0 5 2. To make a salt solution, 0.82 mol of CaCl 2 are
O dissolved in 1650 mL of water. What is the
122.55g/mol
concentration, in g/L, of the solution?
The molar mass of oxygen is 3. The density of solid sulfur is 2.07g/cm3. What
2×M =32.00 g/mol is the mass, in kg, of a 1.8dm3 sample?
O
Find the number of moles of potassium chlorate. 4. How many grams of dissolved sodium bromide
(cid:2) (cid:3)
molKClO = 5.0g× 1mol are in 689 mL of a 1.32 mol/L solution?
3 122.55gKClO
3
= 0.0408mol
Find the number of moles of oxygen produced.
molO 2 = 3molO 2
0.0408molKClO 2molKClO
3 3
molO = 0.0408molKClO × 3molO 2
2 3 2molKClO
3
= 0.0612mol
Convert this value to grams.
massO = 0.0612mol× 32.00g
2 1molO
2
= 1.96g
= 2.0g
594 MHR • Appendix D
Appendix E
Chemistry Data Tables Table E.4 Conversion Factors
Quantity Relationships between units
Table E.1 Useful Math Relationships
D = m length 1 m = 10−3 km
V
= 103 mm
P = F = 102 cm
A
π = 3.1416 1 pm = 10−12 m
VolumeofsphereV = 4πr3
3
mass 1 kg = 103 g
Volumeofcylinder=πr2h = 10−3 t
1 u = 1.66 × 10−27 kg
Table E.2 Fundamental Physical Constants (to six
significant digits)
acceleration due to gravity (g ) 9.806 65 m/s2 temperature 0 K = −273.15˚C
Avogadro constant (N a ) 6.022 14 × 1023/mol
charge on one mole of 96 485.3 C/mol T (K) = T (˚C) + 273.15
electrons (Faraday constant) T (˚C) = T (K) − 273.15
mass of electron (m s ) 9.109 38 × 10−31 kg
mass of neutron (m n ) 1.674 93 × 10−27 kg mp of HO = 273.15 K (0˚C)
2
mass of proton (m p ) 1.672 62 × 10−27 kg bp of H 2 O = 373.15 K (100˚C)
molar gas constant (R ) 8.314 47 J/mol·K
molar volume of gas at STP 22.414 0 L/mol volume 1 L = 1 dm3
speed of light in vacuo (c) 2.997 92 × 108 m/s = 10−3 m3
= 103 mL
unified atomic mass (u) 1.660 54 × 10−27 kg
Table E.3 Common SI Prefixes 1 mL = 1 cm3
tera (T) 1012
giga (G) 109 pressure 101 325 Pa = 101.325 kPa
= 760 mm Hg
mega (M) 106
= 760 torr
kilo (k) 103 = 1 atm
deci (d) 10−1
centi (c) 10−2 density 1 kg/m3 = 103 g/m3
milli (m) 10−3 = 10−3 g/mL
micro (µ) 10−6 = 1 g/L
nano (n) 10−9
pico (p) 10−12 energy 1 J = 6.24 × 1018 eV
Appendix E • MHR 595
Table E.5 Alphabetical Listing of Common Polyatomic Ions Table E.6 Summary of Naming Rules for Ions
Type of ion Prefix or suffix Example
Most common ion Common related ions
− Polyatomic Ions
acetate CH COO
3
ammonium NH 4 + if the ion is the most -ate chlorate, ClO 3 −
common oxoanion
arsenate AsO
4
3−
arsenite AsO3
3−
−
if the ion has one O -ite chlorite, ClO
− 2
benzoate C6H5COO atom less than the most
borate BO 3− tetraborate B O 2− common oxoanion
3 4 7
bromate BrO 3 3− i a f t o th m e s i o le n s s h t a h s a t n w t o h e O most hypo-___-ite h C y lO p − ochlorite,
carbonate CO 3
2−
bicarbonate HCO 3
−
common oxoanion
(hydrogen
carbonate) if the ion has 1 O per-___-ate perch − lorate,
atom more than the ClO
− − 4
chlorate ClO 3 perchlorate ClO 4− most common oxoanion
chlorite ClO
hypochlorite ClO 2− if the ion has 1 H atom bi- bicarb − onate,
added to the most HCO
chromate CrO 4
2−
dichromate Cr2O 7
2−
common oxoanion
3
− −
cyanide CN cyanate OCN if the ion has 1 O atom thio- thiosulphate,
thiocyanate SCN − less and 1 S atom more S O 2−
2 3
− than the most common
glutamate C H NO
5 8 4 oxoanion
hydroxide OH
−
peroxide O2
2−
Metallic Ions
− −
iodate IO iodide I
3
if the ion has the higher -ic titanic,
Ti4+
− −
nitrate NO 3 nitrite NO 2 possible charge
oxalate OOCCOO2− if the ion has the lower -ous cuprous, Cu +
− possible charge
permanganate MnO
4
phosphate PO 4
3−
p
tr
h
ip
o
o
sp
ly
h
p
i
h
te
osphate
P
P
O
O
3
3−
5−
N
St
o
o
t
c
e
k
: A
sy
c
s
c
t
o
e
r
m
d
,
i n
m
g
e
t
t
o
a l
t
l
h
ic
e T
nu
h
m
e R
er
o
a
m
l s
a
h
n
ows
t
c
i
o
ta
p
n
p
i
e
u
r
m
(I)
(
,
I V
Cu
)
+
Ti4+
3 10 ions are named using the charge on manganese(VII),
silicate SiO3 2− orthosilicate SiO 4 4− Roman numerals. the metal ion Mn7 +
−
stearate C H COO
17 35
sulfate SO
2−
bisulfate HSO
−
4 4
(hydrogen
sulfate) Table E.7 Summary of Naming Rules for Acids
sulfite SO
2−
3 − Modern name Classical acid name Example
bisulfite HSO
3
(hydrogen aqueous hydro___ic acid HCl, aqueous
sulfite) hydrogen ___ide hydrogen chloride
thiosulfate S 2 O 3
2−
or hydrochloric acid
sulfide
S2−
bisulfide HS
−
aqueous ___ic acid H CO , aqueous
(hydrogen hydrogen ___ate hy 2 dro 3 gen carbonate
sulfide) or carbonic acid
aqueous ___ous acid HNO , aqueous
2
hydrogen ___ite hydrogen nitrite
or nitrous acid
596 MHR • Appendix E
Table E.8 Standard Molar Enthalpies of Formation
Acid Formula Conjugate base K
a
∆H˚ f ∆H˚ f ∆H˚ f hypochlorous HClO ClO − 4.0 × 10 −8
Substance (kJ/mol) Substance (kJ/mol) Substance (kJ/mol) acid
Al 2 O 3(s) −1675.7 HBr (g) −36.3 NH 3(g) −45.9 iodic acid HIO 3 IO 3 − 1.7 × 10 −1
CaCO 3(s) −1207.6 HCl (g) −92.3 N 2 H 4((cid:2)) +50.6 lactic acid CH 3 CHOHCO 2 H CH 3 CHOHCO 2 − 1.4 × 10 −4
CaCl 2(s) −795.4 HF (g) −273.3 NH 4 Cl (s) −314.4 methanoic acid HCOOH HCOO − 1.8 × 10 −4
Ca(OH) 2(s) −985.2 HCN (g) +135.1 NH 4 NO 3(s) −365.6 nitric acid HNO 3 NO 3 − 2.4 × 101
CCl 4((cid:2)) −128.2 H 2 O ((cid:2)) −285.8 NO (g) +91.3 nitrous acid HNO 2 NO 2 − 5.6 × 10 −4
CCl 4(g) −95.7 H 2 O (g) −241.8 NO 2(g) +33.2 phenol C 6 H 5 OH C 6 H 5 O − 1.0 × 10 −10
CHCl 3((cid:2)) −134.1 H 2 O 2((cid:2)) −187.8 N 2 O (g) +81.6
CH 4(g) −74.6 HNO 3((cid:2)) −174.1 N 2 O 4(g) +11.1 Table E.10 Ionization Constants for Polyprotic Acids
C H +227.4 H PO −1284.4 PH +5.4
2 2(g) 3 4(s) 3(g) Acid Formula Conjugate base K
a
C 2 H 4(g) +52.4 H 2 S (g) −20.6 PCl 3(g) −287.0 boric acid H BO H BO − 5.4 × 10 −10
C 2 H 6(g) −84.0 H 2 SO 4((cid:2)) −814.0 P 4 O 6(s) −2144.3 (aqueous H 3 2 BO 3 3 − HB 2 O 3 2 3− <1.0 × 10 −14
C H −103.8 FeO −272.0 P O −2984.0 hydrogen borate)
C 3 6 H 8 6 ( ( g (cid:2)) ) +49.1 Fe 2 O (s 3 ) (s) −824.2 K 4 Br ( 1 s 0 ) (s) −393.8 carbonic acid H HC 2 C O O 3− H CO CO 2 3− − 4 4 . . 5 7 × × 1 1 0 0 − −1 7 1
3 3
CH 3 OH ((cid:2)) −239.2 Fe 3 O 4(s) −1118.4 KCl (s) −436.5 citric acid H C H O H C H O − 7.4 × 10 −4
C 2 H 5 OH ((cid:2)) −277.6 FeCl 2(s) −341.8 KClO 3(s) −397.7 ( h a y q d u r e o o g u e s n citrate) H HC 3 2 C 6 6 H H 5 5 O O 2 7 7 − − H C C 2 H 6 6 H O 5 5 O 3 7− 2 7− 1 4 . . 7 0 × × 1 1 0 0 − − 5 7
CH 3 COOH ((cid:2)) −484.3 FeCl 3(s) −399.5 KOH (s) −424.6 oxalic acid HO 6 OC 5 CO 7 OH H 6 OO 5 CC 7 OO − 5.6 × 10 −2
CO (g) −110.5 FeS 2(s) −178.2 Ag 2 CO 3(s) −505.8 HOOCCOO − OOCCOO 2− 1.5 × 10 −4
CO 2(g) −393.5 PbCl 2(s) −359.4 AgCl (s) −127.0 phosphoric acid H PO H PO − 6.9 × 10 −3
COCl 2(g) −219.1 MgCl 2(s) −641.3 AgNO 3(s) −124.4 ( h a y q d u r e o o g u e s n H HP 3 2 P O O 2 4 4 − − H PO P 2 O 3 4− 2 4− 6 4 . . 2 8 × × 1 1 0 0 − − 8 13
CS 2((cid:2)) +89.0 MgO (s) −601.6 Ag 2 S (s) −32.6 phosphate) 4 4
C C S rC 2( l g) + − 1 5 1 5 6 6 . . 7 5 M Hg g S (OH) 2(s) −9 − 2 5 4 8 . . 5 2 S S F O 6(g) −1 − 2 2 2 96 0. . 5 8 h ac y i d d rosulfuric H HS 2 S − H S2 S − − 8 1 . . 9 0 × × 1 1 0 0 − −1 8 9
3(s) (s) 2(g)
Cu(NO 3 ) 2(s) −302.9 NaCl (s) −411.2 SO 3(g) −395.7 sulfuric acid H HS 2 S O O 4− H SO SO 2 4− − 1 1 . . 0 0 × × 1 1 0 0 3 −2
CuO −157.3 NaOH −425.6 SnCl −325.1 4 4
(s) (s) 2(s) sulfurous acid H SO HSO − 1.4 × 10 −2
CuCl (s) −137.2 Na 2 CO 3(s) −1130.7 SnCl 4((cid:2)) −511.3 HS 2 O 3 3− SO 3 2 3− 6.3 × 10 −8
CuCl 2(s) −220.1 tartaric acid H HC 2 C 4 H H 4 O O 6− H C C H 4 H O 4 O 2 6− − 9 4 . . 3 3 × × 1 1 0 0 − − 4 5
Note:The enthalpy of formation of an element in its 4 4 6 4 4 6
standard state is defined as zero.
Table E.11 Ionization Constants for Nitrogen Bases
Table E.9 Ionization Constants for Acids
Conjugate
Acid Formula Conjugate base K a Base Formula acid K b
a b c e e n t z ic o i a c c a id cid C C H 6H 3 C 5C O O O O H H C C H 6H 3 C 5C O O O O − − 1 6 . . 8 3 × × 1 1 0 0 − − 5 5 1 (e , t 2 h -d yl i e a n m e i d n i o a e m th in an e) e NH 2 CH 2 CH 2 NH 2 NH C 2 C H H 2 N 2 H 3 + 8.4 × 10 −5
chlorous acid HClO ClO − 1.1 × 10 −2 dimethylamine (CH 3 ) 2 NH (CH 3 ) 2 NH 2 + 5.4 × 10 −4
2 2 (N-methylmeth-
cyanic acid HOCN OCN − 3.5 × 10 −4 anamine)
formic acid HCHO 2 CHO 2 − 1.8 × 10 −4 ethanamine C 2 H 5 NH 2 C 2 H 5 NH 3 + 4.5 × 10 −4
hydrobromic HBr Br − 1.0 × 109 methanamine CH 3 NH 2 CH 3 NH 3 + 4.6 × 10 −4
acid trimethylamine (CH ) N (CH ) NH + 6.4 × 10 −5
33 33
hydrochloric HCl Cl − 1.3 × 106 (N-N-dimethyl-
acid methanamine)
hydrocyanic HCN CN − 6.2 × 10 −10 ammonia NH 3 NH 4 + 1.8 × 10 −5
acid hydrazine N H N H + 1.3 × 10 −6
2 4 2 5
hydrofluoric HF F − 6.3 × 10 −4 hydroxylamine NH OH NH OH + 8.8 × 10 −9
acid 2 3
hydrogen oxide H O OH − 1.0 × 10 −14 pyridine C 5 H 5 N C 5 H 5 NH + 1.7 × 10 −9
2
hypobromous HOBr BrO − 2.8 × 10 −9 aniline C 6 H 5 NH 2 C 6 H 5 NH 3 + 7.5 × 10 −10
acid urea NH CONH NH CONH + 1.3 × 10 −14
2 2 2 3
continued…
Appendix E • MHR 597
Table E.12 Solubility Product Constants in Water at 25˚C Reduction half reaction E ˚(V)
Bromates Hydroxides Ag + + e − (cid:3)(cid:4) Ag 0.800
(aq) (s)
A Tl g B B r r O O 3 5 1 . . 3 1 8 0 × × 1 1 0 0 − − 5 4 B C e d ( ( O O H H ) ) 2 6 . 7 9 . 2 2 × × 1 1 0 0 − − 2 1 2 5 Hg 2 2+ (aq) + 2e − (cid:3)(cid:4) 2Hg ((cid:2)) 0.797
A C Pb u g B B B r r r 2 3 Bromid 5 6 6 e . . . s 3 2 6 5 7 0 × × × 1 1 1 0 0 0 − − − 1 9 6 3 C C E F F P u e e b a o ( ( ( ( ( ( O O O O O O H H H H H H ) ) ) ) ) ) 2 3 2 3 2 2 5 5 9 4 2 1 . . . . . . 0 9 3 8 7 4 2 2 8 7 9 3 × × × × × × 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 − − − − − − 6 1 2 1 2 39 5 7 7 0 F O I C 2 e u ( 2 s 3 ( + ) g + ( + ) ( a a + q q 2 ) ) 2 + e + H − e e (cid:3)(cid:4) + − − ( a (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:3)(cid:4) q 2 ) I + − C F ( a 2 u e q e ( ) 2 s − + ) ( (cid:3)(cid:4) a q ) H 2 O 2(aq) 0 0 0 0 . . . . 7 6 5 5 7 9 3 2 1 5 6 1
A B C M Pb a a g g C C C 2 C C O O O O O 3 3 3 3 Carbona 8 2 3 6 7 te . . . . . 4 5 3 8 4 s 6 8 6 2 0 × × × × × 1 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 − − − − − 1 9 9 6 14 2 M N S Z n n i g ( ( ( ( O O O O H H H H ) ) ) ) 2 2 2 2 2 Iodate 5 5 5 s . . . 6 4 4 1 8 5 3 × × × × 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 − − − − 1 1 2 1 2 6 7 7 O C A 4H u 2 g ( 2 C + g + ( ) l a ( + ( a q s q ) ) 2 ) + + + H S e 2 2 O − O e (cid:3)(cid:4) 4 − ( 2 (cid:2) (cid:3)(cid:4) ) − A ( + a q g C 4 ) ( s + e u ) − ( + 2 s (cid:3)(cid:4) ) e C − l (cid:3)(cid:4) − 4 ( O a q H H ) 2 − S (a O q) 3 (aq) + H 2 O ((cid:2)) 0 0 0 0 . . . . 4 3 2 1 0 4 2 7 1 2 2 2
3 Ba(IO ) 4.01 × 10 −9 Cu2+ + e − (cid:3)(cid:4) Cu + 0.153
A Cu gC C l l Chlorid 1 1 e . . s 7 7 7 2 × × 1 1 0 0 − − 1 9 0 C S Y r a ( ( I ( I O I O O 3 3 ) 3 3 ) 3 ) 2 2 2 6 1 1 . . . 4 1 1 7 4 2 × × × 1 1 1 0 0 0 − − − 6 1 7 0 2 F H e3 + + ( ( a ( a a q q q ) ) ) + + 2 3 e e − − (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:3)(cid:4) H Fe 2( ( g ( s a ) ) q) − 0 0 . . 0 0 0 3 0 7
Chromates Iodides Pb2+ + 2e − (cid:3)(cid:4) Pb −0.126
(aq) (s)
A B Pb a g C C 2 C r r O O rO 4 4 1 1 . . 2 1 1 . 2 2 3 × × × 1 1 1 0 0 0 − − − 1 1 13 2 0 C P A b u g I I I 2 1 8 . 9 . 2 5 . 7 8 2 × × × 1 1 1 0 0 0 − − − 1 9 1 2 7 S N n i2 2 + + ( ( a a q q ) ) + + 2 2 e e − − (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:3)(cid:4) N Sn i ( ( s s ) ) − − 0 0 . . 1 2 3 5 8 7
4
Cd2+ + 2e − (cid:3)(cid:4) Cd −0.403
Cyanides Phosphates (aq) (s)
AgCN 5.97 × 10 −17 AlPO 9.84 × 10 −21 Cr3+ (aq) + e − (cid:3)(cid:4) Cr2+ (aq) −0.407
CuCN Fluorid 3 es .47 × 10 −20 C C C a o u 3 3 ( ( ( P P P 4 O O O 4 4 ) ) ) 2 2 2 2 1 . . . 0 0 4 7 5 0 × × × 1 1 1 0 0 0 − − − 3 3 3 3 5 7 F C e r3 2 + + ( ( a a q q ) ) + + 3 2 e e − − (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:3)(cid:4) C F r e ( ( s s ) ) − − 0 0 . . 4 7 4 4 7 4
B C C d a a F F F 2 2 1 6 3 . . . 8 4 4 4 4 5 × × × 1 1 1 0 0 0 − − − 7 3 11 Ni 3 3 (PO 4 4 ) 2 2 Sulfate 4 s .74 × 10 −32 Z 2H n2 2 + O (a ( q (cid:2) ) ) + + 2 2 e e − − (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:3)(cid:4) Z H n 2( ( g s ) ) + 2OH − (aq) − − 0 0 . . 7 8 6 2 2 8
FeF 2 2 2.36 × 10 −6 B C a a S S O O 4 1 4 . . 0 9 8 3 × × 1 1 0 0 − − 1 5 0 Al3+ (aq) + 3e − (cid:3)(cid:4) Al (s) −1.662
Hg 2 SO 4 4 6.5 × 10 −7 Mg2+ (aq) + 2e − (cid:3)(cid:4) Mg (s) −2.372
Thiocyanates La3+ (aq) + 3e − (cid:3)(cid:4) La (s) −2.379
CuSCN 1.08 × 10 −13 Na + (aq) + e − (cid:3)(cid:4) Na (s) −2.711
Pd(SCN) 2 4.39 × 10 −23 Ca2+ + 2e − (cid:3)(cid:4) Ca −2.868
(aq) (s)
Ba2+ + 2e − (cid:3)(cid:4) Ba −2.912
Table E.13 Standard Reduction Potentials (aq) (s)
K + + e − (cid:3)(cid:4) K −2.931
Reduction half reaction E ˚(V) (aq) (s)
Li + + e − (cid:3)(cid:4) Li −3.040
F + 2e − (cid:3)(cid:4) 2F − 2.866 (aq) (s)
2(g) (aq)
Co3+ + e − (cid:3)(cid:4) Co2+ 1.92
(aq) (aq)
H 2 O 2(aq) + 2H + (aq) + 2e − (cid:3)(cid:4) 2H 2 O ((cid:2)) 1.776
Ce4+ + e − (cid:3)(cid:4) Ce3+ 1.72
(aq) (aq)
PbO 2(s) + 4H + (aq) + SO 4 2− (aq) + 2e − (cid:3)(cid:4) PbSO 4(s) + H 2 O ((cid:2)) 1.691
MnO 4 − (aq) + 8H + (aq) + 5e − (cid:3)(cid:4) Mn2+ (aq) + 4H 2 O ((cid:2)) 1.507
Au3+ + 3e − (cid:3)(cid:4) Au 1.498
(aq) (s)
PbO 2(s) + 4H + (aq) + 2e − (cid:3)(cid:4) Pb2+ (aq) + 2H 2 O ((cid:2)) 1.455
Cl + 2e − (cid:3)(cid:4) 2Cl − 1.358
2(g) (aq)
Cr 2 O 7 2− (aq) + 14H + (aq) + 6e − (cid:3)(cid:4) 2Cr3+ (aq) + 7H 2 O ((cid:2)) 1.232
O 2(g) + 4H + (aq) + 4e − (cid:3)(cid:4) 2H 2 O ((cid:2)) 1.229
MnO 2(s) + 4H + (aq) + 2e − (cid:3)(cid:4) Mn2+ (aq) + 2H 2 O ((cid:2)) 1.224
IO 3 − (aq) + 6H + (aq) + 6e − (cid:3)(cid:4) I − (aq) + 3H 2 O ((cid:2)) 1.085
Br 2((cid:2)) + 2e − (cid:3)(cid:4) 2Br − (aq) 1.066
AuCl − + 3e − (cid:3)(cid:4) Au + 4Cl − 1.002
4 (aq) (s) (aq)
NO 3 − (aq) + 4H + (aq) + 3e − (cid:3)(cid:4) NO (g) + 2H 2 O ((cid:2)) 0.957
2Hg2+ + 2e − (cid:3)(cid:4) Hg 2+ 0.920
(aq) 2 (aq)
continued…
598 MHR • Appendix E
Table E.14 Specific Heat Capacities of Various
Energy Energy Energy Energy
Substances Bond (kJ/mol) Bond (kJ/mol) Bond (kJ/mol) Bond (kJ/mol)
Specific heat capacity Oxygen Silicon Halogens Multiple bonds
Substance (J/g·˚C at 25˚C)
O—O 204 Si—Si 226 F—Cl 256 C C 607
Element
O—F 222 Si—P 364 F—Br 280 C N 615
aluminum 0.900
O—Si 368 Si—S 226 F—I 272 C O 745
carbon (graphite) 0.711
O—P 351 Si—F 553 Cl—Br 217 N N 418
copper 0.385
O—S 265 Si—Cl 381 Cl—I 211 N O 631
gold 0.129
O—Cl 269 Si—Br 368 Br—I 179 O O 498
hydrogen 14.267
O—Br 235 Si—I 293 F—F 159 C C 839
iron 0.444
O—I 249 Si O 640 Cl—Cl 243 C N 891
Compound
Br—Br 193 C O 1077
ammonia (liquid) 4.70
I—I 151 N N 945
ethanol 2.46
Note:The values in this table represent average values
water (solid) 2.01
for the dissociation of bonds between the pairs of atoms
water (liquid) 4.184
listed. The true values may vary for different molecules.
water (gas) 2.01
Other material Table E.16 Average Bond Lengths
air 1.02 Length Length Length Length
Bond (pm) Bond (pm) Bond (pm) Bond (pm)
concrete 0.88
Phosphorus
glass 0.84
Hydrogen Carbon Nitrogen and sulfur
granite 0.79
H—H 74 C—C 154 N—N 146 P—P 221
wood 1.76
H—C 109 C—N 147 N—O 144 P—S 210
H—N 101 C—O 143 N—F 139 P—F 156
H—O 96 C—F 133 N—Si 172 P—Cl 204
H—F 92 C—Si 186 N—P 177 P—Br 222
H—Si 148 C—P 187 N—S 168 P—I 243
H—P 142 C—S 181 N—Cl 191 S—S 204
Table E.15 Average Bond Energies
H—S 134 C—Cl 177 N—Br 214 S—F 158
Energy Energy Energy Energy
Bond (kJ/mol) Bond (kJ/mol) Bond (kJ/mol) Bond (kJ/mol) H—Cl 127 C—Br 194 N—I 222 S—Cl 201
Phosphorus H—Br 141 C—I 213 S—Br 225
Hydrogen Carbon Nitrogen and sulfur H—I 161 S—I 234
H—H 436 C—C 347 N—N 160 P—P 210 H—Mg 173
H—C 338 C—N 305 N—O 201 P—S 444 Oxygen Silicon Halogens Multiple bonds
H—N 339 C—O 358 N—F 272 P—F 490 O—O 148 Si—Si 234 F—Cl 166 C C 134
H—O 460 C—F 552 N—Si 330 P—Cl 331 O—F 142 Si—P 227 F—Br 178 C N 127
H—F 570 C—Si 305 N—P 209 P—Br 272 O—Si 161 Si—S 210 F—I 187 C O 123
H—Si 299 C—P 264 N—S 464 P—I 184 O—P 160 Si—F 156 Cl—Br 214 N N 122
H—P 297 C—S 259 N—Cl 200 S—S 266 O—S 151 Si—Cl 204 Cl—I 243 N O 120
H—S 344 C—Cl 397 N—Br 276 S—F 343 O—Cl 164 Si—Br 216 Br—I 248 O O 121
H—Cl 432 C—Br 280 N—I 159 S—Cl 277 O—Br 172 Si—I 240 F—F 143 C C 121
H—Br 366 C—I 209 S—Br 218 O—I 194 Cl—Cl 199 C N 115
H—I 298 S—I 170 Br—Br 228 C O 113
H—Mg 126 I—I 266 N N 110
continued… Note: The values in this table are average values. The
length of a bond may be slightly different in different
molecules, depending on the intramolecular forces
within the molecules.
Appendix E • MHR 599
Appendix F
Titration Guidelines
Rinsing the Pipette
A pipette is used to measure and transfer a precise 3.Relax your grip on the bulb to draw up a small vol-
volume of liquid. You rinse a pipette with the solu- ume of distilled water.
tion whose volume you are measuring. This ensures 4.Remove the bulb, and discard the water by letting it
that the solution will not be diluted or contaminated. drain out.
1.Pour a sample of standard solution into a clean, 5.Rinse the pipette by drawing several millilitres of
dry beaker. solution from the beaker into it. Rotate and rock the
2.Place the pipette tip in a beaker of distilled water. pipette to coat the inner surface with solution.
Squeeze the suction bulb. Maintain your grip Discard the rinse. Rinse the pipette twice in this
while placing it over the stem of the pipette. Do way. It is now ready to fill with standard solution.
not insert the stem into the bulb. (If your suction
TITRATION TIP
bulbs have valves, your teacher will show you
how to use them.) Never use your mouth instead of a suction bulb
to draw a liquid into a pipette. The liquid could be
corrosive or poisonous. As well, you would contami-
nate the glass stem.
Filling the Pipette
6.Place the tip of the pipette below the surface of 9.Gently roll your finger slightly away from end of
the solution. the stem to let solution drain slowly out.
7.Hold the suction bulb loosely on the end of the 10. When the bottom of the meniscus aligns with the
glass stem. Use the suction bulb to draw liquid etched mark, as in Figure F.2, press your finger
up just past the etched volume mark. (See Figure back over the end of the stem. This will prevent
F.1.) more solution from draining out.
8.As quickly and smoothly as you can, slide the 11. Touch the tip of the pipette to the side of the beaker
bulb off and place your index finger over the end to remove any clinging drop. See Figure F.3. The
of the glass stem. measured volume inside the pipette is now ready
to be transferred to an Erlenmeyer flask or a volu-
metric flask.
Figure F.1 Draw a bit Figure F.2 The bottom of
more liquid than you need the meniscus must align
into the pipette. It is easier exactly with the etched
to reduce this volume than mark.
it is to add more solution to
the pipette.
TITRATION TIP
Figure F.3 You can prevent a
Practice removing the bulb and replacing it with “stubborn” drop from clinging to
your index finger (or thumb). You need to be able the pipette tip by touching the tip to
to perform this action quickly and smoothly. the inside of the glass surface.
600 MHR • Appendix F
Transferring the Solution Adding the Indicator
12. Place the tip of the pipette against the inside 14. Add two or three drops of indicator to the flask
glass wall of the flask. Let the solution drain and its contents. Do not add too much indicator.
slowly, by removing your finger from the stem. Using more does not make the colour change
13. After the solution drains, wait several seconds easier to see. Also, indicators are usually weak
and then touch the tip to the inside wall of the acids. Too much can change the amount of base
flask to remove any drop on the end. Note:You needed for neutralization. You are now ready to
may notice a small amount of liquid remaining in prepare the apparatus for the titration.
the tip. The pipette was calibrated to retain this
amount. Do not try to remove it.
Rinsing the Burette
A burette is a graduated glass tube with a tap at 17. Hold the burette over a sink. Open the tap, and
one end. It is used to accurately measure the let the water drain out. While you do this, check
volume of liquid added during a titration that the tap does not leak. Make sure that it turns
smoothly and easily.
experiment.
18. Rinse the burette with 5 mL to 10 mL of the solu-
15. To rinse the burette, close the tap and add about
tion that will be measured. Remember to open
10 mL of distilled water from a wash bottle.
the tap to rinse the lower portion of the burette.
16. Tip the burette to one side, and roll it gently
Rinse the burette twice, discarding the liquid
back and forth so that the water comes in
each time.
contact with all inner surfaces.
TITRATION TIP
If you are right-handed, the tap should be on your
right as you face the burette. Use your left hand to
operate the tap. Use your right hand to swirl the
liquid in the Erlenmeyer flask. If you are left-handed,
reverse this arrangement.
Filling the Burette
19. Assemble a retort stand and burette clamp to 22. Record the initial burette reading in your note-
hold the burette. Place a funnel in the top of the book.
burette. 23. Replace the beaker with the Erlenmeyer flask that
20. With the tap closed, add solution until the liquid you prepared earlier. Place a sheet of white paper
is above the zero mark. Remove the funnel. under the Erlenmeyer to help you see the indicator
Carefully open the tap. Drain the liquid into a colour change that will occur near the endpoint.
beaker until the bottom of the meniscus is at or
TITRATION TIP
below the zero mark.
21. Touch the tip of the burette against the beaker to Near the endpoint, when you see the indicator
remove any clinging drop. Check that the portion change colour as liquid enters the flask from the
of the burette that is below the tap is filled with burette, slow the addition of liquid. The endpoint
liquid and contains no air bubbles. can occur very quickly.
Reading the Burette
24. A meniscus reader is a small white card with a thick
Figure F.4 A meniscus
black line on it. Hold the card behind the burette,
reader helps you read the
with the black line just under the meniscus, as in
volume of liquid more easily
Figure F.4. Record the volume added from the
burette to the nearest 0.01 mL.
TITRATION TIP
Observe the level of solution in the burette so that
your eye is level with the bottom of the meniscus.
Appendix F • MHR 601
Glossary
Section numbers are provided in parentheses, where alkyl halide (haloalkane):an alkane in which one or
applicable. Terms that appear in the Concepts and Skills more hydrogen atoms have been replaced with
Review are labelled (Review). halogen atoms (1.3)
alkyne:a hydrocarbon that has at least one carbon-
A carbon triple bond (1.2)
absorption spectrum:the spectrum that is produced allotropes:different forms of the same element that
when electrons of atoms absorb photons of certain have different physical and chemical properties (4.3)
wavelengths, causing the electrons to be excited from amide:an organic compound that has a carbon atom
lower energy levels to higher energy levels (3.1) double-bonded to an oxygen atom and single-bonded
accuracy:the closeness of a measurement to an to a nitrogen atom (1.4)
accepted value amine:an organic compound that has the functional
acid-base titration curve:the graph for an acid-base group −NR 2 , where N represents a nitrogen atom and
titration, in which the pH of an acid (or base) is R represents a hydrogen atom or an alkyl group (1.3)
plotted versus the volume of the base (or acid) added amino acid:an organic compound that contains both
(8.4) the amine and carboxylic acid functional groups,
acid dissociation constant (K ):the equilibrium connected by a central carbon atom; the monomer
a
constant for the ionization of a weak acid in water, from which proteins are made (2.3)
giving the hydronium ion and the conjugate base of amino group:the −NH functional group (1.3)
2
the acid (8.2)
amorphous solids:solids that have indistinct shapes,
activated complex:a highly unstable species that has because their particle arrangements lack order (4.3)
partial bonds and is neither product nor reactant;
amphoteric:the ability of a substance to act as a proton
shown at the transition state (6.3)
donor (an acid) in one reaction and a proton acceptor
activation energy (E a ):the minimum energy that is (a base) in a different reaction (8.1)
required for a successful reaction between colliding
anion:a negatively charged ion
molecules (6.3)
aromatic hydrocarbon:a hydrocarbon that contains one
active site:the small portion of an enzyme that is
or more rings and has electrons shared in a
involved in a catalyzed reaction (6.4)
particularly stable configuration; often drawn with
addition polymerization:a reaction in which monomers alternating single and double bonds (1.2)
with double bonds are joined together, through
Arrhenius theory:(1887) the theory stating that acids
multiple addition reactions, to form a polymer (2.3)
and bases are defined in terms of their structure and
addition reaction:an organic reaction in which atoms the ions produced when they dissolve in water;
are added to a multiple carbon-carbon bond (2.1) defines an acid as a substance that produces
alcohol:an organic compound that contains the −OH hydrogen ions in water and a base as a substance
functional group (1.3) that produces hydroxide ions in water (8.1)
aldehyde:an organic compound that has a double- asymmetrical alkene:an alkene that has different
bonded oxygen and a hydrogen atom bonded to groups on either side of the double bond (2.2)
the first carbon of a carbon chain (1.4) atom:the basic unit of an element, which still retains
aliphatic hydrocarbon:an organic compound that the element’s properties (Review)
contains carbon atoms bonded in chains and/or atomic mass number (mass number, A):the total
non-aromatic rings; alkanes, alkenes, and alkynes number of protons and neutrons in the nucleus
are aliphatic hydrocarbons (1.2) of an atom (Review)
alkane:a hydrocarbon that contains carbon-carbon atomic number (Z):the number of protons in the
single bonds (1.2) nucleus of one atom of a particular element (Review)
alkene:a hydrocarbon that contains at least one carbon- atomic symbol:a one-letter or two-letter abbreviation
carbon double bond (1.2) of the name of an element (Review)
alkoxy group:an −OR group, where O represents an atmosphere (atm):a unit of pressure; equal to
oxygen atom and R represents an alkyl group (1.3) 101.325 kPa or 760 mm Hg
alkyl group:an alkane branch that is obtained by aufbau principle:the principle behind an imaginary
removing one hydrogen atom from an alkane (1.2) process of building up the electronic structure of
the atoms, in order of atomic number (3.3)
602 MHR • Glossary
average rate:the average change in concentration of a catalyst:a substance that increases the rate of a reaction
reactant or product over a given period of time (6.1) and is regenerated at the end of the reaction, so it can
Avogadro constant (N ):the experimentally determined be re-used (6.1)
A
number of particles in 1 mol of a substance; the cation:a positively charged ion
currently accepted value is 6.02214199×1023
Le Châtelier’s principle:the principle stating that a
(Review)
dynamic equilibrium tends to respond so as to
relieve the effect of any change in the conditions that
B affect the equilibrium (7.4)
chemical:traditionally, a substance that has been
bent shape:an angular molecular shape, e.g., around
chemically produced in a laboratory; also defined as
a central oxygen atom with two lone pairs that has
a substance that is composed of atoms (1.1)
formed two single bonds (1.1)
chemical bond:the force that holds atoms together in
bimolecular elementary reaction:a reaction in which
the form of an ionic compound or molecule (4.1)
two particles collide and react (6.4)
cis-isomer:a geometric isomer in which the two largest
binary compound:a compound that contains atoms of
groups are on the same side of the double bond
two elements (Review)
(Review)
biochemistry:the study of the organic compounds and
cis-trans isomers:two compounds that are identical
reactions that occur in living things (2.3)
except for the arrangement of groups across a
bond dipole:a separation of negative and positive
double bond; also see geometric isomers, cis-isomer,
charge along the length of a bond (1.1)
trans-isomer(Review)
bond energy:the energy required to break a bond (4.1)
coffee-cup calorimeter:a calorimeter that consists of
Brønsted-Lowry theory:the theory recognizing acid- two nested polystyrene cups (coffee cups) sitting in
base reactions as a chemical equilibrium; defines an a 400 mL beaker (5.2)
acid as a substance from which a proton can be
collision theory:the theory stating that reacting
removed and a base as a substance that can accept a
particles (atoms, molecules, or ions) must collide
proton (8.1)
with one another for a reaction to occur (6.3)
buffer capacity:the amount of acid or base that can be
combustion reaction:the reaction of a substance with
added to a solution before significant change occurs
oxygen, producing oxides, heat, and light; burning
to the pH of the solution (8.3)
(Review)
buffer solution:a solution that resists changes in pH
common ion effect:the effect on a system at equilibrium
when moderate amounts of acid or base are added
when a surplus of one of the reactant ions is added
(8.3)
to the system; an application of Le Châtelier’s
principle (7.4)
C
complete combustion:combustion in which a
calorimeter:a device that is used to measure enthalpy hydrocarbon fuel is completely reacted in the
changes for chemical and physical processes (5.2) presence of sufficient oxygen, producing only carbon
dioxide, CO , and water vapour, H O (Review)
carbohydrate (saccharide):a biological molecule that, 2(g) 2 (g)
in its linear form, contains either an aldehyde group complete structural diagram:a symbolic representation
or a ketone group, along with two or more hydroxyl of all the atoms in a molecule, showing how they are
groups; when present in ring form, it contains an bonded (Review, 1.1)
ether linkage and hydroxyl groups (2.3) compound:a pure substance that consists of two or
carbonyl group:the functional group of aldehydes and more elements chemically combined in fixed
ketones, composed of a carbon atom double-bonded proportions (Review)
to an oxygen atom (1.4) concentration:an expression of the amount of solute
carboxyl group:the functional group of carboxylic that is present in a given volume of solution (Review)
acids, composed of a carbon atom double-bonded to condensation polymerization:a reaction in which
an oxygen atom and single-bonded to an −OH group; monomers with two functional groups, usually one at
written as −COOH (1.4) each end, are joined together by the formation of
carboxylic acid:an organic compound that contains the ester bonds or amide bonds to produce a polymer
carboxyl functional group, composed of a carbon (2.3)
atom double-bonded to an oxygen atom and single-
bonded to an −OH group (1.4)
Glossary • MHR 603
condensation reaction:an organic reaction in which dispersion force:a weak intermolecular attractive force
two molecules combine to form a larger molecule, that is present between all molecules, due to
producing a small molecule (such as water) as a temporary dipoles (4.3)
second product (2.1)
disproportionation:a reaction in which a single
condensed structural diagram:a symbolic substance undergoes both oxidation and reduction
representation of an organic compound, showing the (10.1)
atoms present and the bonds between carbon atoms
dissociation:the separation of a compound into
(Review, 1.1)
oppositely charged ions when dissolved in water
conjugate acid-base pair:an acid and a base that differ (Review)
by one proton (8.1)
DNA (2-deoxyribonucleic acid):essential genetic
constant-pressure calorimeter:a calorimeter (such as a material that is found in the nucleus of every cell; a
coffee-cup calorimeter) that is open to the double helix with two polymeric strands, each strand
atmosphere (5.2) composed of repeating units called nucleotides (2.3)
coordinate covalent bond:a covalent bond in which double bond:a covalent bond in which two pairs of
one atom contributes both electrons to the shared electrons are shared between two atoms (1.1)
electron pair bond (4.2)
double displacement reaction:a chemical reaction in
covalent bond:a chemical bond in which electrons are which the cations of two ionic compounds exchange
shared between two atoms (1.1, 4.1) places, resulting in the formation of two new
crystalline solids:solids that have organized particle compounds (Review)
arrangements and, therefore, have distinct shapes
(4.3) E
cycloalkane:an alkane in the shape of a ring (1.2)
electrolyte:a solute that conducts a current in an
aqueous solution (11.1)
D
electromagnetic spectrum:the entire range of
decomposition reaction:a chemical reaction in which a wavelengths of electromagnetic waves, including
compound breaks down into elements or simpler visible light waves
compounds (Review) electron:a negatively charged particle with a mass of
derivatives:organic compounds that are structurally 0.000 545 u
based on, or derived from, other organic compounds electron affinity:the change in energy that accompanies
(1.4) the addition of an electron to an atom in the gaseous
dilution:the addition of water or another appropriate state
solvent to a solution in order to reduce the electron configuration:a shorthand notation that shows
concentration of solute the number and arrangement of electrons in an
dipole:a separation of negative and positive charge by atom’s orbitals (3.3)
a short distance; called a bond dipole if the charge is electronegativity:a relative measure of an atom’s ability
separated along the length of a bond; called a dipole to attract shared electrons in a chemical bond
or molecular dipole if the charge is separated across (Review, 1.1)
a molecule (4.2)
element:a pure substance that cannot be separated
dipole-dipole force:an intermolecular attraction chemically into any simpler substances (Review)
between opposite charges of polar molecules
elementary reaction:a reaction that involves a single
(1.1, 4.3)
molecular event, such as a simple collision between
dipole-induced dipole force:an intermolecular force in atoms, molecules, or ions; can involve the formation
which a polar molecule distorts the electron density of different molecules or ions; may involve a change
of a non-polar molecule to produce a temporary in the energy or geometry of the starting molecules;
dipole; similar to an ion-induced dipole force; non- cannot be broken down into simpler steps (6.4)
polar gases (such as oxygen and nitrogen) dissolve,
elimination reaction:a reaction in which atoms are
sparingly, in water because of dipole-induced dipole
removed from a compound and a multiple bond is
forces (4.3)
formed (2.1)
disaccharide:a biological molecule (carbohydrate) that
emission spectrum:a characteristic spectrum of distinct,
is composed of two saccharide units; sucrose (table
coloured lines that results when excited atoms emit
sugar) is a disaccharide (2.3)
light; can be observed through a spectroscope or a
diffraction grating when a high voltage is passed
through a gas in a glass tube (3.1)
604 MHR • Glossary
empirical formula:a formula that is reduced to the F
smallest ratio of atoms present
fat:a lipid that contains a glycerol molecule bonded by
endothermic reaction:a reaction that results in a net
ester linkages to three long-chain carboxylic acids
absorption of energy (5.1)
(2.3)
endpoint:the point in a reaction when an indicator
favourable change:a change that has a tendency to
changes colour; occurs over a range of about 2 pH
occur naturally under certain conditions (7.2)
units (8.4, 9.1)
first-order reaction:a reaction with an overall reaction
enthalpy:the total kinetic energy and potential energy
order of 1 (6.2)
of a substance (5.1)
formation reaction:a reaction in which a substance is
enthalpy change:the difference between the enthalpy of
formed from elements in their standard states (5.3)
the reactants and the enthalpy of the products in a
fractional precipitation:a process by which ions are
reaction (5.1)
selectively precipitated from solution, leaving other
entropy:randomness or disorder in a system (7.2)
ions still dissolved (9.3)
enzyme:an enormous protein molecule that acts as a
free-electron model:a model in which a metal is
biological catalyst (6.4)
thought of as a densely packed core of metallic
equilibrium constant (K eq ):the ratio of the forward rate kernels (nuclei and inner electrons) within a
constant, k f , divided by the reverse rate constant, k r ; delocalized region of shared, mobile valence
also a ratio of products over reactants (7.3) electrons (4.1)
equilibrium (dynamic):an equilibrium in which free energy:available energy; a measure of the useful
opposing changes to a closed chemical system occur work that can be obtained from a reaction (7.2)
simultaneously at the same rate (7.1)
functional group:a group of bonded atoms in an
equivalence point:the point in a titration when just organic compound, which reacts in a characteristic
enough acid and base have been mixed so that a way; if only one functional group is present, it
complete reaction occurs and there is no excess of determines the reactivity of the compound in which
either reactant (8.4, 9.1) it occurs (1.2)
ester:an organic compound that contains a carbon atom
double-bonded to an oxygen atom and single-bonded G
to an alkoxy group; the product of a reaction between
general formula:a formula that represents a family of
a carboxylic acid and an alcohol (1.4)
simple organic compounds; written as R + functional
esterification reaction:the reaction of a carboxylic acid
group, where R represents an alkyl group (1.3)
with an alcohol to form an ester; a specific type of
geometric isomers:two compounds that are identical
condensation reaction (2.2)
except for the arrangement of groups across a double
ether:an organic compound that has the general
bond; also see cis-trans isomers, cis-isomer, trans-
formula ROR; consists of two alkyl groups joined by
isomer(Review)
an oxygen atom (1.3)
global warming:a gradual increase in the average
evidence of reaction:proof that a reaction has occurred;
temperature of Earth’s atmosphere (2.4)
may be a change in colour, the formation of a new
greenhouse gas:a gas that prevents some of the heat
substance, or the evolution of heat
produced by solar radiation from leaving the
exclusion principle:the principle stating that a
atmosphere (2.4)
maximum of two electrons of opposite spin can
ground state:the most stable energy state (3.2)
occupy an orbital (3.3)
exothermic reaction:a reaction that results in a net
H
release of energy (5.1)
expanded molecular formula:a symbolic representation half-life (t1):the time that is needed for the mass or
2
that shows the arrangement of atoms in a molecule; concentration of a reactant to decrease by one-half
an example is CH CH CH for propane, C H of its initial value (6.2)
3 2 3 3 8
(Review) half-reaction:a balanced equation that shows the
expanded valence energy level:the valence energy level number of electrons involved in either oxidation
of a central atom, where the valence energy level has or reduction (10.1)
more than eight electrons (4.2)
Glossary • MHR 605
half-reaction method:a method for balancing a redox hydroxyl group:the functional group of the alcohol
reaction; the oxidation and reduction half-reactions family of organic compounds; a non-basic −OH group
are balanced separately, multiplied to have the same (1.3)
number of electrons, and then combined (10.3)
haloalkane (alkyl halide):an alkane in which one or I
more hydrogen atoms have been replaced with
ICE table:a problem-solving table that shows the initial
halogen atoms (1.3)
conditions, the change, and the equilibrium
heat:the transfer of thermal energy (5.1)
conditions (7.3)
heat capacity:the amount of energy that is needed to
ideal gas equation:the equation that relates the
raise the temperature of an object 1˚C or 1 K (5.2)
pressure, volume, number of moles, and temperature
heat of solution (∆H soln ):the enthalpy change that of an ideal gas; PV =nRT(Review)
occurs when a solution forms from a solute and a
incomplete combustion:combustion in which
solvent (5.1)
insufficient oxygen prevents a hydrocarbon fuel from
Hess’s law of heat summation:the scientific law stating reacting completely, resulting in a combination of
that the enthalpy change of a physical or chemical products that may include carbon dioxide, CO ,
2(g)
process depends only on the beginning conditions water vapour, H O , carbon monoxide, CO , and
2 (g) (g)
(reactants) and the end conditions (products) and is solid carbon, C (Review)
(s)
independent of the pathway of the reaction or the
initial rates method:a method for measuring and
number of intermediate steps in the reaction (5.3)
comparing the initial rates of reactions (6.2)
heterogeneous catalyst:a catalyst that exists in a phase
instantaneous rate:the rate of a reaction at a particular
that is different from the phase of the catalyzed
time; can be determined by drawing a tangent to a
reaction (6.4)
concentration-time curve at the given time and
heterogeneous equilibrium:an equilibrium in which finding the slope of the tangent (6.1)
reactants and products in the chemical system are in
intermolecular forces:forces that act betweenmolecules
different phases; an example is a solution containing
or ions to influence the physical properties of
a crystal of solute (7.1)
compounds (1.3, 4.3)
heterogeneous mixture:a mixture in which the different
intramolecular forces:forces that are exerted withina
components can be seen distinctly (Review)
molecule or polyatomic ion; an example is covalent
homogeneous catalyst:a catalyst that exists in the same bonds (4.3)
phase as the reactants (6.4)
ion:a positively or negatively charged particle that
homogeneous equilibrium:an equilibrium in which all results from a neutral atom or group of atoms giving
the reactants and the products in the system are in up or gaining electrons (Review)
the same phase (7.1)
ion-dipole force:the attraction between an ion and a
homogeneous mixture:a mixture in which the different polar molecule (4.3)
components are mixed so that they appear to be a
ionic bond:a bond between oppositely charged ions
single substance; a solution (Review)
that arises from electron transfer; usually involves
Hund’s rule:the rule stating that the lowest energy state metal atoms and non-metal atoms (4.1)
for an atom has the maximum number of unpaired
ionic equation (total ionic equation):a form of chemical
electrons allowed by the Pauli exclusion principle in
equation that shows dissociated ions of soluble ionic
a given energy sublevel. (3.3)
compounds (Review)
hydrocarbon:a molecular compound that contains only
ion-induced dipole force:an intermolecular force in
hydrogen and carbon atoms (1.2)
which an ion distorts the electron density of a non-
hydrogen bonding:the strong intermolecular attraction polar molecule to produce a temporary dipole (4.3)
between molecules that contain a hydrogen atom
ion product (Q ):an expression that is identical to
sp
bonded to an atom of a highly electronegative
the solubility product constant, but its value is
element, especially oxygen (1.3, 4.3)
calculated using concentrations that are not
hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs):organic compounds that are necessarily those at equilibrium (9.3)
composed of hydrogen, carbon, and fluorine; can be
ion product constant for water (K ):the product of
w
used to replace chlorofluorocarbons (2.4)
the concentration of the hydronium ions and the
hydrolysis reaction:a reaction in which a molecule is hydroxide ions in a solution ([H O+][OH−]); always
3
split in two by the addition of a water molecule (2.1) equal to 1.0×10−14 at 25˚C (8.2)
hydronium ion:an aqueous hydrated proton, H O+(8.1)
3
606 MHR • Glossary
isomers:compounds that have the same chemical Markovnikov’s rule:the rule stating that, in an addition
formula but different molecular arrangements and reaction of two asymmetrical reactants, the halogen
properties (Review) atom or −OH group is usually added to the more
IUPAC:the acronym for International Union of Pure substitutedcarbon atom (the carbon atom that is
and Applied Chemistry, an organization that specifies bonded to the largest number of other carbon atoms);
rules for chemical names and symbols (1.2) the hydrogen atom is added to the carbon atom that
is bonded to the largest number of hydrogen atoms
(2.2)
K
mass defect:the difference in mass between a nucleus
Kelvin scale:a temperature scale that begins at the and its nucleons (5.1)
theoretical point of absolute zero kinetic energy, or
mass number (atomic mass number):the number of
−273.15˚C; each unit (a kelvin) is equal to 1˚C
protons plus the number of neutrons in the nucleus
ketone:an organic compound that has an oxygen atom of an atom of a particular element (Review)
double-bonded to a carbon within a carbon chain (1.4)
matter:anything that has mass and takes up space
(Review)
L
metallic bond:the force of attraction between positively
lattice energy:the energy that is given off as an ionic charged metal ions, and the pool of valence electrons
crystal forms from the gaseous ions of its elements that moves among them (4.1)
(4.1) millimetre of mercury (mm Hg):a unit of pressure that
law of chemical equilibrium:the law stating that there is based on the height of a column of mercury in a
is a constant ratio, at equilibrium, between the barometer or manometer; equal to 1 torr
concentrations of products and reactants (7.3) miscible:a term used to describe substances that are
law of conservation of energy:the law stating that the able to mix with each other in any proportion (1.3)
total energy of the universe is constant (5.1) mixture:a physical combination of two or more kinds
Le Châtelier’s principle:the principle stating that a of matter, in which each component retains its own
dynamic equilibrium tends to respond so as to characteristics (Review)
relieve the effect of any change in the conditions that mole (mol):the SI base unit for amount of substance;
affect the equilibrium (7.4) contains the same number of atoms, molecules, or
Lewis structure:a symbolic representation of the formula units as exactly 12 g of carbon-12 (Review)
arrangement of the valence electrons of an element or molecular compound:a non-conducting compound
compound (1.1, 4.1) whose intramolecular bonds are not broken when the
limiting reactant:the reactant that is completely compound changes state
consumed during a chemical reaction, limiting the molecular formula:a chemical formula that gives the
amount of product (Review) actual number of atoms of each element in a
linear shape:the molecular shape that occurs when a molecule or formula unit (Review)
central atom is bonded to only two other atoms, molecular polarity:the distribution of charge on a
when either zero or three lone pairs are present molecule; if a molecule is polar, it has some
(1.1, 4.2) molecular polarity (1.1)
line structural diagram:a graphical representation of molecularity:the number of reactant particles
the bonds between carbon atoms in an organic (molecules, atoms, or ions) that are involved in an
compound, usually omitting hydrogen atoms and elementary reaction (6.4)
carbon-hydrogen bonds (Review, 1.1)
mole ratio:a ratio that compares the number of moles of
lipid:a biological molecule that is not soluble in water different substances in a balanced chemical equation
but is soluble in a non-polar solvent, such as benzene (Review)
or hexanes (2.3)
monomers:small molecules that are combined in long
lone pairs:pairs of electrons in an atom’s valence shell chains to produce very large molecules called
that are not involved in covalent bonding (1.1, 4.1) polymers (2.3)
monosaccharide:the smallest molecule possible for a
M carbohydrate; composed of one saccharide unit (2.3)
magnetic quantum number (m):an integer that Montréal Protocol:an international agreement that
l
indicates the orientation of an orbital in the space limits the global use of CFCs and other ozone-
around the nucleus; values range from −lto +l, destroying chemicals (2.4)
including 0 (3.2)
Glossary • MHR 607
N ore:a solid, naturally occurring compound, or mixture
of compounds, from which a metal can be extracted
natural:a substance that occurs in nature and is not
(10.1)
artificial (1.1)
organic chemistry:the study of carbon-based
net ionic equation:a representation of a chemical
compounds (1.1)
reaction that shows only the ions and precipitate(s)
organic compound:a molecular compound that is based
involved in the chemical change (Review)
on carbon; usually contains carbon-carbon and
network solids:solids in which atoms are bonded
carbon-hydrogen bonds (1.1)
covalently into continuous two-dimensional or three-
overall reaction order:the sum of the exponents in the
dimensional arrays with a wide range of properties
rate law equation (6.2)
(4.3)
oxidation:defined as the loss of electrons (10.1); in
neutralization reaction:a double displacement reaction
organic chemistry, a reaction in which an organic
in which an acid and a base combine to form water
compound is oxidized by forming more C(cid:2)O bonds
and a salt
or fewer C(cid:2)H bonds (2.1)
neutron:an uncharged subatomic particle in the
oxidation number method:a method for balancing
nucleus of an atom; has a mass of 1 u
redox equations; based on the fact that the total
non-renewable resources:resources that will run out;
increase in the oxidation number(s) of the oxidized
once the supply is used up, there will be no more
element(s) equals the total decrease in the oxidation
(5.4)
number(s) of the reduced element(s) (10.4)
nuclear binding energy:the energy that is associated
oxidation numbers:actual or hypothetical charges that
with the strong force holding a nucleus together;
are used to describe redox reactions with covalent
accounts for the mass defect (5.1)
reactants or products; assigned using a set of rules
nuclear fission:a reaction in which a heavy nucleus (10.2)
splits into lighter nuclei (5.1)
oxidation-reduction reaction (redox reaction):a
nuclear fusion:a reaction in which two smaller nuclei reaction in which one reactant loses electrons
fuse to form a larger nucleus (5.1) (oxidation) and another reactant gains electrons
nuclear model of the atom:a model in which the (reduction) (10.1)
electrons move around the nucleus; also called a oxidizing agent:a reactant that oxidizes another
planetary model(3.1) reactant and gains electrons itself (is reduced) in
nucleotide:the monomer from which DNA and RNA the process (10.1)
are composed; consists of three parts: a sugar, a oxoacid:an acid that contains oxygen atoms (8.1)
phosphate group, and a base; a strand of DNA may
be made of more than one million nucleotides (2.3)
P
nucleus:the central, heavy region of an atom that
parent alkane:an alkane that contains the same number
contains the protons and neutrons
of carbons and the same basic structure as a more
nylon (polyamide):a condensation polymer that
complex organic compound; a concept used
contains amide bonds (2.3)
primarily for nomenclature (1.3)
periodic table:a system for organizing the elements, by
O
atomic number, into groups (columns) and periods
octahedral shape:a molecular shape in which six atoms (rows) (Review)
are bonded to a central atom at 90˚ angles (4.2) pH:the logarithm of the hydronium ion concentration
octet rule:the rule stating that atoms bond in such a (8.2)
way as to attain eight electrons in their valence shells photons:a quantum of electromagnetic energy that has
(Review, 4.1) particle-like properties (3.1)
oil:a fat that is liquid at room temperature (2.3) plastic:a synthetic polymer that can be heated and
orbital diagram:a diagram that uses a box for each moulded into specific shapes and forms (2.3)
orbital in any given principal energy level (3.3) pOH:the logarithm of the hydroxide ion concentration
orbital-shape quantum number (l):the second quantum (8.2)
number; refers to the energy sublevels within each polar:having an uneven distribution of charge (1.1)
principal energy level (3.2)
polar covalent bond:a bond in which electrons are
orbitals:solved wave functions that describe a region of unequally shared between two atoms (Review, 1.1,
probable location of electrons (3.2) 4.1)
608 MHR • Glossary
polyamide (nylon):a condensation polymer that quantitative analysis:the branch of analytical chemistry
contains amide bonds (2.3) that involves determining how muchof a compound,
polyatomic ion:an ion, usually negatively charged, that element, or ion is in a sample (9.3)
contains more than one atom quantum:the discrete quantity of energy that an atom
polyester:a condensation polymer that contains ester can absorb or emit (3.1)
bonds (2.3) quantum mechanical model of the atom:a model that
polymer:a large long-chain molecule with repeating describes atoms as having certain allowed quantities
units; made by linking many small molecules called of energy because of the wave-like properties of their
monomers (2.3) electrons (3.2)
polymerization reaction:a reaction in which monomers
are joined into a long chain called a polymer (2.1) R
polyprotic acid:an acid that has more than one rate constant (k):a proportionality constant; different
hydrogen atom that dissociates in water (8.1) for each reaction at any given temperature (6.2)
polysaccharide:a carbohydrate that consists of ten or rate-determining step:the slowest reaction step;
more saccharide units (2.3) determines the rate of the reaction (6.4)
potential energy diagram:a diagram that charts the rate law equation:an equation that describes the rate of
potential energy of a reaction against the progress of a reaction by the concentration of the reactants raised
the reaction; can represent the increase in potential to an exponent, e.g. Rate =k[A]m[B]n (6.2)
energy during a chemical reaction (6.3)
rate of reaction:the rate at which a reaction occurs;
precipitate:an insoluble solid that is formed by a measured in terms of reactant used or product
chemical reaction between two soluble compounds formed per unit time (6.1)
precision:the closeness of a measurement to other reactant:a starting substance in a chemical reaction
measurements of the same object or phenomenon (Review)
primary alcohol:an alcohol that has the −OH group reaction intermediates:molecules, atoms, or ions that
bonded to a carbon atom, which is bonded to one appear in the elementary reactions but not in the
carbon atom and two hydrogen atoms (1.3) overall reaction (6.4)
primary amide:an amide that has only hydrogen atoms, reaction mechanism:a series of steps that make up an
and no alkyl groups, attached to the nitrogen atom overall reaction (6.4)
(1.4)
reaction quotient (Q):an expression that is identical to
primary amine:an amine that has one alkyl group and the equilibrium constant expression but is calculated
two hydrogen atoms attached to the nitrogen atom using concentration values that are not necessarily
(1.3) those at equilibrium (7.4)
principal quantum number (n):a positive whole redox reaction (oxidation-reduction reaction):a
number (integer) that indicates the energy level reaction in which one reactant loses electrons
and relative size of an atomic orbital (3.2) (oxidation) and another reactant gains electrons
product:a new substance that is formed in a chemical (reduction) (10.1)
reaction (Review) reducing agent:a reactant that reduces another reactant
protein:a natural polymer that is present in plants and and loses electrons (is oxidized) in the process (10.1)
animals; composed of monomers called amino acids reduction:defined as the gain of electrons (10.1); in
(2.3) organic chemistry, a reaction in which an organic
proton:a positive subatomic particle that has an compound is reduced by forming more C(cid:2)H bonds
approximate mass of 1 u; exists in the nucleus or fewer C(cid:2)O bonds (2.1)
of the atom renewable resources:resources that exist in infinite
pure substance:a material that consists of only one type supply (5.4)
of particle; a substance that has a definite chemical resonance structures:two or more Lewis structures
composition (Review) that show the same relative position of atoms but
different positions of electron pairs (4.2)
Q RNA (ribonucleic acid):a nucleic acid that is present in
the body’s cells; works closely with DNA to produce
qualitative analysis:the branch of analytical chemistry
proteins in the body (2.3)
that involves identifying elements, compounds,
and ions in samples of unknown or uncertain
composition (9.3)
Glossary • MHR 609
S stoichiometry:the study of the mass-mole-number
relationships in chemical reactions and formulas
salt:any ionic compound that is formed in a
(Review)
neutralization reaction from the anion of an acid
structural diagram:a two-dimensional representation
and the cation of a base
of the structure of a compound; can be a complete
saturated:containing only single bonds (1.1)
diagram, a condensed diagram, or a line diagram
secondary alcohol:an alcohol that has the −OH group (Review)
bonded to a carbon atom, which is bonded to two
structural isomers:two compounds that contain
other carbon atoms and one hydrogen atom (1.3)
the same number of each atom but in a different
secondary amide:an amide that has one alkyl group arrangement; bonds would have to be broken to
attached to the nitrogen atom (1.4) rearrange one isomer into another (Review)
secondary amine:an amine that has two alkyl groups substitution reaction:a reaction in which a hydrogen
and one hydrogen atom attached to the nitrogen atom or a functional group is replaced by a different
atom (1.3) functional group (2.1)
second law of thermodynamics:the law stating that substrate:the reactant molecule (6.4)
the total entropy of the universe is increasing (7.2)
surroundings:everything in the universe outside the
second order reaction:a reaction in which the overall system (5.1)
reaction order is 2 (6.2)
symmetrical alkene:an alkene that has identical groups
SI:the international system of measurement units, on either side of the double bond (2.2)
including units such as the metre, the kilogram, and
synthesis reaction:a chemical reaction in which two or
the mole; from the French Système internationale
more reactants combine to produce a single, different
d’unités(Review)
substance (Review)
single bond:a covalent bond in which one pair of
system:the part of the universe that is being studied
electrons is shared between two atoms (1.1)
and observed (5.1)
single displacement reaction:a chemical reaction in
which one element in a compound is replaced
T
(displaced) by another element (Review)
temperature:a measure of the average kinetic energy of
solubility:the amount of solute that dissolves in a given
the particles that make up a substance or system (5.1)
quantity of solvent at a specific temperature
termolecular:a term that describes a reaction involving
solubility product constant (K ):the product of the
sp
three particles colliding (6.4)
concentrations of the ions of an ionic compound
in aqueous solution at 25˚C (9.2) tertiary alcohol:an alcohol that has the −OH group
bonded to a carbon atom, which is bonded to three
solute:a substance that is dissolved in a solution
other carbon atoms (1.3)
(Review)
tertiary amide:an amide that has two alkyl groups
solvent:a substance that has other substances (solutes)
attached to the nitrogen atom (1.4)
dissolved in it
tertiary amine:an amine that has three alkyl groups
specific heat capacity:a measure of the amount of heat
attached to the nitrogen atom (1.3)
that is needed to raise the temperature of 1 g of a
substance 1˚C or 1 K (5.2) tetrahedral shape:the most stable shape for a
compound that contains four atoms bonded to
spectator ions:ions that are present in a solution but do
a central atom with no lone pairs; the atoms are
not participate in the chemical reaction taking place
positioned at the four corners of an imaginary
(Review)
tetrahedron, and the angles between the bonds
spin quantum number (m):the quantum number that
s are approximately 109.5˚ (1.1, 4.2)
specifies the direction in which the electron is
spinning with values of +1 and−1 (3.3) thermochemical equation:a balanced chemical
2 2 equation that indicates the amount of energy
standard enthalpy of formation:the quantity of energy
absorbed or released by the reaction it represents
that is absorbed or released when 1 mol of a
(5.1)
compound is formed directly from its elements in
thermochemistry:the study of the energy that is
their standard states (5.3)
involved in chemical reactions (5.1)
standard enthalpy of reaction:the enthalpy change
thermodynamics:the study of energy and energy
associated with a reaction that occurs at SATP (5.1)
transfer (5.1)
starch:a glucose polysaccharide that is used by plants
to store energy; humans can digest starch (2.3)
610 MHR • Glossary
torr:a unit of pressure; equal to 1 mm of mercury in
the column of a barometer or manometer
total ionic equation:a form of chemical equation that
shows dissociated ions of soluble ionic compounds
(Review)
trans-isomer:a geometric isomer in which the two
largest groups are on different sides of the double
bond (Review)
transition state:the top of the E barrier (the “hill”) in a
a
potential energy diagram (6.3)
transition state theory:the theory explaining what
happens when molecules collide in a reaction (6.3)
trigonal bipyramidal:a molecular shape in which five
atoms surround a central atom; three atoms are on a
horizontal plane at 120˚ angles to each other, and two
more atoms point straight up and straight down from
the plane (4.2)
trigonal planar:a molecular shape in which three
bonding groups surround a central atom; the three
bonded atoms are all in the same plane as the central
atom, at the corners of an invisible triangle (1.1, 4.2)
triple bond:a covalent bond in which three pairs of
electrons are shared between two atoms to create
a strong, inflexible bond (1.1)
U
unimolecular elementary reaction:a reaction in which
one molecule or ion reacts (6.4)
unsaturated:having one or more double or triple bonds
(1.2)
V
valence electrons:electrons that occupy the outer
occupied energy level of an atom in its ground state
(Review)
valence shell:the outermost shell of electrons
W
wax:a biological molecule that is an ester of a long-
chain alcohol or a long-chain carboxylic acid (2.3)
Z
zero sum rule:the rule stating that, for chemical
formulas of neutral compounds involving ions,
the sum of the positive charges and the negative
charges must equal zero (Review)
Glossary • MHR 611
Index
The page numbers in boldfacetype indicate the pages where the terms are defined. Terms that occur in Sample Problems
(SP), Investigations (inv), ExpressLabs (EL), and Thoughtlabs (TL) are also indicated.
1,1,2,2-tetrabromopropane, 68 3-chloro-2-methylpentane, 67SP Alcohol, 25–26
1,1-difluoroethane, 101 3-ethyl-2,2-dimethyl-3-heptene, 15SP condensation reaction, 61
1,1-dimethyl ethanol, 102 3-ethyl-2-methylhexane, 16SP elimination reactions, 59, 70
1,2,2,2-tetrafluoroethane, 101 3-methyl-1-hexanol, 26SP functional group, 22
1,2-dibromobutene, 58 3-methyl-2-butanone, 36SP oxidation, 60, 71, 74inv
1,2-dibromopropene, 68 3-methylbutanal, 36SP physical properties, 27
1,2-dichlorobutane, 66 3-methylpentanoic acid, 39 predicting reaction, 72SP
1,2-dimethylbenzene. SeeOrtho-xylene 3-pentanone, 36SP substitution reaction, 58, 70
1,3-butadiene, 6EL Aldehyde, 35, 36SP
1,3-dibromo-4-methylcyclohexane, Absorption spectrum, 128 functional group, 22
28SP Acetaldehyde. SeeEthanal oxidation, 60, 71, 75
1,3-dimethylbenzene meta-dimethyl- Acetaminophen, 48, 98 physical properties, 37
benzene. SeeMeta-xylene Acetic acid, 39, 421 reduction, 60, 61, 75
1,4-dimethylbenzene para-dimethyl- acid dissociation constant, 393, Aldehyde group, carbohydrate
benzene. SeePara-xylene 394–395inv, 396 component, 90
1,6-diaminohexane, 83 buffers, 410 Aliphatic hydrocarbon, 12
1,6-hexamethylenediamine, 205 dissociation reaction, 380–381 Alizarin, 425
1-bromo-1-butene, 68 properties, 377 Alkaline cell battery, 513
1-bromobutane, 66 Acetyl CoA, structure, 565 Alkaline fuel cell. SeeFuel cell
1-bromoethanol, 7 Acetyl salicylic acid, 377 Alkane, 12, 15SP, 16SP
1-butene, 6EL, 66 Acid, functional group, 22
1-butyne, 68 Arrhenius definition, 378, 380 Alkene, 12, 14, 15SP
1-ethoxypropane, 30SP Brønsted-Lowry definition, 380 addition reaction, 57, 66
1-ethylcyclopentane, 15SP ionization constants, 597 functional group, 22
1-methoxypropane, 29 naming rules, 596 reaction, 65–67
1-propanol, boiling point, 37 properties, 377 reduction, 60, 61
10-deacetylbaccatin III, 56 strength, 383–384 Alkoxy group, 29
Acid-base indicator, 412, 425 Alkyl group, 14
2,2-dimethylpropanal, 36SP Acid-base titration curves, 412–413, general formula, 21
2,4,6-trinitromethylbenzene 425 Alkyl halide (haloalkane), 28
(AlsoTNT), 18 Acid dissociation constant (AlsoAcid elimination reactions, 59
2-bromo-1-butene, 68 ionization constant) (K ), 393 substitution reactions, 58
a
2-bromopropane, 72SP Acidic hydrolysis, 76 Alkyne, 12, 14
2-butanamide, 58 Acidic solution addition reaction, 57, 68
2-butanone, 72SP balancing half reactions, 484 functional group, 22
2-butene, 66 balancing redox equation, reactions 65, 68
2-butyne, 6EL 489–490SP reduction, 60
2-chloro-2-methylpentane, 67SP ion concentration, 385–386SP Allotropes, 197
2-deoxyribose, 93 oxidation number method, 497 Aluminum, 234, 449
2-hexyne, 12 salts in, 421 Amide, 46–48
2-methoxy-2-methyl propane, 102 Acrylonitrile, 83 functional group, 22
2-methylbutanal, 36SP Activated complex, 292 Amide bonds, 83
2-methyl-pentene, 67SP Activation energy (E ), 290 Amine, 31–33
a
2-methylpropane, 15SP catalysts’ effect, 302 amides with, 46
2-pentanone, 36SP Active site, enzyme, 304 functional group, 22
2-propanol, 21 Addition polymerization, 82 Amino acid, 90
addition reaction product, 66 Addition reaction, 57 Amino group
addition reaction, 66 alkenes, 57, 66 amino acids component, 90
boiling point, 25 alkynes, 57, 68 Ammonia, 421
elimination reactions, 59 identifying, 62SP bond angles, 181
predicting reaction, 72SP polymers, 82 combustion, 495
reduction product, 61, 77SP Adhesive forces, 196TL dissociation, 381
substitution reaction, 58 Adrenaline, 33 in amides, 46
Adenine, 93 pH at equivalence, 426–428SP
Adipic acid, 83 production, 355SP, 357, 367–369
Adsorption, 69 properties, 377
Airy, George, 362 substitution reaction, 58
612 MHR • Index
Ammonia nitrate, 514 Battery, 512 Bromobenzene, 70
Ammonium chloride Bauxite, 544 Bromochloromethane, 7
electrolysis, 539–540SP Becquerel, Henri, 120 Bromocresol green, 412–413
formation, 379 Bent shape, 7 Bromoethane, 58, 59
salt bridge, 507 Benzene, 18–19 Brønsted, Johannes, 380
Ammonium cyanate, 5 addition reaction, 70 Brønsted-Lowry theory, 380
Ammonium ion, standard molar enthalpy of Buckminster Fuller, R., 198
Lewis structure, 175–176SP formation, 250–251 Buckminsterfullerene, 198
Amorphous solids, 196, 204–205 substitution reaction, 58 structure, 197
Ampere (A), 538 Benzoic acid, 39 Buckyballs. SeeFullerenes
Ampère, André, 538 Bernstein, Dr. Richard, 200 Buffers, 409–411
Amphoteric, 381 Beta-damascone, 37 common ion effect, 440
Amylopectin, 91 Beta-ionone, 37 Butane,6EL, 12
Amylose, 91 Bimolecular elementary CFC substitute, 101
Anesthesiology, 371 reaction, 297–298 Butanoic acid, 39, 44
Angular molecular shape, 182 Binary acids, 383 Button cell battery, 513–514
Aniline, 33, 377, 404 Biochemistry, 88 Butyl group, 14
Anode, 506 Biodegradable plastics, 89 Butyne, addition reaction, 58
Antioxidants, 469 Biofuel, 110
Aqueous solutions, 528, 529–531SP Biological catalysts, 304 Cadavarine, 33
Aromatic chemicals, 17 Biosphere, 456 Cadmium precipitate, 449
Aromatic compounds, 18–19 Birss, Dr. Viola, 552 Calcium oxalate, 418
reactions of, 70 Blood, 371, 568 Calorimeter, 236
substitution reactions, 58 pH 411 Carbohydrate (saccharide), 90–91
Aromatic hydrocarbon, 12 phosphate ions, 418 Carbon, 5
Arrhenius theory, 378–379 Blue Bottle™, 69 allotropic forms, 197
Ascorbic acid, structure, 570 Bohr, Niels, 126 average bond energy, 168
Asymmetrical alkene, 66 Bohr’s atomic model, 126–129 electron configuration, 144–145
Atmosphere, 456 Boiling point nuclear binding energy, 229
Atomic model alcohols, 27 Carbon-based network solids, 197
Bohr’s, 126–129 aldehydes and ketones, 37 Carbon-carbon bonds, 5
Dalton’s, 119–120 amides, 48 Carbon-hydrogen bonds, 5
quantum mechanical, 132–133 amines, 33 Carbon dioxide, 8, 9
Rutherford’s, 120–122 carbon atoms, 24 citric acid cycle, 565
Thomson’s, 120 carboxylic acids, 40 formation, 243
Atomic radius esters, 46 Carbon tetrachloride, 8, 9
ionization energy and, 154 ethers, 31 Carbonyl group, 35
periodic trends, 152–153 metals, 171 Carboxyl group
Atomic solids, 197 molecular polarity, 23 amino acids component, 90
properties of, 201 organic compounds, 41 Carboxylic acid, 39–41
Atomic spectra, 122–123, 124–125inv Body-centred cubic structure, 199 aldehyde oxidation product, 75
Atoms in Molecules (AIM) theory, 186 Bond angles, 179 amides with, 46
Aufbau principle, 142 Bond dipole, 8, 187 condensation reaction, 61
Aurora borealis, 118 Bond energy, 168 esters with, 44
Avogadro constant (N ), 539 Bonding pair-bonding pair derivatives, 42–43inv, 44–48
a
repulsion, 181 functional group, 22
Bader, Richard, 186 Bond strength, periodic trends hydrolysis reaction product, 61
Balancing equations of binary acids, 383 oxidation product, 71
oxidation number method, 495–497 Bonding physical properties, 40
Ball-and-stick-model, 7 solids, 196 reactions, 76
Base, 377– 378, 380 Bonding pair reduction, 60
strength, 383–384 bond representation, 163 Catalase, 565
Base dissociation constant (K ), 404, covalent bond, 167 Catalysts, 276, 302–304, 305TL,
b
405–406SP VSEPR theory, 179 306–307inv, 314, 364
Bases, nucleotides, 92–93 Borkenstein, Robert, 491 equilibrium effects, 364
Basic hydrolysis, 76 Borosilicate glass, 204 fuel cells, 522
Basic solutions Bosch, Carl, 368–369 Haber process, 369
balancing redox equations, 496–497SP Breathalyzer test, 491 Cathode, 506
balancing half reactions, 485–486 Bromine electroplating, 542–543inv
ion concentration, 385–386SP addition reaction, 58, 68, 70 Cathodic protection, 549
salts in, 421 test for alkanes, 68
Index • MHR 613
Cell Potential (AlsoElectric cell electrolyte, 505 Dissolution, 228
potential), 509 electroplating, 542–543inv DNA (2-deoxyribonucleic acid), 92–94
measuring, 510–511SP redox reaction, 465–466, 478, 486 hydrogen bonds, 193
Cell voltage. SeeElectric potential Corrosion, 546 Downs cell, 525
Cellular respiration, 91 prevention, 548–549 Double bond, 5, 167
Cellulose, 88, 91 Coulomb (C), 538 Dry cell, 512
Celsius degrees (˚C), 222 Coulomb, Charles, 538 Ductility, metals, 170
Central atoms, expanded Covalent bond, 167, 195
valence level, 177 diamond, 198 Earth, 456
Cesium chloride, 199 in organic molecules, 5 Ecosystems, 362
Chemical, 5 predicting, 168 Effective nuclear charge (Z ), 153
eff
Chemical bond, 163 Covalent network solid, Einstein, Albert, 126, 229
energy in, 223 properties of, 201 Electric cars, 550
Chemical vapour deposition, 198 Crowfoot Hodgkin, Dorothy, 199 Electric charge, 538
Chlor-alkali process, 552–553 Crystal lattice, 199 Electric current, 505, 538
Chloric acid, structure, 384 Crystalline solids, 196–199 Electric potential (E), 509
Chlorination, 553 Curie, Pierre, 120 Electrochemical cell, 525
Chlorine Curie, Marie, 120 Electrochemistry, 505
addition reaction, 66 Cyanide ion, 475 Electrodes, 506
Lewis structure, 474 Cyclic compound, 18 Electrolysis, 524–527
oxidation number, 474 Cycloalkane, 12 aqueous solutions, 528, 529–531SP
Chloroform, 9 Cyclopentane, 12 calculating mass of product,
Chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), 101 Cytosine, 93 539–540SP
Chlorous acid, structure, 384 potassium iodide, 532–533inv
Chromium, 558 dblock elements, 148–149 Electrolytes, 506
Chromomorphic groups, 89 dorbital, 137 Electrolytic cell, 524
Cinnamaldehyde, 37 Dacron™, 84 electroplating, 542–543inv
Citric acid, 39, 565 Dalton, John, 118 refining copper, 544
Citric acid cycle, 565 Dalton’s atomic model, 119–120 Electromagnetic spectrum
Closed system, 456 Damascenone, 37 properties, 123
Coffee-cup calorimeter, 236, 238SP, Daniell cell, 505–508 Electromotive force (emf), 509
240–241inv conversion to electrolytic cell, 528 Electron
Cold packs, 228 standard cell potentials, 517–518 mass, 120
Collision theory, 289–290 Daniell, John Frederic, 505 probability density maps, 133
Cohesive forces, 196TL Davy, Sir Humphry, 526 spin, 140
Common ion effect, 436–437 de Broglie, Louis, 131 Electron affinity, 156–157
buffers 440 Degradable plastics, 88–89 Electron density maps, 186
Le Châtelier’s principle, 363 Dehydration reaction, 70 Electron configuration, 142–147
solubility, 437–438SP Dehydroascorbic acid, 570 Electron sharing, 167
Complete structural diagram, 6 Deuterium, 231 Electronegativity (EN), 8
Concentration-time curve, 269 Dichlorodiphenyltrichloro-ethane bonding character
Condensation (DDT), 102 determination, 168
polymerization, 83 Diamond, 212 ionic bonding, 165
Condensation reaction, 61 covalent bonds, 198 oxidation numbers, 473
polymers, 82 enthalpy of formation, 250–251 periodic trend of binary acids, 383
Condensed electron configuration, 145 structure, 197 values, 474
Condensed structural diagram, 6 Diethyl ether Electronegativity difference (∆EN)
Conductivity, metals, 170 enthalpies, 228 bond character determination,
Conjugate acid-base pair, 380 See alsoEthoxyethane 168–169
identifying, 381–382SP Dinitrogen peroxide, reaction rate Electron-group arrangement, 179,
dissociation constant relationship, determination, 270, 271SP, 273, 182–183
407, 408–409SP 281–282, 285 Electroplating, 528, 542–543inv, 558
Constant-pressure calorimeter. See Dinitrogen tetroxide, 335 Elementary reactions, 297–298
Coffee-cup calorimeter Dioxin, 88 Elimination reaction, 59, 70
Continuous spectrum, 123 Dipole-dipole force, 22, 190–191, 195 identifying, 62SP
Conversion factors, 595 Dipole-induced dipole force, 191, 195 Emission spectrum, 127
Co-ordinate covalent bond, 175 Disaccharide, 91 Enamel, 548
Copper, refining, 544 Dispersion force, 22, 24, 192, 195 Endothermic reaction, 223–224,
Copper(I) solution, 468 graphite, 198 328, 363
Copper(II) sulfate solution Disposable batteries, 512–514 potential energy diagram, 292
cell conversion, 528 Disproportionation reaction, 468 End-point, 425
614 MHR • Index
Energy reaction quotient, 354 Fatty tissues, 95
atom ground state, 133 small values of, 350 Favourable change, 328–329
atomic levels, 128, 131 temperature, 337 signs of ∆Hand ∆S, 332
bonding systems, 163 Equilibrium expression Filipovic, Dusanka, 69
changes, 232 quadratic equation solution, First ionization energy, 154
chemical bonds, 223 345–347SP First-order reactions,279
efficiency, 256–257 writing, 336SP half-life, 285, 286–287SP
Einstein’s equation, 229 Equilibrium shift, 355SP Flint glass, 204
fat storage, 94 Equivalence point, 412, 425 Flow battery. SeeFuel cell
non-renewable, 258 Ester, 44–46 Fluorine,
processes, 231–232 bonds in condensation electron affinity, 156
quanta, 126 polymerization, 83 electron configuration, 144–145
renewable, 258 esterification product, 76 hydrogen bonded, 193
sources in Canada, 256 functional group, 22 Fluoroapatite, 423
Sun, 231 hydrolysis reaction, 61, 76 Ford, Henry, 102
technologies, 257 Esterification reaction, 76 Formaldehyde. SeeMethanal
Enthalpy (H),222 Ethanal, 35, 60 Formation reactions, 250
favourable changes, 328 Ethanamide, 46 Fractional precipitation, 448
Gibbs free energy, 331 Ethane, 303 Franklin, Rosalind, 199
temperature, 329 Ethanoic acid Free-electron model, 170
Enthalpy change, (∆H), 223–229 esterification, 77SP Free radical, 469
algebraic determination, 244–245 See alsoAcetic acid Freezing point, 227
Hess’s law, 245–246SP Ethanol, 21, 44, 76 Freon®, 101
calculating, 252–253 elimination reaction, 71 Fructose, structure, 90
of a neutralization reaction, enthalpies, 228 Fuel cell, 550
240–241inv esterification, 77SP Fulhame, Elizabeth, 314
transition state theory, 291 fuel catalyst, 102 Fullerenes, 198
Enthalpy of combustion (∆H ), 223 oxidation, 60 Fumaric acid, structure, 565
comb
magnesium, 248–249inv substitution reaction, 58, 70 Functional group, 12
Enthalpy of condensation (∆H ), 227 Ethene carbonyl groups, 35–41
cond
Enthalpy of formation, 253–254SP addition polymerization, 82, 83 single bonds, 21–33
Enthalpy of freezing (∆H ), 227 addition reaction, 58 Fusion, phase change, 227
fre
Enthalpy of fusion, 227 elimination reactions
Enthalpy of melting (∆H ), 227 product, 59, 71 Galvani, Luigi, 506
melt
Enthalpy of reaction (∆H ), 223, 236, symmetry, 66 Galvanic cell, 505–508
rxn
237–238SP Ether, 29–31 measuring cell potentials,
Enthalpy of solution (∆H ), 228 Ethoxyethane, 29 510–511SP
soln
Enthalpy of vaporization (∆H ), 227 See alsoDiethyl ether rusting, 547–548
vap
Entropy, 329 Ethyl alcohol, 25 Galvanizing, 548
favourable changes, 329–331 See alsoEthanol Gas
Gibbs free energy, 331 Ethyl butanoate, 44, 76 collision theory, 290
Enzymes, 304, 308, 314 Ethyl ethanoate, 45SP, 77SP entropy, 330
Equilibrium, 323 Ethyl group, 14 phase change with heat, 227
catalyst, 364 Ethylene glycol, 25, 100 Geiger, Hans, 121
changing conditions, 365 Ethylene hydrogenation, 303 Geosphere, 456
common ion effect, 363 Exothermic reaction, 223–224, Gibbs free energy, 331–332, 430
conditions that apply, 326–327 328, 332, 363 Gibbs, Josiah Willard, 331
free energy, 331 potential energy diagram, 292 Gillespie, Ronald, 178
heterogeneous, 326 Expanded valence energy level, Glass, 204, 234
homogeneous, 326 177–178 Glucose, structure, 90
modelling, 325EL Explosives, 514 Glycerol, lipid, 94
perturbing, 358–361inv External circuit, 505 Glyceryl trioleate, 94
pressure changes, 364 Extraction, 544 Glycogen, 91
temperature change effect, 363 Gold, 116
volume change, 364 fblock elements, 148–149 Goulenchyn, Dr. Karen, 129
Equilibrium concentrations Face-centred cubic structure, 199 Grain alcohol, 25
approximation method, 350–352SP Faraday (F), 539 See alsoEthanol
calculating, 339, 344–345SP Faraday, Michael, 506, 538–539 Graphite, 212
Equilibrium constant (K ), 335 Faraday’s law, 541, 542–543inv enthalpy of formation, 250–251
eq
calculating, 337–338SP, 340–343SP Fat, 94 dispersion forces in, 198
qualitative interpretation, 348 Fatty acids, 94 structure, 197
Index • MHR 615
Greenhouse gas, 101 amines, 33 Iron(III) oxide, 547
Ground state, 133 boiling point effect, 23 Iron(III) thiocyanate ion, 339,
Guanine, 93 carboxylic acids, 40 340–343SP
Guillet, Dr. James, 89 ethers, 31 Isobutane, 101
Guldberg, Cato, 334–335 esters, 46 Iso-butyl group, 14
solubility in water effect, 23 Isocitric acid, structure, 565
Haber, Fritz, 367–369 Hydrogen chloride gas, 377 Isomers, 19
Haber process, 355SP, 367–369 Hydrogen fuel cell, 552 Isopropanol (Isopropyl alcohol), 25
Haber-Bosch process, 369 Hydrogenation, 303 See also2-propanol
Half-life (t ) of a reaction, 285 Hydrohalic acids, 383 Isopropyl group, 14
1/2
Half-reaction, 467 Hydroiodic acid, 58 Isostacy, 362
balancing, 483–485 Hydrolysis reaction, 61, 421 Isotropic materials, 204
Half-reaction method, 486–489 carbohydrates, 91
Haloalkane. SeeAlkyl halide esters, 61, 76 Joules (J), 222
Halozite™, 69 fatty acids, 94
Heat, 222, 226–228 Hydronium ion, 379 Kamerlingh Onnes, Heike, 206
Heat capacity (C), 235 concentration, 388, 389SP, 392 Karwa, Dr. Laila Rafik, 371
Heat transfer molecular shape, 184–185SP Kelvin (K), 222
measuring, 236 polyprotic acids, 402 Ketoglutaric acid, 565
specific heat capacity, 235 Hydrosphere, 456 Ketone, 35
Heisenberg, Werner, 132 Hydroxide ion functional group, 22, 90
Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle, 132 concentration, 389, 392 oxidation, 71, 75
Helium atom, collision geometry, 293 physical properties, 37
emission spectrum, 131 Hydroxyapatite, 422 reduction, 60, 61, 75
electron configuration, 144–145 Hydroxyl group, 21 Kettering, Charles, 102
quantum numbers, 140 carboxylic acids, 41 KEVLAR®, 205–206
Henri, Victor, 308 carbohydrate component, 90 Kinetic energy
Hess’s law of heat summation, 243, Hypochlorous acid, 384 collision theory, 290
248–249inv heat definition, 222
Heterogeneous catalyst, 303 ICE table, 339, 344, 345SP, 346SP, transition state theory, 291
Heterogeneous equilibrium, 326 351SP Krebs cycle. SeeCitric acid cycle
Homeostasis, 362 Induced fit-model, enzyme, 304 Krebs, Hans, 565
Homogeneous catalyst, 303 Inert electrodes, 508 Kwolek, Stephanie, 205–206
Homogeneous equilibrium, 326 Inert gases, 364
Hund’s rule, 143–144 Infrared spectroscopy, 38 Lattice energy, 166
Hydrobromic acid Initial rates method, 280 Law of chemical equilibrium, 334
addition reaction product, 70 Inner transition elements, 149 Law of conservation of energy, 221
addition reaction, 58, 66, 68 Integrated rate law, 285 Law of mass action, 335
elimination reaction product, 59 Intermolecular forces, 22, 190 Lead-acid battery, 535
substitution reaction product, 58 comparing, 24TL Lead(II) chromate, common
Hydrocarbon, 12 physical properties, 22–24 ion effect, 436, 437–438SP
naming, 14 International Union of Pure and Leaded fuels, 102
drawing, 16 Applied Chemistry (IUPAC), 13 Le Châtelier, Henri, 357
Hydrochloric acid, 67SP Intramolecular forces, 190 Le Châtelier’s principle, 356–357,
Hydrofluoric acid, 376 Iodoethane, 58 358–361inv, 418
Hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), 101 Iodine titration, 570 applying, 365–366SP
Hydrogen atom, Ion, naming rules, 596 blood, 568
absorption spectrum, 128 Ion product constant (Q ), 443–444 buffers, 410
sp
electron probability Ion product constant of water (K ), 388 gas equilibrium, 439
w
density map, 133 Ion-dipole forces, 191, 195 Haber process, 367–369
electron configuration, 144–145 Ionic bonding, 165–166, 195 non-chemistry applications, 362
emission spectrum, 131 lattice energy, 166 water dissociation, 388
line spectrum, 123 predicting, 168 Leclanché cell. SeeDry cell
orbital energy, 139 Ionic crystal, 199 Leclanché, Georges, 512
spectrum and Bohr’s atomic Ion-induced dipole force, 191, 195 Le Roy radius, 200
model, 126–127 Ionic liquids, 203 Le Roy-Bernstein theory, 200
quantum numbers, 140 Ionic solids, 166, 201 Lenz, Heinrich, 362
Hydrogen bonding, 22, 192–193, 195 Ionization constants, 597 Lenz’s law, 362
alcohols, 27 Ionization energy, 153–155 Leroy, Dr. R.J., 200
aldehydes and ketones, 37 Iron, galvanizing, 548
amides, 48 Iron(III) nitrate, 339
616 MHR • Index
Lewis structure metals, 171 Monosaccharide, 91
molecules, 173–176 organic compounds, 41 Montréal Protocol, 101
oxidation numbers from, 473–475 Menten, Dr. Maud L., 308 Mueller, Paul, 102
representing chemical bonds, 163 Menthol, 97, 99 Multi-electron atoms,
Light, 126 Metabolism, 565 orbital energy, 139
Linear electron-group Metallic bonding, 170, 195
arrangement, 179, 182 Metal activity series, 470 N-methylpropanamide, 46
Linear shape, 7 Metals, 170 acid hydrolysis, 76
Linear molecular shape, 182 extraction, 544 Nagaoka, Hantaro, 122
Lipid, 94–95 properties, 170–171, 201 Nanotubes, 198
Liquid reactivity and periodic trends, 155 structure, 197
entropy, 330 stress, 170 superconductors, 207
phase change with heat, 227 Meta-xylene, 19 Natural essential oils, 17
Liquidmetal™alloy, 205 Methanal (formaldehyde), 35 Natural gas, 257
Lithium Lewis structure, 174–175SP Haber process, 369
electron configuration, 144–145 oxidation, 77SP Natural polymers, 88
orbital energy, 139 Methanamide, 46 Natural substance, 5
quantum numbers, 142 Methanamine, 76 Net ionic equation, 487
Lithium hydroxide, 488 Methane Network solids, 197
Lock-and-key model, 304 bond angles, 181 Neutral solutions, salts in, 420–421
Logarithm, 592 energy efficiency, 257 Niacin, 393
London forces. SeeDispersion force enthalpies, 228 Nickel-cadmium (nicad) cell, 536
London, Fritz, 192 enthalpy changes from Nickel tetracarbonyl, 150
Lone pair, 163 combustion, 252 Nitrates, 322
covalent bonds, 167 greenhouse gas, 260 Nitrobenzene, 58
VSEPR theory, 179 hydrates, 260 Nitrogen, 364
resonance structures, 176 Lewis structure, 5 average bond energy, 168
Lone pair-bonding pair repulsion, 181 Methanoic acid, 39, 77SP cycle, 322
Lonsdale, Kathleen Yardley, 19 See alsoFormic acid electron configuration, 144–145
Lowry, Thomas, 380 Methanol (Also Methyl hydrogen bonded, 193
alcohol), 25, 293 in amines, 31
MacInnes, Dr. Joseph, 439 Methyl benzene, 18 Nitrogen dioxide, 334
Magnetic quantum number (m), 135 Methyl bromide, 293 Nitroglycerin, 218, 514
l
Magnesium Methyl group, 14 Nitrous acid, 58
alloys, 552 Methyl red, 412–413, 425 Nobel, Alfred B., 218
enthalpy of combustion, 248–249inv Michaelis, Leonor, 308 Noble gases, 364
Magnesium fluoride Michaelis-Menten equation, 308 Non-polar molecule, 9, 12, 187
crystal structure, 165 Molar absorption coefficient, 200 dispersion forces, 192
lattice energy, 166 Molar solubility, calculating Non-renewable energy, 258
Lewis structure, 165 from K , 435–436SP Non-spontaneous change.
sp
orbital diagram, 165 Molecular geometry, 181 See Unfavourable change
Magnetite, 476 Molecular polarity, 8 Noronha, Jennifer, 259
Main group elements, 147, 148 boiling point effect, 23 Nuclear binding energy, 229
atomic radii, 152–153 molecular shape Nuclear fission, 230
electron affinity, 157 relationship, 187–188 Nuclear fusion, 231
Malic acid, structure, 565 predicting, 8–9, 10SP energy source, 261
Malleability, metals, 170 solubility effect, 10 Nuclear medicine, 129
Markovnikov’s rule, 66, 67SP, 68 Molecular shape, 7, 8, 179, Nuclear model of the atom.
Marsden, Ernest, 121 182–183, 184SP SeeRutherford’s atomic model
Mass defect, 229 modelling, 180EL Nuclear safety, 259
Matter waves, 131–132 molecular polarity, 187–188 Nucleotide, 92–94
Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution, 290 Molecular solids, 197 Nyholm, Ronald, 178
Melting points, 227 properties of, 201 Nylon (polyamide), 83, 84
alcohols, 27 Molecularity, 297
aldehydes and ketones, 37 Molecule, 173 Octrahedral electron-group
amides, 48 Lewis structures, 173–175 arrangement, 179, 183
amines, 33 polarity, 178 Octahedral molecular shape, 183
carboxylic acids, 40 shapes, 178 Octane numbers, 102
esters, 46 Monomers, 81 Octyl ethanoate, 46
ethers, 31 Monoprotic acids, 384 Oil, 94
Index • MHR 617
One-electron systems, 129 Periodic table, 118 Polyvinylchloride (PVC, vinyl), 83, 88
Orbital diagram, 143 arrangement, 151TL Positron emission
Orbitals, 132–137 atomic radius, 152–153 tomography (PET), 129
covalent bonds, 167 electron affinity, 156–157 Potassium chloride, 483
filling guidelines, 143 electron configurations, 147–148 Potassium iodide,
relative energies of, 142 electronegativity values, 474 electrolysis, 532–533inv
Orbital-shape quantum ionization energy trends, 153–155 Potassium permanganate,
number, 134–135 pH, 390 oxidizing agent, 74inv
Organic chemistry, 4 blood, 411 Potassium thiocyanate, 339
Organic compounds, 5, 78 buffers, 410 Potential energy, 509
boiling points of 41 calculation at equivalence, 425, Potential energy diagram,
general formula, 21 426–428SP 291–293, 293–294SP
general rules for naming, 13 common ion effect, 440–441SP catalyst effect on, 302
melting points of, 41 logarithm, 592 transition state theory and, 291–292
organic shapes of, 7 scale, 341 Potential ladder diagram, 517–518,
reactions, 56 Phase changes, 227 531SP
risk-benefit analysis, 97–98 Phenolphthalein, 412–413 Pratt, John, 362
predicting products of, 77SP Phenylethene, 18 Precipitation, predicting,
three-dimensional Phosphate group, 92–93 445SP, 446–447SP
structural diagrams, 7 Phosphate ions, blood, 418 Pressure, effecting equilibrium, 363
Ortho-xylene, 19 Phospholipids, 95 Primary alcohol, 25, 26SP
Overvoltage, 527 Phosphoric acid, aldehyde reduction product, 75
Oxaloacetic acid, 565 pH calculation, 400–402SP oxidation, 71
Oxidants, 469 Phosphorous pentachloride, Primary amide, 47
Oxidation, 465–466, 479 expanded valence level, 177 Primary amine, 31, 33
alcohols, 60, 71, 74inv Photochromic lenses, 320 Primary battery, 512
aldehydes, 60, 75 Photodegradable plastics, 89 Principle quantum number (n),
identifying, 62SP Photons, 126 134–135
ketones, 75 Physical constants, 595 See alsoQuantum numbers
organic chemistry definition, 60 Planck, Max, 126 Product, 270–271
Oxidation half-reaction, 506 Plastic, 81, 89 Propanal, boiling point, 37
Oxidation number method, 495–497 Plastic sulfur, 204 Propanamide, 46
Oxidation numbers, 473–475 Platinum catalyst, 303 Propane, 101, 24TL
assigning, 477SP pOH, 390 Propanoic acid, 76, 397–380SP
redox reactions, 478 Polar covalent bond, 8, 169 Propanol, 24TL
rules for finding, 476 Polar molecule, 8, 187 Propanone, 61, 77SP
Oxidation potential, 518 Polarity of functional group Propene, 12, 72SP
Oxidation-reduction reaction. amines, 33 asymmetry, 66
SeeRedox reactions alcohols, 27 elimination reaction product, 59
Oxidizing agent, 60, 466 aldehydes and ketones, 37 Propyl group, 14
Oxoacids, 383 amides, 48 Propyne, 68
Oxygen carboxylic acids, 40 Protein, 90
corrosion agent, 546 esters, 46 Pyrex™. SeeBorosilicate glass
electron configuration, 144–145 ethers, 31 Pyridine, 404, 406SP
enthalpy of formation, 250–251 Polyacrylonitrile, uses, 83 Pyruvate carboxylase, 572
hydrogen bonded, 193 Polyamide (nylon), 83
ionization energy, 154–155 Polyatomic ion, 596 Qualitative analysis, 449, 450TL
Ozone, 101 Lewis structures, 173–175 Quantitative analysis, 449
enthalpy of formation, 250–251 Polyester, 83 Quantum energy, 126
Polyethene, 82, 83 Quantum mechanical model, 132–133
pblock elements, 147, 149 Polyethylene terephthalate (PET), 81 Quantum mechanics, 132
ionic bonding, 165 Polymer, 81–88 Quantum number, 127
porbital, 137 Polymeric sulfur. SeePlastic sulfur See alsoPrinciple quantum
Palladium catalyst, 303 Polymerization reaction, numbers
Para-xylene, 19 classifying, 84SP determining, 135–136SP, 149–150SP
Parent alkane, 25 Polyprotic acids, 384 orbitals, 133–136
Partition coefficient, 371 hydronium ion concentration, 402 Pauli’s exclusion principle, 140–142
Pauli, Wolfgang, 140 ionization constants, 597 periodic table arrangement, 151TL
Pauli’s exclusion principle, 140 pH calculation, 400–402SP Quartz, structure, 198
Pentoic acid, 76 Polysaccharide, 91 Quigg, Jeff, 17
Perchloric acid, 384 Polystyrene, uses, 83 Quinine, 33
618 MHR • Index
pH calculation, 404–405SP See also2-propanol phase change with heat, 227
Rutherford, Ernest, 120 properties of, 201
Radioactive particles, 120 Rutherford’s atomic model, 120–123 Solubility
Rate constant (k),278–279 Rutherford’s gold-foil experiment, 121 general guidelines, 444
determining, 282, 299–300 Rusting, 547–549 molecular polarity, 10
Rate law Solubility in water
determination, 299, 306–307inv sblock elements, 147, 149 alcohols, 27
elementary reactions, 298 ionic bonding, 165 aldehydes and ketones, 37
Rate law equation, 278 sorbital, 137 amides, 48
calculation, 282–283SP Saccharide. SeeCarbohydrates amines, 33
Reactant, 270–271 Sacrificial anode, 548–549 carboxylic acids, 40
Reaction intermediates, 297 Salt solutions, pH, 429EL esters, 46
Reaction mechanism, 297 Salt bridge, 507 ethers, 31
evaluating, 300–301SP Salts hydrogen bonds, 23
Reaction quotient (Q ), 354 acid-base properties, 419, 422 hydrogen bonds in polar
c
Reaction rate, 267 neutral solutions, 420 covalent compounds, 194
average, 268, 270TL predicting acidity/basicity, molecular polarity, 23
calculating, 271SP 423–424SP strong bases, 384
colour changes, 273 Saturated carbon bonds, 5 Solubility product
conductivity changes, 273 Schrödinger, Erwin, 132 constant (K ), 431, 598
sp
experiments, 281 Scientific notation, 591 determining, 432–433SP, 434inv
factors affecting, 276 Sec-butyl group, 14 ion product constant
instantaneous, 268, 270TL Secondary alcohol, 25 relationship, 443–444
mass changes, 272 ketone reduction product, 75 Specific heat capacity (c),234–235
pH changes, 272 oxidation, 71 Spectrophotometer, 273
pressure changes, 273 Secondary amide, 47 Spin quantum number (m), 140
s
reactant concentrations, 278–279 Secondary amine, 31, 33 Spontaneous change.
studying, 274–275SP naming 32SP SeeFavourable change
temperature dependence, 295 Secondary battery, 512 Square planar molecular shape, 183
volume changes, 273 Second law of thermodynamics, 330 Square pyramidal molecular
Reactions Second-order reactions, 279–280 shape, 183
enthalpy changes in, 223–224 Seesaw molecular shape, 182 Stainless steel, 548
half-life, 285 Semi-permeable membrane, 505 Standard cell potential, 519–521SP
first-order, 279 Significant digits, 590 Standard enthalpy of
initial rates method, 280 SI prefixes, 595 reaction (∆H˚ ), 223
rxn
rate determining step, 299–300 Silica, 198 Standard half-cell potentials, 516–518
second order, 279 Silver chloride Standard hydrogen electrode, 517
spontaneity, 534SP photochromic lenses, 320 Standard molar enthalpy of formation
temperature effect, 349SP precipitation, 445SP (∆H˚), 250–251, 597
f
Rechargeable battery, 512, 535–536 Silver halides, 448 Standard reduction potentials, 598
Redox reactions (oxidation-reduction Silver mirror test, 65 Starch, 91
reaction), 466, 492–493inv Silver nitrate test, 445SP Steady state systems, 362
half-reaction method, 486–488 Silver precipitate, 449 Stoichiometry
identifying, 479–480SP Simple cubic crystal, 199 thermochemical equations, 224,
oxidation numbers applied, 478 Single bond carbon bonds, 5 225SP
Reducing agent, 60, 466 Single displacement reactions, unit analysis method, 594SP
Reduction, 465–466, 479 470–471inv Stress, metals, 170
hydrocarbons, 60 , 61, 75 Soda-lime glass, 204 Strong acids, 383, 421
identifying, 62SP Sodium acetate, 324 Strong base, 421
organic chemistry definition, 60 conjugate acid-base dissociation Styrene, 83
Reduction half-reaction, 506 constants, 408–409SP See alsoPhenylethene
Reduction potential, 516 Sodium butanoate, 76 Substitution reaction, 58
Reference values, 522TL Sodium chloride, 422, 423–424SP alcohols, 58, 70
Refining, 544 crystal cubic structure, 199 alkyl halides, 58
Reflux, 295 electrolysis, 524–525 aromatic compounds, 58
Renewable energy, 258 enthalpies, 228 identifying, 62SP
Resonance structures, 176–177 Sodium fluoride, 422–423 Substrate, enzyme, 304
Ribose, 93 Sodium hydroxide, 377 Succinic acid, structure, 565
RNA (ribonucleic acid), 92–93 Solids Succinyl CoA, structure, 565
Rose ketones, 37 bonding, 196 Sucrose, 90
Rubbing alcohol, 25 entropy, 330 Sugar, nucleotides, 92–93
Index • MHR 619
Sulfur dioxide, 176–177 covalent molecules, 167 Zinc, galvanizing, 548
Sulfuryl chloride, 286–287SP Tritium, nuclear fusion, 231 Zinc chloride, catalyst, 303
Superconductors, 206–207 Tungsten, as a catalyst, 280 Zinc sulfate
Surface area, collision theory, 289 cell conversion, 528
Surroundings, 221 Unfavourable change, 328 cell electrolyte, 505
Symmetrical alkene, 66 Unimolecular elementary reaction, 298
Synthetic polymers, 82 Unit analysis method, 593, 594SP
System, 221 Unit cell, 199
Universe, energy of, 221
T-shaped molecular shape, 183 Unleaded fuels, 102
TAXOL™, 56 Unsaturated carbon bonds, 5
Teflon™, 84SP Uracil, 93
Temperature change, 222 Uranium, 230–231
collision theory, 290–291 Urea, 5, 48, 314
enthalpy, 329
equilibrium constant, 337 Valence electrons, 148
equilibrium effect, 363 Valence-Shell Electron-Pair Repulsion
favourable changes, 329 (VSEPR) theory, 178–179
Gibbs free energy, 331 predicting molecular shape,
reaction extent, 349SP 184–185SP
reaction rates, 276, 295 van der Waals, Johannes, 190
Terephthalic acid, 205 Vectors, 8
Termolecular elementary reaction, 298 Villamagna, Fortunato, 514
Tert-butyl group, 14 Vinegar, 39
Tertiary alcohol, 25, 71 Vinyl chloride, 83, 88
Tertiary amide, 47 Vitamins, 95
Tertiary amines, 31, 33 Volume changes
Tetra-ethyl lead, 102 equilibrium effect, 364
Tetrahedral Volt (V), 509
electron-group arrangement, Voltaic cell. SeeGalvanic cell
179, 182
molecular shape, 7, 182 Waage, Peter, 334–335
Thermochemical equation, 223–224, Warm packs, 228
225SP Water, 9, 23
adding algebraically, 244–245 amphoteric character, 381
Thermochemistry, 221 bond angles, 181
Thermodynamics,221 dissociation, 388
Thomson, Joseph John, 120 electrolysis, 526–527
Thomson’s atomic model, 120 enthalpies, 228
Three-dimensional structural diagrams hydrogen bonds, 194
of organic molecules, 7 hydrolysis reaction, 61
Thymol blue, 425 ion product constant (K ), 388
w
Thymine, 93 measuring heat of reaction, 235
Tin, cathodic protection, 549 physical changes with heat, 226–227
Toluene. SeeMethylbenzene properties, 194
Transition elements, 148–149 solubility constants, 598
atomic radii, 152 treatment, 552–553
Transition state, 292 Wax, 94
Transition state theory, 291–292 Weak acid
Trigonal bipyramidal acid dissociation constant, 396,
electron-group arrangement, 397–380SP
179, 182 percent dissociation, 397
molecular shape, 182 pH calculation, 398–399SP
Trigonal planar salts of, 421–422
electron-group arrangement, Weak base, salts of, 421–422
179, 182 Wohler, Friedrich, 5, 314
molecular shape, 7, 182 Wood alcohol, 25. See alsoMethanol
Trigonal pyramidal molecular
shape, 182 X-ray diffraction, 199
Triple bonds
carbon bonds, 5 Zeolites, 69
620 MHR • Index
Photo Credits
iv(top right), © Wally Eberhart/Visuals Unlimited, Inc.; v(top right), © Daryl Benson/Masterfile; v(bottom right),
Artbase Inc.; vi(centre left), © Leonard Rue III/Visuals Unlimited, Inc.; vii(top right), © 1997 Brownie Harris/The Stock
Market/Firstlight.ca; xii(top left), Paul McCormick/Image Bank; xii(centre right), Artbase Inc.; xii(center left), Minnesota
Historical Society/CORBIS/MAGMA; xii(bottom right), Malcolm Hanes/Bruce Coleman Inc.; xiii(top left), Artbase Inc.;
xiii(centre right), Jose L. Pelaez/The Stock Market/Firstlight.ca; 4(bottom right), Stephen Saks/Photo Researchers Inc.;
9(top right), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, © 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.;
9(centre right), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, © 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.;
13(top), From Chemistry 11, © 2001, McGraw-Hill Ryerson, a subsidiary of The McGraw-Hill Companies; 2–3(centre), Paul
McCormick/Image Bank; 35(bottom right), Artbase Inc.; 37(bottom centre), Dick Keen/Visuals Unlimited; 37(centre right),
Paul Eekhoff/Masterfile; 39(top right), © Wally Eberhart/Visuals Unlimited; 46(centre left), Artbase Inc.; 56(bottom centre),
Visuals Unlimited; 57(centre left), Artbase Inc.; 65(centre), © E.R. Degginger/Color-Pic, Inc.; 68(centre left), © Chris
Sorensen; 69(top left), Blue-Zone Technologies; 82(top centre), Lynn Goldsmith/CORBIS/MAGMA; 82(top right), Jacqui
Hurst/CORBIS/MAGMA; 89(top right), Herb Segars/Animals Animals; 91(top left), © Gunther/Explorer/Photo Researchers
Inc.; 91(bottom left), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, © 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies,
Inc.; 92(top centre), Photo Courtesy Vince Satira; 92(top right), © Science Pictures Ltd/Science Photo Library/Photo
Researchers Inc.; 92(centre), Artbase Inc.; 92(centre right), © Studio/Science Photo Library/Photo Researchers Inc.;
94(top left), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, © 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.;
97(top centre), © Jerome Wexler/Visuals Unlimited; 110(top right), Photo Researchers Inc.; 116–117(centre), Artbase Inc.;
118(bottom left), © Daryl Benson/Masterfile; 119(bottom right), From Chemistry 11, © 2001, McGraw-Hill Ryerson, a
subsidiary of The McGraw-Hill Companies; 121(centre), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change.
© 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.; 123(top right), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change.
© 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.; 123(centre), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change.
© 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.; 123(centre right), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change.
© 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.; 123(bottom), © John Talbot; 125(bottom), © John Talbot; 128(top), From
Chemistry 11, © 2001 McGraw-Hill Ryerson Limited, a subsidiary of The McGraw-Hill Companies; 128(bottom), From
Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change. © 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.; 129(centre left),
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory/PhotoDisc; 131(centre), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and
Change. © 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.; 132(top left), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and
Change. © 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.; 133(centre), From Chemistry 11, © 2001, McGraw-Hill Ryerson, a
subsidiary of The McGraw-Hill Companies; 137(bottom), From Physics 12. © 2002, McGraw-Hill Ryerson, a subsidiary of
The McGraw-Hill Companies; 145(top), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change. © 2000, The McGraw-
Hill Companies, Inc.; 148(top), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change. © 2000, The McGraw-Hill
Companies, Inc.; 148(centre left), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change. © 2000, The McGraw-Hill
Companies, Inc.; 152(bottom), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change. © 2000, The McGraw-Hill
Companies, Inc.; 154(centre), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change. © 2000, The McGraw-Hill
Companies, Inc.; 155(bottom left), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, © 2000, The McGraw-Hill
Companies, Inc.; 155(bottom), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, © 2000, The McGraw-Hill
Companies, Inc.; 155(bottom right), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, © 2000, The McGraw-Hill
Companies, Inc.; 156(centre), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, © 2000, The McGraw-Hill
Companies, Inc.; 167(top right), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change. © 2000, The McGraw-Hill
Companies, Inc.; 168(bottom left), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change. © 2000, The McGraw-Hill
Companies, Inc.; 169(top), Stephen Frisch; 169(bottom), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change.
© 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.; 170(top left), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change.
© 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.; 170(bottom left), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change.
© 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.; 172(top), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change. © 2000,
The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.; 179(bottom), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change. © 2000,
The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.; 186(bottom left), Photo Courtesy of Dr. Richard Bader; 186(centre left), Photo Courtesy of
Dr. Richard Bader; 190(bottom), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change. © 2000, The McGraw-Hill
Companies, Inc.; 191(centre), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change. © 2000, The McGraw-Hill
Companies, Inc.; 192(centre), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change. © 2000, The McGraw-Hill
Companies, Inc.; 193(centre left), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change. © 2000, The McGraw-Hill
Companies, Inc.; 193(centre right), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change. © 2000, The McGraw-Hill
Companies, Inc.; 194(bottom), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change. © 2000, The McGraw-Hill
Companies, Inc.; 195(top), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, © 2000, The McGraw-Hill
Companies, Inc.; 195(top), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, © 2000, The McGraw-Hill
Companies, Inc.; 195(centre), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, © 2000, The McGraw-Hill
Companies, Inc.; 195(centre), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, © 2000, The McGraw-Hill
Companies, Inc.; 195(centre), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, © 2000, The McGraw-Hill
Companies, Inc.; 195(centre), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, © 2000, The McGraw-Hill
Companies, Inc.; 195(bottom), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, © 2000, The McGraw-Hill
Companies, Inc.; 195(bottom), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, © 2000, The McGraw-Hill
Companies, Inc.; 195(bottom), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, © 2000, The McGraw-Hill
Companies, Inc.; 197(bottom left), From Chemistry 11, © 2001, McGraw-Hill Ryerson, a subsidiary of The McGraw-Hill
Companies; 197(bottom centre), From Chemistry 11, © 2001, McGraw-Hill Ryerson, a subsidiary of The McGraw-Hill
Companies; 197(bottom right), From Chemistry 11, © 2001, McGraw-Hill Ryerson, a subsidiary of The McGraw-Hill
Companies; 199(top right), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change. © 2000, The McGraw-Hill
Companies, Inc.; 199(centre right), © Rosalind Franklin/Science Photo Library/Photo Researchers Inc.; 199 (bottom right),
Hulton Archive/STONE; 200(top right), Photo courtesy the Photo Imaging Department at the University of Waterloo;
Credits • MHR 621
206(bottom right), AT&T Bell Labs/Science Photo Library/Photo Researchers Inc.; 212(bottom left), David Parker/Science
Photo Library/Photo Researchers Inc.; 216(bottom right), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change,
© 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.; 218–219(centre), Minnesota Historical Society/CORBIS/MAGMA; 220(bottom
right), Artbase Inc.; 222(centre), From Physics 11. © 2001, McGraw-Hill Ryerson Limited, a subsidiary of The McGraw-Hill
Companies; 230(top left), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, © 2000, The McGraw-Hill
Companies, Inc.; 231(bottom left), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, © 2000, The McGraw-Hill
Companies, Inc.; 234(centre left), © Trevor Bonderud/Firstlight.ca; 243(bottom right), From Chemistry 11, © 2001,
McGraw-Hill Ryerson Limited, a subsidiary of The McGraw-Hill Companies; 251(top centre), © Thom Lang/The Stock
Market/Firstlight.ca; 251(top left), Artbase Inc.; 257(bottom left), Artbase Inc.; 259(top left), Courtesy of OPG; 260(bottom
right), Tom Pantages; 266(bottom right), VCL-TCL/Masterfile; 267(bottom right), Stu Forster/Allsport; 273(centre left),
Courtesy of Thermo Spectronic, Rochester, NY A Thermo Electron Business; 285(centre), From Chemistry: The Molecular
Nature of Matter and Change, © 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.; 289(bottom right), Paul A.
Souders/CORBIS/MAGMA; 290(top left), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, © 2000, The
McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.; 291(top), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, © 2000, The
McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.; 293(top), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, © 2000, The
McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.; 297(bottom left), Mike Clemmer/The Stock Market/Firstlight.ca; 302(centre), From Chemistry:
The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, © 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.; 303(bottom left), From Chemistry:
The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, © 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.; 304(centre), From Chemistry:
The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, © 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.; 308(top left), With Permission
of The Canadian Medical Hall of Fame and artist Irma Coucill; 314(top left), Cover of Mrs. Fulhame’s Book from,
http://bip.cnrs-mrs.fr/bip10/jbiosci.htm; 314(centre right), From Chemistry 11, © 2001, McGraw-Hill Ryerson, a subsidiary
of The McGraw-Hill Companies; 320–321(centre), Malcolm Hanes/Bruce Coleman Inc.; 322(bottom), © Marcos
Welsh/Firstlight.ca; 323(bottom left), © Pat Ivy/Ivy Images; 329(centre), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter
and Change, © 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.; 330(top left), From Chemistry 11, © 2001 McGraw-Hill Ryerson
Limited, a subsidiary of The McGraw-Hill Companies; 330(top centre), From Chemistry 11, © 2001 McGraw-Hill Ryerson
Limited, a subsidiary of The McGraw-Hill Companies; 330(top right), From Chemistry 11, © 2001 McGraw-Hill Ryerson
Limited, a subsidiary of The McGraw-Hill Companies; 334(centre left), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter
and Change, © 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.; 334(centre), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and
Change, © 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.; 334(centre), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and
Change, © 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.; 334(centre right), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and
Change, © 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.; 354(bottom), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and
Change, © 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.; 357(centre right), Science Photo Library/Photo Researchers Inc.; 362(top
left), © Leonard Rue III/Visuals Unlimited Inc.; 369(top), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, ©
2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.; 371(top left), Adrian Holmes Photography Ltd.; 376(bottom centre), Carl & Anne
Purcell/CORBIS/MAGMA; 379(centre left), E.F. Smith Collection/University of Pennsylvania Library; 391(centre left), From
Chemistry 11, © 2001, McGraw-Hill Ryerson, a subsidiary of The McGraw-Hill Companies; 391(centre), From Chemistry 11,
© 2001 McGraw-Hill Ryerson Limited, a subsidiary of The McGraw-Hill Companies; 410(bottom left), From Chemistry: The
Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, © 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.; 412(bottom left), From Chemistry: The
Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, © 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.; 413(centre), From Chemistry: The
Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, © 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.; 413(centre), From Chemistry: The
Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, © 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.; 418(bottom right), © Stephen J.
Krasemann/Photo Researchers, Inc.; 425(centre), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, © 2000, The
McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.; 430(bottom left), CNRI/Science Photo Library/Photo Researchers Inc.; 437(top left), Stephen
Frisch; 437(top centre), Stephen Frisch; 439(centre left), AP/Wide World Photos; 448(bottom right), Jeff Greenberg/Photo Edit;
456(centre left), Photo Courtesy NASA; 456(top right), Mangelsen/Firstlight.ca; 462–463(centre), Artbase Inc. 464(bottom cen-
tre), Artbase Inc.; 465(bottom left), Stephen Frisch; 465(bottom centre), Stephen Frisch; 469(top right), Josh Mitchell/Index
Stock Imagery/Picture Quest; 473(top left), © Jeff Daly/Stock Boston; 474(centre right), From Chemistry 11, © 2001,
McGraw-Hill Ryerson, a subsidiary of The McGraw-Hill Companies; 482(centre right), © 1997 Brownie Harris/The Stock
Market/Firstlight.ca; 483(centre left), Stephen Frisch; 483(centre), Stephen Frisch; 483(centre right), From Chemistry:
The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, © 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.; 488(centre left), Stephen Frisch;
488(centre), Stephen Frisch; 488 (centre right), Stephen Frisch; 491(bottom right), © Phil Martin/Photo Edit; 506(bottom left),
From Chemistry Concepts and Applications © The McGraw-Hill Companies Inc.; 512(bottom centre), StudiOhio; 513(top
left), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, © 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.; 513(centre
right), The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc/ Photographer Pat Watson; 513(bottom right), The Bakken Library and Museum
Minneapolis; 514(top centre), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, © 2000, The McGraw-Hill
Companies, Inc.; 514(centre left), Photo courtesy of Fortunato Villamagna; 517(top left), From Chang’s Chemistry. © 1998,
The McGraw-Hill Companies Inc, 6th edition; 524(bottom centre), From Chemistry Concepts and Applications © The
McGraw-Hill Companies Inc.; 525(centre), From Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, © 2000, The
McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.; 526(bottom centre), Stephen Frisch; 535(centre right), © Charles D. Winters/ Photo
Researchers Inc.; 535(bottom left), From Chemistry Concepts and Applications © The McGraw-Hill Companies Inc.;
536(top left), Myrleen Ferguson Cate/Photo Edit; 536(bottom left), From Chemistry Concepts and Applications © The
McGraw-Hill Companies Inc.; 538(top right), Hulton/Archive by Getty Images; 544(top left), Artbase Inc.; 544(bottom right),
© Chris Sharp/Photo Researchers Inc.; 546(top right), Bill Lisenby/CORBIS/MAGMA; 546(bottom right), AP Wide World;
547(top left), From Chang’s Chemistry. © 1998, The McGraw-Hill Companies Inc, 6th edition; 549(top right), RC Hall
Photography; 550(centre), Artbase Inc.; 551(top left), From Chang’s Chemistry. © 1998, The McGraw-Hill Companies Inc, 6th
edition; 552(top left), Chipperfield Photography/ Photographed By Jennifer Chipperfield; 553(top left), From Chang’s
Chemistry. © 1998, The McGraw-Hill Companies Inc, 6th edition; 558(bottom left), Ken Stepnell/Bruce Coleman; 564(top),
Jose L. Pelaez/The Stock Market/Firstlight.ca; 564(centre right), Christel Gerstenberg/CORBIS/MAGMA; 567(top right),
Artbase Inc.; 568(bottom left), Steve Callahan/Visuals Unlimited
622 MHR • Credits
stnemelE
eht
fo
elbaT
cidoireP
PUORG-NIAM
PUORG-NIAM
STNEMELE
STNEMELE
81
1
*ssam
cimota egarevA
10.21
6
rebmun cimotA
)AIIIV(
egrahc
noi nommoC
4 +
5.2
ytivitagenortcelE
)AI(
00.4
2
segrahc noi rehtO
2+ C
6 5 8 6 0 7 1 4
) ) l K o ( m tn /J io k p ( y g g n r i e tl n e e M noitazinoi
tsriF
10.1
1
–
–
8904
)K( tniop gnilioB
+1
02.2
eH
2 9 7 1 3 . 2 5
71
61
51
41
31
nobrac
2
-1
H
1 2 8 1 . 3 3 1 1
1
20.5
82.02
)AIIV(
)AIV(
)AV(
)AVI(
)AIII(
)AII(
muileh
)puorg niam( slatem
negordyh
81.02
0100.91
900.61
810.41
710.21
618.01
5
)noitisnart( slatem
10.9
449.6
3
–
–
–1
89.3
–2
44.3
–3
40.3
–
55.2
–
40.2
)noitisnart renni( slatem
sesaG
+2
75.1
+1
89.0
eN6
0 5 8 . 0 4 2 2
F
8 1 4 8 . 6 3 1 5
O
6 4 3 1 . 3 4 1 5
N5
2 1 0 . 4 3 1 6
C
6 5 8 6 0 7 1 4
B
8 0 4 0 3 8 2
sdiollatem
sdiuqiL
eB0
9 6 9 5 8 1
iL7.
0 3 2 5 5 4
2
70.72
88.48
2.09
63.77
8904
3724
slatemnon
scitehtnyS
4472
5161
noen
eniroulf
negyxo
negortin
nobrac
norob
muillyreb
muihtil
59.93
8154.53
7170.23
6179.03
5190.82
4189.62
31
STNEMELE
NOITISNART
13.42
2199.22
11
–
–
–1
61.3
–2
85.2
–
91.2
–
09.1
–
16.1
+2
13.1
+1
39.0
0251
6521
999
2101
687
775
837
694
rA
8 3 . . 3 7 8 8
lC7
1 . . 1 9 7 3 1 2
S
8 8 . . 2 7 9 1 3 7
P
3 7 . . 7 3 1 5 3 5
iS7
8 8 3 6 5 1 3
lA5
2 .3 9 3 7 9 2
21
11
01
9
8
7
6
5 4
3
gM
3 2 6 .3 3 2 1 9
aN
6 1 5 7 1 3 1
3
nogra
enirolhc
ruflus
surohpsohp
nocilis
munimula
)BII(
)BI(
)BIIIV(
)BIIV(
)BIV(
)BV( )BVI(
)BIII(
muisengam
muidos
08.38
6309.97
5369.87
4329.47
3316.27
2327.96
1393.56
0355.36
9296.85
8239.85
7258.55
6249.45 5200.25
4249.05
3278.74 2269.44
1280.04
0201.93
91
–
–
–1
69.2
–2
55.2
–
81.2
–
10.2
+3
18.1
+2
56.1
+2
09.1
+2
19.1
+2
88.1 +3
38.1 +4 55.1
+3
66.1
+5 36.1 +4 45.1
+3
63.1
+2
00.1
+1
28.0
rK8
1 . 5 5 3 1 1 1
rB
34 6 1 6 1 2
eS7.
1 3 4 9 9 4
sA0
7 9 4 0 9 1
eG1
1 1 6 2 7 1
aG9.
9 2 7 0 5 3
nZ7.
6 2 0 9 9 6
+1
uC8
5 5 4 3 7 1
+3 iN8
7 2 3 7 7 1
+3 oC8
0 6 6 7 7 1 +2 eF1
9 1 5 8 7 1 + + 2 3nM9 7 1 1 5 7 1
+ + 2 6 rC0
3 8 5 1 6 2
+ + 2 3 V 3 0 8 5 1 6 2 + + 2 3 iT 1 8 4 5 9 6 1
cS4
1 1 3 8 6 1
aC5
0 1 9 1 5 1
K
7. 9 6 1 3 4 3
4
9.911
233
2.859
2.678
6013
7742
0811
5382
6813
0023
4313 +7 4332
4492
+4 0863 0653
9013
7571
2301
notpyrk
enimorb
muineles
cinesra
muinamreg
muillag
cniz
reppoc
lekcin
tlaboc
nori
esenagnam
muimorhc
muidanav muinatit
muidnacs
muiclac
muissatop
92.131
4509.621
3506.721
2567.121
1517.811
0528.411
9414.211
8478.701
7424.601
6419.201
5470.101
44)89( 3449.59
2419.29
1422.19 0419.88
9326.78
8374.58
73
–
–
–1
66.2
–
1.2
–
50.2
+4
69.1
+3
87.1
+2
96.1
+1
39.1
+2
02.2
+3
82.2 +3
2.2 +7 01.2
+6
61.2
+5 6.1 +4 33.1
+3
22.1
+2
59.0
+1
28.0
eX4
0 . 7 1 1 6 1 1
I
9 9 . 0 6 0 8 1 3
eT7.
9 2 6 2 8 7
bS8.
4 3 3 0 8 9
+2
nS
8 5 0 0 7 5
nI8.
8 9 5 2 5 4
dC2.
8 4 6 9 8 5
gA5
1 3 3 2 7 1
+3 dP8
5 2 0 8 8 1
hR7
0 3 2 2 7 2 uR7
1 0 1 6 7 2 + + 4 6 cT0 2 3 0 4 7 2
oM6
5 9 8 8 6 2
+3 bN0 4 5 6 7 6 2 rZ8 0 2 6 1 6 2
Y
5 6 9 1 7 6 1
rS0
9 5 4 0 5 1
bR5.
3 2 0 1 4 3
5
561
4.754
1621
0681
5782
5433
0401
5342
6323
8693
3244 8354
2194
7105 2864
8163
5561
2.149
nonex
enidoi
muirullet
ynomitna
nit
muidni
muimdac
revlis
muidallap
muidohr
muinehtur
muitenhcet
munedbylom
muiboin muinocriz
muirtty
muitnorts
muidibur
)222(
68)012(
58)902(
4889.802
3802.702
2883.402
1895.002
0879.691
9780.591
8722.291
7732.091
6712.681 5748.381
4759.081
3794.87127
19.8317533.731
6519.231
55
–
–
–1
2.2
+4
0.2
+3
9.1
+2
8.1
+1
8.1
+2
9.1
+3
4.2
+4
2.2
+4
2.2 +4
2.2 +4 9.1
+6
7.1
+5 5.1 +4 3.1
+3
01.1
+2
98.0
+1
97.0
nR2
7 . 3 2 0 0 1 2
tA
)6 5 2 7 9 5 (
+2
oP2.
3 7 1 2 8 5
+5 iB6.
3 4 0 4 7 5
+4
bP6.
5 0 1 0 7 6
+3
lT2.
9 7 8 7 5 5
+1 gH3
7 . 0 4 1 3 1 2
+1
uA7
0 3 9 3 8 1
+2 tP2
0 4 7 0 8 2
+3 rI
9 0 1 8 7 8 2 +3 sO6
0 0 4 3 8 3 + + 6 7 eR9 0 5 6 4 7 3
W5
0 9 7 6 7 3
aT0 1 9 6 2 7 3 fH6 2 0 4 5 6 2
aL1
8 9 3 1 5 1
aB0
3 0 0 0 5 1
sC7.
6 1 7 0 3 3
6
5.112
–
5321
7381
2202
6471
9.926
9213
8904
1074
5825 9685
8285
1375 6784
7373
0712
449
nodar
enitatsa
muinolop
htumsib
dael
muillaht
yrucrem
dlog
munitalp
muidiri
muimso
muinehr
netsgnut
mulatnat muinfah
munahtnal
muirab
muisec
)982(
611
511)582(
411
311)772(
211)272(
111)172(
011)862(
901)962(
801)462( 701)662(
601)262(
501)162( 401
)722(
98)622(
88)322(
78
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
– –
– – –
–
–
– – +4 –
+3
1.1
+2
9.0
+1
7.0
–
–
–
–
–
–
– –
–
– –
994
905
573~
7
huU
–
quU
–
buU
–
uuU
–
nuU
–
tM
– sH
– hB –
gS
–
bD – fR –
cA4231
aR2.379
rF2.003
–
–
–
–
–
–
– –
–
– –
1743
–
–
muixehnunu
muidauqnunu
muibnunu
muinununu
muilinnunu
muirentiem
muissah
muirhob
muigrobaes
muinbud muidrofrehtur
muinitca
muidar
muicnarf
STNEMELE
NOITISNART
RENNI
79.471
1740.371
0739.861
9662.761
8639.461
7605.261
6639.851
5652.751
4669.151
3663.051 26)541(
1642.441
0619.041 9521.041
85
+3
0.1
+3
–
+3
52.1
+3
42.1
+3
32.1
+3
22.1
+3
–
+3
02.1 +3
– +3 71.1
+3
–
+3 41.1 +3 31.1
+3
21.1
uL6
4 3 2 9 5 1
+2 bY2
3 9 0 0 6 1
mT8
7 1 9 8 5 1
rE2
9 0 8 8 5 1
oH7
1 4 8 7 5 1
yD5
2 8 7 6 5 1
bT9
5 2 6 6 5 1
dG6
3 8 9 5 5 1 +2 uE5
7 9 4 0 5 1 +2 mS7 3 4 4 3 5 1
mP5
6 1 3 3 5 1
dN4 0 9 3 2 5 1 rP4 3 0 2 2 5 1
+4 eC1
7 7 2 0 5 1
sdionahtnaL
6
5763
9641
3222
1413
3792
0482
3053
6453
2081 7602
3723
7433 3973
6173
muitetul
muibretty
muiluht
muibre
muimloh
muisorpsyd
muibret
muinilodag
muiporue
muiramas
muihtemorp
muimydoen muimydoesarp
muirec
)262(
301)952(
201)852(
101)752(
001)252(
99)152(
89)742(
79)742(
69)342(
59)442( 4950.732
3930.832
2940.132 1940.232
09
+3
–
+3
–
+3
–
+3
–
+3
–
+3
–
+3
–
+3
– +3
– +4 3.1
+5
3.1
+6 7.1 +5 5.1
+4
3.1
–
+2
246
+2
536
726
916
806
+4
106
185 +4
875 +3 585
+3
795
+3 485 +4 865
785
sdionitcA
7
rL
0091
oN0011
dM0011
mF0081
sE3311
fC3711
kB3231
mC8161
+5mA9441
+5 uP2.319
+4 pN719
+4 U 8041 aP5481
hT3202
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
3733 +6
4822 +6 1053
+6
–
+5 4044 –
1605
muicnerwal
muilebon
muivelednem
muimref
muinietsnie
muinrofilac
muilekreb
muiruc
muicirema
muinotulp
muinutpen
muinaru muinitcatorp
muiroht
.tnemele
eht fo epotosi
elbats tsom fo ssam
cimota
etacidni
stekcarb ni atad ssam cimota
egarevA*
Ripped by Jack Truong, if you bought this, you got ripped off.
Matter and
Chemical Bonding
N
UNIT 1 CONTENTS
ame ten things in your life
CHAPTER 1
that do not, in some way, involve
Observing Matter
the products and processes of
CHAPTER 2 chemistry. Take your time.
Elements and the Periodic Table Are you having trouble? Can
you name five things that do not
CHAPTER 3
involve chemistry?
Chemical Compounds and Bonding
Are you still thinking? Consider
each room in your home. Think
CHAPTER 4
Classifying Reactions: about the bathroom, for example.
Chemicals in Balance Does soap involve chemistry? Do
toothpaste, cosmetics, and shampoo
UNIT PROJECT
involve chemistry? Think about
Developing a Chemistry Newsletter
the light in the bathroom. Without
chemistry, there is no glass to
make lightbulbs.
UNIT 1 OVERALL EXPECTATIONS Move to another room. Walk
quickly. The floor is disappearing
What are the relationships
beneath your feet. Pause briefly to
among periodic trends, types
of chemical bonds, and watch the paint fade away from the
properties of compounds? walls. In a moment, the walls will
be gone, too.
How can laboratory investiga-
tions help you represent the The story is the same if you step
structures and interactions outdoors. There are no sidewalks,
of chemicals in chemical vehicles, people, trees, or animals.
reactions, and classify A world without chemistry is a
these reactions?
world without anything! Everything
How can understanding the in the world, including you, is made
properties and behaviour of up of matter. Chemistry is the study
matter lead to the develop-
of matter: its composition, its prop-
ment of useful substances
erties, and the changes it undergoes
and new technologies?
when it interacts with other matter.
In this unit, you will explore matter.
Unit Project Prep You will learn how to predict the
Begin collecting ideas and kinds of bonds (the chemical
resources for the project at the combinations) and the reactions
end of Unit 1. that occur during these interactions.
2
Observing Matter
I
magine a chemical that Chapter Preview
• is a key ingredient in most pesticides
1.1 The Study of Chemistry
• contributes to environmental hazards, such as acid rain, the greenhouse
1.2 Describing and
effect, and soil erosion
• helps to spread pollutants that are present in all contaminated rivers, Measuring Matter
lakes, and oceans 1.3 Classifying Matter and
• is used in vast quantities by every industry on Earth Its Changes
• can produce painful burns to exposed skin
• causes severe illness or death in either very low or very high
concentrations in the body
• is legally discarded as waste by individuals, businesses, and industries
• has been studied extensively by scientists throughout the world
In 1996, a high school student wrote a report about this chemical,
dihydrogen monoxide, for a science fair project. The information in the
student’s report was completely factual. As a result, 86% of those who
read the report—43 out of 50 students—voted in favour of banning the
chemical. What they did not realize was that “dihydrogen monoxide” is
simply another name for water.
What if you did not know that water and dihydrogen monoxide are
the same thing? What knowledge and skills can help you distinguish
genuine environmental issues from pranks like this one? What other
strategies can help you interpret all the facts, opinions, half-truths, and
falsehoods that you encounter every day?
This chapter will reacquaint you with the science of chemistry. You
will revisit important concepts and skills from previous grades. You will
also prepare to extend your knowledge and skills in new directions.
What mistake in measuring
matter nearly resulted in an
airplane disaster in 1983?
Read on to find the answer
to this question later in this
chapter.
Chapter 1 Observing Matter • MHR 5
1.1 The Study of Chemistry
Section Preview/ Many people, when they hear the word “chemistry,” think of scientists in
Specific Expectations white lab coats. They picture bubbling liquids, frothing and churning
inside mazes of laboratory glassware.
In this section, you will
Is this a fair portrayal of chemistry and chemists? Certainly, chemistry
(cid:2) identifyexamples of
happens in laboratories. Laboratory chemists often do wear white lab
chemistry and chemical
processes in everyday use coats, and they do use lots of glassware! Chemistry also happens every-
where around you, however. It happens in your home, your school, your
(cid:2) communicateideas related
to chemistry and its relation- community, and the environment. Chemistry is happening right now,
ship to technology, society, inside every cell in your body. You are alive because of chemical changes
and the environment, using and processes.
appropriate scientific Chemistry is the study of matter and its composition. Chemistry is
vocabulary
also the study of what happens when matter interacts with other matter.
(cid:2) communicateyour When you mix ingredients for a cake and put the batter in the oven, that
understanding of the is chemistry. When you pour soda water on a stain to remove it from your
following terms:
favourite T-shirt, that is chemistry. When a scientist puts a chunk of an
chemistry, STSE
ice-like solid into a beaker, causing white mist to ooze over the rim, that
is chemistry, too. Figure 1.1 illustrates this interaction, as well as several
other examples of chemistry in everyday life.
A B
Figure 1.1
A Frozen (solid) carbon dioxide is also known as
“dry ice.” It changes to a gas at temperatures higher
than −78˚C. In this photograph, warm water has
been used to speed up the process, and food
colouring has been added.
B Dry ice is also used to create special effects for rock
concerts, stage plays, and movies.
C Nitrogen gas becomes a liquid at –196˚C. Liquid
nitrogen is used to freeze delicate materials, such
as food, instantly.
C
6 MHR • Unit 1 Matter and Chemical Bonding
Chemistry: A Blend of Science and Technology
Like all scientists, chemists try to describe and explain the world.
Chemists start by asking questions such as these:
• Why is natural gas such an effective fuel?
• How can we separate a mixture of crude oil and water?
• Which materials dissolve in water?
• What is rust and why does it form?
To answer these questions, chemists develop models, conduct
experiments, and seek patterns. They observe various types of chemical
reactions, and they perform calculations based on known data. They build
continuously on the work and the discoveries of other scientists.
Long before humans developed a scientific understanding of the
world, they invented chemical techniques and processes. These tech-
niques and processes included smelting and shaping metals, growing
crops, and making medicines. Early chemists invented technological
instruments, such as glassware and distillation equipment.
Present-day chemical technologists continue to invent new equipment.
They also invent new or better ways to provide products and services that
people want. Chemical technologists ask questions such as the following:
• How can we redesign this motor to run on natural gas?
• How can we contain and clean up an oil spill?
• What methods can we use, or develop, to make water safe to drink?
• How can we prevent iron objects from rusting?
D E
D Green plants use a chemical process, called photo-
synthesis, to convert water and carbon dioxide into
the food substances they need to survive. All the
foods that you eat depend on this process.
E Your body uses chemical processes to break down
food and to release energy.
F Your home is full of products that are manufactured
by chemical industries. The products that are shown
here are often used for cleaning. Some of these
products, such as bleach and drain cleaner, can be
dangerous if handled improperly.
F
Chapter 1 Observing Matter • MHR 7
Chemistry, Technology, Society, and the Environment
Today we benefit in many ways from chemical understanding and tech-
nologies. Each benefit, however, has risks associated with it. The risks and
benefits of chemical processes and technologies affect us either directly or
indirectly. Many people—either on their own, in groups, or through their
elected government officials—assess these risks and benefits. They ask
questions such as the following:
• Is it dangerous to use natural gas to heat my home?
• Why is the cost of gasoline so high?
• Is my water really clean enough to drink and use safely?
•How does rust degrade machinery over time?
During your chemistry course this year, you will study the interactions
among science, technology, society, and the environment. These interac-
tions are abbreviated as STSE. Throughout the textbook—in examples,
practice problems, activities, investigations, and features—STSE interac-
tions are discussed. The issues that appear at the end of some units are
especially rich sources for considering STSE interactions. In these simula-
tions, you are encouraged to assess and make decisions about important
issues that affect society and the environment.
STSE Issue: Are Phosphates Helpful or Harmful?
Phosphorus is an essential nutrient for life on Earth. Plants need
phosphorus, along with other nutrients, in order to grow. Phosphorus is
a component of bones and teeth. In addition, phosphorus is excreted as
waste from the body. Thus, it is present in human sewage.
Since phosphorus promotes plant growth, phosphates are excellent
fertilizers for crops. (Phosphates are chemicals containing phosphorus.
You will learn more about phosphates later in this unit.) Phosphates are
also used as food additives, and as components in some medicines. In
addition, they are an important part of dishwasher and laundry deter-
gents. For example, sodium tripolyphosphate (STPP) acts to soften water,
and keep dirt suspended in the water. Before the 1970s, STPP was a major
ingredient in most detergents.
Phosphates Causing Trouble
In the 1960s, residents around Lake Erie began to notice problems. Thick
growths of algae carpeted the surface of the water. Large amounts of the
algae washed onto beaches, making the beaches unfit for swimming. The
water in the lake looked green, and had an unpleasant odour. As time
passed, certain fish species in Lake Erie began to decrease.
In 1969, a joint Canadian and American task force pinpointed the
Language source of the problem. Phosphates and other nutrients were entering the
LINK
lake, causing algae to grow rapidly. The algae then began to die and rot,
using up dissolved oxygen in the water. As a result, fish and other water
Eutrophicationis the process
in which excess nutrients in a species that needed high levels of oxygen were dying off.
lake or river cause algae to The phosphate pollution arrived in the lake from three main sources:
grow rapidly. Look up this term wastewater containing detergents, sewage, and run-off from farms carrying
in a reference book or on the phosphate fertilizers. The task force recommended reducing the amount
Internet. Is eutrophication
of phosphate in detergents. They also suggested removing phosphorus at
always caused by human
wastewater treatment plants before the treated water entered the lake.
action?
Detergent manufacturers were upset by the proposed reduction in
phosphates. Without this chemical, their detergents would be less effec-
8 MHR • Unit 1 Matter and Chemical Bonding
tive. Also, it would be expensive to develop other chemicals to do the
same job. After pressure from the government, detergent companies
reduced the amount of phosphate in their products by about 90%. Cities
on Lake Erie spent millions of dollars adding phosphorus removal to their
waste treatment. Today, Lake Erie has almost completely recovered.
The connection between technology (human-made chemical
products) and the environment (Lake Erie) is an obvious STSE
connection in this issue. What other connections do you see?
Canadians in Chemistry
it is emitted in the infrared range of energy. It can
be detected, however, with the right instruments.
Dr. Polanyi’s work led to the invention of the laser.
As well, his research helped to explain what
happens to energy during a chemical reaction.
Dr. Polanyi believes that people must accept
the responsibility that comes with scientific
understanding and technological progress. He
believes, as well, that a vital element of hope
lies at the heart of modern science. To Dr. Polanyi,
human rights are integral to scientific success.
“Science must breathe the oxygen of freedom,”
he stated in 1999.
John Charles Polanyi was born in Berlin,
This is why Dr. Polanyi says that scientists
Germany, into a family of Hungarian origin.
must take part in the debate on technological,
Polanyi was born on the eve of the Great
social, and political affairs. Dr. Polanyi points
Depression, shortly before the Nazi takeover. His
to the political role played by scientists such
father moved to England to become a chemistry
as Andrei Sakharov in the former Soviet Union,
professor at Manchester University. Polanyi was
Linus Pauling in the United States, and Fang Lizhi
sent to Canada for safety during the darkest years
in China.
of World War II.
John Polanyi went back to England to earn a
doctorate in chemistry at Manchester University Make Connections
in 1952. He returned to Canada a few years later. 1. Research the scientists whom Dr. Polanyi
Soon after, he took up a position at the University mentioned: Andrei Sakharov, Linus Pauling,
of Toronto. There Dr. Polanyi pursued the and Fang Lizhi. What work distinguished them
research that earned him a share of the Nobel as scientists? What work distinguished them
Prize for chemistry in 1986. He pioneered the field as members of society?
of reaction dynamics, which addresses one of the
2. Throughout history, chemists have laboured to
most basic questions in chemistry: What happens
present the truth as they know it to their fellow
when two substances interact to produce another
scientists and to society. Some of them, such
substance? Polanyi’s father had once investigated
as Linus Pauling, have been scorned and
the same question.
ridiculed by the scientific community. Do fur-
Dr. Polanyi tried to provide some answers by
ther research to discover two other chemists
studying the very faint light that is given off by
who have struggled to communicate their
molecules as they undergo chemical changes.
ideas, and have succeeded.
This light is invisible to the unaided eye, because
Chapter 1 Observing Matter • MHR 9
Section Wrap-up
COURSE
CHALLENGE During this chemistry course, your skills of scientific inquiry will be
assessed using the same specific set of criteria (Table 1.1). You will
At the end of this course, you
notice that all review questions are coded according to this chart.
will have a chance to use what
you have learned to help you in Table 1.1 Achievement Chart Criteria, Ontario Science Curriculum
the Course Challenge: Planet
Knowledge and Inquiry Communication Making Connections
Unknown. In this challenge,
Understanding (K/U) (I) (C) (MC)
you are a member of a science
team sent to a new planet. It is •understanding •application of •communication •understanding
your task to analyze the plan- of concepts, the skills and of information of connections
et’s resources. You will design principles, strategies of and ideas among science,
and carry out hands-on investi- laws, and scientific technology,
•use of scientific
gations and analyze your theories inquiry society, and the
terminology,
results. Then you will prepare environment
•knowledge of •application of symbols,
a presentation to persuade the facts and terms technical skills conventions, •analysis of
Canadian government to invest and procedures and standard social and
•transfer of
in the establishment of a com- (SI) units economic
concepts to •use of tools,
munity on the planet. As you issues involving
new contexts equipment, and •communication
work through this book, keep a science and
materials for different
research portfolio of notes and •understanding technology
audiences and
ideas that may help you in the of relationships
purposes •assessment of
Course Challenge. between
impacts of
concepts •use of various
science and
forms of
technology on
communication
the environment
•use of
•proposing of
information
courses of
technology for
practical action
scientific
in relation to
purposes
science-and
technology-
based problems
Section Review
1 K/U Based on your current understanding of chemistry, list five ways
in which chemistry and chemical processes affect your life.
2 I Earlier in this section, you learned that fertilizers containing
phosphorus can cause algae to grow faster. Design an investigation on
paper to determine the effect of phosphorus-containing detergents on
algae growth.
3 C Design a graphic organizer that clearly shows the connections
among science, technology, society, and the environment.
4 MC For each situation, identify which STSE interaction is most
important.
(a) Research leads to the development of agricultural pesticides.
(b) The pesticides prevent insects and weeds from destroying crops.
(c) Rain soaks the excess pesticides on farm land into the ground. It
ends up in groundwater systems.
(d) Wells obtain water from groundwater systems. Well-water in the
area is polluted by the pesticides. It is no longer safe to drink.
10 MHR • Unit 1 Matter and Chemical Bonding
Describing and Measuring Matter 1.2
As you can see in the photograph at the beginning of this chapter, water Section Preview/
is the most striking feature of our planet. It is visible from space, giving Specific Expectations
Earth a vivid blue colour. You can observe water above, below, and at
In this section, you will
Earth’s surface. Water is a component of every living thing, from the
(cid:2) selectand usemeasuring
smallest bacterium to the largest mammal and the oldest tree. You drink
instruments to collect and
it, cook with it, wash with it, skate on it, and swim in it. Legends and record data
stories involving water have been a part of every culture in human
(cid:2) expressthe results of calcu-
history. No other kind of matter is as essential to life as water. lations to the appropriate
number of decimal places
As refreshing as it may be, water straight from the tap seems rather and significant digits
ordinary. Try this: Describe a glass of water to someone who has never (cid:2) selectand useappropriate
seen or experienced water before. Be as detailed as possible. See how SI units
well you can distinguish water from other kinds of matter. (cid:2) communicateyour under-
standing of the following
terms: matter, properties,
In addition to water, there are millions of different kinds of matter in the
physical property, chemical
universe. The dust specks suspended in the air, the air itself, your chair,
property, significant digits,
this textbook, your pen, your classmates, your teacher, and you—all these
accuracy, precision
are examples of matter. In the language of science, matter is anything that
has mass and volume (takes up space). In the rest of this chapter, you will
examine some key concepts related to matter. You have encountered these
concepts in previous studies. Before you continue, complete the Checkpoint
activity to see what you recall and how well you recall it. As you proceed
through this chapter, assess and modify your answers.
Describing Matter
You must observe matter carefully to describe it well. When describing
From memory, explain and
water, for example, you may have used statements like these:
define each of the following
•Water is a liquid.
concepts. Use descriptions,
•It has no smell.
examples, labelled sketches,
•Water is clear and colourless.
graphic organizers, a computer
•It changes to ice when it freezes. FAQs file or Help file, or any
•Water freezes at 0˚C. combination of these. Return to
•Sugar dissolves in water. your answers frequently during
•Oil floats on water. this chapter. Modify them as
necessary.
Characteristics that help you describe and identify matter are called • states of matter
properties. Figure 1.2 on the next page shows some properties of water • properties of matter
and hydrogen peroxide. Examples of properties include physical state, • physical properties
colour, odour, texture, boiling temperature, density, and flammability • chemical properties
(combustibility). Table 1.2 on the next page lists some common properties • physical change
of matter. You will have direct experience with most of these properties • chemical change
• mixture
during this chemistry course.
• pure substance
• element
• compound
Chapter 1 Observing Matter • MHR 11
Table 1.2 Common Properties of Matter
Physical Properties Chemical Properties
Qualitative Quantitative
physical state melting point reactivity with water
colour boiling point reactivity with air
odour density reactivity with pure oxygen
crystal shape solubility reactivity with acids
malleability electrical conductivity reactivity with pure substances
Figure 1.2 Liquid water is
ductility thermal conductivity combustibility (flammability)
clear, colourless, odourless, and
transparent. Hydrogen peroxide hardness toxicity
(an antiseptic liquid that many brittleness decomposition
people use to clean wounds) has
the same properties. It differs Properties may be physical or chemical. A physical property is a property
from water, however, in other that you can observe without changing one kind of matter into something
properties, such as boiling point,
new. For example, iron is a strong metal with a shiny surface. It is solid at
density, and reactivity with acids.
room temperature, but it can be heated and formed into different shapes.
These properties can all be observed without changing iron into some-
thing new.
A chemical property is a property that you can observe when one
kind of matter is converted into a different kind of matter. For example, a
chemical property of iron is that it reacts with oxygen to form a different
kind of matter: rust. Rust and iron have completely different physical and
chemical properties.
Figure 1.3 shows another example of a chemical property. Glucose
test paper changes colour in the presence of glucose. Thus, a chemical
property of glucose test paper is that it changes colour in response to
glucose. Similarly, a chemical property of glucose is that it changes the
colour of glucose test paper.
Recall that some properties of matter, such as colour, and flammabili-
ty, are qualitative. You can describe them in words, but you cannot
measure them or express them numerically. Other properties, such as
density and boiling point, can be measured and expressed numerically.
Such properties are quantitative. In Investigation 1-A you will use both
qualitative and quantitative properties to examine a familiar item.
Figure 1.3 People with diabetes rely on a chemical property to help them monitor the
amount of glucose (a simple sugar) in their blood.
12 MHR • Unit 1 Matter and Chemical Bonding
S K I L L F O C U S
Initiating and Planning
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
Observing Aluminum Foil
You can easily determine the length and width 3. As a group, review the properties you have
of a piece of aluminum foil. You can use a ruler recorded. Reflect on the possible methods
to measure these values directly. What about its you brainstormed. Decide on one method,
thickness? In this investigation, you will design and try it. (If you are stuck, ask your teacher
a method for calculating the thickness of for a clue.)
aluminum foil.
Analysis
Problem
1. Consider your value for the thickness of the
How can you determine the thickness of a piece aluminum foil. Is it reasonable? Why or why
of aluminum foil, in centimetres? not?
2. Compare your value with the values obtained
Safety Precautions
by other groups.
(a) In what ways are the values similar?
(b) In what ways are the values different?
Conclusion
3.(a) Explain how you decided on the method
you used.
(b) How much confidence do you have in your
method? Explain why you have this level
of confidence.
(c) How much confidence do you have in
the value you calculated? Give reasons to
justify your answer.
Materials
Applications
10 cm × 10 cm square of aluminum foil
4. Pure aluminum has a chemical property in
ruler
common with copper and iron. It reacts with
electronic balance
oxygen in air to form a different substance
calculator
with different properties. This substance is
chemical reference handbook
called aluminum oxide. Copper has the same
chemical property. The substance that results
Procedure
when copper reacts with oxygen is called a
1. Work together in small groups. Brainstorm patina. Similarly, iron reacts with oxygen to
possible methods for calculating the thickness form rust. Do research to compare the proper-
of aluminum foil. ties and uses (if any) of aluminum oxide,
copper patina, and rust. What technologies
2. Observe and record as many physical
are available to prevent their formation? What
properties of aluminum foil as you can.
technologies make use of their formation?
CAUTION Do not use the property of taste.
Never taste anything in a laboratory.
Chapter 1 Observing Matter • MHR 13
Using Measurements to Describe Matter
In the investigation, you measured the size and mass of a piece of alu-
minum foil. You have probably performed these types of measurement
many times before. Measurements are so much a part of your daily life
that you can easily take them for granted. The clothes you wear come in
different sizes. Much of the food you eat is sold by the gram, kilogram,
millilitre, or litre. When you follow a recipe, you measure amounts. The
dimensions of paper and coins are made to exact specifications. The value
of money is itself a measurement.
Measurements such as clothing size, amounts of food, and currency
are not standard, however. Clothing sizes in Europe are different from
those in North America. European chefs tend to measure liquids and
powdered solids by mass, rather than by volume. Currencies, of course,
differ widely from country to country.
To communicate effectively, scientists rely on a standard system of
measurement. As you have learned in previous studies, this system is
called the International System of Units (Le système international
d’unités, SI). It allows scientists anywhere in the world to describe
matter in the same quantitative language. There are seven base SI units,
and many more units that are derived from them. The metre (m), the
kilogram (kg), and the second (s) are three of the base SI units. You will
learn about two more base units, the mole (mol) and the kelvin (K), later
in this book.
When you describe matter, you use terms such as mass, volume, and
temperature. When you measure matter, you use units such as grams,
cubic centimetres, and degrees Celsius. Table 1.3 lists some quantities and
units that you will use often in this course. You are familiar with all of
them except, perhaps, for the mole and the kelvin. The mole is one of the
most important units for describing amounts of matter. You will be intro-
duced to the mole in Unit 2. The kelvin is used to measure temperature.
You will learn more about the kelvin scale in Unit 5. Consult Appendix E
if you would like to review other SI quantities and units.
Table 1.3 Important SI Quantities and Their Units
Quantity Definition SI units or their derived equivalents Equipment use to measure the quantity
mass the amount of kilogram (kg) balance
matter in an object gram (g)
milligram (mg)
length the distance metre (m) ruler
between two points centimetre (cm)
millimetre (mm)
temperature the hotness or coldness kelvin (K) thermometer
of a substance degrees Celsius (˚C)
volume the amount of space cubic metre (m3) beaker, graduated cylinder, or
that an object occupies cubic centimetre (cm3) pipette; may also be calculated
litre (L)
millilitre (mL)
mole the amount of a substance mole (mol) calculated not measured
density the mass per unit of kilograms per cubic metre (kg/m3) calculated or measured
volume of a substance grams per cubic centimetre (g/cm3)
energy the capacity to do joule (J) calculated not measured
work (to move matter)
14 MHR • Unit 1 Matter and Chemical Bonding
Measurement and Uncertainty
Before you look more closely at matter, you need to know how much you Give five examples of exact
can depend on measurements. How can you recognize when a measure- numbers that you have person-
ment is trustworthy? How can you tell if it is only an approximation? For ally experienced today or over
example, there are five Great Lakes. Are you sure there are five? Is there the past few days.
any uncertainty associated with the value “five” in this case? What about
the number of millilitres in 1 L, or the number of seconds in 1 min?
Numbers such as these—numbers that you can count or numbers that are
true by definition—are called exact numbers. You are certain that there
are five Great Lakes (or nine books on the shelf, or ten students in the
classroom) because you can count them. Likewise, you are certain that
there are 1000 mL in 1 L, and 60 s in 1 min. These relationships are true
by definition.
Now consider the numbers you used and the calculations you did in
Investigation 1-A. They are listed in Figure 1.4.
Did you verify these dimensions?
(cid:2) The area of the aluminum
Are you certain that each side
square measured 100 cm2
measured exactly 10 cm? Could
(10 cm × 10 cm). it have been 9.9 cm or 10.1 cm?
If you used an electronic
balance, are you certain that the
(cid:2) The mass of the aluminum digital read-out was accurate?
square, as measured by an Did the last digit fluctuate at
all? If you used a triple-beam
electronic balance, may
balance, are you certain that you
have been about 0.33 g.
read the correct value? Could
it have been 0.34 g or 0.32 g?
What reference did you use to find
the density? Did you consult more
(cid:2) The density of aluminum than one reference? Suppose
is 2.70 g/cm3 at a given that the density was actually
temperature. 2.699 g/cm3. Would this make a
difference in your calculations?
Would this make a difference in
the certainty of your answer?
Are you certain that this value
(cid:2) The thickness of the
is fair, given the other values
aluminum square, calculated
that you worked with? Is it fair to
using a calculator, may have
have such a precise value, with
been about 0.001 222 cm. so many digits, when there are
so few digits (just two: the 1 and
the 0) in your dimensions of the
aluminum square?
Figure 1.4 Numbers and calculations from Investigation 1-A
Chapter 1 Observing Matter • MHR 15
During the investigations in this textbook, you will use equipment
such as rulers, balances, graduated cylinders, and thermometers to
measure matter. You will calculate values with a calculator or with
specially programmed software. How exact can your measurements and
calculations be? How exact should they be?
Two main factors affect your ability to record and communicate meas-
urements and calculations. One factor is the instruments you use. The
other factor is your ability to read and interpret what the instruments tell
you. Examine Figures 1.5 and 1.6. They will help you understand which
digits you can know with certainty, and which digits are uncertain.
What is the length measured by ruler A? Is it 4.2 cm, or is it 4.3 cm? You
cannot be certain. The 2 of 4.2 is an estimate. The 3 of 4.3 is also an
estimate. In both cases, therefore, you are uncertain about the last
(farthest right) digit.
cm
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
ruler A
ruler B
Figure 1.5 These two rulers 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
measure the same length of the cm
blue square. Ruler A is calibrated
into divisions of 1 cm. Ruler B What is the length measured by ruler B? Is it 4.27 cm or 4.28 cm? Again, you
is calibrated into divisions cannot be certain. Ruler B lets you make more precise measurements than
of 0.1 cm. Which ruler can ruler A. Despite ruler B’s higher precision, however, you must still estimate
help you make more precise the last digit. The 7 of 4.27 is an estimate. The 8 of 4.28 is also an estimate.
measurements?
A
B
Figure 1.6 These two thermometers measure the same temperature.
Thermometer A is calibrated into divisions of 0.1˚C. Thermometer B is
calibrated into divisions of 1˚C. Which thermometer lets you make more
precise measurements? Which digits in each thermometer reading are
you certain about? Which digits are you uncertain about?
16 MHR • Unit 1 Matter and Chemical Bonding
Significant Digits, Certainty, and Measurements
All measurements involve uncertainty. One source of this uncertainty
is the measuring device itself. Another source is your ability to perceive
and interpret a reading. In fact, you cannot measure anything with
complete certainty. The last (farthest right) digit in any measurement is
always an estimate.
The digits that you record when you measure something are called
significant digits. Significant digits include the digits that you are certain
about and a final, uncertain digit that you estimate. For example, 4.28 g
has three significant digits. The first two digits, the 4 and the 2, are
certain. The last digit, the 8, is an estimate. Therefore, it is uncertain.
The value 4.3 has two significant digits. The 4 is certain, and the 3 is
uncertain.
How Can You Tell Which Digits Are Significant?
You can identify the number of significant digits in any value. Table 1.4
lists some rules to help you do this.
Table 1.4 Rules for Determining Significant Digits
Rules Examples
1. All non-zero numbers 7.886 has four significant digits.
are significant. 19.4 has three significant digits.
527.266 992 has nine significant digits.
2. All zeros that are located 408 has three significant digits.
between two non-zero numbers 25 074 has five significant digits.
are significant.
3. Zeros that are located to the 0.0907 has three significant digits.
left of a value are not significant. They are the 9, the third 0 to the right,
and the 7. The function of the 0.0 at the
begining is only to locate the decimal.
0.000 000 000 06 has one significant digit.
4. Zeros that are located to the 22 700 may have three significant digits,
right of a value may or may not or it may have five significant digits.
be significant. See the box below to find out why.
Explaining Three Significant Digits
The Great Lakes contain 22 700 km3 of water. Is there exactly that amount
of water in the Great Lakes? No, 22 700 km3 is an approximate value. The
actual volume could be anywhere from 22 651 km3 to 22 749 km3. You can
use scientific notation to rewrite 22 700 km3 as 2.27×104km. This shows
that only three digits are significant. (See Appendix E at the back of the
book, if you would like to review scientific notation.)
Explaining Five Significant Digits
What if you were able to measure the volume of water in the Great Lakes?
You could verify the value of 22 700 km3. Then all five digits (including the
zeros) would be significant. Here again, scientific notation lets you show
clearly the five significant digits: 2.2700×104km3.
Chapter 1 Observing Matter • MHR 17
Practice Problems
1. Write the following quantities in your notebook. Beside each
quantity, record the number of significant digits.
(a) 24.7 kg (e) 8.930×105 km
(b) 247.7 mL (f) 2.5 g
(c) 247.701 mg (g) 0.0003 mL
(d) 0.247 01 L (h) 923.2 g
2. Consider the quantity 2400 g.
(a) Assume that you measured this quantity. How many significant
digits does it have?
(b) Now assume that you have no knowledge of how it was obtained.
How many significant digits does it have?
Accuracy and Precision
In everyday speech, you might use the terms “accuracy” and “precision”
to mean the same thing. In science, however, these terms are related to
certainty. Each, then, has a specific meaning.
Accuracy refers to how close a given quantity is to an accepted or
expected value. (See Figure 1.7.) Precision may refer to the exactness of a
measurement. For example, ruler B in Figure 1.5 lets you measure length
with greater precision than ruler A. Precision may also refer to the close-
ness of a series of data points. Data that are very close to one another are
said to be precise. Examine Figure 1.8. Notice that a set of data can be
precise but not accurate.
Figure 1.7 Under standard conditions of temperature and pressure, 5 mL of water has a
mass of 5 g. Why does the reading on this balance show a different value?
18 MHR • Unit 1 Matter and Chemical Bonding
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
1 2 3 4
Trial number
Figure 1.8 Compare student A’s results with results obtained by student B.
Two students conducted four trials each to measure the volumes and
masses of 5 mL of water. The graphs in Figure 1.8 show their results. The
expected value for the mass of water is 5 g. Student A’s results show high
precision and high accuracy. Student B’s results show high precision but
low accuracy.
In the following Express Lab, you will see how the equipment you use
affects the precision of your measurements.
Chapter 1 Observing Matter • MHR 19
)g(
retaw
fo
ssaM
Student A Student B
7
6
5
4
high precision 3
high accuracy
2
1
1 2 3 4
Trial number
)g(
retaw
fo
ssaM
high precision
low accuracy
A B
ExpressLab Significant Digits
You know that the precision of a measuring 2. Determine the mass and volume of a quantity
device affects the number of significant digits that of water. (The quantity you use is up to you
you should report. In this activity, each group will to decide.)
use different glassware and a different balance to
3. From the data you collect, calculate the
collect data.
density of water.
4. Enter your values for mass, volume, and
Materials
density in the class table.
glassware for measuring volume: for example,
graduated cylinders, Erlenmeyer flasks,
Analysis
pipettes or beakers
1. Examine each group’s data and calculated
balance
value for density. Note how the number of
water significant digits in each value for density
compares with the number of significant
Procedure digits in the measured quantities.
1. Obtain the glassware and balance assigned to 2. Propose a rule or guideline for properly
your group. handling significant digits when you multiply
and divide measured quantities.
Calculating with Significant Digits
In this course, you will often take measurements and use them to calcu-
late other quantities. You must be careful to keep track of which digits
in your calculations and results are significant. Why? Your results
should not imply more certainty than your measured quantities justify.
This is especially important when you use a calculator. Calculators
usually report results with far more figures—greater certainty—than
your data warrant. Always remember that calculators do not make
decisions about certainty. You do.
There are three rules for reporting significant digits in calculated
answers. These rules are summarized in Table 1.5. Reflect on how they
apply to your previous experiences. Then examine the Sample
Problems that follow.
Table 1.5 Rules for Reporting Significant Digits in Calculations
Rule 1: Multiplying and Dividing
The value with the fewest number of significant digits, going into the
calculation, determines the number of significant digits that you should
report in your answer.
Rule 2: Adding and Subtracting
The value with the fewest number of decimal places, going into the
calculation, determines the number of decimal places that you should
report in your answer.
Rule 3: Rounding
To get the appropriate number of significant digits (rule 1) or decimal
places (rule 2), you may need to round your answer.
If your answer ends in a number that is greater than 5, increase the
preceding digit by 1. For example, 2.346 can be rounded to 2.35.
If your answer ends with a number that is less than 5, leave the preceding
number unchanged. For example, 5.73 can be rounded to 5.7.
If your answer ends with 5, increase the preceding number by 1 if it is odd.
Leave the preceding number unchanged if it is even. For example, 18.35
can be rounded to 18.4, but 18.25 is rounded to 18.2.
Sample Problem
Reporting Volume Using Significant Digits
Problem
A student measured a regularly shaped sample of iron and found it
to be 6.78 cm long, 3.906 cm wide, and 11 cm tall. Determine its
volume to the correct number of significant digits.
What Is Required?
You need to calculate the volume of the iron sample. Then you need
to write this volume using the correct number of significant digits.
Continued ...
20 MHR • Unit 1 Matter and Chemical Bonding
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 20
What Is Given?
You know the three dimensions of the iron sample.
Length = 6.78 cm (three significant digits)
Width = 3.906 cm (four significant digits)
Height = 11 cm (two significant digits)
Plan Your Strategy
To calculate the volume, use the formula
Volume = Length×Width×Height
V = l ×w ×h
Find the value with the smallest number of significant digits. Your
answer can have only this number of significant digits.
Act on Your Strategy
V = l ×w ×h
= 6.78cm×3.906cm×11cm
= 291.30948cm3
The value 11 cm has the smallest number of significant digits: two.
Thus, your answer can have only two significant digits. In order to
have only two significant digits, you need to put your answer into
scientific notation.
V = 2.9×102cm3
Therefore, the volume is 2.9×102cm3, to two significant digits.
Check Your Solution
•Your answer is in cm3. This is a unit of volume.
•Your answer has two significant digits. The least number of
significant digits in the question is also two.
Sample Problem
Reporting Mass Using Significant Digits
Problem
Suppose that you measure the masses of four objects as 12.5 g,
145.67 g, 79.0 g, and 38.438 g. What is the total mass of the objects?
What Is Required?
You need to calculate the total mass of the objects.
What Is Given?
You know the mass of each object.
Continued ...
Chapter 1 Observing Matter • MHR 21
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 21
Plan Your Strategy
•Add the masses together, aligning them at the decimal point.
•Underline the estimated (farthest right) digit in each value. This
is a technique you can use to help you keep track of the number
of estimated digits in your final answer.
•In the question, two values have the fewest decimal places: 12.5
and 79.0. You need to round your answer so that it has only one
decimal place.
PROBLEM TIP Act on Your Strategy
Notice that adding the values 12.5
results in an answer that has 145.67
three decimal places. Using 79.0
the underlining technique + 38.438
mentioned in “Plan Your
275.608
Strategy” helps you count
them quickly. Total mass = 275.608 g
Therefore, the total mass of the objects is 275.6 g.
Check Your Solution
•Your answer is in grams. This is a unit of mass.
•Your answer has one decimal place. This is the same as the values
in the question with the fewest decimal places.
Practice Problems
3. Do the following calculations. Express each answer using the
correct number of significant digits.
(a) 55.671g+45.78g
(b) 1.9mm+0.62mm
−
(c) 87.9478L 86.25 L
(d) 0.350mL+1.70mL+1.019mL
(e) 5.841g×6.03g
0.6kg
(f)
15L
17.51g
(g)
2.2cm3
Chemistry, Calculations, and Communication
Mathematical calculations are an important part of chemistry. You will
need your calculation skills to help you investigate many of the topics in
this textbook. You will also need calculation skills to communicate your
measurements and results clearly when you do activities and investiga-
tions. Chemistry, however, is more than measurements and calculations.
Chemistry also involves finding and interpreting patterns. This is the
focus of the next section.
22 MHR • Unit 1 Matter and Chemical Bonding
Chemistry Bulletin
Air Canada Flight 143 By multiplying 7682 L by 1.77, Pearson
calculated that the airplane had 13 597 kg of
fuel on board. He subtracted this value from
the total amount of fuel for the trip, 22 300 kg,
and found that 8703 kg more fuel was needed.
To convert kilograms back into litres,
Pearson divided the mass, 8703 kg, by 1.77.
The result was 4916 L. The crew added 4916 L
of fuel to the airplane’s tanks.
This conversion number, 1.77, had been
used in the past because the density of jet fuel
is 1.77 pounds per litre. Unfortunately, the
number that should have been used to convert
litres into kilograms was 0.803. The crew
should have added 20 088 L of fuel, not 4916 L.
Air Canada Flight 143 was en route from First officer Maurice Quintal calculated
Montréal to Edmonton on July 23, 1983. The their rate of descent. He determined that they
airplane was one of Air Canada’s first Boeing would never make Winnipeg. Pearson turned
767s, and its systems were almost completely north and headed toward Gimli, an abandoned
computerized. Air Force base. Gimli’s left runway was being
While on the ground in Montréal, Captain used for drag-car and go-kart races.
Robert Pearson found that the airplane’s fuel Surrounding the runway were families and
processor was malfunctioning. As well, all campers. It was into this situation that Pearson
three fuel gauges were not operating. Pearson and Quintal landed the airplane.
believed, however, that it was safe to fly the Tires blew upon impact. The airplane skid-
airplane using manual fuel measurements. ded down the runway as racers and spectators
Partway into the flight, as the airplane scrambled to get out of the way. Flight 143
passed over Red Lake, Ontario, one of two fuel finally came to rest 1200 m later, a mere 30 m
pumps in the left wing failed. Soon the other from the dazed onlookers.
fuel pump failed and the left engine flamed Miraculously no one was seriously injured.
out. Pearson decided to head to the closest As news spread around the world, the airplane
major airport, in Winnipeg. He began the became known as “The Gimli Glider.”
airplane’s descent. At 8400 m, and more than
160 km from the Winnipeg Airport, the right Making Connections
engine also failed. The airplane had run out 1. You read that the airplane should have
of fuel. received 20 088 L of fuel. Show how this
In Montréal, the ground crew had deter- amount was calculated.
mined that the airplane had 7682 L of fuel in
2. Use print or electronic resources to find out
its fuel tank. Captain Pearson had calculated
what caused the loss of the Mars Climate
that the mass of fuel needed for the trip from
Orbiter spacecraft in September 1999. How
Montréal to Edmonton was 22 300 kg. Since
is this incident related to the “Gimli Glider”
fuel is measured in litres, Pearson asked a
story? Could a similar incident happen
mechanic how to convert litres into kilograms.
again? Why or why not?
He was told to multiply the amount in litres
by 1.77.
Chapter 1 Observing Matter • MHR 23
Section Wrap-up
In this section, you learned how to judge the accuracy and precision of
your measurement. You learned how to recognize significant digits. You
also learned how to give answers to calculations using the correct number
of significant digits.
In the next section, you will learn about the properties and classifica-
tion of matter.
Section Review
1 K/U Explain the difference between accuracy and precision in your
own words.
2 C What SI or SI-derived unit of measurement would you use to
describe:
(a) the mass of a person
(b) the mass of a mouse
(c) the volume of a glass of juice
(d) the length of your desk
(e) the length of your classroom
3 K/U Record the number of significant digits in each of the following
values:
(a) 3.545
(b) 308
(c) 0.000876
4 K/U Complete the following calculations and give your answer to the
correct number of significant digits.
(a) 5.672g+92.21g
(b) 32.34km×93.1km
(c) 66.0mL×0.031mL
(d) 11.2g÷92mL
5 I What lab equipment would you use in each situation? Why?
(a) You need 2.00 mL of hydrogen peroxide for a chemical reaction.
(b) You want approximately 1 L of water to wash your equipment.
(c) You are measuring 250 mL of water to heat on a hot plate.
(d) You need 10.2 mL of alcohol to make up a solution.
6 I Review the graphs in Figure 1.8. Draw two more graphs to show
(a) data that have high accuracy but low precision
(b) data that have low accuracy and low precision
24 MHR • Unit 1 Matter and Chemical Bonding
Classifying Matter 1.3
and Its Changes
Matter is constantly changing. Plants grow by converting matter from Section Preview/
the soil and air into matter they can use. Water falls from the sky, evapo- Specific Expectations
rates, and condenses again to form liquid water in a never-ending cycle.
In this section, you will
You can probably suggest many more examples of matter changing.
(cid:2) identifychemical sub-
Matter changes in response to changes in energy. Adding energy to
stances and chemical
matter or removing energy from matter results in a change. Figure 1.9 changes in everyday life
shows a familiar example of a change involving matter and energy.
(cid:2) demonstratean under-
standing of the need to
removing energy use chemicals safely in
everyday life
(cid:2) communicateyour under-
standing of the following
terms: physical changes,
chemical changes, mixture,
pure substance, element,
compound
solid state liquid state gas state
adding energy
Figure 1.9 Like all matter, water can change its state when energy is added or removed.
Physical and Chemical Changes in Matter
A change of state alters the appearance of matter. The composition of
matter remains the same, however, regardless of its state. For example, ice,
liquid water, and water vapour are all the same kind of matter: water.
Melting and boiling other kinds of matter have the same result. The
appearance and some other physical properties change, but the matter
retains its identity—its composition. Changes that affect the physical
appearance of matter, but not its composition, are physical changes.
Figure 1.10 shows a different kind of change involving water.
Electrical energy is passed through water, causing it to decompose. Two
completely different kinds of matter result from this process: hydrogen gas
and oxygen gas. These gases have physical and chemical properties that
are different from the properties of water and from each other’s properties.
Therefore, decomposing water is a change that affects the composition of
water. Changes that alter the composition of matter are called chemical
Figure 1.10 An electrical
changes. Iron rusting, wood burning, and bread baking are three examples current is used to decompose
of chemical changes. water. This process is known
You learned about physical and chemical properties earlier in this as electrolysis.
chapter. A physical change results in a change of physical properties
only. A chemical change results in a change of both physical and
chemical properties.
Chapter 1 Observing Matter • MHR 25
Practice Problems
Before adopting the metric
4. Classify each situation as either a physical change or a chemical
system, Canadians measured
change. Explain your reasoning.
temperature in units called
Fahrenheit degrees (˚F). Based (a) A rose bush grows from a seed that you have planted and
on the Fahrenheit scale, water nourished.
boils at 212˚F and freezes at
(b) A green coating forms on a copper statue when the statue is
32˚F. A few countries, including
exposed to air.
the United States, still use
the Fahrenheit scale. Without (c) Your sweat evaporates to help balance your body temperature.
checking any reference
(d) Frost forms on the inside of a freezer.
materials, design a method
for converting Fahrenheit (e) Salt is added to clear chicken broth.
temperatures to Celsius (f) Your body breaks down the food you eat to provide energy for your
temperatures, and back again.
body’s cells.
Show your work, and explain
(g) Juice crystals dissolve in water.
your reasoning.
(h) An ice-cream cone melts on a hot day.
Classifying Matter
All matter can be classified into two groups: mixtures and pure sub-
stances. A mixture is a physical combination of two or more kinds of
matter. For example, soil is a mixture of sand, clay, silt, and decom-
posed leaves and animal bodies. If you look at soil under a magnifying
glass, you can see these different components. Figure 1.11 shows
another way to see the components of soil.
The components in a mixture can occur in different proportions
(relative quantities). Each individual component retains its identity.
Mixtures in which the different components are clearly visible are
called heterogeneous mixtures. The prefix “hetero-” comes from the
Greek word heteros, meaning “different.”
Mixtures in which the components are blended together so well
that the mixture looks like just one substance are called homogeneous
Figure 1.11 To see the mixtures. The prefix “homo- ” comes from the Greek word homos,
components of soil, add some meaning “the same.” Saltwater, clean air, and grape juice are common
soil to a glass of water. What examples. Homogeneous mixtures are also called solutions. You will
property is responsible for
investigate solutions in Unit 3.
separating the components?
A pure substance has a definite composition, which stays the same
in response to physical changes. A lump of copper is a pure substance.
Water (with nothing dissolved in it) is also a pure substance. Diamond,
carbon dioxide, gold, oxygen, and aluminum are pure substances, too.
Pure substances are further classified into elements and com-
Word
LINK
pounds. An element is a pure substance that cannot be separated
chemically into any simpler substances. Copper, zinc, hydrogen,
The word “pure” can be used
oxygen, and carbon are examples of elements.
to mean different things. In
A compound is a pure substance that results when two or more
ordinary conversation, you
elements combine chemically to form a different substance.
might say that orange juice is
“pure” if no other materials Compounds can be broken down into elements using chemical process-
have been added to it. How is es. For example, carbon dioxide is a compound. It can be separated into
this meaning of pure different the elements carbon and oxygen. The Concept Organizer on the next
from the scientific meaning in page outlines the classification of matter at a glance. The ThoughtLab
the term “pure substance?”
reinforces your understanding of properties, mixtures, and separation
of substances.
26 MHR • Unit 1 Matter and Chemical Bonding
Concept Organizer The Classification System for Matter.
Matter
(cid:2) anything that has mass and volume Pure Substances
(cid:2) found in three physical states: (cid:2) matter that has a definite
solid, liquid, gas composition
Elements
Mixtures (cid:2) matter that cannot be
decomposed into simpler
(cid:2) physical combinations of matter in which each
substances
component retains its identity
Homogeneous Physical
Heterogenous Mixtures Mixtures (Solutions) Chemical Changes
Changes
(Mechanical Mixtures) (cid:2) components are
(cid:2) all components blended so that
are visible it looks like a Compounds
single substance. (cid:2) matter in which two or
more elements are
chemically combined
ThoughtLab Mixtures, Pure Substances, and Changes
You frequently use your knowledge of properties 4. Record a mixture that is made with four of
to make and separate mixtures and substances. the chemicals. Then suggest one or more
You probably do this most often in the kitchen. techniques that you can use to separate the
Even the act of sorting clean laundry, however, four chemicals from one another. Write notes
depends on your ability to recognize and make and sketch labelled diagrams to show your
use of physical properties. This activity is a techniques. Identify the properties that your
“thought experiment.” You will use your under- techniques depend on.
standing of properties to mix and separate a
variety of chemicals, all on paper. Afterward, Analysis
your teacher may ask you to test your ideas, 1. In step 2, what properties of the chemicals did
either in the laboratory or at home in the kitchen. you use to determine your combinations?
2. In step 3, what properties did you use to
Procedure
determine your combinations?
1. Consider the following chemicals: table salt,
water, baking soda, sugar, iron filings, sand, Application
vegetable oil, milk, and vinegar. Identify each
3. Exchange your four-chemical mixture with
chemical as a mixture or a pure substance.
a partner. Do not include your notes and
2. Which of these chemicals can you mix diagrams. Challenge your partner to suggest
together withoutproducing a chemical techniques to separate the four chemicals.
change? In your notebook, record as many Then assess each other’s techniques. What
of these physical combinations as you can. modifications, if any, would you make to
3. Which of these chemicals can you mix your original techniques?
together to produce a chemical change?
Record as many of these chemical
combinations as you can.
Chapter 1 Observing Matter • MHR 27
Section Wrap-up
Notice that the classification system for matter, shown in the Concept
Organizer, is based mainly on the changes that matter undergoes:
• physical changes to separate mixtures into elements or compounds
• chemical changes to convert compounds or elements into different
compounds or elements
To explain how and why these chemical changes occur, you must look
“deeper” into matter. You must look at its composition. This is what you
will do in the next chapter. You will see how examining the composition
of matter leads to a different classification system: the periodic table. You
will also see how the periodic table allows chemists to make predictions
about the properties and behaviour of matter.
Section Review
1 C Copy Figure 1.9 into your notebook. Add the following labels in the
appropriate places: evaporation, condensation, melting, freezing, solid-
ifying. Note: Some labels may apply to the same places on the diagram.
2 C You may recall that sublimation is a change of state in which a
solid changes directly into a gas. The reverse is also true. Add the label
“sublimation” to your diagram for question 1. Include arrows to show
the addition or removal of energy.
3 K/U List three mixtures that you use frequently.
(a) Explain how you know that each is a mixture.
(b) Classify each mixture as either heterogeneous or homogenous.
4 K/U List three pure substances that you use frequently.
(a) Explain how you know that each is a pure substance.
(b) Try to classify each substance as an element or compound. Explain
your reasoning.
5 I You are given a mixture of wood chips, sand, coffee grounds, and
water. Design a process to clean the water.
6 MC The water going down your drain and toilet is cleaned and recy-
cled. You will learn about water purification processes in Chapter 9.
(a) Propose a possible series of steps that you could use to clean the
waste water from your home.
(b) Will this cleaned water be drinkable? Explain your answer.
(c) What further steps may be needed to clean this water?
28 MHR • Unit 1 Matter and Chemical Bonding
Review
Reflecting on Chapter 1 (b) You add baking soda to vinegar, and the
mixture bubbles and froths.
Summarize this chapter in the format of your
(c) You use a magnet to locate iron nails that
choice. Here are a few ideas to use as guidelines:
were dropped in a barn filled knee-deep
•List possible interactions among science, tech-
with straw.
nology, society, and the environment (STSE).
(d) Carbon dioxide gas freezes at a temperature
•Give examples of physical and chemical
of −78˚C.
properties.
(e) You recover salt from a solution of saltwater
•Make a table of common SI units.
by heating the solution until all the water
•Think about measurement and uncertainty.
has evaporated.
When is a number exact?
(f) The temperature of a compost pile rises as
•Make up a list of values. Challenge your friends
the activity of the bacteria inside the pile
to identify the number of significant digits in
increases.
each.
•Review the rules for significant digits when 4. Use the terms “accuracy” and “precision”
adding, subtracting, multiplying, and dividing to describe the results on the dart boards
numbers. shown below. Assume that the darts represent
•Explain the difference between accuracy and data and the bulls-eye represents the expected
precision. value.
•Give examples of physical and chemical changes.
•Into what categories can matter be classified?
Reviewing Key Terms
For each of the following terms, write a sentence
that shows your understanding of its meaning.
accuracy chemical changes
chemical property chemistry Exp. I Exp. II
compound element
matter mixture
physical changes physical property
precision properties
pure substance significant digits
STSE
Exp. III Exp. IV
Knowledge/Understanding
1. Identify each property as either physical or
chemical. 5. Examine the containers on the next page.
(a) Hydrogen gas is extremely flammable. (a) What volume of liquid does each container
(b) The boiling point of ethanol is 78.5˚C. contain? Be as accurate and precise as
(c) Chlorine gas is pale green in colour. possible in your answers.
(d) Sodium metal reacts violently with water. (b) Assume that the liquid in all three containers
is water. If the flask and the graduated
2. How can you tell the difference between a
cylinder are emptied into the beaker, what
physical change and a chemical change?
is the total volume of water in the beaker?
3. Name the property that each change depends
Report your answer to the correct number
on. Then classify the property as either
of significant digits.
chemical or physical.
(c) Which container is the best choice for meas-
(a) You separate a mixture of gravel and road
uring volume in a laboratory? Explain why.
salt by adding water to it.
Chapter 1 Observing Matter • MHR 29
11. A plumber installs a pipe that has a diameter
of 10 cm and a length of 2.4 m. Calculate the
volume of water (in cm3) that the pipe will
hold. Express your answer to the correct
number of significant digits. Note: The formula
for the volume of a cylinder is V = πr2h, where
ris the radius and his the height or length.
12. During an investigation, a student monitors
the temperature of water in a beaker. The data
from the investigation are shown in the table
below.
(a) What was the average temperature of the
water? Express your answer to the appropri-
ate number of significant digits.
(b) The thermometer that the student used has
6. Make each conversion below.
a scale marked at 1˚ intervals. Which digits
(a) 10 kg to grams (g)
in the table below are estimated?
(b) 22.3 cm to metres (m)
(c) 52 mL to centimetres cubed (cm3) Time (min) Temperature (˚C)
(d) 1.0 L to centimetres cubed (cm3) 0.0 25
7. Identify the number of significant digits in 1 24.3
each value.
2 24
(a) 0.002 cm
3 23.7
(b) 3107 km
(c) 5 g 4 23.6
(d) 8.6×1010m3
13. Identify each change as either physical or
(e) 4.0003 mL
chemical.
(f) 5.432×102km2
(a) Over time, an iron swing set becomes
(g) 91 511 L
covered with rust.
8.(a) Explain why the value 5700 km could have
(b) Juice crystals “disappear” when they are
two, three, or four significant digits.
stirred into a glass of water.
(b) Write 5700 km with two significant digits.
(c) Litmus paper turns pink when exposed to
(c) Write 5700 km with four significant digits.
acid.
9. Complete each calculation. Express your (d) Butter melts when you spread it on hot toast.
answer to the correct number of significant
digits. Inquiry
(a) 4.02 mL + 3.76 mL + 0.95 mL 14. Your teacher asks the class to measure the mass
(b) (2.7×102m)×(4.23×102m) of a sample of aluminum. You measure the
(c) 5092kg÷23L mass three times, and obtain the following
(d) 2−0.3+6−7 data: 6.74, 6.70, and 6.71 g. The actual value
(e) (6.853×103L)+(5.40×103L) is 6.70 g. Here are the results of three other
(f) (572.3g+794.1g)÷(24mL+52mL) students:
10. Round each value to the given number of Student A 6.50, 6.49, and 6.52 g
significant digits.
Student B 6.57, 6.82, and 6.71 g
(a) 62 091 to three significant digits
Student C 6.61, 6.70, and 6.87 g
(b) 27 to one significant digit
(c) 583 to one significant digit (a) Graph the four sets of data. (Call yourself
(d) 17.25 to three significant digits “student D.”)
30 MHR • Unit 1 Matter and Chemical Bonding
(b) Which results are most precise? • any safety symbols or warnings on the
(c) Which results are most accurate? packaging or container
(d) Which results have the highest accuracy • any hazards associated with the chemical(s)
and precision? that the product contains
15.(a) Design an investigation to discover some of • suggestions for using the product safely
the physical and chemical properties of Back in class, share and analyze the chemicals
hydrogen peroxide, H O . that everyone found.
2 2
(b) List the materials you need to carry out (a) Prepare a database that includes all the
your investigation. different chemicals, the products in which
(c) What specific physical and/or chemical they are found, their hazards, and instruc-
properties does your investigation test for? tions for their safe use. Add to the database
(d) What variables are held constant during your throughout the year. Make sure that you
investigation? What variables are changed? have an updated copy at all times.
What variables are measured? (b) Identify the cleaning products that depend
(e) If you have time, obtain some hydrogen mainly on chemical changes for their
peroxide from a drugstore. Perform your cleaning action. How can you tell?
investigation, and record your observations.
20. At the beginning of this chapter, you saw how
water, a very safe chemical compound, can be
Communication
misrepresented to appear dangerous. Issues
16. Choose one of the common chemicals listed about toxic and polluting chemicals are some-
below. In your notebook, draw a concept web times reported in newspapers or on television.
that shows some of the physical properties, List some questions you might ask to help you
chemical properties, and uses of this chemical. determine whether or not an issue was being
• table salt (sodium chloride) misrepresented.
• water
21. Describe the most important STSE connections
• baking soda (sodium hydrogen carbonate)
for each situation.
• sugar (sucrose)
(a) Car exhaust releases gases such as sulfur
17. In your notebook, draw a flowchart or concept dioxide, SO , and nitrogen oxide, NO .
2(g) (g)
web that illustrates the connections between These gases lead to smog in cities. As well,
the following words: they are a cause of acid rain.
• mixture (b) In the past, people used dyes from plants
• pure substance and animals to colour fabrics. These natural
• homogeneous dyes produced a limited range of colours,
• heterogeneous and they faded quickly. Today long-lasting
• solution artificial dyes are available in almost every
• matter possible colour. These dyes were invented
• water by chemists. They are made in large quanti-
• cereal ties for the fabric and clothing industries.
• aluminum
Answers to Practice Problems and
• apple juice
Short Answers to Section Review Questions
18. Is salad dressing a homogenous mixture or Practice Problems: 1.(a)3 (b)4 (c)6 (d)5 (e)4 (f)2 (g)1 (h)4
a heterogeneous mixture? Use diagrams to 2.(a)4 (b)2 3.(a)101.45 g (b)2.5 mm (c)1.70 L (d)3.07 mL
explain. (e)35.2g2 (f)4×10−2kg/L (g)8.0g/cm3 4.(a)chemical
(b)chemical (c)physical (d)physical (e)physical
Making Connections
(f)chemical (g)physical (h)physical
Section Review: 1.2: 2.(a)kg (b)g (c)mL (d)cm (e)m 3.(a)4
19. Locate 3 cleaning products in your home. For (b)3 (c)3 4.(a)97.88 g (b)3.01×103km2 (c)2.0mL2
each product, record the following information: (d)0.12 g/mL 5.(a)pipette (b)Erlenmeyer flask or large
• the chemical(s) most responsible for its beaker (c)250 mL beaker (d)graduated cylinder
cleaning action
Chapter 1 Observing Matter • MHR 31
32
Elements and
the Periodic Table
T
oday, if you want to travel by air across the country or overseas, you Chapter Preview
take an airplane. During the first three decades of the twentieth century,
2.1 Atoms and Their
you would have boarded a hydrogen-filled balloon such as the one shown
Composition
in the black-and-white photograph. Large and small airships such as
2.2 Atoms, Elements, and the
these, called dirigibles, were common sights in the skies above many
Periodic Table
North American and European cities. Unfortunately, during a landing in
2.3 Periodic Trends Involving
Lakehurst, New Jersey in 1937, the hydrogen in one of these airships, the
the Sizes and Energy
Hindenburg, ignited. The resulting explosion killed 36 people, and
Levels of Atoms
marked the end of the use of hydrogen for dirigibles.
Gas-filled airships and balloons like the one shown in the colour pho-
tograph now use helium gas instead of hydrogen. Helium, unlike hydro-
gen, does not burn. In fact, helium is a highly unreactive gas. What is it
about hydrogen that makes it so reactive? Why is helium so unreactive?
The answer lies in the structure of the atoms of these elements. In previ-
ous science courses, you traced the history of our understanding of atoms
and their structure. You also learned how chemists use properties to
arrange elements, and the atoms of which they are made, into a remark-
able tool called the periodic table. This chapter highlights and expands on
Concepts and Skills
key ideas from your earlier studies. By the end of the chapter, you will
You Will Need
have a greater understanding of the properties of elements at an atomic
Before you begin this chapter,
level. This understanding is a crucial foundation for concepts that you
review the following concepts
will explore in your chemistry course this year.
and skills:
(cid:2) expressing the results
of calculations to the
appropriate number
Our modern understanding of mat-
of decimal places and
ter and its composition was largely
significant digits (Chapter
developed before scientists
1, section 1.2)
obtained direct evidence for the
existence of atoms. How can you
explain this fact?
Chapter 2 Elements and the Periodic Table • MHR 33
2.1 Atoms and Their Composition
Section Preview/ Elements are the basic substances that make up all matter. About 90
Specific Expectations elements exist naturally in the universe. The two smallest and least dense
of these elements are hydrogen and helium. Yet hydrogen and helium
In this section, you will
account for nearly 98% of the mass of the entire universe!
(cid:2) defineand describethe
Here on Earth, there is very little hydrogen in its pure elemental form.
relationships among atomic
number, mass number, There is even less helium. In fact, there is such a small amount of helium
atomic mass, isotope, and on Earth that it escaped scientists’ notice until 1895.
radioisotope Regardless of abundance, any two samples of hydrogen—from
(cid:2) communicateyour under- anywhere on Earth or far beyond in outer space—are identical to each
standing of the following other. For example, a sample of hydrogen from Earth’s atmosphere is iden-
terms: atom, atomic mass tical to a sample of hydrogen from the Sun. The same is true for helium.
unit (u), atomic number (Z),
This is because each element is made up of only a single kind of atom.
mass number (A), atomic
For example, the element hydrogen contains only hydrogen atoms. The
symbol, isotopes, radioactiv-
element helium contains only helium atoms. What, however, is an atom?
ity, radioisotopes
The Atomic Theory of Matter
Technology John Dalton was a British teacher and self-taught scientist. In 1809, he
LINK
described atoms as solid, indestructible particles that make up all matter.
How scientists visualize the (See Figure 2.1.) Dalton’s concept of the atom is one of several ideas in
atom has changed greatly his atomic theory of matter, which is outlined on the next page. Keep in
since Dalton proposed his mind that scientists have modified several of Dalton’s ideas, based on later
atomic theory in the early nine- discoveries. You will learn about these modifications at the end of this
teenth century. Technology has
section. See if you can infer what some of them are as you study the struc-
played an essential role in
ture of the atom on the next few pages.
these changes. At a library or
on the Internet, research the
key modifications to the model
of the atom. Create a summary
chart to show your findings.
Include the scientists involved,
the technologies they used, the
discoveries they made, and the
impact of their discoveries on
the model of the atom. If you
wish, use a suitable graphics
program to set up your chart.
Figure 2.1 This illustration shows an atom as John Dalton (1766–1844) imagined it.
Many reference materials refer to Dalton’s concept of the atom as the “billiard ball
model.” Dalton, however, was an avid lawn bowler. His concept of the atom was almost
certainly influenced by the smooth, solid bowling balls used in the game.
34 MHR • Unit 1 Matter and Chemical Bonding
Dalton’s Atomic Theory (1809)
• All matter is made up of tiny particles called atoms. An atom The atomic theory was a
convincing explanation of
cannot be created, destroyed, or divided into smaller particles.
the behaviour of matter. It
• The atoms of one element cannot be converted into the atoms of
explained two established
any another element.
scientific laws: the law of
• All the atoms of one element have the same properties, such as conservation of mass and the
mass and size. These properties are different from the properties law of definite composition.
of the atoms of any other element. • Law of conservation of
• Atoms of different elements combine in specific proportions to mass: During a chemical
form compounds. reaction, the total mass of
the substances involved
does not change.
• Law of definite
The Modern View of the Atom
proportion: Elements
An atom is the smallest particle of an element that still retains the identi- always combine to form
compounds in fixed
ty and properties of the element. For example, the smallest particle of the
proportions by mass.
writing material in your pencil is a carbon atom. (Pencil “lead” is actually
(For example, pure water
a substance called graphite. Graphite is a form of the element carbon.)
always contains the
An average atom is about 10
−10
m in diameter. Such a tiny size is
elements hydrogen and
difficult to visualize. If an average atom were the size of a grain of sand, oxygen, combined in the
a strand of your hair would be about 60 m in diameter! following proportions:
Atoms themselves are made up of even smaller particles. These 11% hydrogen and 89%
subatomic particles are protons, neutrons, and electrons. Protons and oxygen.)
neutrons cluster together to form the central core, or nucleus, of an atom. How does the atomic theory
Fast-moving electrons occupy the space that surrounds the nucleus of explain these two laws?
the atom. As their names imply, subatomic particles are associated with
electrical charges. Table 2.1 and Figure 2.2 summarize the general features
and properties of an atom and its three subatomic particles.
Table 2.1 Properties of Protons, Neutrons, and Electrons
Subatomic particle Charge Symbol Mass (in g) Radius (in m)
electron 1− e− 9.02 × 10−28 smaller than 10−18 Approximately 10 −10 m
proton 1+ p+ 1.67 × 10−24 10−15
neutron 0 n0 1.67 × 10−24 10−15 Nucleus
Expressing the Mass of Subatomic Particles
As you can see in Table 2.1, subatomic particles are incredibly small.
Suppose that you could count out protons or neutrons equal to
602 000 000 000 000 000 000 000 (or 6.02×1023)
and put them on a scale. They would have a mass of about 1 g. This
means that one proton or neutron has a mass of
A Atom
1g
= 0.00000000000000000000000166g
6.02×1023
= 1.66×10 −24g
Proton
It is inconvenient to measure the mass of subatomic particles using units (positive charge)
such as grams. Instead, chemists use a unit called an atomic mass unit Neutron
(symbol u). A proton has a mass of about 1 u, which is equal to (no charge)
1.66×10 −24g.
Figure 2.2 This illustration shows the modern view of an atom. Notice that a fuzzy, Approximately 10 −14 m
cloud-like region surrounds the atomic nucleus. Electrons move rapidly throughout this
B Nucleus
region, which represents most of the atom’s volume.
Chapter 2 Elements and the Periodic Table • MHR 35
The Nucleus of an Atom
CHEM
FACT
All the atoms of a particular element have the same number of protons
The number 6.02×1023is in their nucleus. For example, all hydrogen atoms—anywhere in the
called the Avogadro constant. universe—have one proton. All helium atoms have two protons. All
In Chapter 5, you will learn oxygen atoms have eight protons. Chemists use the term atomic number
more about the Avogadro (symbol Z) to refer to the number of protons in the nucleus of each atom
constant.
of an element.
As you know, the nucleus of an atom also contains neutrons. In fact,
the mass of an atom is due to the combined masses of its protons and
neutrons. Therefore, an element’s mass number (symbol A) is the total
number of protons and neutrons in the nucleus of one of its atoms. Each
CHEM
proton or neutron is counted as one unit of the mass number. For exam-
FACT
ple, an oxygen atom, which has 8 protons and 8 neutrons in its nucleus,
A proton is about 1837 times has a mass number of 16. A uranium atom, which has 92 protons and
more massive than an elec-
146 neutrons, has a mass number of 238.
tron. According to Table 2.1,
Information about an element’s protons and neutrons is often
the mass of an electron is
9.02×10−28g. This value is so summarized using the chemical notation shown in Figure 2.3. The letter X
represents the atomic symbol for an element. (The atomic symbol is also
small that scientists consider
the mass of an electron to be called the element symbol.) Each element has a different atomic symbol.
approximately equal to zero. All chemists, throughout the world, use the same atomic symbols. Over
Thus, electrons are not taken the coming months, you will probably learn to recognize many of these
into account when calculating symbols instantly. Appendix G, at the back of this book, lists the elements
the mass of an atom.
in alphabetical order, along with their symbols. You can also find the ele-
ments and their symbols in the periodic table on the inside back cover of
this textbook, and in Appendix C. (You will review and extend your
understanding of the periodic table, in section 2.2.)
A
mass number
atomic symbol
Z
atomic number
Figure 2.3
Notice what the chemical notation in Figure 2.3 does, and does not,
tell you about the structure of an element’s atoms. For example, consider
the element fluorine: 19F. The mass number (the superscript 19) indicates
9
that fluorine has a total of 19 protons and neutrons. The atomic number
(subscript 9) indicates that fluorine has 9 protons. Neither the mass num-
ber nor the atomic number tells you how many neutrons fluorine has. You
can calculate this value, however, by subtracting the atomic number from
the mass number.
Numberofneutrons = Massnumber−Atomicnumber
= A−Z
36 MHR • Unit 1 Matter and Chemical Bonding
Thus, for fluorine,
Math
Numberofneutrons = A−Z LINK
= 19−9
Expressing numerical data
= 10
about atoms in units such as
Now try a few similar calculations in the Practice Problem below. metres is like using a bulldozer
to move a grain of sand. Atoms
and subatomic particles are
so small that they are not
Practice Problems
measured using familiar units.
Instead, chemists often meas-
1. Copy the table below into your notebook. Fill in the missing ure atoms in nanometres
information. Use a periodic table, if you need help identifying (1nm = 1×10−9m)
the atomic symbol. and picometres
(1 pm =1 ×10−12m).
Chemical notation Element Number of protons Number of neutrons • Convert the diameter of
a proton and a neutron
11B (a) (b) (c)
5 into nanometres and
2 8 0 2 8Pb (d) (e) (f) then picometres.
(g) tungsten (h) 110 • Atomic and subatomic
sizes are hard to imagine.
(i) helium (j) 2
Create an analogy to help
239Pu (k) (l) (m) people visualize the size
94
56(n) (o) 26 (p) of an atom and its sub-
26
atomic particles. (The first
(q) bismuth (r) 126
sentence of this feature is
(s) (t) 47 60 an example of an analogy.)
20(u) (v) (w) (x)
10
Using the Atomic Number to Infer the Number of Electrons
As just mentioned, the atomic number and mass number do not give you
direct information about the number of neutrons in an element. They do
not give you the number of electrons, either. You can infer the number of Web LINK
electrons, however, from the atomic number. The atoms of each element
are electrically neutral. This means that their positive charges (protons) www.school.mcgrawhill.ca/
and negative charges (electrons) must balance one another. In other words, resources/
in the neutral atom of any element, the number of protons is equal to the The atomic symbols are linked
to the names of the elements.
number of electrons. For example, a neutral hydrogen atom contains one
The links are not always obvi-
proton, so it must also contain one electron. A neutral oxygen atom con-
ous, however. Many atomic
tains eight protons, so it must contain eight electrons.
symbols are derived from the
names of the elements in a
Isotopes and Atomic Mass language other than English,
such as Latin, Greek, German,
All neutral atoms of the same element contain the same number of
or Arabic. With your class-
protons and, therefore, the same number of electrons. The number of
mates, research the origin
neutrons can vary, however. For example, most of the oxygen atoms in and significance of the name
nature have eight neutrons in their atomic nuclei. In other words, most of each element. Go to
oxygen atoms have a mass number of 16 (8 protons + 8 neutrons). As you the web site above. Go to
can see in Figure 2.4 on the next page, there are also two other naturally Science Resources, then to
occurring forms of oxygen. One of these has nine neutrons, so A = 17. The Chemistry 11to find out where
other has ten neutrons, so A = 18. These three forms of oxygen are called to go next. See if you can infer
the rules that are used to cre-
isotopes. Isotopes are atoms of an element that have the same number of
ate the atomic symbols from
protons but different numbers of neutrons.
the names of the elements.
Chapter 2 Elements and the Periodic Table • MHR 37
8 electrons 8 electrons 8 electrons
Figure 2.4 Oxygen has three
naturally occurring isotopes.
Notice that oxygen-16 has the
same meaning as 16O. Similarly,
8
atom of oxygen-16 atom of oxygen-17 atom of oxygen-18
oxygen-17 has the same meaning
as 17Oand oxygen-18 has the (8 protons + 8 neutrons) (8 protons + 9 neutrons) (8 protons + 10 neutrons)
8
same meaning as 18O.
8
The isotopes of an element have very similar chemical properties because
they have the same number of protons and electrons. They differ in mass,
however, because they have different numbers of neutrons.
CHEM Some isotopes are more unstable than others. Their nuclei (plural
FACT of nucleus) are more likely to decay, releasing energy and subatomic
particles. This process, called radioactivity, happens spontaneously.
Radioisotopes decay because
All uranium isotopes, for example, have unstable nuclei. They are called
their nuclei are unstable. The
time it takes for nuclei to decay radioactive isotopes, or radioisotopes for short. Many isotopes are not
varies greatly. For example, it radioisotopes. Oxygen’s three naturally occurring isotopes, for example,
takes billions of years for only are stable. In contrast, chemists have successfully synthesized ten other
half of the nucleus of naturally isotopes of oxygen, all of which are unstable radioisotopes. (What prod-
occurring uranium-238 to
ucts result when radioisotopes decay? You will find out in Chapter 4.)
decay. The nuclei of other
radioisotopes—mainly those
Electrons in Atoms
that scientists have synthe-
sized—decay much more So far, much of the discussion about the atom has concentrated on the
rapidly. The nuclei of some
nucleus and its protons and neutrons. What about electrons? What is their
isotopes, such as sodium-22,
importance to the atom? Recall that electrons occupy the space surround-
take about 20 years to decay.
ing the nucleus. Therefore, they are the first subatomic particles that are
For calcium-47, this decay
likely to interact when atoms come near one another. In a way, electrons
occurs in a matter of days. The
nuclei of most synthetic are on the “front lines” of atomic interactions. The number and arrange-
radioisotopes decay so quickly, ment of the electrons in an atom determine how the atom will react, if at
however, that the radioiso- all, with other atoms. As you will learn in section 2.2, and throughout the
topes exist for mere fractions rest of this unit, electrons are responsible for the chemical properties of
of a second.
the elements.
Revisiting the Atomic Theory
When chemists refer symboli- John Dalton did not know about subatomic particles when he developed
cally to oxgyen-16 atoms, they his atomic theory. Even so, the modern atomic theory (shown on the next
often leave out the atomic page) retains many of Dalton’s ideas, with only a few modifications.
number. They write 16O. You Examine the comments to the right of each point. They explain how the
can write other isotopes of
modern theory differs from Dalton’s.
oxygen, and all other elements,
The atomic theory is a landmark achievement in the history of
the same way. Why is it
chemistry. It has shaped the way that all scientists, especially chemists,
acceptable to leave out the
think about matter. In the next section, you will investigate another
atomic number?
landmark achievement in chemistry: the periodic table.
38 MHR • Unit 1 Matter and Chemical Bonding
The Modern Atomic Theory
• All matter is made up of tiny particles called Although an atom is divisible, it is still the
smallest particle of an element that has
atoms. Each atom is made up of smaller subatomic
the properties and identity of the element.
particles: protons, neutrons, and electrons.
Nuclear reactions (changes that alter the
• The atoms of one element cannot be converted
composition of the atomic nucleus) may,
into the atoms of any another element by a in fact, convert atoms of one element into
chemical reaction. atoms of another.
• Atoms of one element have the same properties, Different isotopes of an element have
such as average mass and size. These properties different numbers of neutrons and thus
different masses. As you will learn in
are different from the properties of the atoms of
Chapter 5, scientists treat elements as if
any other element.
their atoms have an average mass.
• Atoms of different elements combine in specific
This idea has remained basically
proportions to form compounds. unchanged.
Section Review
1 C Copy the table below into your notebook. Use a graphic organizer
to show the relationship among the titles of each column. Then fill in
the blanks with the appropriate information. (Assume that the atoms of
each element are neutral.)
CHEM
Atomic Mass Number Number Number FACT
Element number number of protons of electrons of neutrons
Not all chemists believed
(a) (b) 108 (c) 47 (d) that Dalton’s atoms existed. In
(e) (f) (g) 33 (h) 42 1877, one skeptical scientist
called Dalton’s atoms “stupid
(i) 35 (j) (k) (l) 45
hallucinations.” Other scien-
(m) 79 179 (n) (o) (p) tists considered atoms to be
a valuable ideafor understand-
(q) (r) (s) (t) 50 69
ing matter and its behaviour.
They did not, however, believe
2 K/U Explain the difference between a stable isotope and a
that atoms had any physical
radioisotope. Provide an example other than oxygen to support
reality. The discovery of
your answer. electrons (and, later, the other
subatomic particles) finally
3 K/U Examine the information represented by the following pairs: 3H
1 convinced scientists that
and 3He; 14C and 16N; 19F and 18F.
2 6 7 9 9 atoms are more than simply
(a) For each pair, do both members have the same number of protons? an idea. Atoms, they realized,
electrons? neutrons? must be matter.
(b) Which pair or pairs consist of atoms that have the same value for Z?
Which consists of atoms that have the same value for A?
4 C Compare Dalton’s atomic theory with the modern atomic theory.
Explain why scientists modified Dalton’s theory.
5 C In your opinion, should chemistry students learn about Dalton’s
theory if scientists no longer agree with it completely? Justify
your answer.
Chapter 2 Elements and the Periodic Table • MHR 39
2.2 Atoms, Elements,
and the Periodic Table
Section Preview/ By the mid 1800’s, there were 65 known elements. Chemists studied these
Specific Expectations elements intensively and recorded detailed information about their reac-
tivity and the masses of their atoms. Some chemists began to recognize
In this section, you will
patterns in the properties and behaviour of many of these elements. (See
(cid:2) state, in your own words, the
Figure 2.5.)
periodic law
Other sets of elements display similar trends in their properties and
(cid:2) describeelements in the
behaviour. For example, oxygen (O), sulfur (S), selenium (Se), and
periodic table in terms of
energy levels and the elec- tellurium (Te) share similar properties. The same is true of fluorine (F),
tron arrangements chlorine (Cl), bromine (Br), and iodine (I). These similarities prompted
chemists to search for a fundamental property that could be used to
(cid:2) useLewis structures to rep-
resent valence electrons organize all the elements. One chemist, Dmitri Mendeleev (1834–1907),
sequenced the known elements in order of increasing atomic mass. The
(cid:2) communicateyour under-
result was a table of the elements, organized so that elements with similar
standing of the following
terms: energy levels, properties were arranged in the same column. Because Mendeleev’s
periodic trends, valence arrangement highlighted periodic (repeating) patterns of properties, it was
electrons, Lewis structures, called a periodic table.
stable octet, octet The modern periodic table is a modification of the arrangement first
proposed by Mendeleev. Instead of organizing elements according to
atomic mass, the modern periodic table organizes elements according to
Language
LINK
atomic number. According to the periodic law, the chemical and physical
properties of the elements repeat in a regular, periodic pattern when they
The term periodicmeans
are arranged according to their atomic number.
“repeating in an identifiable
Figures 2.6 and 2.7 outline the key features of the modern periodic
pattern.” For example, a calen-
dar is periodic. It organizes table. Take some time to review these features. Another version of the
the days of the months into a periodic table, containing additional data, appears on the inside back
repeating series of weeks. cover of this textbook, as well as in Appendix C.
What other examples of
periodicity can you think of?
Figure 2.5 These five elements share many physical and chemical properties.
However, they have widely differing atomic masses.
lithium, Li Sodium, Na Potassium, K Rubidium, Rb Cesium, Cs
Shared Physical Properties Shared Chemical Properties
(cid:2) soft (cid:2) are very reactive
(cid:2) metallic (therefore malleable, ductile, and good (cid:2) react vigorously (and explosively) with water
conductors of electricity)
(cid:2) combine with chlorine to form a white solid that
dissolves easily in water
40 MHR • Unit 1 Matter and Chemical Bonding
MAIN GROUP MAIN-GROUP
ELEMENTS ELEMENTS
1 metals (main group) 18
(IA) metals (transition) (VIIIA)
1 2
metals (inner transition)
1 H He
2 metalloids 13 14 15 16 17
1.01 (IIA) (IIIA) (IVA) (VA) (VIA) (VIIA) 4.003
nonmetals
3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
2 Li Be B C N O F Ne
6.941 9.012 10.81 12.01 14.01 16.00 19.00 20.18
TRANSITION ELEMENTS
11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18
3 Na Mg Al Si P S Cl Ar
3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
22.99 24.13 (IIIB) (IVB) (VB) (VIB) (VIIB) (VIIIB) (IB) (IIB) 26.98 28.09 30.97 32.07 35.45 39.95
19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36
4 K Ca Sc Ti V Cr Mn Fe Co Ni Cu Zn Ga Ge As Se Br Kr
39.10 40.08 44.96 47.88 50.94 52.00 54.94 55.85 58.93 58.69 63.55 65.39 69.72 72.61 74.92 78.96 79.90 83.80
37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 52 53 54
5 Rb Sr Y Zr Nb Mo Tc Ru Rh Pd Ag Cd In Sn Sb Te I Xe
85.47 87.62 88.91 91.22 92.91 95.94 (98) 101.1 102.9 106.4 107.9 112.4 114.8 118.7 121.8 127.6 126.9 131.3
55 56 57 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85 86
6 Cs Ba La Hf Ta W Re Os Ir Pt Au Hg TI Pb Bi Po At Rn
132.9 137.3 138.9 178.5 180.9 183.9 186.2 190.2 192.2 195.1 197.0 200.6 204.4 207.2 209.0 (209) (210) (222)
87 88 89 104 105 106 107 108 109 110 111 112 114 116 118
7 Fr Ra Ac Rf Db Sg Bh Hs Mt Uun Uuu Uub Uuq Uuh Uuo
(223) (226) (227) (261) (262) (266) (262) (265) (266) (269) (272) (277) (285) (289) (293)
INNER TRANSITION ELEMENTS
58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71
6 Ce Pr Nd Pm Sm Eu Gd Tb Dy Ho Er Tm Yb Lu
140.1 140.9 144.2 (145) 150.4 152.0 157.3 158.9 162.5 164.9 167.3 168.9 173.0 175.0
90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 100 101 102 103
7 Th Pa U Np Pu Am Cm Bk Cf Es Fm Md No Lr
232.0 (231) 238.0 (237) (242) (243) (247) (247) (251) (252) (257) (258) (259) (260)
(cid:2) Each element is in a separate The elements in the ten B groups (cid:2) Group 1 (IA) elements are known
box, with its atomic number, are known as the transition as alkali metals. They react with
atomic symbol, and atomic elements. (In older periodic water to form alkaline, or basic,
mass. (Different versions of the tables, Roman numerals are solutions.
periodic table provide additional used to number the A and B
(cid:2) Group 2 (IIA) elements are
data and details.) groups.)
known as alkaline earth metals.
(cid:2) Elements are arranged in seven (cid:2) Within the B group transition They react with oxygen to form
numbered periods (horizontal elements are two horizontal compounds called oxides, which
rows) and 18 numbered groups series of elements called inner react with water to form alkaline
(vertical columns). transition elements. They usually solutions. Early chemists called
appear below the main periodic all metal oxides “earths.”
(cid:2) Groups are numbered according
table. Notice, however, that they
to two different systems. The (cid:2) Group 17 (VIIA) elements are
fit between the elements in
current system numbers the known as halogens, from the
Group 3 (IIIB)andGroup 4 (IVB).
groups from 1 to 18. An older Greek word hals, meaning
system numbers the groups (cid:2) A bold “staircase” line runs from “salt.” Elements in this group
from I to VIII, and separates them the top of Group 13 (IIIA) to the combine with other elements to
into two categories labelled A bottom of Group 16 (VIA). This form compounds called salts.
and B. Both of these systems line separates the elements
(cid:2) Group 18 (VIIIA) elements are
are included in this textbook. into three broad classes: metals,
known as noble gases. Noble
metalloids (or semi-metals),
(cid:2) The elements in the eight A gases do not combine in nature
and non-metals. (See Figure 2.7
groups are the main-group with any other elements.
on the next page for more
elements. They are also called
information.)
the representative elements.
Figure 2.6 The basic features of the periodic table are summarized here. Most of your
work in this course will focus on the representative elements.
Chapter 2 Elements and the Periodic Table • MHR 41
Cd
Pb
Cu
Metals
Cr Bi
Cl
As
S Br
Si Sb
C I
B Metalloids Te Nonmetals
Figure 2.7 Several examples from each of the three main classes of elements are
shown here. Find where they appear in the periodic table in Figure 2.6.
Practice Problems
2. Identify the name and symbol of the elements in the following loca-
tions of the periodic table:
(a) Group 14 (IVA), Period 2 (e) Group 12 (IIB), Period 5
(b) Group 11 (IB), Period 4 (f) Group 2 (IIA), Period 4
(c) Group 18 (VIIIA), Period 6 (g) Group 17 (VIIA), Period 5
(d) Group 1 (IA), Period 1 (h) Group 13 (IIIA), Period 3
Electrons and the Periodic Table
History You have seen how the periodic table organizes elements so that those
LINK
with similar properties are in the same group. You have also seen how
Mendeleev did not develop the periodic table distinguishes among metals, non-metals, and metalloids.
his periodic table in isolation. Other details of the organization of the periodic table may seem baffling,
He built upon work that had however. Why, for example, are there different numbers of elements in
been done by other chemists, the periods?
in other parts of the world,
The reason for this, and other details of the periodic table’s organiza-
over several decades.
tion, involves the number and arrangement of electrons in the atoms of
Research other ideas that
each element. To appreciate the importance of electrons to the periodic
were proposed for organizing
table, it is necessary to revisit the structure of the atom.
the elements. Include
Mendeleev’s work in your In the following ExpressLab, you will observe elements in much the
research. What was it about same way that scientists did in the early twentieth century. In doing so,
his arrangement that con- these scientists set the stage for a new understanding of matter and the
vinced chemists to adopt it? electrical structure of its atoms.
42 MHR • Unit 1 Matter and Chemical Bonding
ExpressLab Observing the Spectra of Elements
In this activity, you will use a device called a 3. Observe the light that is emitted from the
diffraction grating. It separates light into banded discharge tubes of other elements. Sketch
patterns of colour (a spectrum). Different colours your observations for each element.
of light have different frequencies and wave-
lengths, so they have different amounts of Analysis
energy. Red light is less energetic, for example,
1. If the electrons in a discharge tube are moving
than blue light.
everywhere in the space around the nucleus,
their spectrum should look like the spectrum
Safety Precautions
of an ordinary light bulb. What does hydro-
gen’s spectrum look like? How do the spectra
• Gas discharge tubes operate at a voltage that is of the other elements compare with the
high enough to cause serious injury. Observe spectrum of a light bulb and the spectrum
them only from a safe distance, as determined of hydrogen?
by your teacher.
2. Hydrogen has only one electron. Why, then,
does its spectrum have four coloured lines?
Materials
3. Why is the light that is emitted by hydrogen
diffraction grating
different from the light that is emitted by
incandescent light source
the other elements? Explain the difference
gas discharge tubes containing different elements
in terms of electrons.
Procedure
Application
1. Use the diffraction grating to observe the light
4. What do gas discharge tubes have in common
that is emitted from an ordinary incandescent
with street lights? Do research to find out
light bulb. Make a quick sketch to record your
which gases are used in street lamps, and why
observations.
certain gases are chosen for certain locations.
2. Observe the light that is emitted from the
hydrogen gas discharge tube. CAUTION You
should be about 1 m from the discharge tube.
Come no farther than your teacher directs.
Sketch your observations.
Electrons and Energy Levels
Electrons cannot move haphazardly. Their
movement around an atomic nucleus is restricted
to fixed regions of space. These regions are three-
dimensional, similar to the layers of an onion.
Figure 2.8 shows a representation of these
regions. Keep in mind that they are not solid.
They are volumes of space in which electrons may
be found. You may have heard these regions
called energy shells or shells. In this textbook,
they are called energy levels. An electron that
is moving in a lower energy level is close to the
nucleus. It has less energy than it would if it
were moving in a higher energy level.
Figure 2.8 Energy levels of an atom from the fifth period
Chapter 2 Elements and the Periodic Table • MHR 43
suelcun
levelygrenetsrif
levelygrenednoces
levelygrenedriht
levelygrenehtruof
levelygrenehtfif
There is a limit to the number of electrons that can occupy each ener-
gy level. For example, a maximum of two electrons can occupy the first
Examine the following energy level. A maximum of eight electrons can occupy the second energy
illustration. Then answer level. The periodic trends (repeating patterns) that result from organizing
these questions. the elements by their atomic number are linked to the way in which
• Which book possesses electrons occupy and fill energy levels. (See Figure 2.9.)
more potential energy?
As shown in Figure 2.9A, a common way to show the arrangement of
Why?
electrons in an atom is to draw circles around the atomic symbol. Each
• Can a book sit between
circle represents an energy level. Dots represent electrons that occupy
shelves instead of on a
each energy level. This kind of diagram is called a Bohr-Rutherford dia-
shelf as shown?
• How does the potential gram. It is named after two scientists who contributed their insights to the
energy of a book on a atomic theory.
higher shelf change if it is Figure 2.9B shows that the first energy level is full when two electrons
moved to a lower shelf? occupy it. Only two elements have two or fewer electrons: hydrogen and
• How do you think this
helium. Hydrogen has one electron, and helium has two. These elements,
situation is related
with their electrons in the first energy level, make up Period 1 of the
to electrons and the
periodic table.
potential energy they
As you can see in Figure 2.9C, Period 2 elements have two occupied
possess when they move
in different energy levels? energy levels. The second energy level is full when eight electrons occupy
it. Neon, with a total of ten electrons, has its first and second energy levels
filled. Notice how the second energy level fills with electrons as you move
across the period from lithium to fluorine.
H He
A B
Li Be B C NN O F Ne
Electronic Learning Partner
Your Chemistry 11 Electronic
Learning Partner has an
interactive activity to help you
assess your understanding
of the relationship among
C
elements, their atomic number,
and their position in the
periodic table. Figure 2.9 (A) A Bohr-Rutherford diagram (B) Hydrogen and helium have a single
energy level. (C) The eight Period 2 elements have two energy levels.
44 MHR • Unit 1 Matter and Chemical Bonding
Patterns Based on Energy Levels and Electron Arrangements
CHEM
FACT
The structure of the periodic table is closely related to energy levels and
the arrangement of electrons. Two important patterns result from this Energy levels and the arrange-
relationship. One involves periods, and the other involves groups. ment of electrons involve ideas
from theoretical physics. These
The Period-Related Pattern ideas are beyond the scope of
this course. Appendix D at the
As you can see in Figure 2.9, elements in Period 1 have electrons in one
back of this book provides a
energy level. Elements in Period 2 have electrons in two energy levels.
brief introduction to these
This pattern applies to all seven periods. An element’s period number is
ideas. If you pursue your stud-
the same as the number of energy levels that the electrons of its atoms ies in chemistry next year and
occupy. Thus, you could predict that Period 5 elements have electrons beyond, you will learn a more
that occupy five energy levels. This is, in fact, true. complete theory of electron
What about the inner transition elements—the elements that are arrangement.
below the periodic table? Figure 2.10 shows how this pattern applies to
them. Elements 58 through 71 belong in Period 6, so their electrons
occupy six energy levels. Elements 90 through 103 belong in Period 7, so
their electrons occupy seven energy levels. Chemists and chemical tech-
nologists tend to use only a few of the inner transition elements (notably
uranium and plutonium) on a regular basis. Thus, it is more convenient to
place all the inner transition elements below the periodic table.
1 18
IA VIIIA
1 2 13 14 15 16 17 2
1
H IIA IIIA IVA VA VIA VIIA He
3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
2
Li Be B C N O F Ne
11 12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18
3
Na Mg IIIB IVB VB VIBVIIB VIIIB IB IIB Al SI P S Cl Ar
19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36
4
K Ca Sc Ti V Cr Mn Fe Co Ni Cu Zn Ga Ge As Se Br Kr
37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 52 53 54
5
Rb Sr Y Zr Nb Mo Tc Ru Rh Pd Ag Cd In Sn Sb Te I Xe
55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85 86
6
Cs Ba La Ce Pr Nd Pm Sm Eu Gd Tb Dy Ho Er Tm Yb Lu Hf Ta W Re Os Ir Pt Au Hg TI Pb Bi Po At Rn
7 87 88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 100 101 102 103 104 105 106 107 108 109 110 111 112 114 116 118
Fr Ra Ac Th Pa U Np Pu Am Cm BK Cf Es Fm Md No Lr Rf Db Sg Bh Hs Mt UunUuuUub Uuq Unh Uuo
Figure 2.10 The “long form” of the periodic table includes the inner transition metals
in their proper place.
The Group-Related Pattern
The second pattern emerges when you consider the electron arrangements
in the main-group elements: the elements in Groups 1 (IA), 2 (IIA), and
13 (IIIA) to 18 (VIIIA). All the elements in each main group have the same
number of electrons in their highest (outer) energy level. The electrons
that occupy the outer energy level are called valence electrons. The term
“valence” comes from a Latin word that means “to be strong.” “Valence
electrons” is a suitable name because the outer energy level electrons are
the electrons involved when atoms form compounds. In other words,
valence electrons are responsible for the chemical behaviour of elements.
Chapter 2 Elements and the Periodic Table • MHR 45
You can infer the number of valence electrons in any main-group
element from its group number. For example, Group 1 (IA) elements have
one valence electron. Group 2 (IIA) elements have two valence electrons.
For elements in Groups 13 (IIIA) to 18 (VIIIA), the number of valence
electrons is the same as the second digit in the current numbering system.
It is the same as the only digit in the older numbering system. For exam-
ple, elements in Group 15 (VA) have 5 valence electrons. The elements in
Group 17 (VIIA) have 7 valence electrons.
Using Lewis Structures to Represent Valence Electrons
It is time-consuming to draw electron arrangements using Bohr-Rutherford
diagrams. It is much simpler to use Lewis structures to represent elements
and the valence electrons of their atoms. To draw a Lewis structure, you
replace the nucleus and inner energy levels of an atom with its atomic
symbol. Then you place dots around the atomic symbol to represent the
valence electrons. The order in which you place the first four dots
is up to you. You may find it simplest to start at the top and proceed
clockwise: right, then bottom, then left.
Examine Figure 2.11, and then complete the Practice Problems that
follow. In Chapter 3, you will use Lewis structures to help you visualize
what happens when atoms combine to form compounds.
Li Be B C N O F Ne
Figure 2.11 Examine these Lewis structures for the Period 2 elements. Place a dot on
each side of the element—one dot for each valence electron. Then start pairing dots
when you reach five or more valence electrons.
Practice Problems
3. Draw boxes to represent the first 20 elements in the periodic table.
Using Figure 2.9 as a guide, sketch the electron arrangements for
these elements.
4. Redraw the 20 elements from Practice Problem 2 using Lewis
structures.
5. Identify the number of valence electrons in the outer energy levels of
the following elements:
(a) chlorine (f) lead
(b) helium (g) antimony
(c) indium (h) selenium
(d) strontium (i) arsenic
(e) rubidium (j) xenon
6. Use the periodic table to draw Lewis structures for the following
elements: barium (Ba), gallium (Ga), tin (Sn), bismuth (Bi), iodine (I),
cesium (Cs), krypton (Kr), xenon (Xe).
46 MHR • Unit 1 Matter and Chemical Bonding
The Significance of a Full Outer Energy Level
The noble gases in Group 18 (VIIIA) are the only elements that exist as
individual atoms in nature. They are extremely unreactive. They do not
naturally form compounds with other atoms. (Scientists have manipulated
several of these elements in the laboratory to make them react, however.)
What is it about the noble gases that explains this behaviour?
Recall that chemical reactivity is determined by valence electrons.
Thus, there must be something about the arrangement of the electrons in
the noble gases that explains their unreactivity. All the noble gases have
outer energy levels that are completely filled with the maximum number
of electrons. Helium has a full outer energy level of two valence electrons.
The other noble gases have eight valence electrons in the outer energy
level. Chemists reason that having a full outer energy level must be a very
stable electron arrangement.
What does this stability mean? It means that a full outer energy level
is unlikely to change. Scientists have observed that, in nature, situations
or systems of lower energy are favoured over situations or systems of
higher energy. For example, a book on a high shelf has more potential
energy (is less stable) than a book on a lower shelf. If you move a book
from a high shelf to a lower shelf, it has less potential energy (is more
stable). If you move a book to the floor, it has low potential energy
(is much more stable).
When atoms have eight electrons in the outer energy level (or two
electrons for hydrogen and helium), chemists say that they have a
stable octet. Often this term is shortened to just octet. An octet is a very
stable electron arrangement. As you will see in Chapter 3, an octet is
often the result of changes in which atoms combine to form compounds.
Section Wrap-up
You have seen that the structure of the periodic table is directly related to
energy levels and arrangements of electrons. The patterns that emerge
from this relationship enable you to predict the number of valence elec-
trons for any main group element. They also enable you to predict the
number of energy levels that an element’s electrons occupy. The relation-
ship between electrons and the position of elements in the periodic table
leads to other patterns, as well. You will examine several of these patterns
in the next section.
Section Review
1 K/U State the periodic law, and provide at least two examples to
illustrate its meaning.
2 K/U Identify the group number for each of these sets of elements.
Then choose two of these groups and write the symbols for the ele-
ments within it.
• alkali metals
• noble gases
• halogens
• alkaline earth metals
Chapter 2 Elements and the Periodic Table • MHR 47
3 (a) K/U Identify the element that is described by the following
information. Refer to a periodic table as necessary.
• It is a Group 14 (IVA) metalloid in the third period.
• It is a Group 15 (VA) metalloid in the fifth period.
• It is the other metalloid in Group 15 (VA).
• It is a halogen that exists in the liquid state at room temperature.
(b) C Develop four more element descriptions like those in part (a).
Exchange them with a classmate and identify each other’s elements.
4 K/U What is the relationship between electron arrangement and the
organization of elements in the periodic table?
5 C In writing, sketches, or both, explain to someone who has never
seen the periodic table how it can be used to tell at a glance the num-
ber of valence electrons in the atoms of an element.
6 (a) K/U How many valence electrons are there in an atom of each of
these elements?
neon sodium magnesium
bromine chlorine silicon
sulfur helium
strontium tin
(b) Present your answers from part (a) in the form of Lewis structures.
(c) Without consulting a periodic table, classify each element from part
(a) as a metal, non-metal, or metalloid.
7 K/U How many elements are liquids at room temperature?
Name them.
8 K/U Compare and contrast the noble gases with the other elements.
9 I An early attempt to organize the elements placed them in groups of
three called triads. Examine the three triads shown below.
Triad 1 Triad 2 Triad 3
Mn Li S
Cr Na Se
Fe K Te
(a) Infer the reasoning for grouping the elements in this way.
(b) Which of the elements in these three triads still appear together in
the same group of the modern periodic table?
10 MC Using print or electronic resources, or both, find at least one com-
mon technological application for each of the following elements:
(a) europium (f) mercury
(b) neodymium (g) ytterbium
(c) carbon (h) bromine
(d) nitrogen (i) chromium
(e) silicon (j) krypton
11 (a) C Draw Lewis structures for each of these elements: lithium,
sodium, potassium, magnesium, aluminum, carbon.
(b) Which of these elements have the same number of occupied
energy levels?
(c) Which have the same number of valence electrons?
48 MHR • Unit 1 Matter and Chemical Bonding
Periodic Trends Involving the 2.3
Sizes and Energy Levels of Atoms
In section 2.1, you learned that the size of a typical atom is about 10
−10
m. Section Preview/
You know, however, that the atoms of each element are distinctly differ- Specific Expectations
ent. For example, the atoms of different elements have different numbers In this section, you will
of protons. This means, of course, that they also have different numbers
(cid:2) useyour understanding of
of electrons. You might predict that the size of an atom is related to the electron arrangement and
number of protons and electrons it has. Is there evidence to support this forces in atoms to explain
prediction? If so, is there a pattern that can help you predict the relative the following periodic
size of an atom for any element in the periodic table? trends: atomic radius,
ionization energy, electron
In Investigation 2-A, you will look for a pattern involving the size of
affinity
atoms. Chemists define, and measure, an atom’s size in terms of its radius.
The radius of an atom is the distance from its nucleus to the approximate (cid:2) analyzedata involving
atomic radius, ionization
outer boundary of the cloud-like region of its electrons. This boundary is
energy, and electron affinity
approximate because atoms are not solid spheres. They do not have a
to identify and describe
fixed outer boundary.
general periodic trends
Figure 2.12 represents how the radius of an atom extends from its
(cid:2) communicateyour under-
nucleus to the approximate outer boundary of its electron cloud. Notice
standing of the following
that the radius line in this diagram is just inside the outer boundary of the
terms: ion, anion, cation
electron cloud. An electron may also spend time beyond the end of the ionization energy,
radius line. electron affinity
electron “cloud”
nucleus rraaddiiuuss
Figure 2.12 A representation of the radius of an atom
Chapter 2 Elements and the Periodic Table • MHR 49
S K I L L F O C U S
Predicting
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
Analyzing Atomic Radius Data
Examine the main-group elements in the periodic Materials
table. Imagine how their size might change as
to be decided in class
you move down a group or across a period. What
knowledge and reasoning can you use to infer
Procedure
the sizes of the atoms?
1. The table below lists the atomic radii (plural
of radius) for the main-group elements. Design
Question
different scale models that could help you
How do the sizes of main-group atoms compare
visualize and compare the sizes of the atoms.
within a group and across a period?
Your models can be two-dimensional or
three-dimensional, large or small.
Prediction
2. Discuss your designs as a group. Choose a
Predict a trend (pattern) that describes how the
design that you think will best show the
sizes of main-group atoms change down a group
information you require.
and across a period. Include a brief explanation
to justify your prediction. 3. Build your models. Arrange them according
to their positions in the periodic table.
Safety Precautions
Be careful when handling any sharp instruments
or materials that you choose to use.
Atomic Radii of Main-Group Elements
Atomic radius in Atomic radius in Atomic radius in
Name of element picometres (pm) Name of element picometres (pm) Name of element picometres (pm)
aluminum 143 gallium 141 polonium 167
antimony 159 germanium 137 potassium 235
argon 88 helium 49 radon 134
astatine 145 hydrogen* 79 rubidium 248
barium 222 indium 166 selenium 140
beryllium 112 iodine 132 silicon 132
bismuth 170 krypton 103 sodium 190
boron 98 lead 175 strontium 215
bromine 112 lithium 155 sulfur 127
calcium 197 magnesium 160 tellurium 142
carbon 91 neon 51 thallium 171
cesium 267 nitrogen 92 tin 162
chlorine 97 oxygen 65 xenon 124
fluorine 57 phosphorus 128
*Quantum mechanical value for a free hydrogen atom
50 MHR • Unit 1 Matter and Chemical Bonding
Analysis
1. How do atomic radii change as you look from
top to bottom within a group?
2. How do atomic radii change as you look from
left to right across a period?
3. Compare your observations with your predic-
tion. Explain why your results did, or did not,
agree with your prediction.
Conclusion
4. State whether or not atomic radius is a period-
ic property of atoms. Give evidence to support
your answer.
Application
5. Would you expect atoms of the transition ele-
ments to follow the same trend you observed
for the main-group elements? Locate atomic
radius data for the transition elements (not
including the inner transition elements). Make
additional models, or draw line or bar graphs,
to verify your expectations.
Chapter 2 Elements and the Periodic Table • MHR 51
Trends for Atomic Size (Radius)
There are two general trends for atomic size:
• As you go down each group in the periodic table, the size of an atom
increases. This makes sense if you consider energy levels. As you go
down a group, the valence electrons occupy an energy level that is
farther and farther from the nucleus. Thus, the valence electrons experi-
ence less attraction for the nucleus. In addition, electrons in the inner
energy levels block, or shield, the valence electrons from the attraction
of the nucleus. As a result, the total volume of the atom, and thus the
size, increases with each additional energy level.
• As you go across a period, the size of an atom decreases. This trend
might surprise you at first, since the number of electrons increases as
you go across a period. You might think that more electrons would
occupy more space, making the atom larger. You might also think that
repulsion from their like charges would force the electrons farther apart.
The size of an atom decreases, however, because the positive charge on
the nucleus also increases across a period. As well, without additional
energy the electrons are restricted to their outer energy level. For exam-
ple, the outer energy level for Period 2 elements is the second energy
level. Electrons cannot move beyond this energy level. As a result, the
positive force exerted by the nucleus pulls the outer electrons closer,
reducing the atom’s total size.
Figure 2.13 summarizes the trends for atomic size. The Practice
Problems that follow give you a chance to apply your understanding of
these trends.
direction of increasing size
direction of
increasing
size
Figure 2.13 Atomic size increases down a group and decreases across
a period in the periodic table.
Practice Problems
7. Using only their location in the periodic table, rank the atoms in
each set by decreasing atomic size. Explain your answers.
(a) Mg, Be, Ba (f) Se, Br, Cl
(b) Ca, Se, Ga (g) Mg, Ca, Li
(c) Br, Rb, Kr (h) Sr, Te, Se
(d) Se, Br, Ca (i) In, Br, I
(e) Ba, Sr, Cs (j) S, Se, O
52 MHR • Unit 1 Matter and Chemical Bonding
Trends for Ionization Energy
A neutral atom contains equal numbers of positive charges (protons) and
negative charges (electrons). The particle that results when a neutral atom
gains electrons or gives up electrons is called an ion. Thus, an ion is a
charged particle. An atom that gains electrons becomes a negatively
charged anion. An atom that gives up electrons becomes a positively
charged cation. Figure 2.14 shows the formation of ions for several ele-
ments. As you examine the diagrams, pay special attention to
• the energy level from which electrons are gained or given up
• the charge on the ion that is formed when an atom gains or gives up
electrons
• the arrangement of the electrons that remain after electrons are gained
or given up
Group 1 (IA) Group 2 (IIA) Group 16 (VIA) Group 17 (VIIA)
neutral NNaa MMgg SS CCll
atoms
giving up
or gaining NNaa MMgg SS CCll
electrons
−
+ 2+ 2−
resulting NNaa MMgg SS CCll
ions
Figure 2.14 These diagrams show the ions that are formed from neutral atoms of
sodium, magnesium, sulfur, and chlorine. What other element has the same electron
arrangement that sodium, magnesium, sulfide, and chloride ions have?
Try to visualize the periodic table as a cylinder, rather than a flat
plane. Can you see a relationship between ion formation and the electron
arrangement of noble gases? Examine Figure 2.14 as well as 2.15 on the
next page. The metals that are main-group elements tend to give up elec-
trons and form ions that have the same number of electrons as the nearest
noble gases. Non-metals tend to gain electrons and form ions that have
the same number of electrons as the nearest noble gases. For example,
when a sodium atom gives up its single valence electron, it becomes a
positively charged sodium ion. Its outer electron arrangement is like
neon’s outer electron arrangement. When a fluorine atom gains an
electron, it becomes a negatively charged ion with an outer electron
arrangement like that of neon.
Chapter 2 Elements and the Periodic Table • MHR 53
Figure 2.15 can help you determine the charge on an ion. Count the
number of groups an ion is from the nearest noble gas. That number is
A the charge on the ion. For example, aluminum is three groups away
( 7 1 A 7) ( 8 1 A 8) 1 (1 A ) 2 (2 A ) ( 3 13) from neon. Thus, an aluminum ion has a charge of 3+. Sulfur is two
(
N
5 1 A
3
5
–
) (
O
6 1 A
2
6
–
) H
F −
− H
Ne
e
N
Li
a
+
+ Mg2+
Al3 R
n
gr
e
e o
g
m u
a
p
t
e
i
m s
v e
a b w e
io
r a :
n
y M
s
f
(
r e
a
o t
n
a m
i
l
o
s a
n
f r o
s
g
)
r o
.
m n . p T o h s u it s iv , e a i s o u n lfi s d (c e a i t o io n n h s) a s a n a d c h n a o r n g - e m o e f t a 2 l − s . form
S2– Cl − Ar K + Ca2+ It takes energy to overcome the attractive force of a nucleus and pull
an electron away from a neutral atom. The energy that is required to
Br − Kr Rb + Sr2+ remove an electron from an atom is called ionization energy. The bar
I − Xe Cs + Ba2+ graph in Figure 2.16 shows the ionization energy that is needed to remove
one electron from the outer energy level of the atoms of the main-group
elements. This energy is called the first ionization energy. It is measured
Figure 2.15 Examine the rela- in units of kJ/mol. A kilojoule (kJ) is a unit of energy. A mole (mol) is an
tionship between ion charge and amount of a substance. (You will learn about the mole in Unit 2.)
noble gas electron arrangement. As you can see, atoms that give up electrons easily have low ioniza-
tion energies. You would probably predict that the alkali metals of Group
1 (IA) would have low ionization energies. These elements are, in fact,
extremely reactive because it takes so little energy to remove their single
valence electron.
Io ( e n k n J iz e / a m r t g i o o y l n ) H 2 e 372
2500 Ne
2080
2000 F
1681
Ar
1500
N
1402
O
1314
1520 2
5
0
H Cl 0
A h t T t T r h h e a h h l a a l m v e e t n e e r o e l c e e o v m n a f e m n o e n C o e r e a r r e b g H n e i , s o e y t t e t n s E h h t r c , i h e e z a M e o a a m y n x n t t F o c h i d o i o s v e a A n n e e p v n e l d e e t e C e e . n h c e m l T e y t d e r o d r e c o g r r d t n e o y r . o g t i s o n en, 10 5 0 0 0 0 1 0 P 2 e 13 3 1 L 5 i 2 N 0 4 B a 9 8 e 6 K 9 4 M 9 1 7 R 9 g 3 b C 8 5 a 90 S B 5 8 r 4 0 9 0 A 5 l C 1 7 G 0 7 8 5 S a 6 7 7 i 9 8 In 5 G 6 5 7 e 8 P 1 6 T 0 5 1 S I 1 8 7 A n 2 9 0 9 s S 8 P 4 9 7 9 7 S b 9 1 S 8 b 5 3 9 e 1 4 4 B 2 1 T 7 5 i 0 B 8 e 6 1 3 6 r 1 9 P 43 8 o 1 I 1 K 0 1 3 r 0 3 9 5 A ( X 1 9 t 1 2 e 1 6 7 ) 0 R 1 n 037 5 0 1 0 0 1 0 5 2 0 0 0 0 0 0
c e
n
e e
n
e
l n
a
e
e
e
e
l
c
le r
d
r t
g
g
d
r
e
o
y
y
d
t .
, n
h T
a
t
e
o
i
h
n s
e s
d
r
t
e
e
h
e
s
m
c
e o
n o
o
e
t
n
o h
v
r d
n
e
g
ir .
y
d
i
a
o
W
t
i
n h
t
o h
h
i a
n
z
a
i
a t
r
i z t
d
t i
a
s i
t
o
r t e i
n
o n n d
rio d 4
5
6
40 C 3
3
s
76
B 5 a 03
2 1 ( 3 IIIA) 1 ( 4 IV G A)
1
r
5
o (V u A) p
16
(VIA)
1
(
7 VIIA 8 ) A (VII 0 IA)
would you expect to see in the 1 (IIA)
values of the first, second, and (IA)
third ionization energies for
main-group elements? What is
Figure 2.16 This graph represents the first ionization energy for the main-group
your reasoning?
elements.
54 MHR • Unit 1 Matter and Chemical Bonding
Summarizing Trends for Ionization Energy
Although you can see a few exceptions in Figure 2.16, there are two
general trends for ionization energy:
• Ionization energy tends to decrease down a group. This makes sense in
terms of the energy level that the valence electrons occupy. Electrons in
the outer energy level are farther from the positive force of the nucleus.
Thus, they are easier to remove than electrons in lower energy levels.
• Ionization energy tends to increase across a period. As you go across a
period, the attraction between the nucleus and the electrons in the outer
energy level increases. Thus, more energy is needed to pull an electron
away from its atom. For this trend to be true, you would expect a noble
gas to have the highest ionization energy of all the elements in the same
period. As you can see in Figure 2.16, they do.
Figure 2.17 summarizes these general trends for ionization energy.
The Practice Problems below give you a chance to apply your understand-
ing of thesetrends.
direction of increasing ionization energy
direction of
increasing
ionization
energy
Figure 2.17 Ionization energy tends to decrease down a group and increase across
a period.
Practice Problems
8. Using only a periodic table, rank the elements in each set by
increasing ionization energy. Explain your answers.
(a) Xe, He, Ar (d) Kr, Br, K COURSE
CHALLENGE
(b) Sn, In, Sb (e) K, Ca, Rb
(c) Sr, Ca, Ba (f) Kr, Br, Rb Your understanding of periodic
trends such as atomic radius
9. Using only a periodic table, identify the atom in each of the follow-
and ionization energy will help
ing pairs with the lower first ionization energy.
you identify some unknown
(a) B, O (d) F, N
elements in the Chemistry
(b) B, In (e) Ca, K Course Challenge at the end of
(c) I, F (f) B, Tl this book.
Chapter 2 Elements and the Periodic Table • MHR 55
Chemistry Bulletin
Manitoba Mine Specializes in Rare Metals tungsten and rhenium. Tantalum’s resistance
to corrosion and high melting point make it
suitable for use in surgical equipment and
implants. For example, some of the pins that
are used by surgeons to hold a patient’s broken
bones together are made of tantalum.
Tantalum is resistant to corrosion because a
thin film of tantalum oxide forms when tanta-
lum is exposed to oxygen. The metal oxide acts
as a protective layer. The oxide also has special
refractive properties that make it ideal for use
in camera lenses.
Cesium is quite different from tantalum,
but it, too, has many high-tech applications.
Cesium is a silvery-white metal. It is found in
a mineral called pollucite. Cesium is the softest
At TANCO in Bernic Lake, Manitoba, miners
of all the metals and is a liquid at just above
are busy finding and processing two rare and
room temperature. It is also the most reactive
very different metallic elements: tantalum and
metal on Earth.
cesium. Both of these metals are important
Cesium has a low ionization energy. It
parts of “high-tech” applications around the
readily gives up its single valence electron
world. They are used in nuclear reactors and as
to form crystalline compounds with all the
parts of aircraft, missiles, camera lenses, and
halogen non-metals. Cesium is also very
surgical instruments like the one shown above.
photoelectric. This means that it easily gives
Tantalum is found only in Canada,
up its lone outer electron when it is exposed
Australia, Brazil, Zaire, and China. TANCO
to light. Thus, cesium is used in television
(the Tantalum Mining Corporation of Canada)
cameras and traffic signals. As well, it has the
is the only mine in North America that pro-
potential to be used in ion propulsion engines
duces tantalum. TANCO is also the world’s
for travel into deep space.
main producer of cesium. Other than the fact
that tantalum and cesium are both found at
Making Connections
TANCO and both are used in high-tech
1. Make a table to show the differences and
applications, they share little in common.
similarities between tantalum and cesium.
Tantalum is a heavy, hard, and brittle grey
For each metal, add a column to describe
metal. In its pure form, it is extremely ductile
how its different properties make it useful
and can be made into a fine wire. This has
for specific applications.
proved useful for making surgical sutures.
Another property that makes tantalum useful is 2. Bernic Lake is one of the few locations
its resistance to corrosion by most acids, due to where tantulum can be found. As well,
its very limited reactivity. At normal tempera- it is the most important cesium source in
tures, tantalum is virtually non-reactive. In the world. Research and describe what
fact, tantalum has about the same resistance to geographical conditions led to the presence
corrosion as glass. Tantalum can withstand of two such rare metals in one location.
higher temperatures than glass, however. It has
a melting point of 3290 K—higher than the
melting points of all other elements, except
56 MHR • Unit 1 Matter and Chemical Bonding
Trends for Electron Affinity
In everyday conversation, if you like something, you may say that you
have an affinity for it. For example, what if you enjoy pizza and detest
asparagus? You may say that you have a high affinity for pizza and a
low affinity for asparagus. If you prefer asparagus to pizza, your affinities
are reversed.
Atoms are not living things, so they do not like or dislike anything.
You know, however, that some atoms have a low attraction for electrons.
Other atoms have a greater attraction for electrons. Electron affinity is a
measure of the change in energy that occurs when an electron is added
to the outer energy level of an atom to form a negative ion.
Figure 2.18 identifies the electron affinities of the main-group
elements. If energy is released when an atom of an element gains an
electron, the electron affinity is expressed as a negative integer. When
energy is absorbed when an electron is added, electron affinity is low, and
is expressed as a positive integer. Notice, for example, that fluorine has
the highest electron affinity (indicated by a large, negative integer). This
indicates that fluorine is very likely to be involved in chemical reactions.
In fact, fluorine is the most reactive of all the elements.
Metals have very low electron affinities. This is especially true for the
Group 1 (IA) and 2 (IIA) elements. Atoms of these elements form stable
positive ions. A negative ion that is formed by the elements of these
groups is unstable. It breaks apart into a neutral atom and a free electron.
Examine Figure 2.18. What trends can you observe? How regular are
these trends?
1 18
(IA) (VIIIA)
H He
2 13 14 15 16 17
−72.8 (+21)
(IIA) (IIIA) (IVA) (VA) (VIA) (VIIA)
Li Be B C N O F Ne
−59.6 (+241) −26.7 −122 0 −141 −328 (+29)
Na Mg Al Si P S Cl Ar
−52.9 (+230) −42.5 −134 −72.0 −200 −349 (+34)
K Ca Ga Ge As Se Br Kr
−48.4 (+156) −28.9 −119 −78.2 −195 −325 (+39)
Rb Sr In Sn Sb Te I Xe
−46.9 (+167) −28.9 −107 −103 −190 −295 (+40)
Cs Ba Tl Pb Bi Po At Rn
−45.5 (+52) −19.3 −35.1 −91.3 −183 −270 (+41)
Figure 2.18 The units for electron affinity are the same as
the units for ionization energy: kJ/mol. High negative numbers
mean a high electron affinity. Low negative numbers and any
positive numbers mean a low electron affinity.
Chapter 2 Elements and the Periodic Table • MHR 57
Tools & Techniques
Analyzing the Ice Man’s Axe complication, however. Dating techniques that
were used for the clothing and body suggested
that the “Ice Man” was about 5300 years old.
Bronze implements do not appear in Europe’s fos-
sil record until about 4000 years ago. Either
Europeans were using bronze earlier than origi-
nally thought, or the axe was made of a different
material. Copper was consistent with the Ice
Man’s age, since it has been used for at least the
past 6000 years.
One technique to determine a metal’s identity
is to dissolve it in acid. The resulting solution is
examined for evidence of ions. Scientists did not
want to damage the precious artifact in any way,
though.
The solution was an analytical technique
called X-ray fluorescence. The object is irradiated
with high-energy X-ray radiation. Its atoms
absorb the radiation, causing electrons from a
lower energy level to be ejected from the atom.
In September 1991, hikers in the Alps Mountains This causes electrons from an outer energy level
near the Austrian-Italian border discovered the to “move in,” to occupy the vacated space. As
body of a man who had been trapped in a glacier. the electrons fall to a less energetic state, they
He was almost perfectly preserved. With him was emit X-rays. The electrons of each atom emit
an assortment of tools, including an axe with a X-rays of a particular wavelength. Scientists use
metal blade. this energy “signature” to identify the atom.
Scientists were particularly interested in the Analysis by X-ray fluorescence revealed
axe. At first, they believed that it was bronze, that the metal in the blade of the axe was almost
which is an alloy of copper and tin. There was a pure copper.
direction of increasing electron affinity
direction of
increasing
electron
affinity
Figure 2.19 Electron affinity
tends to decrease down a group
and increase across a period.
The trends for electron affinity, shown in Figure 2.19, are more
irregular than the trends for ionization energy and atomic radius.
Nevertheless, the following general trends can be observed:
• Electron affinity tends to decrease down a group. For example, fluorine
has a higher electron affinity than iodine.
• Electron affinity tends to increase across a period. For example, calcium
has a lower electron affinity than sulfur.
58 MHR • Unit 1 Matter and Chemical Bonding
ThoughtLab Design an Annotated Periodic Table
You have learned a great deal about the proper- If possible, find a photograph of the element
ties of the elements. In the following chapters, in its natural form. If this is not possible, find a
you will learn more. With your classmates, devel- photograph that shows one or more com-
op your own large-scale periodic table to record pounds in which the element is commonly
the properties and common uses of the elements. found.
3. Record your findings on a sheet of notepaper
Procedure or blank paper. Arrange all the sheets of paper,
1. Use print and electronic resources (including for all the elements, in the form of a periodic
this textbook) to find information about one table on a wall in the classroom. Make sure
element. Consult with your classmates to that you leave space to insert additional prop-
make sure that everyone chooses a different erties and uses of your element as you learn
element. about them during this course.
2. Find the following information about your
Analysis
element:
• atomic number 1. What uses of your element did you know
• atomic mass about? Which uses surprised you? Why?
• atomic symbol 2. Examine the dates on which the elements
• melting point were discovered. What pattern do you notice?
• boiling point How can you explain this pattern?
• density 3. Do you think that scientists have discovered
• atomic radius all the naturally occurring elements? Do you
• ionization energy think they have discovered all the synthetically
• electron affinity produced elements? Give reasons to justify
• place and date discovered, and the name your opinions.
of the scientist who discovered it
• uses, both common and unusual
• hazards and methods for safe handling
Section Wrap-up
Despite some irregularities and exceptions, the following periodic trends
summarize the relationships among atomic size, ionization energy, and
electron affinity:
• Trends for atomic size are the reverse of trends for ionization energy
and electron affinity. Larger atoms tend to have lower ionization
energies and lower electron affinities.
• Group 16 (VIA) and 17 (VIIA) elements attract electrons strongly. They
do not give up electrons readily. In other words, they have a strong
tendency to form negative ions. Thus, they have high ionization
energies and high electron affinities.
• Group 1 (IA) and 2 (IIA) elements give up electrons readily. They have
low or no attraction for electrons. In other words, they have a strong
tendency to form positive ions. Thus, they have low ionization energies
and low electron affinities.
• Group 18 (VIIIA) elements do not attract electrons and do not give up
electrons. In other words, they do not naturally form ions. (They are
very stable.) Thus, they have very high ionization energies and very
low electron affinities.
Chapter 2 Elements and the Periodic Table • MHR 59
The trends you have examined in this chapter have an enormous
influence on the ability of atoms to combine and form compounds. In
the next chapter, you will use these trends to help you understand and
predict the kinds of compounds that atoms form. As well, you will learn
about another periodic trend. This trend called electronegativity, is related
to the formation of some of the most common compounds in your life,
such as water, carbon dioxide, and sugar.
Section Review
1 K/U How does your understanding of electron arrangement and forces
in atoms help you explain the following periodic trends?
(a) atomic radius (c) electron affinity
(b) ionization energy
2 K/U Using only their location in a periodic table, rank each of the
following sets of elements in order of increasing atomic size. Explain
your answer in each case.
(a) Mg, S, Cl (d) Rb, Xe, Te
(b) Al, B, In (e) P, Na, F
(c) Ne, Ar, Xe (f) O, S, N
Unit Project Prep 3 K/U Using only their location in a periodic table, rank each of the
Look ahead to the project at following sets of elements in order of decreasing ionization energy.
the end of this unit. Many Explain your answer in each case.
common chemical products (a) Cl, Br, I (d) Na, Li, Cs
contain elements (as compo- (b) Ga, Ge, Se (e) S, Cl, Br
nents of compounds) from
(c) K, Ca, Kr (f) Cl, Ar, K
some groups of the periodic
table more than others. 4 K/U Which element in each of the following pairs will have the lower
Examine ingredient labels from electron affinity? Explain your answer in each case.
different chemical products. (a) K or Ca (c) S or Se
Which element groups are (b) O or Li (d) Cs or F
represented most frequently?
5 C The graph shows a periodic trend, but is only partially complete.
Why might that be?
Copy it into your notebook and fill in all the data and labels that will
make it complete. Title the graph with the trend it shows.
250
200
150
100
50
0
What data does this graph need to be complete?
6 I Use your understanding of periodic trends to sketch the shape of a
graph that shows a trend that is opposite to that shown in question 5.
Label the x- and y-axes, and add any other labels that you think are
necessary to represent the trend you are showing.
60 MHR • Unit 1 Matter and Chemical Bonding
Review
Reflecting on Chapter 2
Symbol Protons Neutrons Electrons Charge
Summarize this chapter in the format of your 14N−3 (a) (b) (c) (d)
7
choice. Here are a few ideas to use as guidelines:
(e) 34 45 36 (f)
• Identify the subatomic particles that make up
52(g)3+ (h) (i) (j) (k)
atoms, as well as the theory that chemists 24
use to explain the composition and behaviour (m (l ) )(F) (n) 10 (o) (p)
of atoms.
• Use the periodic law to examine the 7. A cobalt atom has an atomic mass of 59 and an
atomic number of 27. How many neutrons does
structure and organization of the periodic table
it have? How many electrons does it have?
of the elements.
• Draw Lewis structures to model the arrange- 8.(a) Hydrogen atoms are lying side-by-side along
ments of electrons in the outer energy levels a line that is 1 mm long. How many hydro-
of atoms. gen atoms are there?
• Identify periodic trends involving atomic size, (b) How many potassium atoms would lie side-
ionization energy, and electron affinity. by-side along the same 1 mm line?
9. Use a Venn diagram or a graphic organizer of
Reviewing Key Terms
your choice to compare Dalton’s atomic theory
For each of the following terms, write a sentence with the more modern atomic theory that you
that shows your understanding of its meaning. learned about in this chapter.
element 10. Invent an entirely different name for the
atom atomic mass unit (u) periodic table. Give reasons to support your
atomic number (Z) mass number (A) choice.
isotope radioisotope
11. Consider the following elements: H, Li, N, F,
periodic law energy level
Co, Ag, Kr, I, Hg.
periodic trend valence electrons
(a) Sketch an outline of the periodic table, with
Lewis structure stable octet
these elements properly placed.
octet atomic radius
(b) State the group number and period number
ionization energy electron affinity
each element belongs to.
(c) Identify each element as a metal, metalloid,
Knowledge/Understanding
or non-metal.
1. Explain the difference between an atom and an (d) Identify the state of each element at room
element.
temperature.
2. Compare protons, neutrons, and electrons (e) Draw the Lewis structure for each of these
in terms of their charge, their mass, and elements.
their size.
12.(a) Which of the following trends is best repre-
3. What information does the following notation sented by this diagram: atomic size, ioniza-
express: 16O? tion energy, or electron affinity? Justify your
8
4. Write an equation that shows how to calculate decision.
the number of neutrons in a neutral atom if
you know its mass number and its atomic
number.
5. Use an example and the appropriate terminolo-
gy to explain the difference between an isotope
and a radioisotope.
(b) Sketch outlines of the periodic table to show
6. In your notebook, copy the table below and fill
the trends for the remaining two choices
in the missing information.
from part (a). Explain how these trends are
related to the one in part (a).
Chapter 2 Elements and the Periodic Table • MHR 61
13. Arrange the following elements into groups Communication
that share similar properties: Ca, K, Ga, P, Si,
18. Explain how you would design a data base to
Rb, B, Sr, Sn, Cl, Bi, Br. How much confidence
display information about the atomic numbers,
do you have in your groupings, and why?
atomic masses, the number of subatomic parti-
14. Use a drawing of your choice to show clearly cles, and the number of electrons in the outer
the relationship among the following terms: energy levels of the main-group elements. If
valence, stable octet, electron, energy level. you have access to spreadsheet software, con-
15. In what ways are periodic trends related to the struct this table.
arrangement of electrons in atoms? 19.(a) Decide on a way to compare, in as much
detail as you can, the elements sodium and
Inquiry helium. The following terms should appear
in your answer. Use any other terms that you
16. Imagine hearing on the news that somebody
think are necessary to complete your answer
has discovered a new element. The scientist
fully.
who discovered this element claims that it
atom element
fits between tin and antimony on the periodic
nucleus proton
table.
neutron electron
(a) How likely is it for this claim to be true?
energy level valence
Justify your answer.
periodic table periodic trend
(b) Write at least three questions that you could
group period
ask this scientist. What is your reasoning for
atomic radius electron affinity
asking these questions? (In other words,
ionization energy
what do you expect to hear that could help
convince you that the scientist is right or (b) Modify your answer to part (a) so that a class
that you are?) of grade 4 students can understand it.
17. Technetium, with an atomic number of 43, was 20. Element A, with three electrons in its outer
discovered after Mendeleev’s death. energy level, is in Period 4 of the periodic
Nevertheless, he used the properties of man- table. How does the number of its valence
ganese, rhenium, molybdenum, and ruthenium electrons compare with that of Element B,
to predict technetium’s properties. which is in Group 13 (IIIA) and Period 6? Use
(a) Use a chemical database to find the follow- Lewis structures to help you express your
ing properties for the above-mentioned ele- answer.
mental "neighbours" of technetium:
• atomic mass 21. Which elements would be affected if the ele-
• appearance ments in Periods 1, 2, 3, and 4 were arranged
• melting point based on their atomic mass, rather than their
• density atomic number? Based on what you have
learned in this chapter, how can you be reason-
If you would like to truly follow in
ably sure that arranging elements by their atom-
Mendeleev’s footsteps, you could also look for
ic number is accurate?
the chemical formulas of the compounds that
these elements form with oxygen and chlorine.
Making Connections
(Such compounds are called oxides and chlo-
rides.) 22. “When she blew her nose, her handkerchief
(b) Use this data to predict the properties for glowed in the dark.” The woman who made
technetium. this statement in the early 1900s was one of
(c) Consult a chemical data base to assess your several factory workers who were hired to paint
predictions against the observed properties clock and watch dials with luminous paint.
for technetium. This paint glowed in the dark, because it con-
tained radium (atomic number 88), which is
62 MHR • Unit 1 Matter and Chemical Bonding
highly radioactive and toxic. Marie and Pierre energy level. 4.The pattern of outer energy level elec-
Curie discovered radium in 1898. Chemists trons from Practice Problem 3 is repeated by placing
knew as early as 1906 that the element was dots around the atomic symbol for each element. 5.(a)7
(b)2 (c)3 (d)2 (e)1 (f)4 (g)5 (h)6 (i)5 (j)8 6.Ba has
dangerous. Nevertheless, it was used not only
two dots; Ga has 3 dots; Sn has 4 dots; Bi has 5 dots;
for its “glowing effects,” but also as a medicine.
I has 7 dots; Cs has 1 dot; Kr has 8 dots; Xe has 8 dots.
In fact, several companies produced drinks,
7.(a)Ba, Mg, Be (b)Ca, Ga, Se (c)Rb, Br, Kr
skin applications, and foods containing radium. (d)Ca, Se, Br (e)Cs, Ba, Sr (f)Se, Br, Cl (g)Ca, Mg, Li
Choose either one of the topics below for (h)Sr, Te, Se (i)In, I, Br (j)Se, S, O 8.(a)Xe, Ar, He
(b)In, Sn, Sb (c)Ba, Sr, Ca (d)K, Br, Kr (e)Rb, K, Ca
research.
(f)Rb, Br, Kr 9. (a)B (b)In (c)I (d)N (e)K (f)Tl
• the uses and health-related claims made for
Section Review:2.1: 1.(a)silver (b)47 (c)47 (d)61
radium during the early 1900s (e)arsenic (f)33 (g)75 (h)33 (i)bromine (j)80 (k)35
• the story of the so-called “radium girls”—the (l)35 (m)gold (n)79 (o)79 (p)100 (q)tin (r)50 (s)119
(t)50 3.(a)last pair has same protons and electrons, but
factory workers who painted clock and watch
different neutrons (b)last pair has same value for Z;
faces with radium paint
first pair has same value for A 2.2: 2.1 (1A), 18 (8A), 17
How does the early history of radium and its (7A), 2 (2A) 3.(a)Si; Sb; Te; Br 6.(a)8; 7; 6; 2; 1; 7; 2; 5;
uses illustrate the need for people to under- 2; 4. (c)non-metal; non-metal; non-metal; metal; metal;
stand the connections among science, technolo- non-metal; non-metal; metal, metal; metalloid 7.two:
gy, society, and the environment? mercury and bromine 9.(b)Triads 2 and 3 11. (b)Na,
Mg, and Al have same number of energy levels, as do Li
23. Have you ever heard someone refer to alu-
and C (c)Li, Na, and K have same number of valence
minum foil as “tin foil”? At one time, the foil electrons 2.3: 2. (a)Cl, S, Mg (b)B, Al, In (c)Ne, Ar, Xe
was, in fact, made from elemental tin. Find out (d)Xe, Te, Rb (e)F, P, Na (f)O, N, S 3.(a)Cl, Br, I (b)Se,
why manufacturers phased out tin in favour of Ge, Ga (c)Kr, Ca, K (d)Li, Na, Cs (e)Cl, Br, S (f)Ar, Cl,
aluminum. Compare their chemical and physi- K 4. (a)Ca, (b)Li (c)Se (d)Cs
cal properties. Identify and classify the prod-
ucts made from or with aluminum. What are
the technological costs and benefits of using
aluminum? What health-related and environ-
ment-related issues have surfaced as a result of
its widespread use in society? Write a brief
report to assess the economic, social, and envi-
ronment impact of our use of aluminum.
Answers to Practice Problems and Short Answers to
Section Review Questions:
Practice Problems: 1.(a)boron (b)5 (c)6 (d)lead (e)82
(f)126 (g)184W (h)74 (i)4He (j)2 (k)plutonium
74 2
(l)94 (m)145 (n)Fe (o)iron (p)30 (q)209Bi (r)83
83
(s)154Ag (t)silver (u)Ne (v)neon (w)10 (x)10
47
2.(a)carbon (b)copper (c)radon (d)hydrogen
(e)cadmium (f)calcium (g)iodine (h)aluminum
3.H and He have one occupied energy level; H has 1
electron, He has 2. Li, Be, B, C, N, O, F, and Ne have
two energy levels. First energy level is filled with two
electrons. Second energy of Li has 1 electron, and elec-
trons increase by one, totaling 8 in outer energy level for
Ne. Na, Mg, Al, Si, P, S, Cl, Ar have three occupied
energy levels. First two energy levels are full. Third
energy level of Na has 1 electron, and electrons increase
by one, totaling 8 in outer energy level for Ar. K and Ca
have four occupied energy levels. First three energy
levels are full. K has 1 electron and Ca has two in outer
Chapter 2 Elements and the Periodic Table • MHR 63
64
Chemical Compounds
and Bonding
T
he year was 1896. A chance discovery sent a message echoing from Chapter Preview
Yukon’s Far North to the southern reaches of the United States: “Gold!”
3.1 Classifying Chemical
People migrated in great numbers to the Yukon Territory, hoping to make
Compounds
their fortunes. Within two years, these migrants transformed a small fish-
3.2 Ionic and Covalent
ing village into bustling Dawson City—one of Canada’s largest cities at
Bonding: The Octet Rule
the time. They also launched the country’s first metal-mining industry.
3.3 Polar Covalent Bonds
Gold, like all metals, is shiny, malleable, ductile, and a good conduc-
and Polar Molecules
tor of electricity and heat. Unlike most metals and other elements, howev-
er, gold is found in nature in its pure form, as an element. Most elements 3.4 Writing Chemical
Formulas and Naming
are chemically combined in the form of compounds. Why is this so? Why
Chemical Compounds
do atoms of some elements join together as compounds, while others do
not? In this chapter, you will use the periodic trends you examined in
Chapter 2 to help you answer these questions. You will learn about the
bonds that hold elements together in compounds. At the same time, you
will learn how to write chemical formulas and how to name compounds.
Concepts and Skills
You Will Need
Before you begin this chapter,
review the following concepts
Your teeth are made of a and skills:
material that is naturally
(cid:2) drawing Lewis structures
able to withstand the
to represent valence
abrasion and chemical
electrons in the outer
activity that takes place
energy levels of atoms
in your mouth when you
(Chapter 2, section 2.1)
eat. Although gold does
not react with most sub- (cid:2) identifying and
stances, it is not a suit- explaining periodic trends
able material for tooth (Chapter 2, section 2.2)
replacement. Why? What (cid:2) identifying elements
materials are used today by name and by symbol
for fillings and tooth (Chapter 2, section 2.2)
replacements?
Chapter 3 Chemical Compounds and Bonding • MHR 65
3.1 Classifying Chemical Compounds
Section Preview/ As you learned in the chapter opener, most elements do not exist in
Specific Expectations nature in their pure form, as elements. Gold, silver, and platinum are
three metals that can be found in Earth’s crust as elements. They are
In this section, you will
called “precious metals” because this occurrence is so rare. Most other
(cid:2) describehow electron
metals, and most other elements, are found in nature only as compounds.
arrangement and forces
in atoms can explain the As the prospectors in the Yukon gold rush were searching for the
periodic trend associated element gold, they were surrounded by compounds. The streams they
with electronegativity panned for gold ran with water, H O, a compound that is essential to the
2
(cid:2) performa Thought Lab to survival of nearly every organism on this planet. To sustain their energy,
classify compounds as the prospectors ate food that contained, among other things, starch.
ionic or covalent according Starch is a complex compound that consists of carbon, hydrogen, and
to their properties
oxygen. To flavour their food, they added sodium chloride, NaCl, which
(cid:2) predictthe ionic character is commonly called table salt. Sometimes a compound called pyrite, also
of a given bond using known as “fool’s gold,” tricked a prospector. Pyrite (iron disulfide, FeS )
2
electronegativity values
looks almost exactly like gold, as you can see in Figure 3.1. Pyrite,
(cid:2) communicateyour under- however, will corrode, and it is not composed of rare elements. Thus, it
standing of the following was not valuable to a prospector.
terms: chemical bonds,
ionic bond, covalent bond,
electronegativity
A B
Figure 3.1 Prospectors used the physical properties of gold and pyrite to distinguish
between them. Can you tell which of these photos shows gold and which shows pyrite?
There are only about 90 naturally occurring elements. In comparison,
there are thousands upon thousands of different compounds in nature,
and more are constantly being discovered. Elements combine in many
different ways to form the astonishing variety of natural and synthetic
compounds that you see and use every day.
66 MHR • Unit 1 Matter and Chemical Bonding
Because there are so many compounds, chemists have developed a classi-
fication system to organize them according to their properties, such as
melting point, boiling point, hardness, conductivity, and solubility. In the
following Express Lab, you will use the property of magnetism to show
that an element has formed a compound.
ExpressLab A Metal and a Compound
Humans have invented ways to extract iron 3. Test the iron nail with the magnet. Record
from its compounds in order to take advantage your observations.
of its properties. Does iron remain in its uncom-
4. Gently rub the rusted nail with the other nail
bined elemental form once it has been extracted?
over the cardboard. Some rust powder will
No, it doesn’t. Instead, it forms rust, or iron(III)
collect on the cardboard.
oxide, Fe O . How do we know that rust and iron
2 3 5. Hold up the cardboard horizontally. Move the
are different substances? One way to check is to
magnet back and forth under the cardboard.
test a physical property, such as magnetism. In
Record your observations.
this activity, you will use magnetism to compare
the properties of iron and rust.
Analysis
Safety Precautions 1. How did the magnet affect the new iron nail?
Based on your observations, is iron magnetic?
2. What did you observe when you moved the
Procedure magnet under the rust powder?
1. Obtain a new iron nail and a rusted iron nail 3. What evidence do you have to show that iron
from your teacher. and rust are different substances?
2. Obtain a thin, white piece of cardboard and a 4. Consider what you know about iron and rust
magnet. Wrap your magnet in plastic to keep from your everyday experiences. Is it more
it clean. likely that rust will form from iron, or iron
from rust?
Properties of Ionic and Covalent Compounds
Based on their physical properties, compounds can be classified into
two groups: ionic compounds and covalent compounds. Some of the
properties of ionic and covalent compounds are summarized in Table 3.1.
Table 3.1 Comparing Ionic and Covalent Compounds
Property Ionic compound Covalent compound
state at room crystalline solid liquid, gas, solid
temperature
melting point high low
electrical conductivity yes no
as a liquid
solubility in water most have high solubility most have low solubility
conducts electricity yes not usually
when dissolved in water
In the following Thought Lab, you will use the properties of various
compounds to classify them as covalent or ionic.
Chapter 3 Chemical Compounds and Bonding • MHR 67
ThoughtLab Ionic or Covalent?
Imagine that you are a chemist. A colleague has Analysis
just carried out a series of tests on the following
1. Write down the reasoning you used to identify
compounds:
each compound, based on the properties
ethanol
given.
carbon tetrachloride
2. Write down the reasoning you used to
glucose
decide whether each compound was ionic
table salt (sodium chloride)
or covalent.
water
potassium permanganate 3. Were you unsure how to classify any of the
compounds? Which ones, and why?
You take the results home to organize and ana-
lyze them. Unfortunately your colleague labelled 4. Think about the properties in the table you
the tests by sample number and forgot to write filled in, as well as your answers to questions
down which compound corresponded to each 1 to 3. Which property is most useful for
sample number. You realize, however, that you deciding whether a compound is ionic or
can use the properties of the compounds to covalent?
identify them. Then you can use the compounds’ 5. Suppose that you could further subdivide the
properties to decide whether they are ionic or covalent compounds into two groups, based
covalent. on their properties. Which compounds would
you group together? Explain your answer.
Procedure
1. Copy the following table into your notebook.
Conductivity
as a liquid or
when
Compound Dissolves dissolved in Melting Covalent
Sample name in water? water point Appearance or ionic?
1 yes high 801˚C clear, white crystalline solid
2 yes low 0.0˚C clear, colourless liquid
3 yes high 240˚C purple, crystalline solid
4 yes low 146˚C white powder
5 no low −23˚C clear, colourless liquid
6 yes low −114˚C clear, colourless liquid
2. Based on what you know about the properties Applications
of compounds, decide which compound
6. Use a chemistry reference book or the Internet
corresponds to each set of properties. Write
to find an MSDS for ethanol, carbon tetrachlo-
your decisions in your table. Once you have
ride, and potassium permanganate.
identified the samples, share your results as a
(a) Write down the health hazards associated
class and come to a consensus. Hint:Carbon
with each compound.
tetrachloride is not soluble in water.
(b) What precautions would a chemist who was
3. Examine the properties associated with each
performing tests on ethanol and carbon
compound. Decide whether each compound
tetrachloride need to take?
is ionic or covalent. If you are unsure, leave
the space blank. Discuss your results as a
class, and come to a consensus.
68 MHR • Unit 1 Matter and Chemical Bonding
Table Salt: An Ionic Compound
Sodium chloride, NaCl, is a familiar compound. You know it as table salt.
The sodium in sodium chloride plays a vital role in body functions. We
need to ingest about 500 mg of sodium a day. Too much sodium chloride,
however, may contribute to high blood pressure. In the winter, sodium
chloride is put on roads and sidewalks to melt the ice, as shown in
Figure 3.2. Although this use of sodium chloride increases the safety of
pedestrians and drivers, there are several drawbacks. For example, the
saltwater discolours and damages footwear, and it corrodes the metal
bodies of cars and trucks. Also, as shown in Figure 3.3, deer and moose
that are attracted to the salt on the roads can be struck by vehicles.
Figure 3.2 Sodium chloride is
used to melt ice because salt
water has a lower melting point
than pure water.
Figure 3.3 This moose was attracted to the sodium chloride that was put on the road
to melt snow and ice. Humans, like most organisms, need sodium to maintain normal
body functions.
Sodium chloride is a typical ionic compound. Like most ionic com-
pounds, it is a crystalline solid at room temperature. It melts at a very
high temperature, at 801˚C. As well, it dissolves easily in water. A solu-
tion of sodium chloride in water is a good conductor of electricity. Liquid
sodium chloride is also a good electrical conductor.
Carbon Dioxide: A Covalent Compound
The cells of most organisms produce carbon dioxide, CO ,
2
during cellular respiration: the process that releases energy
from food. Plants, like the ones shown in Figure 3.4, synthe-
size their own food from carbon dioxide and water using
the Sun’s energy.
Carbon dioxide has most of the properties of a typical
covalent compound. It has a low melting point (–79˚C). At
certain pressures and temperatures, carbon dioxide is a liq-
uid. Liquid carbon dioxide is a weak conductor of electricity.
Figure 3.4 Plants use carbon dioxide and water to produce their own
food, using the Sun’s energy.
Chapter 3 Chemical Compounds and Bonding • MHR 69
Carbon dioxide is somewhat soluble in water, especially at high pressures.
This is why soft drinks are bottled under pressure. When you open a
bottle of pop, some of the carbon dioxide comes out of solution. Often,
this happens too quickly, as you can see in Figure 3.5. A solution of
carbon dioxide in water is a weak conductor of electricity.
What Is Bonding?
Why are carbon dioxide and sodium chloride so different? Why can we
divide compounds into two categories that display distinct physical
properties? The answers come from an understanding of chemical bonds:
the forces that attract atoms to each other in compounds. Bonding
involves the interaction between the valence electrons of atoms. Usually
the formation of a bond between two atoms creates a compound that is
more stable than either of the two atoms on their own.
The different properties of ionic and covalent compounds result from
the manner in which chemical bonds form between atoms in these com-
pounds. Atoms can either exchange or share electrons.
Figure 3.5 The bubbles fizzing When two atoms exchange electrons, one atom loses its valence
out of the soft drink contain car- electron(s) and the other atom gains the electron(s). This kind of bonding
bon dioxide.
usually occurs between a metal and a non-metal. Recall, from Chapter 2,
that metals have low ionization energies and non-metals have high elec-
tron affinities. That is, metals tend to lose electrons and non-metals tend
to gain them. When atoms exchange electrons, they form an ionic bond.
Atoms can also share electrons. This kind of bond forms between two
non-metals. It can also form between a metal and a non-metal when the
metal has a fairly high ionization energy. When atoms share electrons,
they form a covalent bond.
Do you think that water is a How can you determine whether the bonds that hold a compound
covalent compound or an together are ionic or covalent? Examining the physical properties of
ionic compound? List water’s the compound is one method. This method is not always satisfactory,
physical properties. Can however. Often a compound has some ionic characteristics and some
you tell whether water is a
covalent characteristics. You saw this in the previous Thought Lab.
covalent compound or an
For example, hydrogen chloride, also known as hydrochloric acid, has
ionic compound based only
a low melting point and a low boiling point. (It is a gas at room tempera-
on its physical properties?
ture.) These properties might lead you to believe that hydrogen chloride is
Why or why not?
a covalent compound. Hydrogen chloride, however, is extremely soluble
in water, and the water solution conducts electricity. These properties are
characteristic of an ionic compound. Is there a clear, theoretical way to
decide whether the bond between hydrogen and chlorine is ionic or
covalent? The answer lies in a periodic trend.
Electronegativity: Attracting Electrons
When two atoms form a bond, each atom attracts the other atom’s
electrons in addition to its own. The electronegativity of an atom is a
measure of an atom’s ability to attract electrons in a chemical bond. EN
is used to symbolize electronegativity. There is a specific electronegativity
associated with each element.
As you can see in Figure 3.6, electronegativity is a periodic property,
just as atomic size, ionization energy, and electron affinity are. Atomic
size, ionization energy, and electron affinity, however, are properties of
single atoms. In contrast, electronegativity is a property of atoms that are
involved in chemical bonding.
70 MHR • Unit 1 Matter and Chemical Bonding
1 Electronegativities 2
H He
2.20 -
3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Li Be B C N O F Ne
0.98 1.57 2.04 2.55 3.04 3.44 3.98 -
11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18
Na Mg Al Si P S Cl Ar
0.93 1.31 1.61 1.90 2.19 2.58 3.16 -
19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36
K Ca Sc Ti V Cr Mn Fe Co Ni Cu Zn Ga Ge As Se Br Kr
0.82 1.00 1.36 1.54 1.63 1.66 1.55 1.83 1.88 1.91 1.90 1.65 1.81 2.01 2.18 2.55 2.96 -
37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 52 53 54
Rb Sr Y Zr Nb Mo Tc Ru Rh Pd Ag Cd In Sn Sb Te I Xe
0.82 0.95 1.22 1.33 1.6 2.16 2.10 2.2 2.28 2.20 1.93 1.69 1.78 1.96 2.05 2.1 2.66 -
55 56 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85 86
Cs Ba Hf Ta W Re Os Ir Pt Au Hg TI Pb Bi Po At Rn
0.79 0.89 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.2 2.2 2.2 2.4 1.9 1.8 1.8 1.9 2.0 2.2 -
87 88 104 105 106 107 108 109 110 111 112 113 114 115 116 117 118
Fr Ra Rf Db Sg Bh Hs Mt Uun Uuu Uub Uuq Uuh Uuo
0.7 0.9 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71
La Ce Pr Nd Pm Sm Eu Gd Tb Dy Ho Er Tm Yb Lu
1.10 1.12 1.13 1.14 - 1.17 - 1.20 - 1.22 1.23 1.24 1.25 - 1.0
89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 100 101 102 103
Ac Th Pa U Np Pu Am Cm BK Cf Es Fm Md No Lr
1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.3 1.3 - - - - - - - - -
The trend for electronegativity is the reverse of the trend for atomic size. Figure 3.6 Electronegativity is
Examine Figure 3.7, on the next page, to see what this means. In general, a periodic trend. It increases up
as atomic size decreases from left to right across a period, electronegativi- a group and across a period.
ty increases. Why? The number of protons (which attract electrons) in the
nucleus increases. At the same time, the number of filled, inner electron
energy levels (which shield the protons from valence electrons) remains
the same. Thus the electrons are pulled more tightly to the nucleus,
resulting in a smaller atomic size. The atom attracts a bonding pair of
electrons more strongly, because the bonding pair can move closer to
the nucleus.
In the second period, for example, lithium has the largest atomic
Which element is the most
size and the lowest electronegativity. As atomic size decreases across the
electronegative? Not including
second period, the electronegativity increases. Fluorine has the smallest
the noble gases, which
atomic size in the third period (except for neon) and the highest elec- element is the least
tronegativity. Because noble gases do not usually participate in bonding, electronegative?
their electronegativities are not given.
Similarly, as atomic size increases down a group, electronegativity
decreases. As you move down a group, valence electrons are less strongly
attracted to the nucleus because the number of filled electron energy
levels between the nucleus and the valence electrons increases. In a
compound, increasing energy levels between valence electrons and the
nucleus mean that the nucleus attracts bonding pairs less strongly.
For example, in Group 2 (IIA), beryllium has the smallest atomic
radius and the largest electronegativity. As atomic size increases down
the group, electronegativity decreases.
Figure 3.7 shows the relationship between atomic size and electro-
negativity for the main-group elements in periods 2 to 6.
Chapter 3 Chemical Compounds and Bonding • MHR 71
4.0
F
3.5
O
3.0
N
2.5
C
2.0
Electro- B
negativity Cl
1.5
Be
S
1.0
Li P
0.5 Si
Al Br
0
2 Mg Se
Na
As
Ge
Ga
3
Ca I
K Te
Period In Sn Sb
4 4.0
Sr
Rb At 3.5
Tl Pb Bi Po
3.0
5
2.5
Ba
Cs 2.0
1.5
Figure 3.7 Periodic trends for 6 1.0
electronegativity (bars) and 0.5
0
atomic size (spheres) are 1A 2A 3A 4A 5A 6A 7A
inversely related. (1) (2) (13) (14) (15) (16) (17)
Group
Predicting Bond Type Using Electronegativity
You can use the differences between electronegativities to decide whether
the bond between two atoms is ionic or covalent. The symbol ∆EN stands
for the difference between two electronegativity values. When calculating
the electronegativity difference, the smaller electronegativity is always
subtracted from the larger electronegativity, so that the electronegativity
difference is always positive.
How can the electronegativity difference help you predict the type of
bond? By the end of this section, you will understand the aswer to this
question. Consider three different substances: potassium fluoride, KF,
oxygen, O , and hydrochloric acid, HCl. Potassium fluoride is an ionic
2
compound made up of a metal and a non-metal that have very different
electronegativities. Potassium’s electronegativity is 0.82. Fluorine’s
electronegativity is 3.98. Therefore, ∆EN for the bond between potassium
and fluorine is 3.16.
Now consider oxygen. This element exists as units of two atoms held
together by covalent bonds. Each oxygen atom has an electronegativity of
3.44. The bond that holds the oxygen atoms together has an electronega-
tivity difference of 0.00 because each atom in an oxygen molecule has an
equal attraction for the bonding pair of electrons.
Finally, consider hydrogen chloride, or hydrochloric acid. Hydrogen
has an electronegativity of 2.20, and chlorine has an electronegativity of
3.16. Therefore, the electronegativity difference for the chemical bond in
hydrochloric acid, HCl, is 0.96. Hydrogen chloride is a gas at room tem-
perature, but its water solution conducts electricity. Is hydrogen chloride
a covalent compound or an ionic compound? Its ∆EN can help you
decide, as you will see below.
72 MHR • Unit 1 Matter and Chemical Bonding
The Range of Electronegativity Differences
When two atoms have electronegativities that are identical, as in oxygen,
they share their bonding pair of electrons equally between them in a
covalent bond. When two atoms have electronegativities that are very dif-
ferent, as in potassium fluoride, the atom with the lower electronegativity
loses an electron to the atom with the higher electronegativity. In
potassium fluoride, potassium gives up its valence electron to fluorine.
Therefore, the bond is ionic.
It is not always clear whether atoms share electrons or transfer them.
Atoms with different electronegativities can share electrons unequally
without exchanging them. How unequal does the sharing have to be
before the bond is considered ionic?
Figure 3.8 shows the range of electronegativity differences. These
values go from mostly covalent at 0.0 to mostly ionic at 3.3. Chemists
consider bonds with an electronegativity difference that is greater than
1.7 to be ionic, and bonds with an electronegativity difference that is less
than 1.7 to be covalent.
(cid:2)EN
3.3 1.7 0.5 0
Mostly Ionic Polar covalent Mostly
covalent
Figure 3.8 Chemical bonds range in character from mostly ionic to mostly covalent.
Table 3.2 shows how you can think of bonds as having a percent ionic
character or percent covalent character, based on their electronegativity
differences. When bonds have nearly 50% ionic or covalent character,
they have characteristics of both types of bonding.
Table 3.2 Character of Bonds
Electronegativity
0.00 0.65 0.94 1.19 1.43 1.67 1.91 2.19 2.54 3.03
difference
Percent ionic
0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90%
character
Percent covalent
100% 90% 80% 70% 60% 50% 40% 30% 20% 10%
character
Based on Table 3.2, what kind of bond forms between hydrogen and
chlorine? ∆EN for the bond in hydrogen chloride, HCl, is 0.96. This is
lower than 1.7. Therefore, the bond in hydrogen chloride is a covalent
bond.
Calculate ∆EN and predict bond character in the following Practice
Problem.
Chapter 3 Chemical Compounds and Bonding • MHR 73
Practice Problems
1. Determine ∆EN for each bond shown. Indicate whether each bond is
ionic or covalent.
(a) O—H (e) Cr—O
(b) C—H (f) C—N
(c) Mg—Cl (g) Na—I
(d) B—F (h) Na—Br
Section Wrap-up
In this section, you learned that most elements do not exist in their pure
form in nature. Rather, they exist as different compounds. You reviewed
the characteristic properties of ionic and covalent compounds. You
considered the periodic nature of electronegativity, and you learned how
to use the electronegativity difference to predict the type of bond. You
learned, for example, that ionic bonds form between two atoms with very
different electronegativities.
In section 3.2, you will explore ionic and covalent bonding in terms
of electron transfer and sharing. You will use your understanding of
the nature of bonding to explain some properties of ionic and covalent
compounds.
Section Review
1 K/U Name the typical properties of an ionic compound. Give two
examples of ionic compounds.
2 K/U Name the typical properties of covalent compounds. Give two
examples of covalent compounds.
3 C In your own words, describe and explain the periodic trend for
electronegativity.
4 K/U Based only on their position in the periodic table, arrange the
elements in each set in order of increasing attraction for electrons in
a bond.
(a) Li, Br, Zn, La, Si (b) P, Ga, Cl, Y, Cs
5 K/U Determine ∆EN for each bond. Indicate whether the bond is ionic
or covalent.
(a) N—O (c) H—Cl
(b) Mn—O (d) Ca—Cl
6 I A chemist analyzes a white, solid compound and finds that it
does not dissolve in water. When the compound is melted, it does not
conduct electricity.
(a) What would you expect to be true about this compound’s melting
point?
(b) Are the atoms that make up this compound joined with covalent or
ionic bonds? Explain.
74 MHR • Unit 1 Matter and Chemical Bonding
Ionic and Covalent 3.2
Bonding: The Octet Rule
In section 3.1, you reviewed your understanding of the physical proper- Section Preview/
ties of covalent and ionic compounds. You learned how to distinguish Specific Expectations
between an ionic bond and a covalent bond based on the difference
In this section, you will
between the electronegativities of the atoms. By considering what
(cid:2) demonstratean understand-
happens to electrons when atoms form bonds, you will be able to explain
ing of the formation of ionic
some of the characteristic properties of ionic and covalent compounds. and covalent bonds, and
explainthe properties of
The Octet Rule the products
(cid:2) explainhow different
Why do atoms form bonds? When atoms are bonded together, they are
elements combine to form
often more stable. We know that noble gases are the most stable elements
covalent and ionic bonds,
in the periodic table. What evidence do we have? The noble gases are
using the octet rule
extremely unreactive. They do not tend to form compounds. What do the
(cid:2) representthe formation of
noble gases have in common? They have a filled outer electron energy
ionic and covalent bonds
level. When an atom loses, gains, or shares electrons through bonding
using diagrams
to achieve a filled outer electron energy level, the resulting compound
(cid:2) communicateyour under-
is often very stable.
standing of the following
According to the octet rule, atoms bond in order to achieve an terms: octet rule, isoelec-
electron configuration that is the same as the electron configuration of a tronic, pure covalent bond,
noble gas. When two atoms or ions have the same electron configuration, diatomic elements, double
they are said to be isoelectronic with one another. For example, Cl − is bond, triple bond, molecular
compounds, intramolecular
isoelectronic with Ar because both have 18 electrons and a filled outer
forces, intermolecular
energy level. This rule is called the octet rule because all the noble gases
forces, metallic bond, alloy
(except helium) have eight electrons in their filled outer energy level.
(Recall that helium’s outer electron energy level contains only two
electrons.)
Ionic Bonding
electron transfer
In Section 3.1 you learned that the electronegativity
according to
difference for the bond between sodium and chlorine octet rule
is 2.1. Thus, the bond is an ionic bond. Sodium has a
11p 17p
very low electronegativity, and chlorine has a very 12n 18n
high electronegativity. Therefore, when sodium and
chlorine interact, sodium transfers its valence electron
to chlorine. As shown in Figure 3.9, sodium becomes
1−
Na + and chlorine becomes Cl − . 1+
How does the formation of an ionic bond between
opposite
sodium and chlorine reflect the octet rule? Neutral 11p 17p
sodium has one valence electron. When it loses this 12n charges 18n
attract
+
electron to chlorine, the resulting Na cation has an
electron energy level that contains eight electrons. It
is isoelectronic with the noble gas neon. On the other
1+ 1−
hand, chlorine has an outer electron energy level that
contains seven electrons. When chlorine gains sodium’s
ions
form 11p 17p
Figure 3.9 Sodium’s electron is transferred to chlorine. The atoms ionic 12n 18n
become oppositely charged ions with stable octets. Because they bond
are oppositely charged, they are strongly attracted to one another.
Chapter 3 Chemical Compounds and Bonding • MHR 75
electron, it becomes an anion that is isoelectronic with the noble gas
argon. As you can see in Figure 3.10, you can represent the formation of
an ionic bond using Lewis structures.
Thus, in an ionic bond, electrons are transferred from one atom to
another so that they form oppositely charged ions. The strong force of
attraction between the oppositely charged ions is what holds them
together.
+ −
Na Cl [Na] [ Cl ]
Figure 3.10 These Lewis structures show the formation of a bond between a sodium
atom and a chlorine atom.
Transferring Multiple Electrons
In sodium chloride, NaCl, one electron is transferred from sodium to
PROBLEM TIP
chlorine. In order to satisfy the octet rule, two or three
When you draw Lewis struc-
electrons may be transferred from one atom to another. For example,
tures to show the formation
consider what happens when magnesium and oxygen combine.
of a bond, you can use differ-
The electronegativity difference for magnesium oxide is
ent colours or symbols to
3.4−1.3 = 2.1. Therefore, magnesium oxide is an ionic compound.
represent the electrons from
different atoms. For example, Magnesium contains two electrons in its outer shell. Oxygen contains
use an “x” for an electron from six electrons in its outer shell. In order to become isoelectronic with a
sodium, and an “o” for an noble gas, magnesium needs to lose two electrons and oxygen needs to
electron from chlorine. Or, use gain two electrons. Hence, magnesium transfers its two valence electrons
open and closed cirlces as is
to oxygen, as shown in Figure 3.11. Magnesium becomes
Mg2+
, and
shown here. This will make it
oxygen becomes
O2−
.
easier to see how the elec-
trons have been transferred.
Mg O [Mg]2 + [ O ]2 −
Figure 3.11 These Lewis structures show the formation of a bond between a magne-
sium atom and an oxygen atom.
Try the following problems to practise representing the formation of
ionic bonds between two atoms.
Practice Problems
2. For each bond below, determine ∆EN. Is the bond ionic or covalent?
(a) Ca—O (d) Li—F
(b) K—Cl (e) Li—Br
(c) K—F (f) Ba—O
3. Draw Lewis structures to represent the formation of each bond
in question 2.
76 MHR • Unit 1 Matter and Chemical Bonding
Careers in Chemistry
Metallurgist that was “hands-on.” After completing her sec-
ondary education in Malaysia, where she
grew up, Dickson moved to Canada. She studied
mining and mineral process engineering at the
University of British Columbia.
Dickson says that she also wanted to do
something adventurous. She wanted to travel and
live in different cultures. As a summer student,
Dickson worked at a Chilean copper mine. Her
current job with Cominco involves frequent travel
to various mines. “Every day provides a new
challenge,” Dickson says. When she is at Polaris,
Dickson enjoys polar bear sightings on the tundra.
Alison Dickson
Alison Dickson is a metallurgist at Polaris, the
Making Career Connections
world’s northernmost mine. Polaris is located on
Little Cornwallis Island in Nunavut. It is a lead Are you interested in a career in mining and
and zinc mine, operated by Cominco Ltd., the metallurgy? Here are two ways that you can get
world’s largest producer of zinc concentrate. information:
After ore is mined at Polaris, metallurgists
1. Explore the web site of The Canadian Institute
must separate the valuable lead- and zinc-bearing
of Mining, Metallurgy and Petroleum. Go to
compounds from the waste or “slag.” First the
www.school.mcgrawhill.ca/resources/, to
ore is crushed and ground with water to produce
Science Resources, then to Chemistry 11 to
flour-like particles. Next a process called flotation
know where to go next. It has a special section
is used to separate the minerals from the slag.
for students who are interested in mining and
In flotation, chemicals are added to the metal-
metallurgy careers. This section lists education
containing compounds. The chemicals react with
in the field, scholarships and bursaries, and
the lead and zinc to make them very insoluble in
student societies for mining and metallurgy.
water, or hydrophobic. Air is then bubbled
2. To discover the variety of jobs that are
through the mineral and water mixture. The
available for metallurgists, search for
hydrophobic particles attach to the bubbles and
careers at Infomine. Go to
float to the surface. They form a stable froth, or
www.school.mcgrawhill.ca/resources/,
concentrate, which is collected. The concentrate
to Science Resources, then to Chemistry 11
is filtered and dried, and then stored for
to know where to go next. Many of the
shipment.
postings are for jobs overseas.
Dickson says that she decided on metallurgy
as a career because she wanted to do something
Ionic Bonding That Involves More Than Two Ions
Sometimes ionic compounds contain more than one atom of each ele-
ment. For example, consider the compound that is formed from calcium
and fluorine. Because the electronegativity difference between calcium
and fluorine is 3.0, you know that a bond between calcium and fluorine
is ionic. Calcium has two electrons in its outer energy level, so it needs
to lose two electrons according to the octet rule. Fluorine has seven elec-
trons in its outer energy level, so it needs to gain one electron, again
according to the octet rule. How do the electrons of these elements
interact so that each element achieves a filled outer energy level?
Chapter 3 Chemical Compounds and Bonding • MHR 77
F
+ −
[Ca]2 [ F ]
Ca
−
[ F ]
F
Figure 3.12 These Lewis structures show the formation of bonds between one atom of
calcium and two atoms of fluorine.
Examine Figure 3.11. In an ionic bond, calcium tends to lose two
electrons and fluorine tends to gain one electron. Therefore, one calcium
atom bonds with two fluorine atoms. Calcium loses one of each of its
valence electrons to each fluorine atom. Calcium becomes
Ca2+
, and
−
fluorine becomes F . They form the compound calcium fluoride, CaF .
2
In the following Practice Problems, you will predict the kind of ionic
compound that will form from two elements.
Electronic Learning Partner Practice Problems
Your Chemistry 11 Electronic
4. For each pair of elements, determine ∆EN.
Learning Partner has an
interactive simulation on (a) magnesium and chlorine (d) sodium and oxygen
forming ionic compounds.
(b) calcium and chlorine (e) potassium and sulfur
(c) lithium and oxygen (f) calcium and bromine
5. Draw Lewis structures to show how each pair of elements in
question 4 forms bonds to achieve a stable octet.
Explaining the Conductivity of Ionic Compounds
Now that you understand the nature of the bonds in ionic compounds,
can you explain some of their properties? Consider electrical conductivity.
Ionic compounds do not conduct electricity in their solid state. They are
very good conductors in their liquid state, however, or when they are dis-
solved in water. To explain these properties, ask yourself two questions:
1. What is required for electrical conductivity?
2. What is the structure of ionic compounds in the liquid, solid, and
dissolved states?
An electrical current can flow only if charged particles are available to
move and carry the current. Consider sodium chloride as an example. Is
there a mobile charge in solid sodium chloride? No, there is not. In the
solid state, sodium and chlorine ions are bonded to each other by strong
ionic bonds. Like all solid-state ionic compounds, the ions are arranged
in a rigid lattice formation, as shown in Figure 3.13.
78 MHR • Unit 1 Matter and Chemical Bonding
In the solid state, the ions cannot move very much. Thus, there is no
mobile charge. Solid sodium chloride does not conduct electricity.
Figure 3.13 In solid sodium
chloride, NaCl, sodium and
chlorine are arranged in a rigid
lattice pattern.
− +
Cl Na
In molten sodium chloride, the rigid lattice structure is broken. The ions
that make up the compound are free to move, and they easily conduct
electricity. Similarly, when sodium chloride is dissolved, the sodium Go back to Table 3.1. What
and chlorine ions are free to move. The solution is a good conductor other properties of ionic com-
of electricity, as shown in Figure 3.14. You will learn more about ionic pounds can you now explain
compounds in solution in Chapter 9. with your new understanding
of ionic bonding?
e-
DC
e-
source
sodium
chloride
solution + -
+ -
Cl0 Cl- Na0
chloride ions + -
sodium ions
donate
+
Na+
Na+ - accept electrons
electrons
at the negative
at the positive + Cl0 -
electrode
electrode Cl-
+ Na0 -
Figure 3.14 Aqueous sodium
chloride is a good conductor
positive electrode negative electrode of electricity.
You are probably familiar with the ionic crystals in caves. Stalagmites and
stalactites are crystal columns that form when water, containing dissolved
lime, drips very slowly from the ceiling of a cave onto the floor below.
How do these ionic crystals grow?
When a clear solution of an ionic compound is poured over a seed
crystal of the same compound, the ions align themselves according to
the geometric arrangement in the seed crystal. You will observe this for
yourself in Investigation 3-A.
Chapter 3 Chemical Compounds and Bonding • MHR 79
S K I L L F O C U S
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
Crystalline Columns
In this investigation, you will prepare a super- 5. Raise the burette as high as it will go. Place it
saturated solution of sodium acetate. (A super- on the lab bench where you intend to grow
saturated solution contains more dissolved solute your crystal column.
at a specific temperature than is normally possi-
6. Pour some sodium acetate trihydrate crystals
ble.) Then you will use the solution to prepare
onto the lab bench. Using clean and dry
your own ionic crystal.
forceps, choose a relatively large crystal
(the seed crystal). Place it directly underneath
Question
the burette spout.
How can you build a crystal column on your
7. Turn the buret stopcock slightly so that the
laboratory bench?
solution drips out slowly. Adjust the position
of the seed crystal so that the drops fall on it.
Prediction
(You can drip the solution right onto the
If the solution drips slowly enough, a tall bench, or onto a glass plate if you prefer.)
crystal column will form.
8. Observe the crystal for 10 min. Record your
observations about the crystal column or your
Safety Precautions
apparatus. Continue to make observations
every 10 min.
Materials Analysis
water 1. Describe your observations.
sodium acetate trihydrate crystals
2. Why does the column form upward?
balance
10 mL graduated cylinder 3. What was the purpose of the seed crystal?
100 mL Erlenmeyer flask
4. What improvements would you suggest for
hot plate
better results in the future?
squirt bottle
burette
Conclusions
burette stand
forceps 5. What kind of change is taking place when
a crystal forms? Is the change chemical or
physical? Explain.
Procedure
1. Place 50 g of sodium acetate trihydrate
Application
in a clean 100 mL Erlenmeyer flask.
6. Repeat steps 1 to 3 in the Procedure. Once
2. Add 5 mL of water. Heat the solution slowly.
you remove the solution from the heat, seal
3. Swirl the flask until the solid completely the flask with a clean, dry rubber stopper.
dissolves. If any crystals remain inside the Allow the flask to cool to room temperature.
flask or on the neck, wash them down with Next, remove the stopper and carefully add
a small amount of water. only one crystal of sodium acetate trihydrate
to the flask. Record your observations, and
4. Remove the flask from the heat. Pour the
explain what is happening.
solution into a clean, dry burette.
80 MHR • Unit 1 Matter and Chemical Bonding
Covalent Bonding
You have learned what happens when the electronegativity difference
Cl Cl
between two atoms is greater than 1.7. The atom with the lower elec-
tronegativity transfers its valence electron(s) to the atom with the higher
electronegativity. The resulting ions have opposite charges. They are held
together by a strong ionic bond. Cl Cl
What happens when the electronegativity difference is very small?
What happens when the electronegativity difference is zero? As an exam-
ple, consider chlorine. Chlorine is a yellowish, noxious gas. What is it like Figure 3.15 These Lewis
at the atomic level? Each chlorine atom has seven electrons in its outer structures show the formation
energy level. In order for chlorine to achieve the electron configuration of of a bond between two atoms of
chlorine.
a noble gas according to the octet rule, it needs to gain one electron. When
two chlorine atoms bond together, their electronegativity difference is
zero. The electrons are equally attracted to each atom.
Therefore, instead of transferring electrons, the two atoms each share
CHEM
one electron with each other. In other words, each atom contributes one FACT
electron to a covalent bond. A covalent bond consists of a pair of shared
Some examples of diatomic
electrons. Thus, each chlorine atom achieves a filled outer electron energy
elements are chlorine, Cl ,
level, satisfying the octet rule. Examine Figure 3.15 to see how to repre- 2
bromine, Br , iodine, I ,
2 2
sent a covalent bond with a Lewis structure.
nitrogen, N , and hydrogen, H .
2 2
When two atoms of the same element form a bond, they share their
electrons equally in a pure covalent bond. Elements with atoms that bond
to each other in this way are known as diatomic elements.
When atoms such as carbon and hydrogen bond to each other, their
electronegativities are so close that they share their electrons almost
equally. Carbon and hydrogen have an electronegativity difference of only
2.6−2.2 = 0.4. In Figure 3.16, you can see how one atom of carbon forms
a covalent bond with four atoms of hydrogen. The compound methane,
CH 4 , is formed. H
Each hydrogen atom shares one of its electrons with the carbon. The
carbon shares one of its four valence electrons with each hydrogen. Thus, H C H
each hydrogen atom achieves a filled outer energy level, and so does
H
carbon. (Recall that elements in the first period need only two electrons
to fill their outer energy level.) When analyzing Lewis structures that show
covalent bonds, count the shared electrons as if they belong to each of the Figure 3.16 This Lewis
bonding atoms. In the following Practice Problems, you will represent structure shows a molecule of
covalent bonding using Lewis structures. methane, CH 4 .
Practice Problems
6. Show the formation of a covalent bond between two atoms of each
diatomic element.
(a) iodine (c) hydrogen
(b) bromine (d) fluorine
7. Use Lewis structures to show the simplest way in which each pair of Electronic Learning Partner
elements forms a covalent compound, according to the octet rule.
(a) hydrogen and oxygen (d) iodine and hydrogen Your Chemistry 11 Electronic
Learning Partner has several
(b) chlorine and oxygen (e) nitrogen and hydrogen
animations that show ionic and
(c) carbon and hydrogen (f) hydrogen and rubidium covalent bonding.
Chapter 3 Chemical Compounds and Bonding • MHR 81
Multiple Covalent Bonds
O O
Atoms sometimes transfer more than one electron in ionic bonding.
Similarly, in covalent bonding, atoms sometimes need to share two or
O O three pairs of electrons, according to the octet rule. For example, consider
the familiar diatomic element oxygen. Each oxygen atom has six electrons
in its outer energy level. Therefore, each atom requires two additional
Figure 3.17 These Lewis electrons to achieve a stable octet. When two oxygen atoms form a bond,
structures show the formation
they share two pairs of electrons, as shown in Figure 3.17. This kind of
of a double bond between two
covalent bond is called a double bond.
atoms of oxygen.
Double bonds can form between different elements, as well. For
example, consider what happens when carbon bonds to oxygen in carbon
dioxide. To achieve a stable octet, carbon requires four electrons, and
oxygen requires two electrons. Hence, two atoms of oxygen bond to one
atom of carbon. Each oxygen forms a double bond with the carbon, as
shown in Figure 3.18.
When atoms share three pairs of electrons, they form a triple bond.
Diatomic nitrogen contains a triple bond, as you can see in Figure 3.19.
O C O Try the following problems to practise representing covalent bonding
using Lewis structures. Watch for multiple bonding!
Figure 3.18 This Lewis struc- Practice Problems
ture shows the double bond in a
molecule of carbon dioxide, CO .
2
8. One carbon atom is bonded to two sulfur atoms. Use a Lewis
structure to represent the bonds.
9. A molecule contains one hydrogen atom bonded to a carbon atom,
which is bonded to a nitrogen atom. Use a Lewis structure to
represent the bonds.
10. Two carbon atoms and two hydrogen atoms bond together, forming
a molecule. Each atom achieves a full outer electron level. Use a
N N Lewis structure to represent the bonds.
Figure 3.19 This Lewis
structure shows the triple bond Explaining the Low Conductivity of Covalent Compounds
in a molecule of nitrogen, N .
2 Covalent compounds have a wider variety of properties than ionic
compounds. Some dissolve in water, and some do not. Some conduct
electricity when molten or dissolved in water, and some do not. If you
consider only covalent compounds that contain bonds with an electroneg-
ativity difference that is less than 0.5, you will notice greater consistency.
For example, consider the compounds carbon disulfide, CS , dichlorine
2
monoxide, Cl O, and carbon tetrachloride, CCl . What are some of the
PROBLEM TIP 2 4
properties of these compounds? They all have low boiling points. None of
When drawing Lewis
them conducts electricity in the solid, liquid, or gaseous state.
structures to show covalent
How do we explain the low conductivity of these pure covalent
bonding, you can use lines
compounds? The atoms in each compound are held together by strong
between atoms to show the
bonding pairs of electrons. covalent bonds. Whether the compound is in the liquid, solid, or gaseous
One line (−) signifies a single state, these bonds do not break. Thus, covalent compounds (unlike ionic
bond. Two lines (=) signify a compounds) do not break up into ions when they melt or boil. Instead,
double bond. Three lines
(−=
) their atoms remain bonded together as molecules. For this reason, cova-
signify a triple bond. Non-
lent compounds are also called molecular compounds. The molecules
bonding pairs are shown as
that make up a pure covalent compound cannot carry a current, even if
dots in the usual way.
the compound is in its liquid state or in solution.
82 MHR • Unit 1 Matter and Chemical Bonding
Evidence for Intermolecular Forces
You have learned that pure covalent compounds are not
held together by ionic bonds in lattice structures. They do
form liquids and solids at low temperatures, however.
Something must hold the molecules together when a
intermolecular forces
covalent compound is in its liquid or solid state. The forces
(weak relative to
that bond the atoms to each other within a molecule are covalent bonds)
called intramolecular forces. Covalent bonds are intramole-
cular forces. In comparison, the forces that bond molecules
to each other are called intermolecular forces.
You can see the difference between intermolecular
forces and intramolecular forces in Figure 3.20. Because
pure covalent compounds have low melting and boiling
points, you know that the intermolecular forces must be
very weak compared with the intramolecular forces. It does
not take very much energy to break the bonds that hold the
intramolecular forces
molecules to each other. (strong covalent bonds)
There are several different types of intermolecular
forces. You will learn more about them in section 3.3, as Figure 3.20 Strong intramolecular forces (cova-
well as in Chapters 8 and 11. lent bonds) hold the atoms in molecules together.
Relatively weak intermolecular forces act between
molecules.
Metallic Bonding
In this chapter, you have seen that non-metals tend to form ionic
bonds with metals. Non-metals tend to form covalent bonds with other
non-metals and with themselves. How do metals bond to each other?
We know that elements that tend to form ionic bonds have very
different electronegativities. Metals bonding to themselves or to other
metals do not have electronegativity differences that are greater than 1.7.
Therefore, metals probably do not form ionic bonds with each other.
Evidence bears this out. A pure metal, such as sodium, is soft enough
to be cut with a butter knife. Other pure metals, such as copper or gold,
can be drawn into wires or hammered into sheets. Ionic
compounds, by contrast, are hard and brittle. e− e− e− e− e−
Do metals form covalent bonds with each other? No. 2+ 2+ 2+ 2+ 2+
They do not have enough valence electrons to achieve
stable octets by sharing electrons. Although metals do not
e−
e− e−
e−
e−
e−
e−
e− e−
e−
2+ 2+ 2+ 2+ 2+
form covalent bonds, however, they do share their electrons.
In metallic bonding, atoms release their electrons to a e− e− e− e− e− e−
shared pool of electrons. You can think of a metal as a non- 2+ e− 2+ e− 2+ e− 2+ 2+ e−
rigid arrangement of metal ions in a sea of free electrons,
as shown in Figure 3.21. The force that holds metal atoms e− e− e−
e−
e− e− e− e− e−
together is called a metallic bond. Unlike ionic or covalent 2+ 2+ 2+ 2+ 2+
bonding, metallic bonding does not have a particular orien- e− e− e− e− e− e−
tation in space. Because the electrons are free to move, the
metal ions are not rigidly held in a lattice formation. Figure 3.21 In magnesium metal, the two valence
Therefore, when a hammer pounds metal, the atoms can electrons from each atom are free to move in an
“electron sea.” The valence electrons are shared
slide past one another. This explains why metals can be
by all the metal ions.
easily hammered into sheets.
Pure metals contain metallic bonds, as do alloys. An alloy is a
homogeneous mixture of two or more metals. Different alloys can have
different amounts of elements. Each alloy, however, has a uniform compo-
sition throughout. One example of an alloy is bronze. Bronze contains
copper, tin, and lead, joined together with metallic bonds. You will learn
more about alloys in Chapter 4 and Chapter 8.
Chapter 3 Chemical Compounds and Bonding • MHR 83
Section Wrap-up
In this section, you learned how to distinguish between an ionic bond
and a pure covalent bond. You learned how to represent these bonds
using Lewis structures. You were also introduced to metallic bonding.
In section 3.3, you will learn about “in between” covalent bonds
with ∆EN greater than 0.5 but less than 1.7. You will learn how the nature
of these bonds influences the properties of the compounds that contain
them. As well, you will examine molecules in greater depth. You will
explore ways to visualize them in three dimensions, which will help you
further understand the properties of covalent compounds.
Section Review
1 K/U Use Lewis structures to show how each pair of elements forms
an ionic bond.
(a) magnesium and fluorine (c) rubidium and chlorine
(b) potassium and bromine (d) calcium and oxygen
2 K/U Use Lewis structures to show how the following elements form
covalent bonds.
(a) one silicon atom and two oxygen atoms
(b) one carbon atom, one hydrogen atom, and three chlorine atoms
(c) two nitrogen atoms
(d) two carbon atoms bonded to each other—three hydrogen atoms
bonded to one of the carbon atoms, and one hydrogen atom and one
oxygen atom bonded to the other carbon atom
3 K/U Use what you know about electronegativity differences to
decide what kind of bond would form between each pair of elements.
(a) palladium and oxygen (d) sodium and iodine
(b) carbon and bromine (e) beryllium and fluorine
(c) silver and sulfur (f) phosphorus and calcium
4 C “In general, the farther away two elements are from each other
in the periodic table, the more likely they are to participate in ionic
bonding.” Do you agree with this statement? Explain why or why not.
5 C Covalent bonding and metallic bonding both involve electron shar-
ing. Explain how covalent bonding is different from metallic bonding.
6 MC Ionic compounds are extremely hard. They hold their shape
extremely well.
(a) Based on what you know about ionic bonding within an ionic
crystal, explain these properties.
(b) Give two reasons to explain why, in spite of these properties,
it is not practical to make tools out of ionic compounds.
84 MHR • Unit 1 Matter and Chemical Bonding
Polar Covalent Bonds 3.3
and Polar Molecules
In section 3.2, you learned what kind of bond forms when the electronega- Section Preview/
tivity difference between two atoms is very small or very large. You now Specific Expectations
understand how electrons are shared or transferred in bonds. Thus, you
In this section, you will
can explain the properties of ionic compounds, and some of the proper-
(cid:2) constructmolecular models
ties of covalent compounds.
(cid:2) predictthe polarity of
How can you explain the wide variety of properties that covalent
a given bond, using
compounds have? Covalent compounds may be solids, liquids, or gases
electronegativity values
at different temperatures. Some covalent compounds dissolve in water,
(cid:2) predictthe overall polarity of
and some do not. In fact, water itself is a covalent compound! Examine
molecules, using electroneg-
Figures 3.22 and 3.23. Why are the bonds in water different from the
ativity values and molecular
bonds in dinitrogen monoxide? Both of these compounds are made up of models
two elements, and each molecule contains three atoms. The differences in
(cid:2) communicateyour under-
the properties of these compounds are explained in part by the ∆EN of
standing of the following
their bonds. terms: polar covalent bond,
lone pairs, bonding pairs,
polar molecule, dipolar
molecules, non-polar
molecule
Figure 3.22 Water may be
liquid, solid, or gas in nature.
Why does the water that is
sprayed up by this skier
form a sheet?
Figure 3.23 Dinitrogen monox-
ide, also known as laughing gas,
boils at about −89˚C. Laughing
gas is used as an anaesthetic for
dental work.
Chapter 3 Chemical Compounds and Bonding • MHR 85
Polar Covalent Bonds: The “In-Between” Bonds
When two bonding atoms have an electronegativity difference that is
greater than 0.5 but less than 1.7, they are considered to be a particular
type of covalent bond called a polar covalent bond. In a polar covalent
bond, the atoms have significantly different electronegativities. The
electronegativity difference is not great enough, however, for the less
electronegative atom to transfer its valence electrons to the other, more
electronegative atom. The difference isgreat enough for the bonding
electron pair to spend more time near the more electronegative atom than
the less electronegative atom.
For example, the bond between oxygen and hydrogen in water has
PROBEWARE
an electronegativity difference of 1.24. Because this value falls between
If you have access to prob- 0.5 and 1.7, the bond is a polar covalent bond. The oxygen attracts the
ware, do the Chemistry 11 lab, electrons more strongly than the hydrogen. Therefore, the oxygen has a
Properties of Bonds, now. slightly negative charge and the hydrogen has a slightly positive charge.
Since the hydrogen does not completely transfer its electron to the oxy-
gen, their respective charges are not +1 and −1, but rather δ+ and δ− . The
symbol
δ+
(delta plus) stands for a partial positive charge. The symbol
δ−
(delta minus) stands for a partial negative charge. Figure 3.24 illustrates
the partial negative and positive charges across an oxygen-hydrogen bond.
Figure 3.25 shows the polar covalent bond between hydrogen and
chlorine.
+ −
δ δ
O H
H Cl
(cid:2)− (cid:2)+
Figure 3.24 The O end of an O—H bond Figure 3.25 The Cl end of a H—Cl bond
has a partial negative charge. The H end has a partial negative charge. The H end
has a partial positive charge. has a partial positive charge.
Try the following problems to practise identifying the partial charges
across polar covalent bonds.
Practice Problems
11. Predict whether each bond will be covalent, polar covalent, or ionic.
(a) C—F (c) Cl—Cl (e) Si—H (g) Fe—O
(b) O—N (d) Cu—O (f) Na—F (h) Mn—O
12. For each polar covalent bond in problem 11, indicate the locations
Electronic Learning Partner
of the partial charges.
Your Chemistry 11 Electronic 13. Arrange the bonds in each set in order of increasing polarity.
Learning Partner has a film clip (A completely polarized bond is an ionic bond.)
that shows the formation of
(a) H—Cl, O—O, N—O, Na—Cl
bonds in water, hydrogen gas,
and sodium chloride. (b) C—Cl, Mg—Cl, P—O, N—N
86 MHR • Unit 1 Matter and Chemical Bonding
Comparing Molecular Models
Throughout this chapter, you have seen several different types of
diagrams representing molecules. These diagrams, or models, are useful
for highlighting various aspects of molecules and bonding. Examine
Figure 3.26 to see the various strengths of the different models.
Electronic Learning Partner
A A Lewis structureshows you H O H Your Chemistry 11 Electronic
exactly how many electrons are Learning Partner has a video
involved in each bond in a com- clip that explains how to draw
pound. Some Lewis structures Lewis structures.
show bonding pairs as lines O C O
between atoms.
A
B A structural diagramshows single
bonds as single lines and multiple
bonds as multiple lines. It does H O H
not show non-bonding pairs. It is
less cluttered than a Lewis struc-
ture. It clearly shows whether the
bonds involved are single, dou- O C O
ble, or triple bonds.
B
C A ball-and-stick modelshows
atoms as spheres and bonds as
sticks. It accurately shows how
the bonds within a molecule are
oriented in three-dimensional
space. The distances between the
atoms are exaggerated, however.
In this model, you can see the dif-
ferences in the shapes of carbon C
dioxide and water. Web
LINK
There are ways of represent-
D A space-filling modelshows
ing molecules in addition to
atoms as spheres. It is the most
the ones shown in Figure 3.26.
accurate representation of the
Seach for some examples
shape of a real molecule.
on the Internet. Go to
www.school.mcgrawhill.ca/
resources/ for some ideas on
D
where to start.
Figure 3.26 You can compare a molecule of water with a molecule of carbon dioxide
using a variety of different models.
Consider a molecule of water and a molecule of carbon dioxide. Both
water and carbon dioxide contain two atoms of the same element bonded
to a third atom of another element. According to Figure 3.26, however,
water and carbon dioxide molecules are different shapes. Why does
carbon dioxide have a linear shape while water is bent?
Chapter 3 Chemical Compounds and Bonding • MHR 87
To understand why molecules have different shapes, consider how
electron arrangement affects shape. The Lewis structure for water, for
example, shows that the oxygen is surrounded by four electron pairs. As
shown in figure 3.26, two of the pairs are involved in bonding with the
hydrogen atoms and two of the pairs are not. Electron pairs that are not
involved in bonding are called lone pairs. Electron pairs that are involved
in bonding are called bonding pairs.
Electron pairs are arranged around molecules so that they are a maxi-
mum distance from each other. This makes sense, because electrons are
negatively charged and they repel each other. The shape that allows four
electron pairs to be a maximum distance from each other around an atom
is a tetrahedron. Figure 3.27 shows a tetrahedron.
Figure 3.27 A tetrahedron has
four equal sides. The Shape of a Water Molecule
In a water molecule, there are four electron pairs around the oxygen atom.
Two of these pairs bond with the hydrogen. The electron pairs are
arranged in a shape that is nearly tetrahedral. When you draw the
molecule, however, you draw only the oxygen atom and the two hydrogen
atoms. This is where the bent shape comes from, as you can see in
lone pairs
Figure 3.28.
The Shape of a Carbon Dioxide Molecule
Now consider carbon dioxide, CO . Why does a carbon dioxide molecule
2
have a linear shape? Examine the Lewis structure for carbon dioxide. The
O
central carbon atom is surrounded by eight electrons (four pairs), like the
oxygen atom in a water molecule. In a carbon dioxide molecule, though,
H
all the electrons are involved in bonding. There are no lone pairs. Because
H the bonding electrons spend most of their time between the carbon and
oxygen atoms, they are arranged in a straight line. This allows them to be
bonding pairs as far away from each other as possible, as you can see in Figure 3.29.
Figure 3.28 Two non-bending
pairs account for water’s bent
shape.
lone lone
O C O
pairs pairs
bonding pairs
Figure 3.29 Carbon dioxide is linear in shape.
88 MHR • Unit 1 Matter and Chemical Bonding
The shapes of the water molecule and the lone pair
carbon dioxide molecule, as shown in the
diagram you have seen, make sense based on
what we know about electron pairs. These
shapes have also been supported by experi- N
ment. You will learn more about experimental
evidence for the structure of carbon dioxide
H H
and water later in this chapter.
H Figure 3.30 An ammonia mole-
Drawing the Lewis structure of a molecule
cule is shaped like a pyramid.
can help you determine the molecule’s shape.
In Figure 3.30, you can see the shape of the
ammonia, NH , molecule. The ammonia H
3
molecule has three bonding electron pairs and
one lone pair on its central atom, all arranged
in a nearly tetrahedral shape. Because there is
one lone pair, the molecule’s shape is pyrami-
C
dal. The molecule methane, CH , is shown in Figure 3.31 A methane
4 H
Figure 3.31. This molecule has four bonding H molecule is shaped as though
its hydrogen atoms were on the
pairs on its central atom and no lone pairs. H
corners of a tetrahedron.
It is shaped like a perfectly symmetrical
tetrahedron.
Canadians in Chemistry
constraints. At the University of Toronto, Dr. Ozin
teaches his students the new science of inten-
tional design, instead of the old trial-and-error
methods.
Born in London, England, in 1943, Geoffrey
Ozin earned a doctorate in chemistry at Oxford
University. He joined the University of Toronto
in 1969. Ozin’s father was a tailor. In a way, Ozin
is continuing the family tradition. Ozin, however,
uses ionic and covalent bonds, atoms and
molecules, acids, gases, and solutions to fashion
Dr. Geoffrey Ozin his creations.
In 1996, Dr. Ozin demonstrated the
His work has flown on a Space Shuttle, and it has self-assembly of crystals with a porous
been hailed as art. It may well be part of the next structure in space, under the conditions (such as
computing revolution. microgravity) found aboard a Space Shuttle.
What does Dr. Geoffrey Ozin do? As little as Since then, he has shown how the self-assembly
possible, for he believes in letting the atoms do of many materials can be controlled to produce
most of the work. This approach has made him their structure.
one of the more celebrated chemists in Canada. Dr. Ozin’s latest achievement involves
Time and again, he has brought together organic structure. Ozin was part of an international
and inorganic molecules, polymers, and metals in research team that created regular microscopic
order to create materials with just the right struc- cavities inside a piece of silicon. This material
ture for a specific purpose. can transmit light photons in precisely regulated
Self-assembly is the key. Atoms and ways. In the future, this material might be used
molecules are driven into pre-designed shapes to build incredibly fast computers that function
by intermolecular forces and geometrical by means of photons instead of electrons!
Chapter 3 Chemical Compounds and Bonding • MHR 89
Polar Bonds and Molecular Shapes
Water molecules are attracted to one another. Because we are surrounded
by water, we are surrounded by evidence of this attraction. Re-examine
the water skier in Figure 3.22. If water molecules did not attract one
another, do you think the spray from the ski would form a “sheet” as
shown? Try filling a glass with water. As you near the rim, add water very
slowly. If you are careful, you can fill the glass so that the water bulges
over the rim. After a rainfall, you have probably seen beads of water on
the surface of vehicles. In Figure 3.32, you can see further evidence of
the attraction of water molecules to one another.
Why do water molecules “stick together”? To answer this question,
you need to consider both the nature of the bonds within a water
molecule and its shape.
Figure 3.32 The shape of water
droplets is evidence that water
molecules are attracted to one
another. This property of water
can be explained by the polarity
of its O—H bonds.
The Polar Water Molecule
First consider the shape of a water molecule. You have discovered that
a water molecule has a bent shape. Each oxygen-hydrogen bond is polar.
The hydrogen atom has a partial positive charge and the oxygen atom has
a partial negative charge. You know that the bonds are polar, but what
about the molecule as a whole? Because the molecule is bent, there is a
partial negative charge on the oxygen end and a partial positive charge
on the hydrogen end, as shown in Figure 3.33.
negatively charged end
(cid:2)− (cid:2)−
O
H H
Figure 3.33 Water is a polar
(cid:2)+ (cid:2)+ (cid:2)+
molecule because of its shape
and the polarity of its bonds. positively charged end
90 MHR • Unit 1 Matter and Chemical Bonding
Because the water molecule as a wholehas a partial negative charge on
one end and a partial positive charge on the other end, it is called a polar
molecule. Because water is polar, its negative and positive ends attract
each other. This explains why liquid water “sticks” to itself. Figure 3.34
shows how water molecules attract each other in the liquid state.
−
(cid:2)
negatively charged end
−
(cid:2) N
(cid:2)+
H H
(cid:2)−
+ H +
(cid:2)− (cid:2)
+
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)+
+ +
(cid:2) (cid:2)
(cid:2)− (cid:2)−
(cid:2)+
(cid:2)−
positively
+ charged end
(cid:2)
(cid:2)+ (cid:2)+ Figure 3.35 Because an ammo-
nia molecule contains polar
(cid:2)+ (cid:2)+ bonds and is asymmetrical, it is
a polar molecule.
Figure 3.34 The negative ends of water molecules attracts
the positive ends. Some of the resulting intermolecular forces
are shown here.
+ −
Two other examples of polar molecules are ammonia and hydrogen (cid:2) (cid:2)
chloride, shown in Figures 3.35 and 3.36. Polar molecules are also called
dipolar molecules because they have a negative pole and a positive pole.
H Cl
The Non-Polar Carbon Dioxide Molecule
The bond between carbon and oxygen is polar. It has an electronegativity
difference of 1.0. Does this mean that carbon dioxide, a molecule that
contains two carbon-oxygen double bonds, is a polar molecule? No, it Figure 3.36 Hydrogen chloride
does not. The oxygen atoms have partial negative charges, and the contains one polar bond.
carbon atom has a partial positive charge. The molecule, however, is Therefore, the molecule is polar.
straight and symmetrical. As you can see in Figure 3.37, the effects of
the polar bonds cancel each other out. Therefore, while carbon dioxide
contains polar bonds, it is a non-polar molecule. It has neither a positive −
(cid:2)
pole nor a negative pole.
F
(cid:2)+
C
O C O
F F
− −
(cid:2) F (cid:2)
− + −
(cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2)
−
(cid:2)
Figure 3.38 Carbon tetrafluo-
Figure 3.37 Carbon dioxide is a non-polar molecule because it is symmetrical.
ride, CF , contains four polar
4
bonds. Because of its symmetry,
Carbon tetrafluoride, CF 4 , shown in Figure 3.38, is another example of a however, it is a non-polar
non-polar molecule that contains polar bonds. molecule.
Chapter 3 Chemical Compounds and Bonding • MHR 91
S K I L L F O C U S
Modelling concepts
Analyzing and interpreting
Communicating results
Modelling Molecules
We cannot see molecules with our eyes or with (e) nitrogen bonded to three hydrogens: NH
3
a light microscope. We can predict their shapes, (f) carbon bonded to four chlorines: CCl
4
however, based on what we know about their
(g) boron bonded to three fluorines: BF
3
electron configurations. In this investigation, you
will practise working with a kit to build models 3. Build a three-dimensional model of each
of molecules. molecule using your model kit.
4. Sketch the molecular models you have built.
Question
5. In your notebook, make a table like the one
How can you build models of molecules to help
below. Give it a title, fill in your data, and
you predict their shape and polarity?
exchange your table with a classmate.
Lewis structure Sketch of predicted
Compound for compound shape of molecule
Analysis
1. Compare your models with the models that
your classmates built. Discuss any differences.
2. How did your Lewis structures help you
predict the shape of each molecule?
Conclusion
3. Summarize the strengths and limitations of
creating molecular models using molecular
model kits.
Materials
molecular model kit
pen Applications
paper 4. Calculate the electronegativity difference for
each bond in the molecules you built. Show
Procedure partial charges. Based on the electronegativity
1. Obtain a model kit from your teacher. difference and the predicted shape of each
molecule, decide whether the molecule is
2. Draw a Lewis structure for each molecule
polar or non-polar.
below.
(a) hydrogen bonded to a hydrogen: H 5. Look back through Chapter 3, and locate some
2
different simple molecules. Build models of
(b) chlorine bonded to a chlorine: Cl
2
these molecules. Predict whether they are
(c) oxygen bonded to two hydrogens: H O
2 polar or non-polar.
(d) carbon bonded to two oxygens: CO
2
92 MHR • Unit 1 Matter and Chemical Bonding
Properties of Polar and Non-Polar Molecules
CHEM
FACT
Because water is made up of polar molecules with positive and negative
ends that attract one another, water tends to “stick” to itself. This means Differences in melting points
that it has a high melting point and boiling point, relative to other cova- and boiling points are due
lent compounds. For example, carbon dioxide is made up of non-polar in part to the polarity of the
molecules. These molecules do not attract each other as much as polar molecules that make up the
compounds. They are also
molecules do, because they do not have positive and negative poles.
due to the different masses
Compounds that are made up of non-polar molecules generally have
of the individual molecules.
lower melting points and boiling points than compounds that are made
up of polar molecules. In fact, compounds with non-polar molecules,
like carbon dioxide, are often gases at room temperature.
Section Wrap-up
In section 3.2, you learned about the strong bonds that hold ions in clear-
ly-defined lattice patterns. You learned that these bonds are responsible
for the properties of ionic compounds. You also learned how to describe
the properties of compounds that are made up of molecules with covalent
bonds. In this section, you discovered that the properties of compounds
with polar covalent bonds depend on their shape. The following Concept
Organizer summarizes some of the properties of covalent compounds that
are made up of polar and non-polar molecules.
In sections 3.2 and 3.3, you learned how to represent compounds
using Lewis structures and molecular models. In the next section, you
will learn how chemists name compounds and represent them using
symbols.
Concept Organizer Melting Point and Bonding Concepts
melting point
strong ionic bonds NNaaCCII
Ionic extemely high
hold ions in lattice ssooddiiuumm cchhlloorriiddee
compound melting point
formation 880011˚C˚
relatively strong melting point HO
2
polar molecules intermolecular is lower water
forces than ionic 0˚C
Covalent
compound
relatively weak melting point tends CO
2
non-polar molecules intermolecular to be lower than carbon dioxide
forces polar −57˚C
CChhaapptteerr 33 CChheemmiiccaall CCoommppoouunnddss aanndd BBoonnddiinngg •• MMHHRR 9933
Section Review
Unit Project Prep 1 K/U Determine ∆EN for each bond. Is the bond ionic, covalent, or
polar covalent?
Before beginning your Unit
Project, think about properties (a) B—F (d) Si—O
of compounds that would be
(b) C—H (e) S—O
useful in common chemical
products. What kinds of (c) Na—Cl (f) C—Cl
properties would an abrasire
2 K/U For each polar covalent bond in question 1, label the partial
or a window-cleaning fluid
negative and partial positive charges on each end.
need to have? What kinds
of compounds exhibit these
3 C Explain how a non-polar molecule can contain polar bonds.
properties?
4 K/U Arrange each set of bonds in order of increasing polarity,
using only their position in the periodic table.
(a) H—Cl, H—Br, O—F, K—Br
(b) C—O, C—F, C—H, C—Br
5 K/U Check your arrangements in question 4 by determining the ∆EN
for each bond. Explain any discrepancies between your two sets
of predictions.
6 I A molecule of chloroform, CHCl 3 , has the same shape as
a molecule of methane, CH . However, methane’s boiling point
4
is −164˚C and chloroform’s boiling point is 62˚C. Explain the
difference between the two boiling points.
7 K/U Determine the shape of each molecule by drawing a Lewis struc-
ture and considering the distribution of electron pairs around the
atoms. Determine ∆EN for the bonds. Use the ∆EN and the shape to
predict whether the molecule is polar or non-polar.
(a) SiCl
4
(b) PCl
3
8 MC How would Earth and life on Earth be different if water were
a non-polar molecule? Write a paragarph explaining your ideas.
94 MHR • Unit 1 Matter and Chemical Bonding
Writing Chemical Formulas and 3.4
Naming Chemical Compounds
You have used Lewis structures to demonstrate how ionic and covalent Section Preview/
bonds form between atoms. When given two elements, you determined Specific Expectations
how many atoms of each element bond together to form a compound,
In this section, you will
according to the octet rule. For example, you used the periodic table and
(cid:2) writethe formulas of binary
your understanding of the octet rule to determine how calcium and
and tertiary compounds,
bromine bond to form an ionic compound. Using a Lewis structure, you including compounds that
determined that calcium and bromine form a compound that contains contain elements with
two bromine atoms for every calcium atom, as shown in Figure 3.39. multiple valences
(cid:2) communicateformulas
Chemical Formulas using IUPAC and traditional
systems
Lewis structures are helpful for keeping track of electron transfers in
(cid:2) recognizethe formulas
bonding and for making sure that the octet rule is obeyed. As well,
of compounds in various
Lewis structures can be used to help determine the ratio of the atoms in
contexts
a compound. To communicate this ratio, chemists use a special kind of
(cid:2) communicateyour
shorthand called a chemical formula. A chemical formula provides two
understanding of the
important pieces of information:
following terms: chemical
1. the elements that make up the compound formula, valence, polyatomic
ions, zero sum rule, chemi-
2. the number of atoms of each element that are present in a compound
cal nomenclature, binary
compound, Stock system,
The order in which the elements are written also communicates important
tertiary compounds
information. The less electronegative element or ion is usually listed first
in the formula, and the more electronegative element or ion comes sec-
ond. For example, the ionic compound that is formed from calcium and
bromine is written CaBr . Calcium, a metal with low electronegativity, is
2
written first. The subscript 2 after the bromine indicates that there are two
bromine atoms for every calcium atom.
Br
no subscript
Ca (”1“ is implied)
Br
symbol of positive ion CaBr subscript indicating
2
2 bromine ions
+ −
[Ca]2 [ Br ]
− symbol of negative ion
[ Br ]
Figure 3.39 These Lewis structures Figure 3.40 CaBr 2 is the chemical formula of the compound formed
show the formation of calcium bromide. by calcium and bromine. When a subscript is omitted, only one atom is
present per formula unit.
Chapter 3 Chemical Compounds and Bonding • MHR 95
What a Chemical Formula Represents
For covalent compounds, the chemical formula represents how many of
each type of atom are in each molecule. For example, the formula NH
3
signifies that a molecule of ammonia contains one nitrogen atom and
three hydrogen atoms. The formula C H tells you that a molecule of
2 6
propane contains two atoms of carbon and six atoms of hydrogen.
For ionic compounds, the formula represents a ratio rather than
a discrete particle. For example, the formula for magnesium oxide, MgO,
signifies that magnesium and oxygen exist in a one-to-one atomic ratio.
Recall that MgO exists in a lattice structure held together by ionic bonds,
as shown in Figure 3.41. The formula MgO represents the ratio in which
Mg2+
ions are present in the compound.
O2−
Figure 3.41 In a crystal of Using Valence Numbers to Describe Bonding Capacity
magnesium oxide, MgO, magne-
sium and oxygen atoms exist in You have seen how Lewis structures can help you draw models of ionic,
a 1:1 ratio. covalent, and polar covalent compounds. When you draw a Lewis
structure, you can count how many electrons are needed by each atom
to achieve a stable octet. Thus, you can find out the ratio in which the
atoms combine. Once you know the ratio of the atoms, you can write the
What does the formula of
chemical formula of the compound. Drawing Lewis structures can become
calcium bromide represent?
overwhelming, however, when you are dealing with large molecules. Is
there a faster and easier method for writing chemical formulas?
Every element has a certain capacity to combine with other atoms.
An atom of a Group 1 (IA) element, for example, has the capacity to lose
one electron from its valence level in order to bond with another atom.
A number is assigned to each element to describe the element’s bonding
capacity. This number is called the valence. Thus, Group 1 (IA) elements,
such as sodium and lithium, have a valence of +1. The 1 indicates that
these elements tend to have one electron involved in bonding. This makes
sense, because Group 1 elements have only one electron in their outer
electron energy level. The + indicates that these elements tend to give up
their electrons, becoming positively charged ions. They may transfer their
electrons, or they may attract the electron relatively weakly in a polar
covalent bond.
On the other hand, Group 17 (VIIA) elements (the halogens) have a
valence of −1. Again, the 1 indicates that these elements tend to have one
electron involved in bonding. However, they need to gain an electron to
achieve a stable octet. In general, halogens become more negatively
charged when they participate in bonding.
As a general rule, if two atoms form an ionic bond, the valence tells
you the charges on the ions that are formed. If a covalent bond is formed,
the valence tells you how many electrons the atoms contribute to the
covalent bond.
You can use the periodic table to predict valence numbers. For
example, Group 2 (IIA) elements have two electrons in their outer energy
level. To achieve a stable octet, they need to lose these two electrons.
Therefore, the valence for all Group 2 elements is +2.
96 MHR • Unit 1 Matter and Chemical Bonding
Practice Problems
14. Use the periodic table to predict the most common valences of the
atoms in Groups 16 (VIA) and 17 (VIIA).
15. If you had to assign a valence to the noble gases, what would it be?
Explain your answer.
The smaller atoms of elements in the first two periods usually have only
one common valence, which is easily determined from the periodic table.
Many larger elements, however, have more than one valence because the
electron distribution in these elements is much more complex. Therefore,
you will have to memorize the valences of the elements that are common-
ly used in this course. Some useful valences are listed in Table 3.3, with
the most common valences listed first.
Table 3.3 Common Valences of Selected Elements
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17
HH((++11))
Li(+1) Be(+2) N(−3) O(−2) F(−1)
Na(+1) Mg(+2) P(−3) S(−2) Cl(−1)
Cr(+3)
Fe(+3) Co(+2) Ni(+2) Cu(+2)
K(+1) Ca(+2) Cr(+2) Zn(+2) Ga(+3) Br(−1)
Fe(+2) Co(+3) Ni(+3) Cu(+1)
Cr(+6)
Sn(+4)
Rb(+1) Sr(+2) Ag(+1) Cd(+2) I(−1)
Sn(+2)
Au(+3) Hg(+2) Pb(+2)
Cs(+1) Ba(+2)
Au(+1) Hg(+1) Pb(+4)
Polyatomic Ions
Some compounds contain ions that are made from more than one atom.
These ions are called polyatomic ions. (The prefix poly means “many.”)
Calcium carbonate, CaCO , which is found in chalk, contains one calcium
3
cation and one polyatomic anion called carbonate, CO
2−
.
3
Polyatomic ions are in fact charged molecules. For example, the car-
bonate ion consists of one carbon atom covalently bonded to three oxygen
atoms. The entire molecule has a charge of −2. Therefore, its valence is −2,
as well. Polyatomic ions remain unchanged in simple chemical reactions
because of the strong bonds that hold the component atoms together. They
behave as a single unit and should be treated as a single ion.
Table 3.4 on the next page gives the valences, formulas, and names of
many common polyatomic ions.
Chapter 3 Chemical Compounds and Bonding • MHR 97
+
Language The most common polyatomic cation is the ammonium ion, [NH ].
LINK 4
+
The five atoms in NH form a particle with a +1 charge. Because the
4
atoms are bonded together strongly, the polyatomic ion is not altered in
It is important to learn the
names and valences of the five most chemical reactions. For example, when ammonium chloride is
most common polyatomic ions: dissolved in water, the only ions in the solution are ammonium ions and
nitrate, carbonate, chlorate, chloride ions.
sulfate, and phosphate. These
Table 3.4 Names and Valences of Some Common Ions
ions form many of the chemi-
cals in nature and in common Valence = −1
use. While the task seems
Ion Name Ion Name
overwhelming, it may help to
learn the “big five” using a CN− cyanide H PO − dihydrogen phosphite
2 3
mnemonic, or memory aid. You CH COO− acetate H PO − dihydrogen phosphate
can use the following 3 2 4
mnemonic to remember their ClO− hypochlorite MnO 4 − permanganate
names, valences, and number ClO − chlorite NO − nitrite
2 2
of oxygen atoms:
ClO − chlorate NO − nitrate
3 3
NICK the CAMEL had a CLAM
for SUPPER in PHOENIX. ClO 4 − perchlorate OCN− cyanate
The first letter identifies the HCO 3 − hydrogen carbonate HS− hydrogen sulfide
polyatomic ion. The number of HSO − hydrogen sulfite OH− hydroxide
3
vowels represents the valence.
HSO − hydrogen sulfate SCN− thiocyanate
The number of consonants 4
represents the number of oxy-
Valence = −2
gen atoms. For example, NICK
(nitrate) has three consonants Ion Name Ion Name
and one vowel. Therefore, CO 2− carbonate O 2− peroxide
3 2
nitrate contains three oxygen
atoms and has a valence of −1. C 2 O 4 2− oxalate SiO 3 2− silicate
(All of these valences are CrO 2− chromate SO 2− sulfite
4 3
negative.) Cr O 2− dichromate SO 2− sulfate
2 7 4
Try to come up with your own
HPO 2− hydrogen phosphite S O 2− thiosulfate
mnemonic. 3 2 3
HPO 2− hydrogen phosphate
4
Valence = −3
Ion Name Ion Name
AsO 3− arsenite PO 3− phosphite
3 3
AsO 3− arsenate PO 3− phosphate
4 4
Writing Chemical Formulas Using Valences
You can use valences to write chemical formulas. This method is faster
than using Lewis structures to determine chemical formulas. As well,
you can use this method for both ionic and covalent compounds. In order
to write a chemical formula using valences, you need to know which
elements (or polyatomic ions) are in the compound, and their valences.
You also need to know how to use the zero sum rule: For neutral chemi-
cal formulas containing ions, the sum of positive valences plus negative
valences of the atoms in a compound must equal zero.
In the compound potassium fluoride, KF, each potassium ion has a
charge of +1. Each fluoride ion has a charge of –1. Because there is one of
each ion in the formula, the sum of the valences is zero.
98 MHR • Unit 1 Matter and Chemical Bonding
What is the formula of a compound that consists of magnesium and
chlorine? You know that the valence of magnesium, Mg, is +2. The
valence of chlorine, Cl, is −1. The formula MgCl is not balanced, however,
because it does not yet obey the zero sum rule. How can you balance this
formula? You might be able to see, at a glance, that two chlorine atoms are
needed for every magnesium atom. If it is not obvious how to balance a
formula, you can follow these steps:
1. Write the unbalanced formula. Remember that the metal
is first and the non-metal is second.
Mg Cl
2. Place the valence of each element on top of the appropriate
symbol.
+2 −1
+ −
Mg Cl [Mg]2 [ Cl ]
3. Using arrows, bring the numbers (without the signs) down
to the subscript positions by crossing over.
−
+2 −1 [ Cl ]
Mg Cl
4. Check the subscripts. Any subscript of “1” can be removed. Figure 3.42 This Lewis
structure represents magnesium
MgCl
2 chloride, MgCl . Each atom has
2
achieved a stable octet.
You can check your formula by drawing a Lewis structure, as shown in
Figure 3.42.
Practice Problems
16. Write a balanced formula for a compound that contains
sulfur and each of the following elements. Use a valence
of −2 for sulfur.
(a) sodium (d) aluminum
(b) calcium (e) rubidium PROBLEM TIP
(c) barium (f) hydrogen After the crossing over step,
you may need to reduce the
17. Write a balanced formula for a compound that contains
subscripts to their lowest
calcium and each of the following elements. terms. For example, MgO
2 2
(a) oxygen (d) bromine becomes MgO. Be 2 O 2 becomes
BeO. Remember, formulas for
(b) sulfur (e) phosphorus
ionic compounds represent
(c) chlorine (f) fluorine ratios of ions.
How do you write and balance formulas that contain polyatomic ions?
The same steps can be used, as long as you keep the atoms that belong to
a polyatomic ion together. The easiest way to do this is to place brackets
around the polyatomic ion at the beginning.
For example, suppose that you want to write a balanced formula
for a compound that contains potassium and the phosphate ion. Use
the following steps as a guide.
Chapter 3 Chemical Compounds and Bonding • MHR 99
1. Write the unbalanced formula. Place brackets around any
polyatomic ions that are present.
K PO
4
K (PO )
4
2. Write the valence of each ion above it. (Refer to Table 3.4.)
+1 −3
K (PO )
4
3. Cross over, and write the subscripts.
K (PO )
3 4 1
4. Tidy up the formula. Remember that you omit the subscript if
there is only one particle in the ionic compound or molecule.
Here the brackets are no longer needed, so they can be removed.
K PO
3 4
Pay close attention to the brackets when you are writing formulas that
contain polyatomic ions. For example, how would you write the formula
for a compound that contains ammonium and phosphate ions?
PROBLEM TIP
1. Write the unbalanced formula. Place brackets around any
In this formula, the brackets
polyatomic ions that are present.
must remain around the
ammonium ion to distinguish NH 4 PO 4
the subscripts. The subscript 4 (NH 4 ) (PO 4 )
refers to how many hydrogen
2. Write the valence above each ion.
atoms are in each ammonium
ion. The subscript 3 refers to
+1 −3
how many ammonium ions are (NH ) (PO )
4 4
needed to form an ionic com-
pound with the phosphate ion. 3. Cross over, and write in the subscripts.
(NH ) (PO )
4 3 4 1
4. Tidy up the formula. Remove the brackets only when the
polyatomic ion has a subscript of “1”.
(NH ) PO
4 3 4
Try the following problems to practise writing formulas for compounds
containing polyatomic ions.
Practice Problems
18. Use the information in Table 3.4 to write a chemical formula for
a compound that contains sodium and each of the following
polyatomic ions.
(a) nitrate (c) sulfite (e) thiosulfate
(b) phosphate (d) acetate (f) carbonate
19. Repeat question 19 using magnesium instead of sodium.
100 MHR • Unit 1 Matter and Chemical Bonding
Naming Chemical Compounds
When writing a chemical formula, you learned that you write the metal
element first. Similarly, the metal comes first when naming a chemical
compound. For example, sodium chloride is formed from the metal
sodium and the non-metal chlorine. Think of other names you have seen
in this chapter, such as beryllium chloride, calcium oxide, and aluminum
oxide. In each case, the metal is first and the non-metal is second. In other
words, the cation is first and the anion is second. This is just one of the
rules in chemical nomenclature: the system that is used in chemistry for
naming compounds.
A chemical formula identifies a specific chemical compound because
it reveals the composition of the compound. Similarly, the name of a
compound distinguishes the compound from all other compounds.
Figure 3.43 Many common chemicals have trivial, or common, names.
In the early days of chemistry, there were no rules for naming compounds.
Often, compounds received the names of people or places. Some of the
original names are still used today. They are called trivial or common
names because they tell little or nothing about the chemistry of the
compounds. For example, potassium nitrate, KNO , is commonly known
3
as saltpetre. The Greek word for rock is petra, and saltpetre is a salt found
crusted on rocks. The chemical name of a compound of ammonium and
chloride ions, is ammonium chloride NH Cl. Long before NH Cl received
4 4
this name, however, people commonly referred to it as sal ammoniac.
They mined this ionic compound near the ancient Egyptian temple of
Ammon in Libya. The name sal ammoniac literally means “salt of
Ammon.” Figure 3.43 shows other examples of common (trivial) names
for familiar compounds.
Early chemists routinely gave trivial names to substances before
understanding their chemical structure and behaviour. This situation
changed during the mid- to late-1800s. By this time, chemistry was
firmly established as a science. Chemists observed and discovered new
patterns of chemical relationships (such as periodicity). As well, chemists
discovered new chemical compounds with tremendous frequency. The
rapidly increasing number of chemical compounds required a more
organized method of nomenclature.
Chapter 3 Chemical Compounds and Bonding • MHR 101
The International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) was
formed in 1919 by a group of chemists. The main aim of IUPAC was to
establish international standards for masses, measurement, names, and
symbols used in the discipline of chemistry. To further that aim, IUPAC
developed, and continues to develop, a consistent and thorough system
of nomenclature for compounds.
Table 3.5 contains the IUPAC names of selected common compounds
as well as their common names.
Table 3.5 Common Chemical Compounds
IUPAC name Chemical formula Common name Use or propety
aluminum oxide Al O alumina abrasive
2 3
calcium carbonate CaCO limestone, marble building, sculpting
3
calcium oxide CaO lime neutralizing acidified lakes
hydrochloric acid HCl muriatic acid cleaning metal
magnesium hydroxide Mg(OH) milk of magnesia antacid
2
dinitrogen monoxide N O laughing gas used in dentistry as an anaesthetic
2
silicon dioxide SiO quartz sand manufacturing glass
2
sodium carbonate Na CO washing soda general cleaner
2 3
sodium chloride NaCl table salt enhancing flavour
sodium hydrogen carbonate NaHCO baking soda making baked goods rise
3
sodium hydroxide NaOH lye neutralizing acids
sodium thiosulfate NaS O hypo fixer in photography
2 3
Naming Binary Compounds Containing a Metal and a Non-metal
A binary compoundis an inorganic compound that contains two elements.
Binary compounds may contain a metal and a non-metal or two non-
metals. Binary compounds are often ionic compounds. To name a binary
ionic compound, name the cation first and the anion second. For example,
the compound that contains sodium and chlorine is called sodium chlo-
ride.
In the subsections that follow, you will examine the rules for naming
metals and non-metals in binary compounds.
Naming Metals in Chemical Compounds: The Stock System
The less electronegative element in a binary compound is always named
first. Often this element is a metal. You use the same name as the element.
For example, sodium chloride, NaCl, calcium oxide, CaO, and zinc
sulfide, ZnS, contain the metals sodium, calcium, and zinc.
Many of the common metals are transition elements that have more
than one possible valence. For example, tin is able to form the ions
Sn2+
and
Sn4+
, iron can form
Fe2+
and
Fe3+
, and copper can form Cu
+
and
Cu2+
. (The most common transition metals with more than one valence
number are listed in Table 3.3.) The name of a compound must identify
which ion is present in the compound. To do this, the element’s name is
used, followed by the valence in parentheses, written in Roman numerals.
Therefore,
Sn4+
is tin(IV),
Fe3+
is iron(III), and
Cu2+
is copper(II). This
naming method is called the Stock system after Alfred Stock, a German
chemist who first used it. Some examples of Stock system names are
listed in Table 3.6.
102 MHR • Unit 1 Matter and Chemical Bonding
Another Method for Naming Metals with Two Valences
In a method that predates the Stock system, two different endings are
used to distinguish the valences of metals. The ending -ic is used to repre-
sent the larger valence number. The ending -ous is used to represent
the smaller valence number. Thus, the ions
Sn2+
and
Sn4+
are named
stannous ion and stannic ion. To use this system, you need to know the
Latin name of an element. For example, the two ions of lead are the
plumbous and plumbic ions. See Table 3.6 for more examples.
This naming method has several drawbacks. Many metals have more
than two oxidation numbers. For example, chromium can form three
different ions, and manganese can form five different ions. Another draw-
back is that the name does not tell you what the valence of the metal is.
It only tells you that the valence is the smaller or larger of two.
Table 3.6 Two ways to Name Cations with Two Valences
element ion Stock system Alternative system
copper Cu+ copper(I) cuprous
Some types of ionic com-
Cu2+ copper(II) cupric pounds can absorb water
mercury Hg 2+ mercury(I) mercurous so that each formula unit is
2 attached to a specific number
Hg2+ mercury(II) mercuric of water molecules. They are
lead Pb2+ lead(II) plumbous called hydrates. BaOH 2 •8H 2 O
is called barium hydroxide
Pb4+ lead(IV) plumbic
octahydrate. CaSO •2HOis
4 2
called calcium sulfate dihy-
Naming Non-Metals in Chemical Compounds drate. Can you see the pattern?
Try naming MgSO •7HO. Use
4 2
To distinguish the non-metal from the metal in the name of a chemical
Table 3.8 to help you. You will
compound, the non-metal (or more electronegative element) is always learn more about hydrates
written second. Its ending changes to -ide. For example, hydrogen changes in Chapter 6.
to hydride, carbon changes to carbide, sulfur changes to sulfide, and
iodine changes to iodide.
Putting It All Together
To name a binary compound containing metal and a non-metal, write the
name of the metal first and the name of the non-metal second. For exam-
ple, a compound that contains potassium as the cation and bromine as the
anion is called potassium bromide. Be sure to indicate the valence if
necessary, using the Stock system. For example, a compound that contains
Pb2+
and oxygen is called lead(II) oxide.
Practice Problems
20. Write the IUPAC name for each compound.
(a) Al O (d) Cu S
2 3 2
(b) CaBr (e) Mg N
2 3 2
(c) Na P (f) HgI
3 2
21. Write the formula of each compound.
(a) iron(II) sulfide (d) cobaltous chloride
(b) stannous oxide (e) manganese(II) iodide
(c) chromium(II) oxide (f) zinc oxide
Chapter 3 Chemical Compounds and Bonding • MHR 103
Naming Compounds That Contain Hydrogen
If a binary compound contains hydrogen as the less electronegative
element, “hydrogen” is used first in the name of the compound. For
example, HCl is called hydrogen chloride and H S is called hydrogen
2
sulfide. Sometimes hydrogen can be the anion, usually in a compound
that contains a Group 1 metal. If hydrogen is the anion, its ending must
be changed to -ide. For example, NaH is called sodium hydride and LiH
is called lithium hydride. Hydrogen-containing compounds can also be
formed with the Group 15 elements. These compounds are usually
referred to by their common names as opposed to their IUPAC names. For
example, NH is called ammonia, PH is called phosphine, AsH is called
3 3 3
arsine, and SbH is called stibine.
3
Many compounds that contain hydrogen are also acids. For example,
H SO , hydrogen sulfate, is also called sulfuric acid. You will learn about
2 4
acid nomenclature in Chapter 10.
Practice Problems
22. Write the IUPAC name for each compound.
(a) H Se (d) LiH
2
(b) HCl (e) CaH
2
(c) HF (f) PH
3
Naming Compounds That Contain Polyatomic Ions
Many compounds contain one or more polyatomic ions. Often these
compounds contain three elements, in which case they are called tertiary
compounds. Although they are not binary compounds, they still contain
one type of anion and one type of cation. The same naming rules that
apply to binary compounds apply to these compounds as well. For
example, NH Cl is called ammonium chloride. Na SO is called sodium
4 2 4
sulfate. NiSO is called nickel(II) sulfate. NH NO is called ammonium
4 4 3
nitrate.
The non-metals in the periodic table are greatly outnumbered by the
metals. There are many negatively charged polyatomic ions, however,
to make up for this. In fact, polyatomic anions are commonly found in
everyday chemicals. Refer back to Table 3.4 for the names of the most
common polyatomic anions.
When you are learning the names of polyatomic ions, you will notice
a pattern. For example, consider the polyatomic ions that contain chlorine
and oxygen:
−
ClO hypochlorite
−
ClO chlorite
2
−
ClO chlorate
3
−
ClO perchlorate
4
Can you see the pattern? Each ion has the same valence, but different
numbers of oxygen atoms. The base ion is the one with the “ate” ending
chlorate. It contains three oxygen atoms. When the ending is changed
to “ite,” subtract an oxygen atom from the chlorate ion. The resulting
chlorite ion contains two oxygen atoms. Add “hypo” to “chlorite,” and
subtract one more oxygen atom. The resulting hypochlorite ion has one
104 MHR • Unit 1 Matter and Chemical Bonding
oxygen atom. Adding “per” to “chlorate,” means that you should add an
oxygen to the chlorate ion. The perchlorate ion has four oxygen atoms.
The base “ate” ions do not always have three oxygen atoms like
chlorate does. Consider the polyatomic ions that contain sulfur and
oxygen. In this case, the base ion, sulfate, SO
2−
, contains four oxygen
4
atoms. The sulfite ion, SO
2−
, therefore contains three oxygen atoms.
3
The hyposulfite ion, SO
2−
, contains two oxygen atoms. Once you know
2
the meanings of the prefixes and suffixes, you need only memorize the
formulas of the “ate” ions. You can work out the formulas for the related
ions using their prefixes and suffixes. The meanings of the prefixes and
suffixes are summarized in Table 3.7. In this table, the “x” stands for the
number of oxygen atoms in the “ate” ion.
Table 3.7 Meaning of prefixes and suffixes
Prefix and suffix Number of oxygen atoms Language LINK
hypo ite x − 2 oxygen atoms
ite x − 1 oxygen atoms The prefix “thio” in the name
of a polyatomic ion means that
ate x oxygen atoms an oxygen atom in the root
per ate x + 1 oxygen atoms “ate” ion has been replaced
by a sulfur atom. For example,
the sulfate ion is SO2−,while
4
thethiosulfate ion isSO2−.
2 3
Notice that the valence does
Practice Problems
not change.
23. Write the IUPAC name for each compound.
(a) (NH ) SO (d) Ni(OH)
4 2 3 2
(b) Al(NO ) (e) Ag PO
2 3 3 4
(c) Li CO (f) Cu(CH COO)
2 3 3 2
Naming Binary Compounds That Contain Two Non-Metals
Table 3.8 Numerical Prefixes for
To indicate that a binary compound is made up of two non-metals, a Binary Compounds That Contain
prefix is usually added to both non-metals in the compound. This prefix Two Non-Metals
indicates the number of atoms of each element in one molecule or formu-
Number Prefix
la unit of the compound. For example, P O is named diphosphorus pen-
2 5
toxide. Alternatively, the Stock System may be used, and P O can be 1 mono-
2 5
named phosphorus (V) oxide. AsBr 3 is named phosphorus tribromide. 2 di-
The prefix mono- is often left out when there is only one atom of the first
3 tri-
element in the name. A list of numerical prefixes is found in Table 3.8.
4 tetra-
5 penta-
Practice Problems 6 hexa-
7 hepta-
24. Write the IUPAC name for each compound.
8 octa-
(a) SF (c) PCl
6 5 9 nona-
(b) N O (d) CF
2 5 4 10 deca-
Chapter 3 Chemical Compounds and Bonding • MHR 105
Section Wrap-up
In section 3.4, you learned how to name ionic and covalent compounds.
You also learned how to write their formulas. In Chapter 4, you will learn
how compounds and elements interact in nature, in the laboratory, and
in everyday life. These interactions are responsible for the tremendous
variety of substances and materials found on Earth.
Section Review
1 K/U Write an unambiguous name for each compound.
(a) K CrO
2 4
(b) NH NO
4 3
(c) Na SO
2 4
(d) Sr (PO )
3 4 2
(e) KNO
2
(f) Ba(ClO)
2
Unit Project Prep 2 K/U Write the name of each binary compound.
In this section, you saw some (a) MgCl
2
common names for chemicals.
(b) Na O
Before you begin your Unit 2
Project, create a list of names (c) FeCl 3
of chemicals found in common
(d) CuO
household cleaning products.
(e) ZnS
If you know only the common
name, find out the chemical (f) AlBr
3
name.
3 K/U Write the formula of each compound.
(a) sodium hydrogen carbonate
(b) potassium dichromate
(c) sodium hypochlorite
(d) lithium hydroxide
(e) potassium permanganate
(f) ammonium chloride
(g) calcium phosphate
(h) sodium thiosulfate
4 K/U Write the formula and name of two possible
compounds that could be formed from
each pair of elements.
(a) vanadium and oxygen
(b) iron and sulfur (−2)
(c) nickel and oxygen
5 C The formula for hydrogen peroxide is H 2 O 2 .
Explain why it is not correct to write the formula
for this covalent compound as HO.
106 MHR • Unit 1 Matter and Chemical Bonding
Review
Reflecting on Chapter 3 Knowledge/Understanding
Summarize this chapter in the format of your 1. Both electronegativity and electron affinity
choice. Here are a few ideas to use as guidelines: describe electron attraction. Explain how
• Elements combine to form a wide variety of they are different.
compounds. 2. Calculate ∆EN for each bond.
• Ionic compounds and covalent compounds have (a) Zn—O
characteristic properties. You can use these (b) Mg—I
properties to classify various compounds. (c) Co—Cl
• You can use the concepts of electron arrange- (d) N—O
ment and forces in atoms to explain the periodic
3. Indicate whether each bond in question 2 is
trend of electronegativity.
ionic or covalent.
• The electronegativity difference between
4. Name three characteristics of covalent
elements can be used to predict what kinds of
compounds and three characteristics of
compounds the elements will form.
• Lewis structures can represent the formation of ionic compounds.
ionic and covalent compounds according to the 5. Give two examples of ionic compounds and
octet rule. two examples of covalent compounds.
• You can explain the conductivity of covalent 6. How does a property of noble gases lead to
and ionic compounds using an understanding of the octet rule?
covalent and ionic bonding.
7. Draw a Lewis structure to represent each
• By predicting the shapes of molecules, you can
ionic compound.
predict their polarity.
(a) potassium bromide
• The polarity of molecules can be used to explain
(b) calcium fluoride
the range of boiling points and melting points
(c) magnesium oxide
among compounds that contain molecules with
(d) lithium oxide
similar masses.
• There is a methodical way to unambiguously 8. Draw a Lewis structure to represent each
covalent compound.
name compounds and write their chemical
(a) CO
formulas. 2
(b) NaH
Reviewing Key Terms (c) NF 3
9. Describe, in detail, what happens when an
For each of the following terms, write a sentence
ionic bond forms between calcium and
that shows your understanding of its meaning.
chlorine. Use Lewis structures to illustrate
chemical bonds ionic bond
your description.
covalent bond electronegativity
10. Diatomic elements (such as oxygen, nitrogen,
octet rule isoelectronic
and chlorine) tend to exist at room temperature
pure covalent bond diatomic elements
as gases. Explain why this is true using your
double bond triple bond
understanding of bonding.
molecular compounds intramolecular forces
intermolecular forces metallic bond 11. A solid covalent compound has both intermole-
alloy polar covalent bond cular and intramolecular forces. Do solid ionic
lone pairs bonding pairs compounds contain intermolecular forces?
polar molecule dipolar molecules Explain your answer.
non-polar molecule chemical formula 12. Distinguish between a non-polar covalent bond
valence polyatomic ions and a polar covalent bond.
zero sum rule chemical nomenclature
13. Distinguish between an ionic bond and a polar
binary compound Stock system
covalent bond.
tertiary compounds
Chapter 3 Chemical Compounds and Bonding • MHR 107
14. Without calculating ∆EN, arrange each set Inquiry
of bonds from most polar to least polar. Then
20. Suppose that you have two colourless
calculate ∆EN for each bond to check your
compounds. You know that one is an ionic
arrangement.
compound and the other is a covalent com-
(a) Mn—O, Mn—N, Mn—F
pound. Design an experiment to determine
(b) Be—F, Be—Cl, Be—Br
which compound is which. Describe the
(c) Ti—Cl, Fe—Cl, Cu—Cl, Ag—Cl, Hg—Cl
tests you would perform and the results you
15. What kind of diagram would you use (Lewis would expect.
structure, structural diagram, ball-and-stick
21. You have two liquids, A and B. You know that
model, or space-filling model) to illustrate
one liquid contains polar molecules, and the
each idea?
other liquid contains non-polar molecules. You
(a) When sodium and chlorine form an ionic
do not know which is which, however. You
bond, sodium loses an electron and chlorine
pour each liquid so that it falls in a steady, nar-
gains an electron.
row stream. As you pour, you hold a negatively
(b) Water, H O, is a molecule that has a bent
2 charged ebonite rod to the stream. The stream
shape.
of liquid A is deflected toward the rod. The rod
(c) Each oxygen atom in carbon dioxide, CO ,
2 does not affect the stream of liquid B. Which
has two bonding pairs and two non-bonding
liquid is polar? Explain your answer.
pairs.
(d) Silicon tetrachloride, SiCl 4 , is a tetrahedral Communication
molecule.
22. Explain how you would predict the most com-
16. Write the valences for the elements in each mon valences of the elements of the second
compound. If the compound is ionic, indicate period (Li, Be, B, C, N, O, F, and Ne) if you did
the charge that is associated with each valence. not have access to the periodic table. Use Lewis
(a) AgCl (b) Mn 3 P 2 structures to illustrate your explanation.
(c) PCl (d) CH
5 4 23. Create a concept map to summarize what you
(e) TiO (f) HgF
2 2 learned in this chapter about the nature of
(g) CaO (h) FeS
bonding and the ways in which bonding mod-
17. Write the formula of each compound. els help to explain physical and chemical
(a) tin(II) fluoride properties.
(b) barium sulfate
24. Compare and contrast ionic bonding and metal-
(c) hydrogen cyanide
lic bonding. Include the following ideas:
(d) cesium bromide • Metals do not bond to other metals in defi-
(e) ammonium hydrogen phosphate
nite ratios. Metals do bond to non-metals in
(f) sodium periodate
definite ratios.
(g) potassium bromate • Solid ionic compounds do not conduct
(h) sodium cyanate
electricity, but solid metals do.
18. Write the name of each compound.
25. Explain why it was important for chemists
(a) HIO (b) KClO
2 4 worldwide to decide on a system for naming
(c) CsF (d) NiCl
2 compounds.
(e) NaHSO (f) Al (SO )
4 2 3 3
(g) K 2 Cr 2 O 7 (h) Fe(IO 4 ) 3 Making Connections
19. Name each compound in two different ways.
26. Chemists do not always agree on names, not
(a) FeO (b) SnCl
4 just for compounds but even for elements. As
(c) CuCl (d) CrBr
2 3 new elements are synthesized in laboratories,
(e) PbO (f) HgO
2 they must be named. Until 1997, there was a
controversy over the names of elements 104 to
108 MHR • Unit 1 Matter and Chemical Bonding
109 (called the transfermium elements). The electrons. 8.The carbon atom shares two pairs of elec-
periodic table at the back of this textbook gives trons with each sulfur atom, so it has two double bonds.
the names that have now been accepted. Do 9.The carbon atom shares one pair of electrons with
hydrogen, and three pairs of electrons with the nitrogen
some research to find out what other names
atom. 10.The two carbon atoms share three pairs of
were proposed for those elements. Find out
electrons in a triple bond. Each carbon atom shares one
what justification was given for the alternative
pair of electrons with one hydrogen atom. 11.(a)polar
names and the accepted names. Then write an covalent (b)covalent (c)covalent (d)polar covalent
essay in which you evaluate the choice that (e)covalent (f)ionic (g)polar covalent (h)ionic 12.(a)C δ+,
was made. Do you agree or disagree? Justify F δ− (d)Cu δ+, O δ− (g)Fe δ+, O δ− 13.(a) O—O, N—O,
your opinion. H—Cl, Na—Cl (b)N—N, P—O, C—Cl, Mg—C 14.Group
13, 3, Group 16, –2, Group 17, –1 15.0, do not tend to
Answers to Practice Problems and
Short Answers to Section Review Questions:
gain or lose electrons 16.(a)Na
2
S(b)CaS (c)BaS (d)Al
2
S
3
Practice Problems: 1.(a)1.24, covalent (b) 0.50, covalent
(e)Rb
2
S (f)H
2
S 17.(a)CaO (b)CaS (c)CaCl
2
(d)CaBr
2
(c)1.85, ionic (d)1.94, ionic (e)1.78, ionic (f)0.49, cova-
(e)Ca
3
P
2
(f)CaF
2
18.(a)NaNO
3
(b)Na
3
PO
4
(c)Na
2
SO
3
lent (g)1.73, ionic (h)2.03, ionic 2.(a)2.44, ionic (b)2.34,
(d)NaCH
3
COO (e)Na
2
S
2
O
3
(f)Na
2
CO
3
19.Mg(NO
3
)
2
ionic (c)3.16, ionic (d)3.00, ionic (e)1.98, ionic (f)2.55,
(b)Mg
3
(PO
4
)
2
(c)MgSO
3
(d)Mg(CH
3
COO)
2
(e)MgS
2
O
3
20.(a)aluminum oxide (b)calcium bromide (c)sodium
ionic 3.(a)one calcium atom gives up two electrons to
phosphide (d)copper(I) sulfide (e)magnesium nitride
one oxygen atom (b)one potassium atom gives up one
electron to one chlorine atom (c)one potassium atom
(f)mercury(II) iodide 21.(a)FeS (b)SnO (c) CrO (d)CoCl
2
gives up one electron to one fluorine atom (d)one lithi-
(e)MnI
2
(f)ZnO 22.(a)hydrogen selenide (b)hydrogen
chloride (c)hydrogen fluoride (d)lithium hydride (e)cal-
um atom gives up one electron to one fluorine atom
cium hydride (f)phosphorus(III) hydride 23.(a)ammoni-
(e)one lithium atom gives up one electron to one
um sulfite (b)aluminum nitrite(c)lithium carbonate
bromine atom (f)one barium atom gives up two
(d)nickel(II) hydroxide (e)silver phosphate (f)copper(II)
electrons to one oxygen atom 4.(a)1.85 (b)2.16 (c)2.46
acetate 24.(a)sulfur hexafluoride (b)dinitrogen pentoxide
(d)2.51 (e)1.76 (f)1.96 5.(a)one magnesium atom gives
(c)phosphorus pentachloride (d)carbon tetrafluoride
up one electron to each of two chlorine atoms (b)one
Section Review: 3.1: 4.(a)Li, La, Zn, Si, Br (b)Cs, Y, Ga, P,
calcium atom gives up one electron to each of two
Cl 5.(a)0.40, covalent (b)1.89, ionic (c)0.96, covalent
chlorine atoms (c)two lithium atoms each give up one
(d)2.16, ionic 6.(a)low (b)covalent 3.2: 1.(a)one magne-
electron to one oxygen atom (d)two sodium atoms each
sium atom gives up one electron to each of two fluorine
give up one electron to one oxygen atom (e) two potassi-
atoms (b)one potassium electron gives up one electron
um atoms each give up one electron to one sulfur atom
to one bromine atom (c)one rubidium atom gives up one
(f)one calcium atom gives up one electron to each of
electron to one chlorine atom (d)one calcium atom gives
two bromine atoms 6.(a)Each iodine atom has seven
up two electrons to one oxygen atom 2.(a)The hydrogen
electrons. Two iodine atoms bonded together share one
atom and chlorine atoms all bond to the carbon atom.
pair of electrons so each has access to eight electrons.
(b)Each hydrogen and chlorine atom shares one electron
(b)Each bromine atom has seven electrons. Two bromine
pair with the carbon atom. (c)The two nitrogen atoms
atoms bonded together share one pair of electrons so
share three pairs of electrons in a triple covalent bond.
that each has access to eight electrons. (c)Each hydrogen
3.(a)covalent (b)covalent (c)covalent (d)ionic
atom has one electron. Two hydrogen atoms bonded
3.3: 1.(a)1.94, ionic (b)0.35, covalent (c)2.23, ionic
together share one pair of electrons so that each has
(d)1.54, polar covalent (e)0.86, polar covalent (f)0.61,
access to two electrons. (d)Each fluorine atom has seven polar covalent 2.(d)Si δ+, O δ− (e)S δ+, O δ− (f)C δ+, Cl δ−
electrons. Two fluorine atoms bonded together share one
4.(a)O—F, H—Br, H—Cl, K—Br (b)C—H, C—Br, C—O,
pair of electrons so that each has access to eight elec-
C—F 7.(a)1.26, non-polar molecule (b)0.97, polar mole-
trons. 7.(a)One hydrogen atom bonds to one oxygen
cule (c)1.55, non-polar molecule 3.4: 1.(a)potassium
atom, sharing one electron pair. (b)Two chlorine atoms
chromate (b)ammonium nitrate (c)sodium sulfate (d)
bond to one oxygen atom. Each chlorine atom shares
strontium phosphate (e)potassium nitrite (f)barium
one pair of electrons with the oxygen atom. (c)One car-
hypochlorite 2.(a)magnesium chloride (b)sodium oxide
bon atom bonds to four hydrogen atoms. Each hydrogen
(c)iron(III) chloride (d)copper(II) oxide (e)zinc sulfide
atom shares one pair of electrons with the carbon atom.
(d)One iodine atom bonds to one hydrogen atom. They
(f)aluminum bromide 3.(a)NaHCO 3(b)K
2
Cr
2
O
7
(c)NaClO
share an electron pair. (e)One nitrogen atom bonds to
(d)LiOH (e)KMnO
4
(f)NH
4
Cl (g)Ca
3
(PO
4
) 2(h)Na
2
S
2
O
3
4.(a)any two of: vanadium(II) oxide, VO, vanadium(III)
three hydrogen atoms. Each hydrogen atom shares a pair
oxide, V O , vanadium(IV) oxide, VO , vanadium(V)
of electrons with the nitrogen atom. (f)One hydrogen 2 3 2
atom bonds to one rubidium atom. They share a pair of
oxide, V
2
O
5
(b)iron(II) sulfide, FeS, iron(I) sulfide, Fe
2
S
(c)nickel(II) oxide, NiO, nickel(III) oxide, Ni
2
O
3
Chapter 3 Chemical Compounds and Bonding • MHR 109
110
Classifying Reactions:
Chemicals in Balance
P
icture a starry night and tired hikers sitting around a campfire. Chapter Preview
Everywhere in this peaceful setting, chemical reactions are taking place.
4.1 Chemical Equations
The cellulose in the firewood reacts with the oxygen in the air, producing
4.2 Synthesis and
carbon dioxide and water. The light and heat of the campfire are evidence
Decomposition Reactions
of the chemical reaction. If someone roasts a marshmallow its sugars react
with oxygen. The soft, white marshmallow forms a brown and brittle 4.3 Single Displacement and
Double Displacement
crust. When someone eats a marshmallow, the chemicals in the stomach
Reactions
react with the sugar molecules to digest them. A person telling a story
exhales carbon dioxide with every breath. Carbon dioxide is the product 4.4 Simple Nuclear Reactions
of respiration, another chemical reaction.
In each star in the night sky above, another type of reaction is taking
place. This type of reaction is called a nuclear reaction, because it
involves changes within the nucleus of the atom. Nuclear reactions are
responsible for the enormous amounts of heat and light generated by all
the stars, including our Sun.
Back on Earth, however, chemical reactions are everywhere in our
daily lives. We rely on chemical reactions for everything from powering a
car to making toast. In this chapter, you will learn how to write balanced
Concepts and Skills
chemical equations for these reactions. You will look for patterns and
You Will Need
similarities between the chemical equations, and you will classify the
Before you begin this chapter,
reactions they represent. As well, you will learn how to balance and
review the following concepts
classify equations for nuclear reactions.
and skills:
(cid:2) defining and describing
the relationships among
atomic number, mass
number, atomic mass,
isotope, and radioisotope
(Chapter 2, section 2.1)
(cid:2) naming chemical
compounds (Chapter 3,
section 3.4)
(cid:2) writing chemical formulas
(Chapter 3, section 3.4)
(cid:2) explaining how different
elements combine to form
covalent and ionic bonds
using the octet rule
You learned above that the cellulose in firewood can react (Chapter 3, sections 3.2
with oxygen to produce carbon dioxide and water. How can and 3.3)
you describe and classify a chemical reaction that causes a
piece of firewood to become a chunk of charcoal? What is
happening as the charcoal burns away?
Chapter 4 Classifying Reactions: Chemicals in Balance • MHR 111
4.1 Chemical Equations
Section Preview/ In Chapter 3, you learned how and why elements combine to form
Specific Expectations different compounds. In this section, you will learn how to describe
what happens when elements and compounds interact with one another
In this section, you will
to form new substances. These interactions are called chemical reactions.
(cid:2) useword equations
A substance that undergoes a chemical reaction is called a reactant. A
and skeleton equations
to describe chemical substance that is formed in a chemical reaction is called a product.
reactions For example, when the glucose in a marshmallow reacts with oxygen
(cid:2) balancechemical equations in the air to form water and carbon dioxide, the glucose and oxygen are
the reactants. The carbon dioxide and water are the products. Chemists
(cid:2) communicateyour under-
use chemical equations to communicate what is occurring in a chemical
standing of the following
terms: chemical reactions, reaction. Chemical equations come in several forms. All of these forms
reactant, product, chemical condense a great deal of chemical information into a short statement.
equations, word equation,
skeleton equation, law of Word Equations
conservation of mass,
balanced chemical equation A word equation identifies the reactants and products of a chemical
reaction by name. In Chapter 3, you learned that chlorine and sodium
combine to form the ionic compound sodium chloride. This reaction can
be represented by the following word equation:
sodium+chlorine → sodiumchloride
In this equation, “+” means “reacts with” and “→” means “to form.” Try
writing some word equations in the following Practice Problems.
Practice Problems
Write the chemical formulas
1. Describe each reaction using a word equation. Label the reactant(s)
of the products in the reactions
and product(s).
described in Practice Problem 1.
(a) Calcium and fluorine react to form calcium fluoride.
(b) Barium chloride and hydrogen sulfate react to form hydrogen
chloride and barium sulfate.
(c) Calcium carbonate, carbon dioxide, and water react to form
calcium hydrogen carbonate.
(d) Hydrogen peroxide reacts to form water and oxygen.
(e) Sulfur dioxide and oxygen react to form sulfur trioxide.
2. Yeast can facilitate a reaction in which the sugar in grapes reacts to
form ethanol and carbon dioxide. Write a word equation to describe
this reaction.
CHEM
FACT
Word equations are useful because they identify the products and
Caffeine is an ingredient in
reactants in a chemical reaction. They do not, however, provide any
coffee, tea, chocolate, and
chemical information about the compounds and elements themselves.
cola drinks. Its chemical name
is 1,3,7-trimethylxanthene. You If you did not know the formula for sodium chloride, for example, this
can see how long names like equation would not help you understand the reaction very well. Another
this would become unwieldy shortcoming of a word equation is that the names for chemicals are often
in word equations. very long and cumbersome. Chemists have therefore devised a more
convenient way of representing reactants and products.
112 MHR • Unit 1 Matter and Chemical Bonding
Skeleton Equations Table 4.1 Symbols
Used in Chemical Equations
Using a chemical formula instead of a chemical name simplifies a
chemical equation. It allows you to see at a glance what elements and Symbol Meaning
compounds are involved in the reaction. A skeleton equation lists the + reacts with
chemical formula of each reactant on the left, separated by a + sign (reactant side)
if more than one reactant is involved, followed by an arrow →. The + and (product side)
chemical formula of each product is listed on the right, again separated → to form
by a + sign if more than one product is produced. A skeleton equation
(s) solid or precipitate
also shows the state of each reactant by using the appropriate subscript,
as shown in Table 4.1. ((cid:2)) liquid
The reaction of sodium metal with chlorine gas to form sodium (g) gas
chloride can be represented by the following skeleton equation:
(aq) in aqueous (water)
Na +Cl → NaCl solution
(s) 2(g) (s)
A skeleton equation is more useful to a chemist than a word equation,
because it shows the formulas of the compounds involved. It also shows
the state of each substance.Try writing some skeleton equations in the
following Practice Problems.
Practice Problems
3. Write a skeleton equation for each reaction.
(a) Solid zinc reacts with chlorine gas to form solid zinc chloride.
(b) Solid calcium and liquid water react to form solid calcium
hydroxide and hydrogen gas.
(c) Solid barium reacts with solid sulfur to produce solid barium sulfide.
(d) Aqueous lead(II) nitrate and solid magnesium react to form
aqueous magnesium nitrate and solid lead.
4. In each reaction below, a solid reacts with a gas to form a solid.
Write a skeleton equation for each reaction.
(a) carbon dioxide + calcium oxide → calcium carbonate
(b) aluminum + oxygen → aluminum oxide
(c) magnesium + oxygen → magnesium oxide
Why Skeleton Equations Are Incomplete
Although skeleton equations are useful, they do not fully describe chemi-
cal reactions. To understand why, consider the skeleton equation showing
the formation of sodium chloride (above). According to this equation, one
sodium atom reacts with one chlorine molecule containing two chlorine
CHEM
atoms. The product is one formula unit of sodium chloride, containing
FACT
one atom of sodium and one atom of chlorine. Where has the extra
Many chemical reactions can
chlorine atom gone?
go in either direction, so an
arrow pointing in the opposite
The Law of Conservation of Mass
direction is often added to the
equation.This can look like
All atoms must be accounted for, according to an important law. The law
or . To indicate which
of conservation of mass states that in any chemical reaction, the mass
reaction is more likely to
of the products is always equal to the mass of the reactants. In other
occur, one arrow can be
words, according to this law, matter can be neither created nor destroyed.
drawn longer than the other:
Chemical reactions proceed according to the law of conservation of mass, for example: or .
which is based on experimental evidence.
Chapter 4 Classifying Reactions: Chemicals in Balance • MHR 113
Careers in Chemistry
Food Chemist alginate forms, which causes the stream of
pimento mixture to form a gel instantly. The
gelled strip is then sliced thinly and stuffed into
the olives.
Food chemists work in universities, govern-
ment laboratories, and major food companies. To
become a food chemist, most undergraduates
take a food science degree with courses in chem-
istry. It is also possible to become a food chemist
with an undergraduate chemistry degree plus
experience in the food industry. Students can
How do you make a better tasting sports drink? specialize in food chemistry at the graduate level.
How can you make a gravy mix that can be ready
to serve in 5 min, yet maintain its consistency Make Career Connections
under a heat lamp for 8 h? Food chemists use
1. If you are interested in becoming a food
their knowledge of chemical reactions to improve
chemist, you can look for a summer or part-
food quality and develop new products.
time job in the food industry.
A good example of food chemistry in action
2. To find out more about food science, search
is the red pimento stuffing in olives. Chopped
for Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada's web
pimentos (sweet red peppers) and sodium algi-
site and the Food Web web site. You can also
nate are mixed. This mixture is then added to a
contact the Food Science department of a
solution of calcium chloride. The sodium alginate
university.
reacts with the calcium chloride. Solid calcium
History Balanced Chemical Equations
LINK
A balanced chemical equation reflects the law of conservation of mass.
Jan Baptista van Helmont This type of equation shows that there is the same number of each kind
(1577–1644) was a Flemish
of atom on both sides of the equation. Some skeleton equations are, by
physician who left medical
coincidence, already balanced. For example, examine the reaction of
practice to devote himself
carbon with oxygen to form carbon dioxide, shown in Figure 4.1. In the
to the study of chemistry. He
used the mass balance in an skeleton equation, one carbon atom and two oxygen atoms are on the left
important experiment that laid side of the equation, and one carbon atom and two oxygen atoms are on
the foundations for the law the right side of the equation.
of conservation of mass.
He showed that a definite
quantity of sand could be fused
with excess alkali to form a
kind of glass. He also showed
that when this product was ++
treated with acid, it regenerat-
ed the original amount of sand
(silica). As well, Van Helmont is
famous for demonstrating the
existence of gases, which he
described as “aerial fluids.” C ++ O 2 CO 2
Investigate on the Internet or
in the library to find out how he
did this.
Figure 4.1 This skeleton equation is already balanced.
114 MHR • Unit 1 Matter and Chemical Bonding
Most skeleton equations, however, are not balanced, such as the one
showing the formation of sodium chloride. Examine Figure 4.2 to see
why. There is one sodium atom on each side of the equation, but there
are two chlorine atoms on the left side and only one chlorine atom on
the right side.
To begin to balance an equation, you can add numbers in front of the
appropriate formulas. The numbers that are placed in front of chemical
formulas are called coefficients. They represent how many of each atom,
molecule, or formula unit take part in each reaction. For example, if you
add a coefficient of 2 to NaCl in the equation in Figure 4.2, you indicate
that two formula units of NaCl are produced in the reaction. Is the equa-
tion balanced now? As you can see by examining Figure 4.3, it is not. The
chlorine atoms are balanced, but now there is one sodium atom on the
left side of the equation and two sodium atoms on the right side.
Na + Cl 2 NaCl Na + Cl 2 2NaCl
Figure 4.2 This skeleton equation is unbalanced. The mass Figure 4.3 The equation is still unbalanced. The mass of
of the reactants is greater than the mass of the product. the product is now greater than the mass of the reactants.
Add a coefficient of 2 to the sodium on the reactant side. As you can
see in Figure 4.4, the equation is now balanced. The mass of the products
is equal to the mass of the reactants. This balanced chemical equation
satisfies the law of conservation of mass.
Why is it notacceptable to
balance the equation
Na+Cl → NaCl
2
by changing the formula of
NaCl to NaCl ? Would this not
2
satisfy the law of conservation
2Na + Cl 2 2NaCl of mass? Write an explanation
in your notebook.
Figure 4.4 The equation is now balanced according to the law of conservation of mass.
Chapter 4 Classifying Reactions: Chemicals in Balance • MHR 115
You cannot balance an equation by changing any of the chemical
formulas. The only way to balance a chemical equation is to put the
appropriate numerical coefficient in front of each compound or element
in the equation.
Many skeleton equations are simple enough to balance by a back-and-
forth process of reasoning, as you just saw with the sodium chloride
reaction. Try balancing the equations in the Practice Problems that follow.
Practice Problems
5. Copy each skeleton equation into your notebook, and balance it.
(a) S +O → SO (c) H +Cl → HCl
(s) 2(g) 2(g) 2(g) 2(g) (g)
(b) P 4(s) +O 2(g) → P 4 O 10(s) (d) SO 2(g) +H 2 O ((cid:2)) → H 2 SO 3(aq)
6. Indicate whether these equations are balanced. If they are not,
balance them.
(a) 4Fe +3O → 2Fe O
(s) 2(g) 2 3(s)
(b) HgO (s) → Hg ((cid:2)) +O 2(g)
(c) H 2 O 2(aq) → 2H 2 O ((cid:2)) +O 2(g)
(d) 2HCl (aq) +Na 2 SO 3(aq) → 2NaCl (aq) +H 2 O ((cid:2)) +SO 2(g)
Steps for Balancing Chemical Equations
More complex chemical equations than the ones you have already tried
can be balanced by using a combination of inspection and trial and error.
Here, however, are some steps to follow.
Step 1 Write out the skeleton equation. Ensure that you have copied
all the chemical formulas correctly.
Step 2 Begin by balancing the atoms that occur in the largest number
on either side of the equation. Leave hydrogen, oxygen, and
other elements until later.
Step 3 Balance any polyatomic ions, such as sulfate, SO
2−
, that occur
4
on both sides of the chemical equation as an ion unit. That is,
do not split a sulfate ion into 1 sulfur atom and 4 oxygen
atoms. Balance this ion as one unit.
Step 4 Next, balance any hydrogen or oxygen atoms that occur in a
combined and uncombined state. For example, combined
oxygen might be in the form of CO , while uncombined
2
oxygen occurs as O .
2
Electronic Learning Partner Step 5 Finally, balance any other element that occurs in its
uncombined state: for example, Na or Cl .
2
Go to the Chemistry 11
Step 6 Check your answer. Count the number of each type of atom on
Electronic Learning Partner for
each side of the equation. Make sure that the coefficients used
some extra practice balancing
are whole numbers in their lowest terms.
chemical equations.
Examine the following Sample Problem to see how these steps work.
116 MHR • Unit 1 Matter and Chemical Bonding
Sample Problem
Balancing Chemical Equations
Problem
Copper(II) nitrate reacts with potassium hydroxide to form
potassium nitrate and solid copper(II) hydroxide.
Balance the equation.
Cu(NO ) +KOH → Cu(OH) +KNO
3 2(aq) (aq) 2(s) 3(aq)
What Is Required?
The atoms of each element on the left side of the equation should
equal the atoms of each element on the right side of the equation.
Plan Your Strategy
− −
Balance the polyatomic ions first (NO , then OH ). Check to see
3
whether the equation is balanced. If not, balance the potassium
and copper ions. Check your equation again.
Act on Your Strategy
−
There are two NO ions on the left, so put a 2 in front of KNO .
3 3
Cu(NO ) +KOH → Cu(OH) +2KNO
3 2(aq) (aq) 2(s) 3(aq)
−
To balance the two OH ions on the right, put a 2 in front of the KOH.
Cu(NO ) +2KOH → Cu(OH) +2KNO
3 2(aq) (aq) 2(s) 3(aq)
Check to see that the copper and potassium ions are balanced. They
are, so the equation above is balanced.
Check Your Solution
Tally the number of each type of atom on each side of the equation. Math
LINK
Cu(NO ) +2KOH → Cu(OH) +2KNO
3 2(aq) (aq) 2(s) 3(aq)
Left Side Right Side What does it mean when
a fraction is expressed in
Cu 1 1
lowest terms? The fraction 5,
NO − 2 2 10
3 expressed in lowest terms,
K 2 2 is 1. Similarly, the equation
OH − 2 2 2
4H 2(g) +2O 2(g) → 4H 2 O ((cid:2))
is balanced, but it can be
Practice Problems
simplified by dividing all
the coefficients by two.
7. Copy each chemical equation into your notebook, and balance it. 2H 2(g) +O 2(g) → 2H 2 O ((cid:2))
(a) SO +O → SO Write the balanced equation
2(g) 2(g) 3(g) 6KClO → 6KCl +9O so
(b) BaCl +Na SO → NaCl +BaSO 3(s) (g) 2(s)
2(aq) 2 4(aq) (aq) 4(s) that the coefficients are the
lowest possible whole num-
8. When solid white phosphorus, P , is burned in air, it reacts with
4
bers. Check that the equation
oxygen to produce solid tetraphosphorus decoxide, P O . When
4 10 is still balanced.
water is added to the P O , it reacts to form aqueous phosphoric
4 10
acid, H PO . Write and balance the chemical equations that repre-
3 4
sent these reactions.
Continued ...
Chapter 4 Classifying Reactions: Chemicals in Balance • MHR 117
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 117
9. Copy each chemical equation into your notebook, and balance it.
(a) As S +O → As O +SO
4 6(s) 2(g) 4 6(s) 2(g)
(b) Sc 2 O 3(s) +H 2 O ((cid:2)) → Sc(OH) 3(s)
(c) C 2 H 5 OH ((cid:2)) +O 2(g) → CO 2(g) +H 2 O ((cid:2))
(d) C H +O → CO +H O
4 10(g) 2(g) (g) 2 (g)
Section Wrap-up
In this section, you learned how to represent chemical reactions using
balanced chemical equations. Because there are so many different
chemical reactions, chemists have devised different classifications for
these reactions. In section 4.2, you will learn about five different types
of chemical reactions.
Section Review
1 MC In your own words, explain what a chemical reaction is. Write
descriptions of four chemical reactions that you encounter every day.
2 C Write a word equation, skeleton equation, and balanced equation
for each reaction.
(a) Sulfur dioxide gas reacts with oxygen gas to produce gaseous sulfur
trioxide.
(b) Metallic sodium reacts with liquid water to produce hydrogen gas
and aqueous sodium hydroxide.
(c) Copper metal reacts with an aqueous hydrogen nitrate solution to
produce aqueous copper(II) nitrate, nitrogen dioxide gas, and liquid
water.
3 K/U The equation for the decomposition of hydrogen peroxide, H 2 O 2
is H 2 O 2(aq) → H 2 O ((cid:2)) +O 2(g) . Explain why you cannot balance it by
writing it as H 2 O 2(aq) → H 2 O ((cid:2)) +O (g)
4 K/U Balance the following chemical equations.
(a) Al +O → Al O
(s) 2(g) 2 3(s)
(b) Na S O +I → NaI +Na S O
2 2 3(aq) 2(aq) (aq) 2 4 6(aq)
(c) Al +Fe O → Al O +Fe
(s) 2 3(s) 2 3(s) (s)
(d) NH 3(g) +O 2(g) → NO (g) +H 2 O ((cid:2))
(e) Na 2 O (s) +(NH 4 ) 2 SO 4(aq) → Na 2 SO 4(aq) +H 2 O ((cid:2)) +NH 3(aq)
(f) C 5 H 12((cid:2)) +O 2(g) → CO 2(g) +H 2 O (g)
5 I A student places 0.58 g of iron and 1.600 g of copper(II) sulfate in
a reaction vessel. The reaction vessel has a mass of 40.32 g, and it
contains 100.00 g of water. The aqueous copper sulfate and solid
iron react to form solid copper and aqueous iron(II) sulfate. After the
reaction, the reaction vessel plus the products have a mass of 142.5 g.
Explain the results. Then write a balanced chemical equation to
describe the reaction.
118 MHR • Unit 1 Matter and Chemical Bonding
Synthesis and 4.2
Decomposition Reactions
How are different kinds of compounds formed? In section 4.1, you Section Preview/
learned that they are formed by chemical reactions that you can describe Specific Expectations
using balanced chemical equations. Just as there are different types of
In this section, you will
compounds, there are different types of chemical reactions. In this
(cid:2) distinguishbetween
section, you will learn about five major classifications for chemical
synthesis, decomposition,
reactions. You will use your understanding of chemical formulas and and combustion reactions
chemical equations to predict products for each class of reaction.
(cid:2) writebalanced chemical
equations to represent
Why Classify? synthesis, decomposition,
and combustion reactions
People use classifications all the time. For example, many types of wild
mushrooms are edible, but many others are poisonous—even deadly! How (cid:2) predictthe products of
chemical reactions
can you tell which is which? Poisonous and deadly mushrooms have
characteristics that distinguish them from edible ones, such as odour, (cid:2) demonstratean under-
standing of the relationship
colour, habitat, and shape of roots. It is not always easy to distinguish
between the type of
one type of mushroom from another; the only visible difference may be
chemical reaction and the
the colour of the mushroom’s spores. Therefore, you should never try to
nature of the reactants
eat any wild mushrooms without an expert’s advice.
(cid:2) communicateyour under-
Examine Figure 4.5. Which mushroom looks more appetizing to you?
standing of the following
An expert will always be able to distinguish an edible mushroom from a
terms: synthesis reaction,
poisonous mushroom based on the characteristics that have been used to decomposition reaction,
classify each type. By classifying, they can predict the effects of eating any combustion reaction,
wild mushroom. incomplete combustion
A
Figure 4.5 The mushroom on the left, called a
chanterelle, is edible and very tasty. The mushroom
on the right is called a death cap. It is extremely
poisonous.
B
Chapter 4 Classifying Reactions: Chemicals in Balance • MHR 119
In the same way, you can recognize similarities between chemical
reactions and the types of reactants that tend to undergo different types
of reactions. With this knowledge, you can predict what will happen
when one, two, or more substances react. In this section, you will often
see chemical reactions without the subscripts showing the states of matter.
They are omitted deliberately because, in most cases, you are not yet in a
position to predict the states of the products.
Synthesis Reactions
In a synthesis reaction, two or more elements or compounds combine to
form a new substance. Synthesis reactions are also known as combination
or formation reactions. A general equation for a synthesis reaction is
A+B → C
In a simple synthesis reaction, one element reacts with one or more other
elements to form a compound. Two, three, four, or more elements may
react to form a single product, although synthesis reactions involving four
or more reactants are extremely rare. Why do you think this is so? When
two elements react together, the reaction is almost always a synthesis
reaction because the product is almost always a single compound. There
are several types of synthesis reactions. Recognizing the patterns of the
various types of reactions will help you to predict whether substances
will take part in a synthesis reaction.
When a metal or a non-metal element reacts with oxygen, the product
is an oxide. Figure 4.6 shows a familiar example, in which iron reacts
with oxygen according to the following equation:
3Fe + O → Fe O
(s) 2(g) 2 3(s)
Figure 4.6 The iron in this car
undergoes a synthesis reaction
with the oxygen in the air. Iron(III)
oxide, also known as rust, is
formed.
Two other examples of this type of reaction are:
2H +O → 2H O
2(g) 2(g) 2 (g)
2Mg +O → 2MgO
(s) 2(g) (s)
A second type of synthesis reaction involves the reaction of a metal and
a non-metal to form a binary compound. One example is the reaction of
potassium with chlorine.
2K +Cl → 2KCl
(s) 2(g) (s)
120 MHR • Unit 1 Matter and Chemical Bonding
Synthesis Reactions Involving Compounds
History
LINK
In the previous two types of synthesis reactions, two elements reacted to
form one product. There are many synthesis reactions in which one or
Today we have sophisticated
more compounds are the reactants. For the purpose of this course, howev- lab equipment to help us ana-
er, we will deal only with the two specific types of synthesis reactions lyze the products of reactions.
involving compounds that you should recognize: oxides and water. In the past, when such equip-
When a non-metallic oxide reacts with water, the product is an ment was not available,
chemists sometimes jeopard-
acid. You will learn more about acids and the rules for naming them in
ized their safety and health to
Chapter 10. The acids that form when non-metallic oxides and water react
determine the products of the
are composed of hydrogen cations and polyatomic anions containing
reactions they studied. Sir
oxygen and a non-metal. For example, one contributor to acid rain is Humphry Davy (1778–1829),
hydrogen sulfate (sulfuric acid), H 2 SO 4 , which forms when sulfur trioxide a contributor to many areas
reacts with water. The sulfur trioxide comes from sources such as of chemistry, thought nothing
industrial plants that emit the gas as a byproduct of burning fossil fuels, of inhaling the gaseous prod-
ucts of the chemical reactions
as shown in Figure 4.7.
that he carried out. He tried
SO 3(g) +H 2 O ((cid:2)) → H 2 SO 4(aq) to breathe pure CO , then
2
known as fixed air. He nearly
suffocated himself by breath-
ing hydrogen. In 1800, Davy
inhaled dinitrogen monoxide,
NO, otherwise known as
2
nitrous oxide, and discovered
its anaesthetic properties.
What is nitrous oxide used
for today?
Figure 4.7 Sulfur trioxide, emitted by this factory, reacts with the water in the air. As you begin learning about
Sulfuric acid is formed in a synthesis reaction. different types of chemical
reactions, keep a separate list
Conversely, when a metallic oxide reacts with water, the product is a of each type of reaction. Add
metal hydroxide. Metal hydroxides belong to a group of compounds called to the list as you encounter
bases. You will learn more about bases in Chapter 10. For example, when new reactions.
calcium oxide reacts with water, it forms calcium hydroxide, Ca(OH) .
2
Calcium oxide is also called lime. It can be added to lakes to counteract
the effects of acid precipitation.
CaO (s) +H 2 O ((cid:2)) → Ca(OH) 2(aq)
Sometimes it is difficult to predict the product of a synthesis reaction.
The only way to really know the product of a reaction is to carry out the
reaction and then isolate and identify the product. For example, carbon
can react with oxygen to form either carbon monoxide or carbon dioxide.
Therefore, if all you know is that your reactants are carbon and oxygen,
you cannot predict with certainty which compound will form. You can
only give options.
C +O → CO
(s) 2(g) 2(g)
2C +O → 2CO
(s) 2(g) (g)
You would need to analyze the products of the reaction by experiment to
determine which compound was formed.
Chapter 4 Classifying Reactions: Chemicals in Balance • MHR 121
Try predicting the products of synthesis reactions in the following
Practice Problems.
Practice Problems
10. Copy the following synthesis reactions into your notebook. Predict
the product of each reaction. Then balance each chemical equation.
(a) K+Br → (c) Ca+Cl →
2 2
(b) H +Cl → (d) Li+O →
2 2 2
11. Copy the following synthesis reactions into your notebook. For
each set of reactants, write the equations that represent the possible
products.
(a) Fe+O →
2
(suggest two different synthesis reactions)
(b) V+O →
2
(suggest four different synthesis reactions)
(c) Co+Cl →
2
(suggest two different synthesis reactions)
(d) Ti+O →
2
(suggest three different synthesis reactions)
12. Copy the following equations into your notebook. Write the product
of each reaction. Then balance each chemical equation.
(a) K O+H O → (c) SO +H O →
2 2 2 2
(b) MgO+H O →
2
13. Ammonia gas and hydrogen chloride gas react to form a solid
compound. Predict what the solid compound is. Then write a
balanced chemical equation.
Decomposition Reactions
In a decomposition reaction, a compound breaks down into elements or
other compounds. Therefore, a decomposition reaction is the opposite of
a synthesis reaction. A general formula for a decomposition reaction is:
C → A+B
The substances that are produced in a decomposition reaction can be
elements or compounds. In the simplest type of decomposition reaction,
a compound breaks down into its component elements. One example is
the decomposition of water into hydrogen and oxygen. This reaction
occurs when electricity is passed through water. Figure 4.8 shows an
apparatus set up for the decomposition of water.
2H O → 2H +O
2 2 2
More complex decomposition reactions occur when compounds break
down into other compounds. An example of this type of reaction is
Figure 4.8 As electricity passes shown in Figure 4.9. The photograph shows the explosive decomposition
through the water, it decomposes of ammonium nitrate.
to hydrogen and oxygen gas.
122 MHR • Unit 1 Matter and Chemical Bonding
When ammonium nitrate is heated to a high temperature, it forms
dinitrogen monoxide and water according to the following balanced
equation:
NH NO → N O +2H O
4 3(s) 2 (g) 2 (g)
Try predicting the products of the decomposition reactions in the
following Practice Problems.
Practice Problems
14. Mercury(II) oxide, or mercuric oxide, is a bright red powder. It
decomposes on heating. What are the products of the decomposition
of HgO?
15. What are the products of the following decomposition reactions?
Predict the products. Then write a balanced equation for each
reaction.
(a) HI → (c) AlCl →
3 Figure 4.9 At high temperatures,
(b) Ag O → (d) MgO → ammonium nitrate explodes,
2
decomposing into dinitrogen
16. Calcium carbonate decomposes into calcium oxide and carbon
monoxide and water.
dioxide when it is heated. Based on this information, predict the
products of the following decomposition reactions.
(a) MgCO →
3
(b) CuCO →
3
Combustion Reactions
Combustion reactions form an important class of chemical reactions.
The combustion of fuel—wood, fossil fuel, peat, or dung—has,
throughout history, heated and lit our homes and cooked our food.
The energy produced by combustion reactions moves our airplanes,
trains, trucks, and cars.
A complete combustion reaction is the reaction of a compound or
element with O to form the most common oxides of the elements that
2
make up the compound. For example, a carbon-containing compound
undergoes combustion to form carbon dioxide, CO . A sulfur-contain-
2
ing compound reacts with oxygen to form sulfur dioxide, SO .
2
Combustion reactions are usually accompanied by the production
of light and heat. In the case of carbon-containing compounds,
complete combustion results in the formation of, among other things,
carbon dioxide. For example, methane, CH , the primary constituent
4
of natural gas, undergoes complete combustion to form carbon dioxide,
(the most common oxide of carbon), as well as water. This combustion
reaction is represented by the following equation:
CH +2O → CO +2H O
4(g) 2(g) 2(g) 2 (g)
The combustion of methane, shown in Figure 4.10, leads to the formation
Figure 4.10 This photo shows
of carbon dioxide and water.
the combustion of methane in a
The complete combustion of any compound that contains carbon,
laboratory burner.
hydrogen, and oxygen (such as ethanol, C H OH) produces carbon
2 5
dioxide and water.
Chapter 4 Classifying Reactions: Chemicals in Balance • MHR 123
Compounds that contain elements other than carbon also undergo
complete combustion to form stable oxides. For instance, sulfur-contain-
ing compounds undergo combustion to form sulfur dioxide, SO , a
2
precursor to acid rain. Complete combustion reactions are often also
synthesis reactions. Metals, such as magnesium, undergo combustion
to form their most stable oxide, as shown in Figure 4.11.
2Mg +O → 2MgO
(s) 2(g) (s)
Figure 4.11 Magnesium metal burns in oxygen. The smoke
and ash that are produced in this combustion reaction are
magnesium oxide.
In the absence of sufficient oxygen, carbon-containing compounds under-
go incomplete combustion, leading to the formation of carbon monoxide,
CO, and water. Carbon monoxide is a deadly gas. You should always make
sure that sufficient oxygen is present in your indoor environment for your
gas furnace, gas stove, or fireplace.
Copy the following skeleton
Try the following problems to practise balancing combustion
equation for the combustion
reactions.
of pentane, CH , into your
5 12
notebook and balance it.
CH +O → CO +HO
5 12 2 2 2
Practice Problems
If it took you a long time to
balance this equation, chances
are that you did not use the 17. The alcohol lamps that are used in some science labs are often
quickest method. Try balancing
fuelled with methanol, CH OH. Write the balanced chemical
3
carbon first, hydrogen second,
equation for the complete combustion of methanol.
and finally oxygen. What is the
advantage of leaving O 2 until 18. Gasoline is a mixture of compounds containing hydrogen and
the end? Would this method carbon, such as octane, C H . Write the balanced chemical
8 18
work for incomplete combus-
equation for the complete combustion of C H .
8 18
tion reactions? Would this
method work if the “fuel” 19. Acetone, C H O, is often contained in nail polish remover. Write the
3 6
contained oxygen in addition balanced chemical equation for the complete combustion of acetone.
to C and H? Now try balancing
the chemical equation for the 20. Kerosene consists of a mixture of hydrocarbons. It has many uses
combustion of heptane (CH ) including jet fuel and rocket fuel. It is also used as a fuel for hurri-
7 16
and the combustion of rubbing cane lamps. If we represent kerosene as C H , write a balanced
16 34
alcohol, isopropanol (C 3 H 8 O). chemical equation for the complete combustion of kerosene.
124 MHR • Unit 1 Matter and Chemical Bonding
Section Wrap-up
In this section, you learned about three major types of reactions: synthe-
sis, decomposition, and combustion reactions. Using your knowledge
about these types of reactions, you learned how to predict the products
of various reactants. In section 5.3, you will increase your understanding
of chemical reactions even further, learning about two major types of
chemical reactions. As well, you will observe various chemical reactions
in three investigations.
Section Review
1 K/U Write the product for each synthesis reaction. Balance the Unit Project Prep
chemical equation. Before you design your
(a) Be+O → Chemistry Newsletter at the
2
end of Unit 1, consider that
(b) Li+Cl →
2 fuels are composed of com-
(c) Mg+N → pounds containing hydrogen
2
(d) Al+Br → and carbon (hydrocarbons).
2 What kind of reaction have you
(e) K+O 2 → seen in this section that
involves those kinds of com-
2 K/U Write the products for each decomposition reaction. Balance the
pounds? What type of warning
chemical equation.
would you expect to see on a
(a) K O → container of lawnmower fuel?
2
(b) CuO → How is the warning related to
the types of reaction that
(c) H 2 O → involve hydrocarbons?
(d) Ni O →
2 3
(e) Ag O →
2
3 C Write a balanced chemical equation for each of the following word
equations. Classify each reaction.
(a) With heating, solid tin(IV) hydroxide produces solid tin(IV) oxide
and water vapour.
(b) Chlorine gas reacts with crystals of iodine to form iodine trichloride.
4 K/U Write a balanced chemical equation for the combustion of
butanol, C H OH.
4 9
5 I A red compound was heated, and the two products were collected.
The gaseous product caused a glowing splint to burn brightly. The
other product was a shiny pure metal, which was a liquid at room
temperature. Write the most likely reaction that would explain these
results. Classify the reaction. Hint: Remember that the periodic table
identifies the most common valences.
6 MC Explain why gaseous nitrogen oxides emitted by automobiles and
industries contribute to acid rain. Write balanced chemical reactions
to back up your ideas. You may need to look up chemical formulas for
your products.
Chapter 4 Classifying Reactions: Chemicals in Balance • MHR 125
4.3 Single Displacement and
Double Displacement Reactions
Section Preview/ In section 4.2, you learned about three different types of chemical reactions.
Specific Expectations In section 4.3, you will learn about two more types of reactions. You will
learn how performing these reactions can help you make inferences about
In this section, you will
the properties of the elements and compounds involved.
(cid:2) distinguishbetween
synthesis, decomposition,
combustion, single Single Displacement Reactions
displacement, and double
In a single displacement reaction, one element in a compound is
displacement reactions
displaced (or replaced) by another element. Two general reactions
(cid:2) writebalanced chemical
represent two different types of single displacement reactions. One type
equations to represent
involves a metal replacing a metal cation in a compound, as follows:
single displacement and
double displacement
A+BC → AC+B
reactions For example, Zn +Fe(NO ) → Zn(NO ) +Fe
(s) 3 2(aq) 3 2(aq) 2(s)
(cid:2) predictthe products of The second type of single displacement reaction involves a non-metal
chemical reactions and test
(usually a halogen) replacing an anion in a compound, as follows:
your predictions through
experimentation
DE+F → DF+E
(cid:2) demonstratean understand- For example, Cl 2(g) +CaBr 2(aq) → CaCl 2(aq) +Br 2((cid:2))
ing of the relationship
between the type of Single Displacement Reactions and the Metal Activity Series
chemical reaction and the
Most single displacement reactions involve one metal displacing another
nature of the reactants
metal from a compound. In the following equation, magnesium metal
(cid:2) investigate, through experi- replaces the zinc in ZnCl , thereby liberating zinc as the free metal.
2
mentation, the reactivity of
Mg +ZnCl → MgCl +Zn
different metals to produce (s) 2(aq) 2(aq) (s)
an activity series The following three reactions illustrate the various types of single
(cid:2) communicateyour under- displacement reactions involving metals:
standing of the following 1. Cu +2AgNO → Cu(NO ) +2Ag
(s) 3(aq) 3 2(aq) (s)
terms: single displacement
In this reaction, one metal replaces another metal in an ionic
reaction, activity series,
compound. That is, copper replaces silver in AgNO . Because of
double displacement 3
the +2 charge on the copper ion, it requires two nitrate ions to
reaction, precipitate,
neutralization reactions balance its charge.
2. Mg +2HCl → MgCl +H
(s) (aq) 2(aq) 2(g)
In this reaction, magnesium metal replaces hydrogen from
hydrochloric acid, HCl . Since hydrogen is diatomic, it is “liberated”
(aq)
in the form of H . This reaction is similar to reaction 1 if
2
• you treat hydrochloric acid as an ionic compound (which it techni-
cally is not), and if
• you treat hydrogen as a metal (also, technically, not the case).
3. 2Na (s) +2H 2 O ((cid:2)) → 2NaOH (aq) +H 2(g)
Sodium metal displaces hydrogen from water in this reaction. Again,
since hydrogen is diatomic, it is produced as H . As above, you can
2
understand this reaction better if
• you treat hydrogen as a metal, and if
+ −
• you treat water as an ionic compound, H (OH ).
126 MHR • Unit 1 Matter and Chemical Bonding
All of the reactions just described follow the original general example of a
single displacement reaction:
A+BC → AC+B
Figures 4.12 and 4.13 show two examples of single displacement reactions.
When analyzing single displacement reactions, use the following
guidelines:
• Treat hydrogen as a metal.
+ −
• Treat acids, such as HCl, as ionic compounds of the form H Cl .
(Treat sulfuric acid, H SO , as H
+
H
+
SO
2−
).
2 4 4
+ −
• Treat water as ionic, with the formula H (OH ).
Figure 4.12 Lithium metal
reacts violently with water in a
single displacement reaction.
Lithium must be stored under
kerosene or oil to avoid reaction
with atmospheric moisture,
or oxygen.
Figure 4.13 When an iron nail is placed in a solution of copper(II) sulfate, a single
displacement reaction takes place.
Fe +CuSO → FeSO +Cu
(s) 4(aq) 4(aq) (s)
Notice the formation of copper metal on the nail.
Practice Problems
21. Each of the following incomplete equations represents a single
displacement reaction. Copy each equation into your notebook,
and write the products. Balance each chemical equation. When in
doubt, use the most common valence.
(a) Ca+H O → (e) Pb+H SO →
2 2 4
(b) Zn+Pb(NO ) → (f) Mg+Pt(OH) →
3 2 4
(c) Al+HCl → (g) Ba+FeCl →
2
(d) Cu+AgNO → (h) Fe+Co(ClO ) →
3 3 2
Through experimentation, chemists have ranked the relative reactivity of
the metals, including hydrogen (in acids and in water), in an activity series.
The reactive metals, such as potassium, are at the top of the activity series.
The unreactive metals, such as gold, are at the bottom. In Investigation 4-A,
you will develop an activity series using single displacement reactions.
Chapter 4 Classifying Reactions: Chemicals in Balance • MHR 127
S K I L L F O C U S
MICROSCALE
Predicting
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
Creating an Activity
Series of Metals
Certain metals, such as silver and gold, are relative reactivity of copper, iron, magnesium,
extremely unreactive, while sodium is so reactive zinc, and tin. Explain your reasons for these
that it will react with water. Zinc is unreactive predictions.
with water. It will, however, react with acid. Why What do you know about alloys such as
will magnesium metal react with copper sulfate bronze, brass, and steel? Based on what you
solution, while copper metal will not react with know, make a prediction about whether steel
aqueous magnesium sulfate? In Chapter 3, you will be more or less reactive than iron, its
learned that an alloy is a solution of two or more main component.
metals. Steel is an alloy that contains mostly iron.
Is its reactivity different from iron’s reactivity? Materials
well plate(s): at least a 6×8 matrix
Question
wash bottle with distilled water
How can you rank the metals, including hydro- 5 test tubes
gen, in terms of their reactivity? Is the reactivity test tube rack
of an alloy very different from the reactivity of its dilute HCl
(aq)
major component? 6 small pieces each of copper, iron, magnesium,
zinc, tin, steel, galvanized steel, stainless steel
Predictions dropper bottles of dilute solutions of CuSO 4 ,
FeSO , MgSO , ZnSO , SnCl
Based on what you learned in Chapter 3 about 4 4 4 2
periodic trends, make predictions about the
Cation or
solution HCI H O
Cu2+ Fe2+ Mg2+ Sn2+
Metal 2
Cu
Mg
Sn
Zn
Fe
steel
galvanized steel
stainless steel
128 MHR • Unit 1 Matter and Chemical Bonding
Safety Precautions 3. Look at Figure 4.12. Lithium reacts violently
with water to form aqueous lithium hydroxide
and hydrogen gas. Do you expect lithium to
Handle the hydrochloric acid solution with care. react with hydrochloric acid?
It is corrosive. Wipe up any spills with copious
(a) Write the balanced chemical equation for
amounts of water, and inform your teacher.
this reaction.
(b) Is lithium more or less reactive than
Procedure
magnesium?
1. Place your well plate(s) on a white sheet of
4. What evidence do you have that hydrogen in
paper. Label them according to the matrix on
hydrochloric acid is different from hydrogen
the previous page.
in water?
2. Place a rice-grain-sized piece of each metal in
the appropriate well. Record the appearance
Conclusion
of each metal.
5.(a) Write the activity series corresponding to
3. Put enough drops of the appropriate solution your observations. Include hydrogen in the
to completely cover the piece of metal. form of water and also as an ion (H + ). Do
not include the alloys.
4. Record any changes in appearance due to a
chemical reaction. In reactions of metal with (b) How did the reactivity of the iron compare
acid, look carefully for the formation of bub- with the reactivity of the various types
bles. If you are unsure about any observation, of steel?
repeat the experiment in a small test tube.
6. How do you think an activity series for metal
This will allow you to better observe the
would help you predict whether or not a
reaction.
single displacement reaction will occur? Use
5. If you believe that a reaction has occurred, examples to help you explain your answer.
write “r” on the matrix. If you believe
7. You have learned that an alloy is a homoge-
that no reaction has occurred, write “nr” on
neous mixture (solution) of two or more
the matrix.
metals. Steel consists of mostly iron.
6. Dispose of the solutions in the waste (a) Which type of steel appeared to be the most
beaker supplied by your teacher. Do not reactive? Which type was the least reactive?
pour anything down the drain. Did you notice any differences?
(b) What other components make up steel,
Analysis
galvanized steel, and stainless steel?
1. For any reactions that occurred, write the
corresponding single displacement reaction. Application
2.(a) What was the most reactive metal that you 8. For what applications are the various types of
tested? steel used? Why would you not use iron for
these applications?
(b) What was the least reactive metal that you
tested?
Chapter 4 Classifying Reactions: Chemicals in Balance • MHR 129
PROBLEM TIP The Metal Activity Series
A single displacement reaction As you can see in Table 4.2, the more reactive metals are at the top of the
always favours the production activity series. The less reactive metals are at the bottom. A reactive metal
of the less reactive metal. In will displace or replace any metal in a compound that is below it in the
other words, the “free” metal
activity series. Metals from lithium to sodium will displace hydrogen as a
that is formed from the com-
gas from water. Metals from magnesium to lead will displace hydrogen as
pound must always be less
a gas only from acids. Copper, mercury, silver, and gold will not displace
reactive than the metal that
hydrogen from acids.
displaced it. For example,
2AgNO +Cu → Table 4.2 Activity Series of Metals
3(aq) (s)
Cu(NO) +2Ag
32(aq) (s) Displaces hydrogen Displaces hydrogen
Silver metal is more stable Metal from acids from cold water
than copper metal. In other
lithium Most Reactive
words, silver is below copper
in the activity series. potassium
barium
calcium
sodium
magnesium
aluminum
zinc
chromium
iron
cadmium
cobalt
nickel
tin
lead
hydrogen
copper
mercury
silver
platinum
gold Least Reactive
CHEM
FACT
You can use the activity series to help you predict the products of the
Most metals that we use reaction of a metal and a metal-containing compound. For example,
in everyday life are actually consider the following incomplete equation.
alloys. An alloy is a solid Fe +CuSO →
solution of one metal (or non- (s) 4(aq)
metal) in another metal. For You can see from the activity series that iron is above copper. This means
example, steel is an alloy of that iron is more reactive than copper. This reaction will proceed.
iron. Steel has many uses, from Fe +CuSO → FeSO +Cu
(s) 4(aq) 4(aq) (s)
construction to the automobile
The copper metal produced is less reactive than iron metal. What about
industry. If the iron were not
alloyed with other elements, the following incomplete reaction between silver and calcium chloride?
it would not have the physical Ag +CaCl →
(s) 2(aq)
and chemical properties
Silver is below calcium in the activity series, meaning that it is less
required, such as hardness
reactive. There would be no reaction between these two substances.
and corrosion resistance.
Predict whether the substances in the following Practice Problem will react.
130 MHR • Unit 1 Matter and Chemical Bonding
Practice Problems
22. Using the activity series, write a balanced chemical equation for
each single displacement reaction. If you predict that there will be
no reaction, write “NR.”
(a) Cu+MgSO → (e) Fe+Al (SO ) →
4 2 4 3
(b) Zn+FeCl → (f) Ni+NiCl →
2 2
(c) K+H O → (g) Zn+H SO →
2 2 4
(d) Al+H SO → (h) Mg+SnCl →
2 4 2
Single Displacement Reactions Involving Halogens
Non-metals, typically halogens, can also take part in single displacement
Based on what you know
reactions. For example, molecular chlorine can replace bromine from KBr,
about the electronegativity and
an ionic compound, producing bromine and potassium chloride.
electron affinity for the halo-
Cl 2(g) +2KBr (aq) → 2KCl (aq) +Br 2((cid:2)) gens, explain the organization
of the halogen activity series.
The activity series for halogens directly mirrors the position of
halogens in the periodic table. It can be shown simply in the following
way. Fluorine is the most reactive, and iodine is the least reactive.
F>Cl>Br>I
In the same way as you used the activity series for metals, you can use the
activity series for halogens to predict whether substances will undergo a
single displacement reaction. For example, fluorine is above chlorine in
the activity series. So, given the reactants fluorine and sodium chloride,
you can predict that the following reaction will occur:
F +2NaCl → 2NaF +Cl
2(g) (aq) (aq) 2(aq)
On the other hand, iodine is below bromine in the activity series. So,
given the reactants iodine and calcium bromide, you can predict that no
reaction will occur.
I +CaBr → NR
2(aq) 2(aq)
Try the following problems to practise using the metal and halogen
activity series to predict whether reactions will occur.
Practice Problems
23. Using the activity series for halogens, write a balanced chemical
equation for each single displacement reaction. If you predict that
there will be no reaction, write “NR”.
(a) Br +KCl → (b) Cl +NaI →
2 2
24. Using the appropriate activity series, write a balanced chemical
equation for each single displacement reaction. If you predict that
there will be no reaction, write “NR”.
(a) Pb+HCl → (d) Ca+H O →
2
(b) KI+Br → (e) MgSO +Zn →
2 4
(c) KF+Cl → (f) Ni+H SO →
2 2 4
Chapter 4 Classifying Reactions: Chemicals in Balance • MHR 131
Double Displacement Reactions
A double displacement reaction involves the exchange of cations between
two ionic compounds, usually in aqueous (water) solution. A double
displacement reaction is also known as a double replacement reaction.
A general equation for a double displacement reaction is:
AB+CD → CB+AD
In this equation, A and C are cations and B and D are anions.
Consider the following situation. You have two unlabelled beakers.
One contains distilled water, and the other contains salt water. The two
samples look virtually identical. How can you quickly determine which
is the salt water without tasting them? (You should never taste anything
in a chemistry laboratory.)
A common test for the presence of chloride ions in water is the
addition of a few drops of silver nitrate solution. The formation of a
white solid indicates the presence of chloride ions, as you can see in
Figure 4.14.
A double displacement reaction has occurred. That is, the cations
in the reactants have essentially changed places. This switch is
modelled in Figure 4.15.
Figure 4.14 When a few drops
of silver nitrate, AgNO, are
3
added to a sample of salt water,
NaCl , a white precipitate of
(aq) + → +
silver chloride, AgCl, is formed. NaCl (aq) AgNO 3(aq) AgCl (s) NaNO 3(aq)
Figure 4.15 Sodium chloride and silver nitrate form ions in solution. When silver ions
and chloride ions come into contact, they form a solid.
Since silver chloride is virtually insoluble in water, it forms a solid
compound, or precipitate.
Double displacement reactions tend to occur in aqueous solution. Not
all ionic compounds, however, will react with one another in this way.
You can tell that a double displacement reaction has taken place in the
following cases:
• a solid (precipitate) forms
• a gas is produced
• some double displacement reactions also form a molecular compound,
such as water. It is hard to tell when water is formed, because often the
reaction takes place in water.
Double Displacement Reactions that Form a Precipitate
A precipitate is a solid that separates from a solution as the result of a
chemical reaction. You will learn more about precipitates in Chapter 9.
Many double displacement reactions involve the formation of a precipitate.
Examine the double displacement reaction that occurs when aqueous
solutions of barium chloride and potassium sulfate are mixed. A white
precipitate is immediately formed. The equation for the reaction is
BaCl +K SO → BaSO +2KCl
2(aq) 2 4(aq) 4(s) (aq)
132 MHR • Unit 1 Matter and Chemical Bonding
You should think about two questions when analyzing a double
displacement reaction.
1. How do we determine the products?
2. Which of the products—if any—will precipitate out of solution?
Barium chloride solution contains
Ba2+
ions and Cl
−
ions. Potassium
sulfate solution contains K
+
and SO
2−
ions. When they are mixed, the
4
Ba2+
ions come in contact with SO
2−
ions. Because barium sulfate is
4
+
insoluble, the product comes out of solution as a solid. The K ions and
−
Cl ions also come into contact with each other, but potassium chloride is
soluble, so these ions stay in solution.
How do you know that the precipitate is BaSO and not KCl? More
4
generally, how can you predict whether a precipitate will be formed in a
double displacement reaction? In this chapter, you will be given informa-
tion on solubility as you need it. You will learn more about how to
predict whether a compound is soluble or not in Chapter 9. Barium
sulfate, BaSO is not soluble in water, while potassium chloride, KCl,
4
is. Therefore, a reaction will take place and barium sulfate will be the
precipitate.
In summary, to determine the products and their physical states in a
double displacement reaction, you must first “deconstruct” the reactants.
Then switch the cations, and “reconstruct” the products using proper
chemical formulas. You should then balance the chemical equation. You
will be given information to determine which of the products, if any, will
form a precipitate. Finally, you can write the physical state—(s) or (aq)—
of each product and balance the equation.
Given the following reactants, how would you predict the products
of the reaction and their state? Note that many hydroxide compounds,
including magnesium hydroxide, are insoluble. Potassium cations form
soluble substances with all anions.
MgCl +KOH →
2(aq) (aq)
Examine figure 4.16 to see how to separate the compounds into ions,
Mg2+
− + −
and Cl ; K and OH . Then switch the anions and write chemical formu-
las for the new compounds. Check to ensure your equation is balanced.
1 MgCl + 2KOH → Mg(OH) + 2KCl
2 2(s) (aq)
Mg2+ Cl− K+ OH−
2 Mg2+ OH− K+ Cl−
Figure 4.16 Predicting a double displacement reaction.
What happens if both products are soluble ionic compounds? Both
ionic compounds will be ions dissolved in the water. If neither product
precipitates out, no reaction occurs. Try the following problem to practise
writing the products of double displacement reactions and predicting
their states.
Chapter 4 Classifying Reactions: Chemicals in Balance • MHR 133
PROBLEM TIP
Practice Problems
When aqueous solutions of
barium chloride and sodium
25. Write a balanced chemical equation for each double displacement
chromate are mixed, a precipi-
reaction. Write “NR” if you predict that no reaction will occur. Note
tate is formed. The balanced
+ + +
that K , Na , and Li ions form soluble compounds with all anions.
equation for this double
All nitrate compounds are soluble. Sulfate compounds with
Ca2+
,
replacement reaction is
BaCl +NaCrO →
Sr2+
,
Ba2+
,
Ra2+
, and
Pb2+
are insoluble, but most other sulfate
2(aq) 2 4(aq)
compounds are soluble. Lead(II) iodide is insoluble.
BaCrO +2NaCl
4(?) (?)
(a) Pb(NO ) +KI →
What is the precipitate? From 3 2(aq) (aq)
experience, you know that (b) FeCl + Na SO →
3(aq) 2 4(aq)
NaCl iswater soluble. So, (c) NaNO + MgSO →
3(aq) 4(aq)
by process of elimination, the
precipitate must be barium (d) Ba(NO 3 ) 2(aq) + MgSO 4(aq) →
chromate, BaCrO .
4(s)
Double Displacement Reactions That Produce a Gas
In certain cases, you know that a double displacement reaction has
occurred because a gas is produced. The gas is formed when one of the
products of the double displacement reaction decomposes to give water
and a gas.
Consider the reaction of aqueous sodium carbonate (washing soda)
and hydrochloric acid, shown in Figure 4.17. Hydrochloric acid is sold at
the hardware store under the common name “muriatic acid.” If you carry
out this reaction, you immediately see the formation of carbon dioxide
gas. The first reaction that takes place is a double displacement reaction.
Determine the products in the following way. Separate the reactions into
ions, and switch the anions. Write chemical formulas for the products
and balance the equation.
Na CO +2HCl → 2NaCl + H CO
2 3(aq) (aq) (aq) 2 3(aq)
But this isn’t all that is happening! The carbonic acid, H CO , is unstable
2 3
and subsequently decomposes to carbon dioxide and water.
H 2 CO 3(aq) → H 2 O ((cid:2)) +CO 2(g)
Overall, we can write this two-step reaction as follows:
Na 2 CO 3(aq) +2HCl (aq) → 2NaCl (aq) +H 2 O ((cid:2)) +CO 2(g)
Another double displacement reaction results in the formation of
gaseous ammonia, NH . Ammonia, a pungent-smelling gas, is an impor-
3
tant industrial chemical. It is used as a fertilizer and, when dissolved in
water, as a household cleaner. Ammonium hydroxide is formed in the
reaction below
NH Cl +NaOH → NH OH +NaCl
4 (aq) (aq) 4 (aq) (aq)
The ammonium hydroxide, NH OH, immediately decomposes to give
4
Figure 4.17 The reaction of ammonia and water, according to the equation
hydrochloric acid and sodium
carbonate, NaCO (washing NH 4 OH (aq) → NH 3(g) +H 2 O ((cid:2))
2 3
soda), is a double displacement Combining these equations gives
reaction. This reaction initially NH 4 Cl (aq) +NaOH (aq) → NaCl (aq) +NH 3(g) +H 2 O ((cid:2))
forms sodium chloride and car-
bonic acid, HCO. The carbonic This example illustrates the formation of a gas by an initial double
2 3
acid spontaneously decomposes displacement reaction, followed by the decomposition of one of the
to water and carbon dioxide gas. products to a gas and water.
134 MHR • Unit 1 Matter and Chemical Bonding
Practice Problems CHEM
FACT
26.(a) When sodium sulfite, Na SO , is mixed with hydrogen chloride, To non-chemists, the term
2 3(aq)
HCl (hydrochloric acid), the odour of sulfur dioxide gas, SO , “salt” refers solely to sodium
(aq) 2(g)
chloride. To chemists, “salt” is
is detected. Write the balanced chemical equation for this reaction.
a generic term that describes
(b) Hydrogen sulfide, H 2 S, is a poisonous gas that has the odour of an ionic compound with an
rotten eggs. When aqueous calcium sulfide, CaS, is reacted with anion that is not OH− or O2−
sulfuric acid, a rotten egg smell is detected. Write the balanced and with a cation that is not
chemical equation for this reaction. H+. Sodium chloride, NaCl, and
potassium fluoride, KF, are
two examples.
The Formation of Water in a Neutralization Reaction
Neutralization reactionsare a special type of double displacement reaction
that produces water. Neutralization involves the reaction of an acid with
a base to form water and an ionic compound. You will learn more about
neutralization reactions in Chapter 10. For example, the neutralization of
hydrogen nitrate (nitric acid) with sodium hydroxide (a base) is a double
displacement reaction.
HNO 3(aq) +NaOH (aq) → NaNO 3(aq) +H 2 O ((cid:2))
Often neutralization reactions produce no precipitate or gas. In Chapter 10,
you will learn how chemists recognize when neutralization reactions
take place.
Practice Problems
27. Write the balanced chemical equation for each neutralization
reaction.
(a) HCl +LiOH →
(aq) (aq)
(b) HClO +Ca(OH) →
4(aq) 2(aq)
(c) H SO +NaOH →
2 4(aq) (aq)
28. Write the balanced chemical equation for each double replacement
reaction. Be sure to indicate the physical state of all products.
(a) BaCl +Na CrO → (A precipitate is produced.)
2(aq) 2 4(aq)
(b) H PO +NaOH → (Water is produced.)
3 4(aq) (aq)
(c) K CO +HNO → (A gas is produced.)
2 3(aq) 3(aq)
Consider the reaction
You have learned about a variety of double displacement reactions.
KNO +NaI →
In Investigation 4-B, you will make predictions about whether double 3(aq) (aq)
KI +NaNO
displacement reactions will take place. Then you will make observations (aq) 3(aq)
The products are both water
to test your predictions.
soluble. Has a chemical reac-
In Investigation 4-C, you will perform reactions that involve copper
tion occurred? If the water is
compounds to reinforce what you have learned about the different types
allowed to evaporate, what
of reactions. You will identify the series of reactions that begin by reacting
compounds will remain?
copper and finish by producing copper.
Chapter 4 Classifying Reactions: Chemicals in Balance • MHR 135
SS KK II LL LL FF OO CC UU SS
MICROSCALE
PPrreeddiiccttiinngg
PPeerrffoorrmmiinngg aanndd rreeccoorrddiinngg
AAnnaallyyzziinngg aanndd iinntteerrpprreettiinngg
Observing Double
Displacement Reactions
A double displacement reaction involves Materials
the exchange of cations between two ionic
well plate
compounds, usually in aqueous solution. It can
sheet of white paper
be represented with the general equation
several test tubes
AB+CD → AD+CB
test tube rack
Most often, double displacement reactions result test tube holder
in the formation of a precipitate. However, some 2 beakers (50 mL)
double displacement reactions result in the tongs
formation of an unstable compound which scoopula
then decomposes to water and a gas. laboratory burner
The reaction of an acid and a base—a flint igniter
neutralization reaction—is also a type of double red litmus paper
displacement reaction. It results in the formation wooden splint
of a salt and water. wash bottle with distilled water
HCl solution
Question the following aqueous solutions in dropper
bottles: BaCl , CaCl , MgCl , Na SO , NaOH,
2 2 2 2 4
How can you tell if a double displacement
AgNO , Pb(NO ) , KI, FeCl , solid Na CO
3 3 2 3 2 3
reaction has occurred? How can you predict the
and NH Cl
4
products of a double displacement reaction?
Safety Precautions
Prediction
For each reaction in Tables A and B, write a
balanced chemical equation. Use the following •Hydrochloric acid is corrosive. Use care when
guidelines to predict precipitate formation in handling it.
Table A. •Before lighting the laboratory burner, check
•Hydrogen, ammonium, and Group I ions form that there are no flammable liquids nearby.
soluble compounds with all negative ions. •If you accidentally spill a solution on your
•Chloride ions form compounds that are not skin, immediately wash the area with copious
very soluble when they bond to silver, lead(II), amounts of water.
mercury(I), and copper(I) positive ions. •Wash your hands thoroughly after the
•All compounds that are formed from a nitrate experiment.
and a positive ion are soluble.
•With the exception of the ions in the first Procedure
bulleted point, as well as strontium, barium,
1. Copy Tables A and B into your notebook.
radium, and thallium positive ions, hydroxide
Do not write in this textbook.
ions form compounds that do not dissolve.
•Iodide ions that are combined with silver, 2. Place the well plate on top of the sheet of
lead(II), mercury(I), and copper(I) are not white paper.
very soluble.
3. Carry out each of the reactions in Table A
•Chromate compounds are insoluble, except
by adding several drops of each solution to
when they contain ions from the first bulleted
a well. Record your observations in Table A.
point.
113366 MMHHRR •• UUnniitt 11 MMaatttteerr aanndd CChheemmiiccaall BBoonnddiinngg
If you are unsure about the formation of a Analysis
precipitate, repeat the reaction in a small
1. Write the balanced chemical equation
test tube for improved visibility.
for each reaction in Table A.
4. Place a scoopula tipful of Na CO in a 50 mL
2 3 2. For each reaction in Table B, write the
beaker. Add 5 mL of HCl. Use a burning
appropriate balanced chemical equation for
wooden splint to test the gas produced.
the double displacement reaction. Then
Record your observations in Table B.
write a balanced chemical equation for the
5. Place a scoopula tipful of NH Cl in a test decomposition reaction that leads to the
4
tube. Add 2 mL NaOH. To detect any odour, formation of a gas and water.
gently waft your hand over the mouth of the
test tube towards your nose. Warm the tube Conclusion
gently (do not boil) over a flame. Record your
3. How did you know when a double displace-
observations in Table B.
ment reaction had occurred? How did your
6. Dispose of all chemicals in the waste beaker results compare with your predictions?
supplied by your teacher. Do not pour any-
thing down the drain.
Application
Table A Double Displacement 4. Suppose that you did not have any informa-
Reactions That May Form a Precipitate tion about the solubility of various com-
pounds, but you did have access to a large
Skeleton equation Observations
variety of ionic compounds. What would you
MgCl + NaOH
2 need to do before predicting the products of
FeCl 3 + NaOH the displacement reactions above? Outline a
BaCl + Na SO brief procedure.
2 2 4
CaCl + AgNO
2 3
Pb(NO ) + KI
32
Table B Double Displacement
Reactions That May Form a Gas
Reaction Observations
Na CO + HCl
2 3
NH Cl + NaOH
4
Chapter 4 Classifying Reactions: Chemicals in Balance • MHR 137
SS KK II LL LL FF OO CC UU SS
MICROSCALE
PPrreeddiiccttiinngg
PPeerrffoorrmmiinngg aanndd rReeccoorrddiinngg
AAnnaallyyzziinngg aanndd iInntteerrpprreettiinngg
From Copper to Copper
This experiment allows you to carry out • Do not allow electrical cords to hang over the
the sequential conversion of copper metal edge of the bench.
to copper(II) nitrate to copper(II) hydroxide • NaOH and H SO solutions are corrosive.
2 4
to copper(II) oxide to copper(II) sulfate and back
Handle them with care. If you accidentally
to copper metal. This conversion is carried out
spill a solution on your skin, wash the area
using synthesis, decomposition, single displace-
immediately with copious amounts of cool
ment, and double displacement reactions.
water. Inform your teacher.
Question Procedure
What type of chemical reaction is involved in
Reaction A: Reaction of Copper
each step of this investigation?
Metal to form Copper(II) Nitrate
Cu +4HNO →
(s) 3(aq)
Prediction
Cu(NO 3 ) 2(aq) +2NO 2(g) +2H 2 O ((cid:2))
Examine the five reactions outlined in the proce-
CAUTION Your teacher will carry out steps 1 to 4
dure. Predict what reactions will occur, and
in the fumehood before class. Concentrated
write equations to describe them.
nitric acid is required, and the NO produced
2(g)
is poisonous. Furthermore, this reaction is quite
Materials
slow. Your teacher will perform a brief demon-
hot plate stration of this reaction so that you may record
glass rod observations.
wash bottle with distilled water 1. Place 0.100 g (100 mg) of Cu in a 50 mL
50 mL Erlenmeyer flask Erlenmeyer flask.
beaker tongs
2. Add 2 mL of 6 mol/L HNO to the flask in
250 mL beaker containing ice and liquid water 3(aq)
the fumehood.
red litmus paper
Cu(NO 3 ) 2 solution 3. Warm the flask on a hot plate in the
*6 mol/L NaOH solution in dropping bottle fumehood. The heating will continue until
*3 mol/L H 2 SO 4 solution in dropping bottle all the Cu dissolves and the evolution of
0.8 g of flaked zinc brown NO ceases.
2(g)
4. Cool the flask in a cool water bath.
Safety Precautions
5. Add about 2 mL of distilled water to the
flask containing the Cu(NO ) solution.
3 2
• Constantly stir, or swirl, any precipitate-
containing solution that is being heated to
avoid a sudden boiling over, or bumping.
• Unplug any hot plate not in use.
*The unit mol/L refers to concentration. You will learn more about this in Unit 3.
For now, you should know that 6 mol/L NaOH and 3 mol/L H SO are highly
2 4
corrosive solutions, and you should treat them with respect.
138 MHR • Unit 1 Matter and Chemical Bonding
Reaction B: Preparation 11. When the reaction is complete, add 5 mL of
of Copper(II) Hydroxide 3 mol/L sulfuric acid while stirring or swirling
6. At room temperature, while stirring with a the solution. This removes any unreacted zinc
glass rod, add 6 mol/L NaOH, drop by drop, but does not affect the copper metal. Carefully
until the solution is basic to red litmus decant the liquid into a clean waste container.
paper. (Red litmus paper turns blue in basic Wash the copper metal carefully several times
solution.) Do not put the red litmus paper with water. Return the copper metal to your
in the solution. Dip the glass rod into the teacher. Wash your hands. CAUTION This
solution and touch it to the red litmus paper. sulfuric acid is highly corrosive. If any comes
Record your observations. in contact with your skin, rinse the area
thoroughly and immediately with water.
Reaction C: Preparation of Copper(II) Oxide
7. While constantly stirring the solution with a Analysis
glass rod, heat the mixture from step 6 on a
1. What type of reaction is occurring in reactions
hot plate until a black precipitate is formed.
A through E?
If necessary, use the wash bottle to wash loose
any unreacted light blue precipitate that is 2. Write a balanced chemical equation for
reactions B through E.
adhering to the side of the flask.
8. When all of the light blue precipitate has 3. Explain why H 2 SO 4 reacts with Zn but not
with Cu. (See step 11 in the procedure.)
reacted to form the black precipitate, cool the
flask in an ice bath or a cool water bath for 4. Could another metal have been used in place
several minutes. of Zn in step 10? Explain.
Reaction D: Preparation 5. Why was powdered Zn used in step 10, rather
of Copper(II) Sulfate Solution than a single piece of Zn?
9. Carefully add about 6 mL of 3 mol/L sulfuric 6. You used 0.100 g of Cu metal in reaction A.
acid to the flask. Stir it until all the black How much copper should theoretically be
precipitate has dissolved. Record your recovered at the end of reaction E?
observations. CAUTION The sulfuric acid is
highly corrosive. If any comes in contact
Conclusion
with your skin, rinse the area thoroughly
7. Create a flowchart that shows each step of the
and immediately with water.
reaction series. Include the balanced chemical
Reaction E: Regeneration of Copper Metal equations.
10. In the fumehood or in a well ventilated area,
carefully add about 0.8 g of powdered zinc to
the solution of copper(II) sulfate. Stir or swirl
the solution until the blue colour disappears.
Record your observations. CAUTION You
should wear a mask for this step to avoid
breathing in the powdered zinc.
Chapter 4 Classifying Reactions: Chemicals in Balance • MHR 139
Concept Organizer Predicting Chemical Reactions
Reaction Type General Equation Concepts
Synthesis A + B→C
knowledge of bonding
Decomposition C→A + B
and periodic table
A + oxygen →oxides of A +
Chemical Reactions Combustion
other compound(s)
•activity series of metals
and halogens
Single Displacement A + BC→AC + B
•knowledge of bonding
and periodic table
•understanding of
solubility
Double Displacement AC + BD→AD + BC
•knowledge of bonding
and periodic table
Section Wrap-up
In sections 4.2 and 4.3, you have examined five different types of chemi-
cal reactions: synthesis, decomposition, combustion, single displacement,
and double displacement. Equipped with this knowledge, you can exam-
ine a set of reactants and predict what type of reaction will occur and
what products will be formed. The Concept Organizer above provides a
summary of the types of chemical reactions.
Section Review
Unit Project Prep 1 K/U Write the product(s) of each single displacement reaction. If you
Before you design your predict that there will be no reaction, write “NR.” Balance each
Chemistry Newsletter at the chemical equation.
end of Unit 1, take a look at (a) Li+H O → (d) Al+MgSO →
2 4
some of the labels of chemical
products in your home. Are (b) Sn+FeCl 2 → (e) Zn+CuSO 4 →
there any warnings about mix- (c) F +KI → (f) K+H O →
2 2
ing different products together?
Use what you know about 2 K/U Complete each double displacement reaction. Be sure to indicate
chemical reactions to explain the physical state of each product. Then balance the equation.
why mixing some chemical Hint: Compounds containing alkali metal ions are soluble. Calcium
products might be dangerous. chloride is soluble. Iron(III) hydroxide is insoluble.
(a) NaOH+Fe(NO ) → (c) K CrO +NaCl →
3 3 2 4
(b) Ca(OH) +HCl → (d) K CO +H SO →
2 2 3 2 4
114400 MMHHRR •• UUnniitt 11 MMaatttteerr aanndd CChheemmiiccaall BBoonnddiinngg
3 (a) C Explain why the following chemical equation represents a double
displacement reaction followed by a decomposition reaction.
(NH 4 ) 2 SO 4(aq) +KOH (aq) → NH 3(g) +H 2 O ((cid:2)) +K 2 SO 4(aq)
(b) Balance the chemical equation in part (a).
4 K/U Identify each reaction as synthesis, combustion (complete
or incomplete), decomposition, single displacement, or double
displacement. Balance the equations, if necessary.
(a) C 8 H 18((cid:2)) +O 2(g) → CO (g) +H 2 O (g)
(b) Pb +H SO → PbSO +H
(s) 2 4(aq) 4(s) 2(g)
(c) Al (SO ) +K CrO → K SO +Al (CrO )
2 4 3(aq) 2 4(aq) 2 4(aq) 2 4 3(s)
(d) C 3 H 7 OH ((cid:2)) +O 2(g) → CO 2(g) +H 2 O (g)
(e) (NH ) Cr O → N +H O +Cr O
4 2 2 7(s) 2(g) 2 (g) 2 3(s)
(f) Mg +N → Mg N
(s) 2(g) 3 2(s)
(g) N O → 2NO
2 4(g) 2(g)
5 MC Biosphere II was created in 1991 to test the idea that scientists
could build a sealed, self-sustaining ecosystem. The carbon dioxide
levels in Biosphere II were lower than scientists had predicted.
Scientists discovered that the carbon dioxide was reacting with
calcium hydroxide, a basic compound in the concrete.
(a) Write two balanced equations to show the reactions. Then classify
the reactions. Hint: In the first reaction, carbon dioxide reacts with
water in the concrete to form hydrogen carbonate. Hydrogen carbon-
ate, an acid, reacts with calcium hydroxide, a base.
(b) Why do you think scientists failed to predict that this would happen?
(c) Suggest ways that scientists could have combatted the problem.
6 K/U What reaction is shown in the figure below? Write a balanced
chemical equation to describe the reaction, then classify it.
Copper wire
Copper coated with
wire silver
Copper
Silver
nitrate
nitrate
solution
solution
Ag+
2e–
Cu2+
Ag+
Ag atoms
coating
Cu atoms
wire
in wire
Chapter 4 Classifying Reactions: Chemicals in Balance • MHR 141
4.4 Simple Nuclear Reactions
Section Preview/ You have seen some chemical reactions that involve the formation and
Specific Expectations decomposition of different compounds. These reactions involve the
rearrangement of atoms due to the breaking and formation of chemical
In this section, you will
bonds. Chemical bonds involve the interactions between the electrons of
(cid:2) balancesimple nuclear
various atoms. There is another class of reactions, however, that are not
equations
chemical. These reactions involve changes that occur within the nucleus
(cid:2) communicateyour under-
of atoms. These reactions are called nuclear reactions.
standing of the following
terms: nuclear reactions, We know that nuclear weapons are capable of mass destruction, yet
nuclear equation, alpha (α) radiation therapy, shown in Figure 4.18, is a proven cancer fighter. Smoke
particle emission, beta (β) detectors, required by law in all homes, rely on the radioactive decay of
decay, beta particle, gamma americium-241. The human body itself is radioactive, due to the presence
(γ) radiation, nuclear fission,
of radioactive isotopes including carbon-14, phosphorus-32, and potassi-
nuclear fusion
um-40. Most people view radioactivity and nuclear reactions with a
mixture of fascination, awe, and fear. Since radioactivity is all around us,
it is important to understand what it is, how it arises, and how we can
deal with it safely.
Types of Radioactive Decay and Balancing Nuclear Equations
There are three main types of radioactive decay: alpha particle emission,
beta particle emission, and the emission of gamma radiation. When an
unstable isotope undergoes radioactive decay, it produces one or more dif-
ferent isotopes. We represent radioactive decay using a nuclear equation.
Two rules for balancing nuclear equations are given below.
Rules for Balancing Nuclear Equations
1. The sum of the mass numbers (written as superscripts) on each
side of the equation must balance.
Figure 4.18 This patient is
about to undergo radiation 2. The sum of the atomic numbers (written as subscripts) on each
therapy. side of the equation must balance.
Media
LINK
Alpha Decay
The media are full of Alpha (α) particle emission, or alpha decay, involves the loss of one alpha
references to radioactivity. For particle. An α particle is a helium nucleus, 4He, composed of two protons
2
example, the comic book hero and two neutrons. Since it has no electrons, an alpha particle carries a
Spiderman gained the abilities charge of +2.
of a spider after being bitten
by a radioactive spider. Bart One example of alpha particle emission is the decay of radium. This
Simpson reads Radioactive decay is shown in the following equation:
Mancomics. Can you think 226Ra → 222Rn+ 4He
88 86 2
of any other references to
Notice that the sum of the mass numbers on the right (222+4) equals
radioactivity in popular
culture? What kind of the mass on the left (226). As well, the atomic numbers balance
reputation do radioactivity and (88 = 86+2). Thus, this nuclear equation is balanced.
nuclear reactions have? Do
you think this reputation
is deserved?
142 MHR • Unit 1 Matter and Chemical Bonding
In another example of alpha particle emission, Berkelium-248 is
History
LINK
formed by the decay of a certain radioisotope according to the balanced
nuclear equation:
Marie Curie discovered the
aX → 248Bk+ 4He
b 97 2 element polonium, Po, in 1898.
Given this information, what is aX? You can use your knowledge of how She named polonium after
b
to balance a nuclear equation to determine the identity of a radioisotope Poland, her homeland. Curie
undergoing alpha particle decay. won two Nobel Prizes, one in
The total of the atomic masses on the right side is (248+4) = 252. Physics (1903) for sharing in
The total of the atomic numbers on the right is (97+2) = 99. Therefore, the discovery of radioactivity,
and one in Chemistry (1911) for
a = 252 and b = 99. From the periodic table, you see that element number
the discovery of radium, which
99 is Es, einsteinium. The missing atom is 252Es, so the balanced nuclear
99 has been used to treat cancer.
equation is: Radium-226 undergoes alpha
252Es → 248Bk+ 4He decay to yield radon-222.
99 97 2
Try the following problems to practise balancing alpha emission
nuclear reactions.
Practice Problems
29. Uranium was the first element shown to be radioactive. Complete
the following reaction representing the alpha decay of uranium-238.
238U → + 4He
92 2
30. Radon-222, 222Rn, is known to decay by alpha particle emission.
86
Write a balanced nuclear equation and name the element produced
in this decay process.
31. Plutonium-242 decays by emitting an alpha particle. Write the
balanced nuclear equation for this reaction.
32. Neodymium-144, 144Nd, decays by alpha particle emission. Write
60
the balanced nuclear equation for this nuclear decay.
Beta Decay
Beta (β) decay occurs when an isotope emits an electron, called a beta CHEM
particle. Because of its tiny mass and −1 charge, a beta particle, is repre- FACT
sented as 0e. For example, hydrogen-3, or tritium, emits a beta particle to
−1
One of the most harmful
form helium-3 as illustrated by the equation:
potential sources of radiation
3 1 H → 3 2 He+ −1 0e in the home is radon gas.
Radon-222 is a product of the
Notice that the total of the atomic masses and the total of the atomic
decay of uranium-containing
numbers on each side of the nuclear equation balance. What is happen-
rocks beneath Earth’s surface.
ing, however to the hydrogen-3 nucleus as this change occurs? In effect,
Since radon is denser than air,
the emission of a beta particle is accompanied by the conversion, inside it can build up to dangerous
the nucleus, of a neutron into a proton: levels in basements when it
1n → 1H + 0e seeps through cracks in walls
0 1 −1
and floors. Simple radon
neutron proton electron (β particle)
detectors can be purchased
at hardware stores.
Chapter 4 Classifying Reactions: Chemicals in Balance • MHR 143
Carbon-14 is a radioactive isotope of carbon. Its nucleus emits a beta,
CHEM
FACT particle to form a nitrogen-14 nucleus, according to the balanced
nuclear equation shown below in Figure 4.19.
The nucleus of the most com-
14C → 14N+ 0e
mon isotope of hydrogen con- 6 7 −1
sists of one proton. Therefore,
a proton can be represented by proton (cid:2) particle
neutron
H+or 1H. (electron)
1
14 C 14N 0 e
6 7 -1
Figure 4.19 Carbon-14 decays by emitting a beta particle and converting to
nitrogen-14. Notice that a neutron in the nucleus of carbon is converted to a protron
as the βparticle is emitted.
CHEM Radioactive waste from certain nuclear power plants and from
FACT weapons testing can lead to health problems. For example, ions of the
radioactive isotope strontium-90, an alkali metal, exhibit chemical behav-
The terms radiation and
iour similar to calcium ions. This leads to incorporation of the ions in
radioactivity are often con-
bone tissue, sending ionizing radiation into bone marrow, and possibly
fused. Radiation refers to
electromagnetic radiation— causing leukemia. Given the following equation for the decay of stron-
everything from gamma rays, tium-90, how would you complete it?
to X-rays, to visible light, 90Sr → + 0e
38 −1
to microwaves, to radio and
television signals. Radioactivity, Since both atomic numbers and mass numbers must balance, you can find
on the other hand, involves the the other product.
emission of particles or energy The mass number of the unknown element is equal to 90+0 = 90.
from an unstable nucleus. The atomic number of the unknown element is equal to 38−(−1) = 39.
From the periodic table, you can see that element 39 is yttrium, Y.
The balanced nuclear equation is therefore
90Sr → 90Y + 0e
38 39 −1
You can check your answer by ensuring that the total mass number and
the total atomic number on each side of the equation are the same.
Mass numbers balance: 90 = 90+0
Atomic numbers balance: 38 = 39+(−1)
Try the following problems to practise balancing beta emission
equations.
Practice Problems
33. Write the balanced nuclear equation for the radioactive decay of
potassium-40 by emission of a β particle.
34. What radioisotope decays by β particle emission to form 47Sc?
21
35. Complete the following nuclear equation:
73Ga → 0e+
31 −1
144 MHR • Unit 1 Matter and Chemical Bonding
Canadians in Chemistry
Harriet Brooks is nearly forgotten today, even
though she helped to show that elements could
be transformed. For over a century, chemists had
rejected the dream of the ancient alchemists who
thought that they might turn lead into gold with the
help of the philosopher's stone. They believed that
elements were forever fixed and unchangeable.
Then Harriet Brooks arrived on the scene.
When she joined Rutherford’s team, she was
asked to measure the atomic mass of the isotopes
that make up the mysterious vapour given off by
radium. She determined that its atomic mass was
between 40 and 100, whereas radium was known
to have an atomic mass of over 140. Surely this
was not just a gaseous form of radium. Somehow
radium was turning into another element!
It turned out that Brooks’ result was a mis-
Harriet Brooks take. Radon—as the mystery gas is now known—
It was the Nobel that just missed being Canadian. has almost the same atomic mass as radium.
In 1907, Ernest Rutherford left Montréal’s McGill Brooks’ result was a fruitful mistake, however.
University for a position in England. The following Her experiment led to a basic understanding of
year, he received the Nobel Prize for Chemistry for radioactivity and isotopes.
his investigations of the chemistry of radioactive Why did Rutherford win a Nobel Prize for
substances. Most of the work, however, had been Chemistry? Both he and Brooks worked as
done in Montréal. Moreover, one young Canadian physicists. By proving that elements transformed,
woman had played an important role in putting it Rutherford, Brooks, and their co-workers revolu-
on the right track. tionized traditional chemistry.
Gamma Radiation
Gamma (γ)radiation is high energy electromagnetic radiation. It often
accompanies either alpha or beta particle emission. Since gamma
radiation has neither mass nor charge, it is represented as 0γ, or simply γ.
0
For example, cesium-137 is a radioactive isotope that is found in nuclear
fall-out. It decays with the emission of a beta particle and gamma
radiation, according to the equation
137Cs → 137Ba + 0e + 0γ
55 56 −1 0
How is gamma radiation produced in a radioactive decay? When a
radioactive nucleus emits an alpha or beta particle, the nucleus is often
left in an unstable, high-energy state. The “relaxation” of the nucleus to
a more stable state is accompanied by the emission of gamma radiation.
Nuclear Fission and Fusion
All cases of radioactive decay involve the atom’s nucleus. Since these
processes do not involve the atom’s electrons, they occur regardless of the
chemical environment of the nucleus. For example, radioactive hydrogen-
3, or tritium, will decay by β particle emission whether it is contained in
a water molecule or hydrogen gas, or in a complex protein.
Chapter 4 Classifying Reactions: Chemicals in Balance • MHR 145
Mode Emission Decay Change in …
Mass Atomic Number of
numbers numbers neutrons
α Decay α (4He) + −4 −2 −2
2
reactant product α expelled
β Decay 0β 1n 1p + 0β 0 +1 −1
−1 0 1 −1
in nucleus in nucleus β expelled
γ Emission 0γ + 0γ 0 0 0
0 0
excited stable γ photon
nucleus nucleus radiated
Figure 4.20 A summary of alpha decay, beta decay, and gamma emission
Many chemical reactions, once begun, can be stopped. For example,
a combustion reaction, such as a fire, can be extinguished before it burns
itself out. Nuclear decay processes, on the other hand, cannot be stopped.
The principles of balancing nuclear equations apply to all nuclear
reactions. Nuclear fission occurs when a highly unstable isotope splits
into smaller particles. Nuclear fission usually has to be induced in a
particle accelerator. Here, an atom can absorb a stream of high-energy
particles such as neutrons, 1n. This will cause the atom to split into
0
smaller fragments.
For example, when uranium-235 absorbs a high energy neutron, 1n, it
0
breaks up, or undergoes fission as follows:
235U + 1n → 87Br+ +31n
92 0 35 0
How would you identify the missing particle? Notice that three neutrons,
1n, have a mass number of 3 and a total atomic number of 0. The total
0
atomic mass on the left side is (235+1) = 236. On the right we have
(87+3(1)) = 90, and so (236−90) = 146 remains. The missing particle
must have a mass number of 146.
The total atomic number on the left is 92. The total atomic number
on the right, not including the missing particle, is 35. This means that
(92−35) = 57 is the atomic number of the missing particle. From the
periodic table, atomic number 57 corresponds to La, lanthanum. The
balanced nuclear equation is
235U+ 1n → 87Br+ 146La+31n
92 0 35 57 0
Check your answer by noting that the total mass number and the total
atomic number are the same on both sides.
146 MHR • Unit 1 Matter and Chemical Bonding
Nuclear fusion occurs when a target nucleus absorbs an accelerated
particle. The reaction that takes place in a hydrogen bomb is a fusion
reaction, as are the reactions that take place within the Sun, shown in
Figure 4.21. Fusion reactions require very high temperatures to proceed
but produce enormous amounts of energy. The fusion reaction that takes
place in a hydrogen bomb is represented by the following equation:
6Li+ 1n → 3H+ 4He
3 0 1 2
Notice that the total mass numbers and the total atomic numbers are
the same on both sides.
Figure 4.21 The Sun’s interior
has a temperature of about
Practice Problems
15 000 000 °C, due to the energy
provided by nuclear fusion
36. Astatine can be produced by the bombardment of a certain atom reactions.
with alpha particles, as follows:
+4He → 211At+21n
2 85 0
Identify the atom.
37. Balance the following equation by adding a coefficient.
252Cf+10B →257Md+ 1n
96 5 101 0
38. How many neutrons are produced when U-238 is bombarded with
C-12 nuclei in a particle accelerator? Balance the following equation.
238U+ 12C → 246Cf+ 1n
92 6 98 0
39. Aluminum-27, when it collides with a certain nucleus, transforms
into phosphorus-30 along with a neutron. Write a balanced nuclear
equation for this reaction.
Section Wrap-Up
In this chapter, you learned how atoms can interact with each other and
how unstable isotopes behave. In the first three sections, you learned
about chemical reactions. In section 4.4, you learned about different types
of nuclear reactions: reactions in which atoms of one element change into
atoms of another element. In Unit 2, you will learn how stable isotopes
contribute to an indirect counting method for atoms and molecules.
Section Review
1 K/U Draw a chart in your notebook to show alpha decay, beta decay,
gamma decay, nuclear fusion, and nuclear fission. Write a description
and give an example of each type of reaction. Illustrate each example
with a drawing.
2 K/U Complete each nuclear equation. Then state the type of nuclear
reaction that each equation represents.
(a) 232Th+ →233Th
90 90
(b) 233Pa →233U+
91 92
(c) 226Ra → +4He
88 2
(d) 210Bi →206Tl +
83 81
Chapter 4 Classifying Reactions: Chemicals in Balance • MHR 147
(e) 210Bi → +206 Tl +
83 81
(f) +1n →90Sr + 143Xe + 31n
0 38 54 0
(g) 6Li+ 2H → 2
3 1
3 MC Nuclear reactors have complex cooling systems that absorb the
heat given off by the fission reaction. The absorbed heat is used to
produce steam to drive a generator, thus producing electrical energy.
Cooling the steam for re-use requires a large amount of cool water,
which is usually obtained from a nearby river or lake. A large amount
of hot water is then released into the river or lake. Do you think this is
a form of pollution? What kinds of problems might warm water cause?
4 K/U Alpha or beta particle emission from a radioactive nucleus is
often, but not always, accompanied by gamma rays. Why does the
presence of gamma rays not affect how a nuclear equation of this type
is balanced?
5 K/U Write a balanced nuclear equation to describe each of the
following statements. Classify the reactions.
(a) Radon-222 undergoes alpha decay, forming polonium-218.
(b) When hydrogen-2 (deuterium) and hydrogen-3 (tritium) react, they
form an alpha particle and a subatomic particle.
(c) Bismuth-214 undergoes beta decay, emitting one electron and
forming a different nucleus.
(d) When a neutron collides with uranium-235, it forms krypton-92 and
one other nucleus.
(e) Polonium-218 decays to lead-214, emitting one other particle.
(f) Strontium-90 emits a subatomic particle, forming yttrium-90.
148 MHR • Unit 1 Matter and Chemical Bonding
Review
Reflecting on Chapter 4 3. Explain how balancing a chemical equation
satisfies the law of conservation of mass.
Summarize this chapter in the format of your
choice. Here are a few ideas to use as guidelines. 4. Copy each chemical equation into your
• Distinguish between chemical reactions and notebook, and balance it.
(a) PdCl +HNO → Pd(NO ) +HCl
nuclear reactions. 2(aq) 3(aq) 3 2(aq) (aq)
• Summarize guidelines for balancing (b) Cr (s) +HCl (aq) → CrCl 2(aq) +H 2(g)
chemical equations. (c) FeO +O → Fe O
(s) 2(g) 2 3(s)
• Summarize the different types of
5. What type of chemical reaction is illustrated
chemical reactions.
in each diagram below?
• Summarize the types of nuclear decay.
• Explain why knowing the solubility of
compounds is important to predicting
double displacement reactions.
• Summarize guidelines for balancing
nuclear equations
• Describe how to use the activity series of
metals and the activity series of halogens.
Reviewing Key Terms
For each of the following terms, write a sentence
that shows your understanding of its meaning.
activity series neutralization
reactions
alpha (α) particle
emission nuclear equation
balanced chemical
equation nuclear fission
beta particle nuclear fusion
beta (β ) decay nuclear reactions
chemical equations precipitate 6. Classify each reaction as synthesis, decomposi-
chemical reactions product tion, single displacement, double displacement,
combustion reaction reactant or combustion. Also, balance each chemical
decomposition reaction single displacement equation.
reactions (a) H +CuO → Cu +H O
2(g) (s) (s) 2 (g)
double displacement (b) Ag +S → Ag S
(s) 8(s) 2 (s)
reaction skeleton equation (c) C H +O → CO +H O
4 8(g) 2(g) 2(g) 2 (g)
gamma (γ) radiation synthesis reaction (d) NH +HCl → NH Cl
3(g) (g) 4 (s)
incomplete combustion word equation (e) Mg +O → MgO
(s) 2(g) (s)
law of conservation (f) RbCl +O → RbClO
(s) 2(g) 4(s)
of mass (g) Cu S +O → Cu O +SO
2 (s) 2(g) 2 (g) 2(g)
Knowledge/Understanding 7. Why is the solubility chart useful for analyzing
double displacement reactions?
1. How can you tell if a chemic.al reaction has
8. Nitrogen dioxide is a component of smog. It
occurred?
is produced in an automobile engine’s combus-
2. Explain why the mixing of red paint with
tion chamber. When exposed to sunlight,
white paint does not constitute a chemical
nitrogen dioxide forms nitrogen monoxide
reaction, even though the “product” has a
and oxygen. What type of reaction is this?
different appearance.
CChhaapptteerr 44 CCllaassssiiffyyiinngg RReeaaccttiioonnss:: CChheemmiiccaallss iinn BBaallaannccee •• MMHHRR 114499
9. Write a balanced chemical equation reacting hydrochloric acid with calcium car-
corresponding to each word equation. bonate. Write the balanced chemical equation
(a) The reaction between aqueous sodium corresponding to this reaction, and classify it.
hydroxide and iron(III) nitrate produces a
precipitate. Inquiry
(b) Powdered antimony reacts with chlorine 17. An American penny is composed of a zinc
gas to produce antimony trichloride. core clad in copper. Some of the copper is
(c) Mercury(II) oxide is prepared from its filed away, exposing the zinc, and placed in
elements. a solution of hydrochloric acid. Describe what
(d) Ammonium nitrite decomposes into nitrogen will occur.
gas and water.
18. What will happen to a silver earring that is
(e) Aluminum metal reacts with a solution of
accidentally dropped into toilet bowl cleaner
zinc sulfate to produce aluminum sulfate
that contains hydrochloric acid?
and metallic zinc.
10. Consider the unbalanced chemical equation Communication
corresponding to the formation of solid lead(II)
19. Explain why it is advisable to store chemicals
chromate, PbCrO :
4 in tightly sealed bottles out of direct sunlight.
Pb(NO ) +K CrO → PbCrO +KNO
3 2(aq) 2 4(aq) 4(s) 3(aq)
20. Why is smoking not allowed near an oxygen
(a) What type of chemical reaction is this?
source? What would happen if a match were
(b) Balance the equation.
struck in an oxygen-rich atmosphere?
11. In general, what is formed when an oxide of a
21. Even if a smoker is very careful not to let a
non-metal reacts with water? Give an example.
lighted cigarette come in contact with liquid
12. In general, what is formed when an oxide of a
gasoline, why is it very dangerous to smoke
metal reacts with water? Give an example.
when refuelling an automobile?
13. Complete and balance each nuclear equation.
22. Solutions that have been used to process
Then classify the reaction. +
film contain silver ions, Ag .
(a) 2H+3H → 4He+ (aq)
1 1 2 (a) Explain how you could recover the silver,
(b) 2 9 3 2 9U → + 0 −1 β in the form of an ionic compound.
(c) 239Np → 239Pu + (b) How could you recover the silver
93 94
(d) 238U → 234Th + + 20γ as silver metal?
92 90 0
14. Write the product(s) for each reaction. If you Making Connections
predict that there will be no reaction, write
23. Calcium oxide, CaO (lime), is used to make
“NR.” Balance each chemical equation.
mortar and cement.
(a) BaCl +Na CO →
2(aq) 2 3(aq)
(a) State two reactions that could be used to
(b) Fe +CuSO →
(s) 4(aq)
make lime. Classify each reaction, based on
(c) C H +O →
2 2(g) 2(g)
the types of reactions studied in this chapter.
(d) PCl → + Cl
5(s) 2(g)
(b) In construction, cement is prepared by
(e) Mg +Fe O →
(s) 2 3
mixing the powdered cement with water.
(f) Ca +Cl →
(s) 2(g)
Write the chemical equation that represents
15. Iron often occurs as an oxide, such as Fe O . In
2 3 the reaction of calcium oxide with water.
the steel industry, Fe O is reacted with carbon
2 3 Why are we cautioned not to expose skin
monoxide to produce iron metal and carbon
to dry cement mix and wet cement? It may
dioxide. Write the balanced chemical equation
help you to know that bases are often
for this reaction, and classify it.
corrosive. They can burn exposed skin.
16. Calcium chloride is often used to melt ice
on roads and sidewalks, or to prevent it from
forming. Calcium chloride can be made by
115500 MMHHRR •• UUnniitt 11 MMaatttteerr aanndd CChheemmiiccaall BBoonnddiinngg
Answers to Practice Problems and 29.[234/90]Th 30.[222/86]Rn→ [4/2]He+[218/82]Pb
Short Answers to Section Review Questions 31.[242/94]Pu→ [4/2]He+[238/92]U 32.[144/60]Nd
Practice Problems: 1.(a)calcium +fluorine (reactants) → → [4/2]He+[140/58]Ce 33.[40/19]K→ [0/−1]e
calcium fluoride (product) (b)barium chloride +hydro- +[40/20]Ca 34.[47/20]Ca 35.[73/31]Ga→ [0/−1]e
gen sulfate →hydrogen chloride +barium sulfate +[73/32]Ge 36.[208/83]Bi 37. 5 38.4
(c)calcium carbonate +carbon dioxide +water 39.[27/13]Al+ [4/2]He → [30/15]P+[1/0]n
→calcium hydrogen carbonate (d)hydrogen peroxide → Section Review: 4.1: 2.(a)2SO
2(g)
+O
2(g)
→ 2SO
3(g)
water +oxygen (e)sulfur dioxide +oxygen →sulfur (b)Na
(s)
+H
2
O
(l)
→ H
2(g)
+NaOH
(aq)
(c)Cu
(s)
+HNO
3(aq)
trioxide 2.Sugar →ethanol +carbon dioxide → Cu(NO
3
)
2(aq)
+NO
2(g)
+H
2
O
(l)
4.(a)4Al
(s)
+3O
2(g)
→
3.(a)Zn (s) +Cl 2(g) → ZnCl 2(s) (b)Ca (s) +H 2 O (l) → 42Al 2 O 3(s) (b)2Na 2 S 2 O 3(aq) +I 2(aq) → 2NaI (aq)
Ca(OH) 2(aq) +H 2(g)(c)Ba (s) +S (s) → BaS (s) (d)Pb(NO 3 ) 2(aq) +Na 2 S 4 O 6(aq) (c)2Al (s) +Fe 2 O 3(s) → Al 2 O 3(s) +2Fe (s)
+Mg (s) → Mg(NO 3 ) 2(aq) +Pb (s) 4.(a)CO2 (g) +CaO (s) → (d)4NH 3(g) +5O 2(g) → 4NO (g) +6H 2 O (l) (e)Na 2 O (s) +
CaCO 3(s) (b)Al (s) +O 2(g) → Al 2 O 3(s) (c)Mg (s) +O 2(g) → (NH 4 ) 2 SO 4(aq) +H 2 O (l) +NH 3(aq) (f)C 5 H 12(l) +8O 2(g) →
MgO (s) 5.(a)S (s) +O 2(g) → SO 2(g) (b)P 4(s) +5O 2(g) → 5CO 2(g) +6H 2 O (g) 5.Fe (s) +CuSO 4(aq) → Cu (s) +FeSO 4(aq)
P 4 O 10(s) (c)H 2(g) +Cl 2(g) → 2HCl (g) (d)SO 2(g) +H 2 O (l) → 4.2: 1.(a)Be+O 2 → BeO (b)2Li+Cl 2 → 2LiCl
H 2 SO 3(aq) 6.(a)balanced (b)2HgO (s) → 2Hg (l) +O 2(g) (c)Mg+N 2 → Mg 3 N 2 (d)Ca+Br 2 → CaBr 2 2.(a)2K 2 O
(c)H 2 O 2(aq) → 2H 2 O (l) +O 2(g) (d)balanced 7.(a)2SO 2(g) → O 2 +4K (b)2CuO → 2Cu+O 2 (c)2H 2 O → 2H 2 +O 2
+O 2(g) → 2SO 3(g) (b)BaCl 2(aq) +Na 2 SO 4(aq) → NaCl (aq) (d)2Ni 2 O 3 → 4Ni+3O 2 (e)2Ag 2 O → 4Ag+O 2
+BaSO 4(s) 8.P 4(s) +5O 2(g) → P 4 O 10(s) ;P 4 O 10(s) +6H 2 O (l) 3.(a)Sn(OH) 4(s) → SnO 2(s) +2H 2 O (g) ,decomposition
→ 4H 3 PO 4(aq) 9.(a)As 4 S 6(s) +9O 2(g) → As 4 O 6(s) +6SO 2(g) (b)3Cl 2 (g)+I 2(s) → 2ICl 3 synthesis (c)C 4 H 9 OH+6O 2
(b)Sc 2 O 3(s) +3H 2 O (l) → 2Sc(OH) 3(s) (c)C 2 H 5 OH (l) +3O 2(g) → 5H 2 O+4CO 2 5.2HgO (s) → O 2(g) +2Hg (s)
→ 2CO 2(g) +3H 2 O (l) (d)2C 4 H 10(g) +9O 2(g) → 8CO (g) decomposition 4.3: 1.(a)Li+H 2 O → Li 2 O+H 2 (b)NR
+10H 2 O (g) 10.(a)2K+Br 2 → 2KBr (b)H 2 +Cl 2 → 2HCl (c)F 2 +2KI → 2KF+I 2 (d)NR (e)Zn+CuSO 4 → Cu
(c)Ca+Cl 2 →CaCl 2 (d)Li+O 2 → LiO 2 11.(a)products +ZnSO 4(f)K+H 2 O → K 2 O+H 2 2.(a)NaOH (aq) +
are Fe 2 O 3, FeO (b)possible products: V 2 O 5 ,VO,V 2 O 3 , Fe(NO 3 ) 3(aq) → NaNO 3(aq) +Fe(OH) 3(s) (b)Ca(OH) 2(aq) +
VO 2(c)possible products: TiO 2 ,TiO,Ti 2 O 3 12.(a)K 2 O HCl (aq) → CaCl 2(aq) +H 2 O) (l) (c)NR (d)K 2 CO 3(s) +
+H 2 O → 2KOH (b)MgO+H 2 O → Mg(OH) 2 H 2 SO 4(aq) → K 2 SO 4(aq) +CO 2(g) +H 2 O (l)
(c)SO 2 +H 2 O → H 2 SO 3 13.NH 3(g) +HCl (g) → NH 4 Cl (s) 3.(b)(NH 4 ) 2 SO 4(aq) +2KOH (aq) → 2NH 3(g) +2H 2 O (l)
14.Hg,O 2 15.(a)2HI → H 2 +I 2 (b)2Ag 2 O → 4Ag+O 2 +K 2 SO 4(aq) 4.(a)incomplete combustion (b)single
(c)2AlCl 3 → 2Al+3Cl 2 (d)MgO → Mg+O 2 displacement (c)double displacement (d)complete
16.(a)MgCO 3 → MgO+CO 2(b)CuCO 3 → CuO+CO 2 combustion (e)decomposition (f)synthesis
17.2CH 3 OH+3O 2 → 2CO 2 +4H 2 O (g)decomposition 5.4: 2.(a)[1/0]n(b)[0/−1]e
18.2C 8 H 18 +25O 2 → 16CO 2 +18H 2 O 19.C 3 H 6 O+O 2 (c)[222/2]Rn (d)[4/2]He (e)[236/92]U (f)[4/2]He
→ CO
2
+H
2
O 20.2C
16
H
34
+49O
2
→ 32CO
2
+34H
2
O
21.(a)Ca+2H
2
O→Ca(OH)
2
+H
2
(b)Zn+Pb(NO
3
)
2
→
Zn(NO
3
)
2
+Pb (c)2Al+6HCl → 2AlCl
3
+3H
2
(d)Li+
AgNO
3
→ Ag+LiNO
3
(e)Pb+H
2
SO
4
→ PbSO
4
+H
2
(f)2Mg+Pt(OH)
4
→ 2Mg(OH)
2
+Pt (g)Ba+FeCl
2
→
BaCl
2
+Fe(h)Fe+Co(ClO
3
)
2
→ Fe(ClO
3
)
3
+Co
22.(a)NR (b)Zn+FeCl
2
→ ZnCl
2
+Fe (c)K+H
2
O →
KOH+H
2
(d)2Al+3H
2
SO
4
→ Al
2
(SO
4
)
3
+3H
2
(e)NR
(f)NR (g)Zn+H
2
SO
4
→ ZnSO
4
+H
2
(h)Mg+SnCl
2
→
MgCl
2
+Sn 23.(a)NR (b)Cl
2
+2NaI → 2NaCl+I
2
24.(a)2Pb+2HCl → 2PbCl+H
2
(b)KI+Br
2
→ KBr+I
2
(c)NR (d)Ca+H
2
O → Ca(OH)
2
+H
2
(e)NR (f)Ni+
H
2
SO
4
→ NiSO
4
+H
2
25.(a)Pb(NO
3
)
2(aq)
+2KI
(aq)
→
2KNO
3(aq)
+PbI
2(s)
(b)NR (c)NR (d)Ba(NO
3
)
2(aq)
+
Mg(SO
4
)
(aq)
→ BaSO
4(s)
+Mg(NO
3
)
2(aq)
26.(a)Na
2
SO
3(aq)
+2HCl
(aq)
→ SO
2(g)
+2NaCl
(aq)
+H
2
O
(l)
(b)CaS
(aq)
+
H
2
SO
4(aq)
→ H
2
S
(g)
+CaSO
4(l)
27.(a)HCl
(aq)
+LiOH
(aq)
→
H
2
O
(l)
+LiCl
(aq)
(b)HclO
4(aq)
+Ca(OH)
2(aq)
→ H
2
O
(l)
+Ca(ClO
4
)
2(aq)
(c)H
2
SO
4(aq)
+NaOH
(aq)
→ Na
2
SO
4(aq)
+H
2
O
(l)
28.(a)BaCl
2(aq)
+Na
2
CrO
4(aq)
→ BaCrO
4(s)
+2NaCl
(aq)
(b)HNO
3(aq)
+NaOH
(aq)
→ H
2
O
(l)
+NaNO
3(aq)
(c)K
2
CO
3(aq)
+2HNO
3(aq)
→ H
2
O
(l)
+2KNO
3(aq)
+CO
2(g)
CChhaapptteerr 44 CCllaassssiiffyyiinngg RReeaaccttiioonnss:: CChheemmiiccaallss iinn BBaallaannccee •• MMHHRR 115511
Project
UNIT 1
Developing a Background
Many of the chemicals in your school laboratory are
Chemistry Newsletter
hazardous. Some are corrosive, some are flammable,
and some are poisonous. Many exhibit these proper-
ties when they are combined. You can work safely
with these chemicals, as long as you treat them with
care and respect, observe proper safety precautions,
and follow the directions that are given by your
teacher and this textbook.
Did you know that many of the chemical products
in your home are hazardous, too? For example, com-
mon household bleach, when used as directed, is safe
for disinfecting and whitening clothing. Hazard labels
on bleaching products, however, warn against mixing
bleach with acids, household ammonia, or products
that contain these chemicals. Bleach, when combined
with acids, produces toxic chlorine gas. The products
of combining bleach with ammonia are explosive.
Most homes contain numerous chemical products,
ranging from cleaners and disinfectants, to fertilizers
and fuels. All potentially hazardous products have a
warning on their containers or on paper inserts in
their packaging. Many, but not all, have a list of the
chemicals they contain. Some hazardous products
advise users only to keep them away from children
and pets.
How much do you know about the safe use of
chemical products? Would you know what to do if an
accidental spill occurred? Would the members of your
family, or people in your community, know what to do?
Challenge
Design, produce, and distribute a newsletter to
inform your community about the safe use of common
chemical products. Include the potential hazards of
these products to living things and the environment.
Also include emergency procedures to follow if an
accident occurred.
Materials
Select a medium for your newsletter, such as a
traditional paper newsletter or an electronic version
for the Internet. For a traditional newsletter, you
will need to decide on methods of production and
distribution. For an electronic version, you will need
to use computer hardware and software.
152 MHR • Unit 1 Matter and Chemical Bonding
Assessment
After you complete this project:
(cid:2) Assess the success of your project based on how
similar the final project is to your action plan.
(cid:2) Assess your project based on how clearly the
Design Criteria
chemistry concepts and safety recommendations
A As a class, develop a rubic listing criteria for are conveyed.
assessing the newsletters. For example, one
(cid:2) Assess your project using the rubric designed
criterion may involve a newsletter’s effectiveness in
in class.
altering the behaviour of its readers. You may want
to develop different criteria for traditional and elec-
tronic newsletters.
B Your newsletter must be factual, easy to read for a
wide variety of audiences, and educational.
Action Plan
1 The following items must be part of your
newsletter:
•examples of household chemical products and
their uses
•hazards associated with each chemical product
•suggestions to encourage safe and responsible use
•environmental considerations for the disposal of
the chemical products
•alternative products (if any), and hazards
(if any) associated with these alternatives
•an interview with a professional who
researches, develops, or works with
household chemical products
2 Develop detailed steps to research, plan, and
produce your newsletter. Include deadlines for
completion and specific roles for the members
of your group (for example, editor, writers, artists,
and designers).
Evaluate
Present your completed newsletter to your class. Hold
a focus group session to evaluate the content and
impact of your newsletter. The focus group could
include students from other classes, parents and
relatives, and members of the community.
Unit 1 Project • MHR 153
Review
Knowledge/Understanding 5. Now suppose that you measure the mass of a
chemical on a filter paper. The mass of the
Multiple Choice filter paper is 1.6 g. The mass of the chemical
In your notebook, write the letter for the best and the filter paper, together, is 14.168 g. How
answer to each question. many significant digits should the final mass of
1. Which statement is the best scientific the chemical have?
description (based on observations) of a car? (a) three, because you subtract to determine the
(a) It is red, and it goes fast. number of significant digits
(b) It was made in Detroit by unionized workers, (b) three, because you use the least number of
using metal and fibreglass. significant digits after the decimal place (the
(c) It has chrome bumpers, a red fibreglass body, tenths place in this question)
and wheels made of a magnesium alloy. It (c) five, because you measured the chemical and
has been tested on a straight road and found filter paper very accurately and you want
to be able to accelerate from 0 to 60 km/h your answer to be as precise as possible
in 4.9 s. (d) two, because you should use the least
(d) It is owned by my cousin. number of significant digits in the numbers
(e) My cousin bought it at the car dealership in the question
down the street. She got a good deal on it. (e) as many as you like, because both of the
given quantities are exact numbers
2. An ocean is not a solution because
(a) solutions cannot contain salt 6. Rust is an example of
(b) solutions cannot be blue (a) a compound
(c) solutions should not have particles that can (b) an element
be seen (c) a homogeneous mixture
(d) solutions should not be clear enough to see (d) a heterogeneous mixture
through them (e) a solution
(e) a whale could not breathe through a solution 7. Which statement contains only qualitative
3. Which mass is expressed to four significant dig- observations about a copper sulfate solution?
its? (a) The solution fills a 250 mL beaker, and the
(a) 0.0027 g (c) 0.270 g (e) 2.700 g solution is clear.
(b) 0.027 g (d) 2.70 g (b) The solution has not evaporated more than
0.5 mL overnight, and the temperature is
4. Suppose that you multiply a density of
23˚C.
13.6g/cm3 by a volume of 2.0cm3. How many
(c) The solution is clear and is a pale blue
significant digits does the resulting mass have?
colour.
(a) five, because you add the total number of
(d) 4.6 g of copper sulfate was added to 249 mL
significant digits in the question
of water to produce the solution.
(b) three, because you use the greatest number
(e) The solution easily conducts about 3 V of
of significant digits in the numbers in the
electricity between two probes.
question
(c) six, because you multiply the significant 8. Which of the following chemical groups are
digits in the question when you multiply least likely to react with other elements?
the numbers (a) the halogen gases
(d) two, because you use the least number of (b) the noble gases
significant digits in the numbers in the (c) the transition metals
question (d) the alkaline earth metals
(e) as many as you like, because both of the (e) the alkali metals
given quantities are exact numbers
154 MHR • Unit 1 Matter and Chemical Bonding
9. Periodic trends are linked to 14. The measurement 4.90 m has three significant
(a) the number of electrons in an atom and the figures.
way they are arranged 15. Matter is anything that has a weight and a
(b) the atomic mass of the atoms density.
(c) the number of neutrons that an atom has
16. The three standard states of matter that exist at
(d) the temperature of the elements
room temperature are liquid, solid, and plasma.
(e) the arrangement of the protons
17. When iron rusts, a compound becomes an ele-
10. Blake measured a piece of steel three times
ment. This is a physical change.
using Vernier calipers. He recorded values
18. Acid rain is a pure liquid.
of 13.62 mm, 13.53 mm, and 13.55 mm. His
lab partner Ayako measured the same piece 19. When water melts, a quantitative chemical
of steel. She recorded values of 13.45 mm, change occurs.
13.33 mm, and 13.56 mm. Which of the 20. To change water from ice to liquid, energy must
following statements are true? be removed from the water.
(a) Blake’s results were more precise than
21. A gold ring is an example of a heterogeneous
Ayako’s.
mixture.
(b) Ayako’s results were more precise
22. Water is an example of an element.
than Blake’s.
(c) Blake’s results were more accurate 23. When the atoms of two elements are not
than Ayako’s. significantly different in size, the element
(d) Ayako’s results were more accurate than with the larger atomic radius has a smaller
Blake’s. electronegativity.
(e) Blake’s results and Ayako’s results were 24. Nitric oxide, NO, is a non-polar molecule.
equally accurate and precise.
25. In a balanced chemical equation, the number
11. Which of the following represent polar of particles of products is always equal to the
covalent bonds? number of particles of reactants.
(i) Na–Cl; (ii) N–O; (iii) Hg–O; (iv) Ag–S
(a) (i), (iii), and (iv) only Short Answer
(b) (ii) and (iii) only 26. Name four chemical processes that occur in
(c) (iii) and (iv) only everyday life.
(d) (iii) only
27. How many different types of atoms would
(e) (i) only
you expect to find in a cylinder of pure
12. Which equation most accurately represents the nitrogen gas?
following reaction:
28. Using only a periodic table, rank the atoms in
iron metal + copper(II) sulfate solution →
each set in order of decreasing size. Explain
copper metal + iron(II) sulfate solution
your ranking.
(a) Fe +Cu(SO ) → Cu +Fe(SO )
(s) 4 2(aq) (s) 4 2(aq) (a) Na, K, H
(b) Fe +Cu(SO ) → Cu +Fe(SO )
(aq) 4 (aq) (aq) 4 (aq) (b) Mg, S, Si
(c) 2Fe +Cu (SO ) → 2Cu +Fe (SO )
(s) 2 4 (aq) (s) 2 4 (aq) (c) Cl, K, Ar
(d) Fe +Cu(SO ) → Cu +Fe(SO )
(s) 4 (aq) (s) 4 (aq)
(e) Fe +CuS → Cu +FeS 29. Using only a periodic table, rank the elements
(s) (aq) (s) (aq)
in each set in order of increasing ionization
True/False energy. Explain your ranking.
(a) B, N, F
In your notebook, indicate whether each statement
(b) F, Cl, Br
is true or false. If a statement is false, rewrite it to
(c) Na, Cs, K
make it true.
13. Masses of 3.9 g, 4.1 g, and 4.0 g were obtained 30. Using only a periodic table, rank the elements
on a scale for a brass 5 g weight. This scale is in each set in order of increasing electron
accurate but not precise. affinity. Explain your ranking.
Unit 1 Review • MHR 155
(a) Be, Ca, Mg
Mass of filter Mass of Mass of
(b) Kr, Se, Br paper paper + powder calcium sulfate
(c) Na, Cs, K
Trial # 1 4.13 g 13.6 g 9.47 g
31. Write the chemical name for each compound.
Trial # 2 4.2 g 12.81 g 8.51 g
(a) NH NO (d) Ba(NO )
4 3 2 2
Trial # 3 4.12 g 10.96 g 6.8 g
(b) Pb(C H O ) (e) P O
2 3 2 4 4 10
(c) S Cl (f) Mn O
2 2 2 3 What errors did Raja make in his reporting and
32. Write the chemical formula of each compound. calculations?
(a) strontium chloride
39. What kinds of tests could be used to differenti-
(b) lead(II) sulfite
ate between unknown metal and non-metal
(c) chromium(III) acetate
samples in a laboratory? Design an experiment
(d) hydrogen sulfide
that includes these tests.
(e) iodine heptafluoride
40. You are given a substance. You must decide
33. Explain why it is useful to classify reactions.
whether it is an ionic compound or a covalent
34. Balance each chemical equation, if necessary.
compound. The substance has roughly cube-
State which class it belongs to.
shaped granules, which are translucent and
(a) Zn +AgNO → Zn(NO ) +Ag
(s) 3(aq) 3 2(aq) (s) colourless.
(b) Fe +S → FeS
(s) (s) (s) (a) Predict whether the compound is ionic or
(c) KClO → 2KCl +3O
3(s) (s) 2(g) covalent.
(d) NaCO +MgSO → MgCO
3(aq) 4(aq) 3(s) (b) Explain your prediction.
+Na SO
2 4(aq) (c) Design an experiment to collect data that
(e) C 2 H 6 O ((cid:2)) +O 2(g) → CO 2(g) +H 2 O (g) will support your prediction.
35. Predict the products of each reaction. Then
41. A student drops a coil of metal wire, X , into a
(s)
write a balanced chemical equation, and state
water solution of a metal sulfate, ZSO . The
4(aq)
which class the reaction belongs to.
student observes that the colour of the solution
(a) Mg +HCl →
(s) (aq) changes, and that a metallic-looking substance
(b) HgO →
(s) appears to be forming on the metal wire. Based
(c) Al +O →
(s) 2(g) on these observations, answer the following
(d) C H O +O →
6 12 6(s) 2(g) questions.
(e) BaCl +Na SO →
2(aq) 2 4(aq) (a) Has a reaction taken place? If so, what
kind of reaction has taken place? Explain
Inquiry
your answer.
36. Describe an experimental procedure to (b) Which metal is more reactive, metal X or
test three qualitative properties and two
metal Z in compound ZSO ? Explain your
4
quantitative properties of lead.
answer.
37. Design an experiment that uses acids to test (c) Write the names of a real metal and a metal
the reactivities of one metal from each of the sulfate that you predict would behave this
following groups: alkali metals, alkaline earth way in a laboratory.
metals, and transition metals.
Communication
38. Raja weighed calcium sulfate on filter papers
for an experiment that he performed three 42. Perform each calculation. Express the answer
times. His data are shown below. to the correct number of significant digits.
(a) 19.3 g + 2.22 g
(b) 14.2cm×1.1cm×3.69cm
(c) 57.9kg÷3.000dm3
(d) 18.76 g – 1.3 g
(e) 25.2 + 273˚C
156 MHR • Unit 1 Matter and Chemical Bonding
43. Name four groups in the periodic table. Give 50. Draw diagrams to represent each class of
characteristics of each group, and list three reaction below. Use symbols or drawings to
members of each group. represent different kinds of atoms.
44. Copy the following table into your notebook, (a) synthesis
and fill in the missing information. If isotopic (b) decomposition
data are not given, use the atomic mass from the (c) combustion
periodic table to find the number of neutrons. (d) single displacement
(e) double displacement
Atom or ion Number Number Number
51. Compare the boiling points of ammonia, NH ,
3
with of of of
phosphorus trihydride, PH , and arsenic
mass number protons neutrons electrons 3
trihydride, AsH . Use the periodic table and
14N3− 3
the concept of molecular shape and polarity.
16 18
52. The molecule BF contains polar covalent
3
2 2 bonds, yet the molecule is not polar. Explain
7Li + 3 why. Include a diagram with your explanation.
20 16
Making Connections
45. Draw a Lewis structure for each element. 53. What effects do accuracy, precision, and margin
(a) argon, Ar of error have in courts of law? Consider court
(b) sodium, Na cases that involve forensic analysis. What are
(c) aluminum, Al the implications of inaccurate science in the
(d) boron, B courts?
46. Draw a Lewis structure for each element. 54. Some metals (such as gold, lead, and silver)
Explain the two patterns that appear. were known and widely used in ancient
(a) carbon, C times. Other metals have only been discovered
(b) neon, N relatively recently. For example, both sodium
(c) oxygen, O and potassium were discovered in the early
(d) fluorine, F nineteenth century by Sir Humphrey Davy.
(e) chlorine, Cl Explain why ancient cultures knew about some
(f) bromine, Br metals, while other metals remained unknown
for thousands of years.
47. Describe three periodic trends. Explain how
these trends change across and down the
periodic table.
48. Arrange the following quantities in a table
to show which are physical and chemical
COURSE
properties, which are qualitative, and which
CHALLENGE
are quantitative: melting point, colour, density,
Planet Unknown
reactivity with acids, flammability, malleability,
electrical conductivity, boiling point, reactivity Consider the following as you continue to plan for
your Chemistry Course Challenge:
with air, hardness, toxicity, brittleness.
• How did chemists use trends of physical and
49. Draw a Lewis structure for each compound.
chemical properties to arrange elements in a
(a) CrBr
2 periodic table?
(b) H S
2 • What are several ways of comparing the reactivity
(c) CCl
4 of metals?
(d) AsH
3 • How can you use the physical and chemical
(e) CS
2
properties of elements to help identify them?
Unit 1 Review • MHR 157
Chemical Quantities
I
UNIT 2 CONTENTS
n the 1939 film The Wizard of Oz,
CHAPTER 5
Dorothy and her companions col-
Counting Atoms and Molecules:
lapsed in sleep in a field of poppies.
The Mole
This scene is not realistic, however.
CHAPTER 6 Simply walking in a field of poppies
Chemical Proportions in Compounds will not put you into a drugged sleep.
Poppy seeds do, however,
CHAPTER 7
contain a substance called opium.
Quantities in Chemical Reactions
Opium contains the drugs morphine,
DESIGN YOUR OWN INVESTIGATION codeine, and heroin, collectively
Analyzing a Mixture Using known as opiates.
Stoichiometry While you are unlikely to expe-
rience any physiological effects from
eating the poppy seeds on a bagel,
UNIT 2 OVERALL EXPECTATIONS
they could cost you your job! For
What is the mole? Why is it some safety sensitive jobs, such as
important for analyzing nursing and truck-driving, you may
chemical systems?
be required to take a drug test as
How are the quantitative part of the interview process.
relationships in balanced Each gram of poppy seeds may
chemical reactions used for
contain 2 mg to 18 mg of morphine
experiments and calculations?
and 0.6 mg to 2.4 mg of codeine.
Why are quantitative Eating foods with large amounts of
chemical relationships
poppy seeds can cause chemists to
important in the home
detect opiates in urine. The opiates
and in industries?
may be at levels above employers’
specified limits.
Unit Investigation Prep Knowing about quantities in
chemical reactions is crucial to
Read pages 274–275 before begin-
ning this unit. There, you will have interpreting the results of drug tests.
the opportunity to determine the Policy-makers and chemists need
composition of a mixture. You can to understand how the proportions
start planning your investigation of codeine to morphine caused by
well in advance by knowing the
eating poppy seeds differ from the
kind of skills and information you
proportions caused by taking opiates.
need to have as you progress
In this unit, you will carry out
through Unit 2.
experiments and calculations based
on the quantitative relationships in
chemical formulas and reactions.
158
160
Counting Atoms and
Molecules: The Mole
A
recipe for chocolate chip muffins tells you exactly what ingredients Chapter Preview
you will need. One recipe might call for flour, butter, eggs, milk, vinegar,
5.1 Isotopes and Average
baking soda, sugar, and chocolate chips. It also tells you how much of
Atomic Mass
each ingredient you will need, using convenient units of measurement.
5.2 The Avogadro Constant
Which of the ingredients do you measure by counting? Which do you
and the Mole
measure by volume or by mass? The recipe does not tell you exactly how
5.3 Molar Mass
many chocolate chips or grains of sugar you will need. It would take far
too long to count individual chocolate chips or grains of sugar. Instead, the
amounts are given in millilitres or grams—the units of volume or mass.
In some ways, chemistry is similar to baking. To carry out a reaction
successfully—in chemistry or in baking—you need to know how much
of each reactant you will need. When you bake something with vinegar
and baking soda, for example, the baking soda reacts with acetic acid in
the vinegar to produce carbon dioxide gas. The carbon dioxide gas helps
the batter rise. The chemical equation for this reaction is
NaHCO 3(s) +CH 3 COOH (aq) → NaCH 3 COO (aq) +H 2 O ((cid:2)) +CO 2(g)
According to the balanced equation, one molecule of baking soda
reacts with one molecule of acetic acid to form a salt, water, and carbon Concepts and Skills
dioxide. If you wanted to carry out the reaction, how would you know the You Will Need
amount of baking soda and vinegar to use? Their molecules are much too Before you begin this chapter,
small and numerous to be counted like eggs. review the following concepts
In this chapter, you will learn how chemists count atoms by organiz- and skills:
ing large numbers of them into convenient, measurable groups. You will (cid:2) defining and describing
learn how these groups relate the number of atoms in a substance to its the relationships among
atomic number, mass
mass. Using your calculator and the periodic table, you will learn how
number, atomic mass,
to convert between the mass of a substance and the number of atoms
and isotope (Chapter 2,
it contains.
section 2.1)
(cid:2) writing chemical formulas
How do recipe writers and equations (Chapter 3,
know that they have the section 3.4)
right number of molecules
(cid:2) balancing chemical
of each ingredient to ensure
equations by inspection
tasty muffins?
(Chapter 4, section 4.1)
Chapter 5 Counting Atoms and Molecules: The Mole • MHR 161
5.1 Isotopes and
Average Atomic Mass
Section Preview/ How does the mass of a substance relate to the number of atoms in
Specific Expectations the substance? To answer this question, you need to understand how the
relative masses of individual atoms relate to the masses of substances that
In this section, you will
you can measure on a balance.
(cid:2) describethe relationship
The head of a pin, like the one shown in Figure 5.1, is made primarily
between isotopic abundance
and average atomic mass of iron. It has a mass of about 8×10 −3g, yet it contains about 8×1019
atoms. Even if you could measure the mass of a single atom on a balance,
(cid:2) solveproblems involving
percentage abundance of the mass would be so tiny (about 1×10 −22g for an iron atom) that it
isotopes and relative atomic would be impractical to use in everyday situations. Therefore, you need to
mass consider atoms in bulk, not individually.
(cid:2) explainthe significance of a How do you relate the mass of individual atoms to the mass of a large,
weighted average easily measurable number of atoms? In the next two sections, you will
find out.
(cid:2) communicateyour under-
standing of the following
terms: isotopic abundance,
average atomic mass,
mass spectrometer,
weighted average
Figure 5.1 The head of a typical pin contains about 80 quintillionatoms.
Relating Atomic Masses to Macroscopic Masses
In Chapter 2, you learned that the mass of an atom is expressed in
atomic mass units. Atomic mass units are a relative measure, defined by
the mass of carbon-12. According to this definition, one atom of carbon-12
is assigned a mass of 12 u. Stated another way, 1u = 1 of the mass of
12
one atom of carbon-12.
The masses of all other atoms are defined by their relationship to
carbon-12. For example, oxygen-16 has a mass that is 133% of the mass
of carbon-12. Hence the mass of an atom of oxygen-16 is
133 ×12.000u = 16.0u.
100
162 MHR • Unit 2 Chemical Quantities
Usually, not all the atoms in an element have the same mass. As you
learned in Chapter 2, atoms of the same element that contain different
numbers of neutrons are called isotopes. Most elements are made up of
two or more isotopes. Chemists need to account for the presence of iso-
topes when finding the relationship between the mass of a large number
of atoms and the mass of a single atom. To understand why this is impor-
tant, consider the following analogy.
Imagine that you have the task of finding the total mass of 10 000
spoons. If you know the mass of a dessertspoon, can you assume that its
mass represents the average mass of all the spoons? What if the 10 000
spoons include soupspoons, dessertspoons, and tablespoons? If you use
the mass of a dessertspoon to calculate the total mass of all the spoons,
you may obtain a reasonable estimate. Your answer will not be accurate,
however, because each type of spoon has a different mass. You cannot
calculate an accurate average mass for all the spoons based on knowing
the mass of only one type. How can you improve the accuracy of your
answer without determining the mass of all the spoons?
Mg-24 Mg-25 Mg-26
CHEM
FACT
Figure 5.2 Think about finding the average mass of a group of objects that have
Magnesium plays a variety of
different masses. How is this similar to finding the average mass of an element that is
roles in the body. It is involved
composed of different isotopes?
in energy production, nerve
function, and muscle relax-
Isotopic Abundance ation, to name just a few.
The magnesium in these
Chemists face a situation similar to the one described above. Because all
tablets, like all naturally
the atoms in a given element do not have the same number of neutrons,
occurring magnesium, is
they do not all have the same mass. For example, magnesium has three made up of three isotopes.
naturally occurring isotopes. It is made up of 79% magnesium-24,
10% magnesium-25, and 11% magnesium-26. Whether the magnesium
is found in a supplement tablet (like the ones on the right) or in seawater
as Mg(OH) , it is always made up of these three isotopes in the same
2
proportion. The relative amount in which each isotope is present in an
element is called the isotopic abundance. It can be expressed as a percent
or as a decimal fraction. When chemists consider the mass of a sample
containing billions of atoms, they must take the isotopic abundance
into account.
Chapter 5 Counting Atoms and Molecules: The Mole • MHR 163
Average Atomic Mass and the Periodic Table
The average atomic mass of an element is the average of the masses
of all the element’s isotopes. It takes into account the abundance of each
isotope within the element. The average atomic mass is the mass that is
given for each element in the periodic table.
It is important to interpret averages carefully. For example, in 1996,
the average size of a Canadian family was 3.1. Of course, no one family
actually has 3.1 people. In the same way, while the average atomic mass
of carbon is 12.01 u, no one atom of carbon has a mass of 12.01 u.
Examine Figure 5.3. Since the atomic mass unit is based on carbon-12,
why does the periodic table show a value of 12.01 u, instead of exactly
12 u? Carbon is made up of several isotopes, not just carbon-12. Naturally
occurring carbon contains carbon-12, carbon-13, and carbon-14. If all
these isotopes were present in equal amounts, you could simply find
the average of the masses of the isotopes. This average mass would be
about 13 u, since the masses of carbon-13 and carbon-14 are about 13 u
and 14 u respectively.
The isotopes, though, are not present in equal amounts. Carbon-12
comprises 98.9% of all carbon, while carbon-13 accounts for 1.1%.
Carbon-14 is present in a very small amount—about 1×10 −10%. It makes
sense that the average mass of all the isotopes of carbon is 12.01 u—very
close to 12—since carbon-12 is by far the predominant isotope.
CHEM
FACT
6
The only elements with only
one naturally occurring
isotope are beryllium, sodium,
aluminum, and phosphorus.
C
12.01
average atomic mass (u)
Figure 5.3 The atomic mass that is given in the periodic table represents the average
mass of all the naturally occurring isotopes of the element. It takes into account their
isotopic abundances.
Thus chemists need to know an element’s isotopic abundance and the
mass of each isotope to calculate the average atomic mass. How do
chemists determine the isotopic abundance associated with each element?
How do they find the mass of each isotope? They use a mass
spectrometer, a powerful instrument that generates a magnetic field to
obtain data about the mass and abundance of atoms and molecules. You
will learn more about the mass spectrometer in Tools & Techniques on
page 166. You can use the data obtained with a mass spectrometer to
calculate the average atomic mass given in the periodic table.
164 MHR • Unit 2 Chemical Quantities
Working with Weighted Averages
If you obtain the isotopic abundance of an element from mass spectrome-
ter data or a table, you can calculate the average atomic mass of the ele-
ment. You do this by calculating the weighted average of each isotope’s We use weighted averages all
mass. A weighted average takes into account not only the values associat- the time! For example, course
ed with a set of data, but also the abundance or importance of each value. marks are often based on
Normally, when you calculate the average of a set of data, you find the weighted averages. Suppose
that the final mark in a chem-
equally weighted average. You add the given values and divide the total
istry course is determined
by the number of values in the set. Each value in the average is given
as follows: laboratory 25%,
equal weight. For example, imagine that you have three objects: A, B, and
tests 30%, homework and
C. A has a mass of 1.0 kg, B has a mass of 2.0 kg, and C has a mass of 3.0 quizzes 5%, project 10%, and
kg. Their average mass is final exam 30%. A student
Massof(A+B+C) = 1.0kg+2.0kg+3.0kg obtains the following marks:
Numberofitems 3 laboratory 114, tests 261,
= 2.0kg 130 300
homework and quizzes 90,
What if you have a set containing two of A, one of B, and three of C? 95
project 21, and final exam 70.
Their average mass becomes 25 80
2(1.0kg)+2.0kg+3(3.0kg) What is the student’s final
= 2.2kg mark in chemistry?
6
This is a weighted average.
Another way to calculate the same weighted average is to consider
the relative abundance of each object. There are six objects in total. A is
2 1
present as (33%) of the total, B is present as (17%) of the total, and C
6 6
3
is present as (50%) of the total. Thus their average mass can be calculat-
6
ed in the following way:
(0.33)(1.0kg)+(0.17)(2.0kg)+(0.50)(3.0kg) = 2.2kg
Calculating Average Atomic Mass
You can use a similar method to calculate average atomic mass. If you
know the atomic mass of each isotope that makes up an element, as well
How is the atomic mass of an
as the isotopic abundance of each isotope, you can calculate the average
atom different from the mass
atomic mass of the element.
number of the atom? How are
For example, lithium exists as two isotopes: lithium-7 and lithium-6. the atomic mass and mass
As you can see in Figure 5.4, lithium-7 has a mass of 7.015 u and makes number similar?
up 92.58% of lithium. Lithium-6 has a mass of 6.015 u and makes up
the remaining 7.42%. To calculate the average atomic mass of lithium,
multiply the mass of each isotope by its abundance.
(cid:2) (cid:3) (cid:2) (cid:3)
92.58 (7.015u)+ 7.42 (6.015u) = 6.94u
100 100
Looking at the periodic table confirms that the aver-
age atomic mass of lithium is 6.94 u. The upcoming
Sample Problem gives another 7.4%
example of how to calculate average Lithium-6
92.6 %
atomic mass.
Lithium-7
Figure 5.4 Naturally occurring lithium
consists of two isotopes, 7Liand 6Li.
3 3
Chapter 5 Counting Atoms and Molecules: The Mole • MHR 165
Tools & Techniques
The Mass Spectrometer In a mass spectrometer, elements that are not
gases are vaporized by heating. Next, the gas
Many chemists depend on instruments known
atoms are ionized. In electron impact ionization,
as mass spectrometers. Mass spectrometers can
the gas atoms are bombarded with a stream of
detect trace pollutants in the atmosphere, provide
electrons from a heated filament. These electrons
information about the composition of large mole-
collide with the gas atoms, causing each atom to
cules, and help to determine the age of Earth’s
lose an electron and become a positive ion.
oldest rocks.
The ions are focussed and accelerated by elec-
As well, mass spectrometers can find the
tric fields, toward a magnetic field. The magnetic
relative abundance of each isotope in an element.
field deflects them and forces them to take a
In 1912, J.J. Thompson first detected neon-20
curved path. Lighter ions curve more than heavier
and neon-22 in a sample of neon gas by using a
ions. Therefore ions from different isotopes arrive
magnetic field to separate the isotopes.
at different destinations. Since ions have a charge,
Today’s mass spectrometers also use a mag-
a detector can be used to register the current at
netic field to separate the isotopes of an element.
each destination. The current is proportional to
Since a magnetic field can only affect the path of
the number of ions that arrive at the destination.
a charged particle, the atoms must first be
An isotope that has a larger relative abundance
charged, or “ionized.” The magnetic field then
generates a larger current. From the currents at
deflects ions with the same charge, but different
the different destinations, chemists can deduce
masses, onto separate paths. Imagine rolling a
the proportion of each isotope in the element.
tennis ball at a right angle to the air current from
Mass spectral data for neon, below, show
a fan. The air current deflects the path of the ball.
the relative abundance of the isotopes of neon.
The same air current deflects a Ping-Pong™ ball
Using mass spectrometers, chemists now detect
more than a tennis ball. Similarly, a magnetic
a signal from neon-21, in addition to the signals
field deflects isotopes of smaller mass more than
from neon-20 and neon-22.
isotopes of larger mass.
Detector
20Ne+
21Ne+
2 If necessary, heater
Lightest particles in sample
vaporizes sample 22Ne+
3 Electron beam knocks
Charged particle
electrons from atoms
beam Heaviest particles
in sample
1 Sample
enters
chamber
20Ne+
(90.5%)
Electron
source 5 Magnetic field separates
particles according to
4 Electric field accelerates their mass/change ratio 22Ne+
21Ne+
particles toward Magnet (9.2%)
magnetic region (0.3%)
166 MHR • Unit 2 Chemical Quantities
ecnadnuba
tnecreP
100
80
60
40
20
Mass spectroscopy of neon 0 1 2 3
Mass/charge
Mass spectral data for isotopes
of neon
Sample Problem
Average Atomic Mass
CHEM
Problem
FACT
Naturally occurring silver exists as two isotopes. From the mass of
Why are the atomic masses of
each isotope and the isotopic abundance listed below, calculate the
individual isotopes not exact
average atomic mass of silver. whole numbers? After all, 12C
has a mass of exactly 12 u.
Isotope Atomic mass (u) Relative abundance (%)
Since carbon has 6 neutrons
107Ag 106.9 51.8 and 6 protons, you might
47
assume that protons and neu-
109Ag 108.9 48.2
47 trons have masses of exactly
1 u each. In fact, protons and
neutrons have masses that are
What Is Required?
close to, but slightly different
You need to find the average atomic mass of silver. from, 1 u. As well, the mass of
electrons, while much smaller
than the masses of protons
What Is Given?
and neutrons, must still be
You are given the relative abundance and the atomic mass taken into account.
of each isotope.
Plan Your Strategy
Multiply the atomic mass of each isotope by its relative abundance,
expressed as a decimal. That is, 51.8% expressed as a decimal is
0.518 and 48.2% is 0.482.
Act on Your Strategy
Average atomic mass of Ag = 106.9u(0.518)+108.9u(0.482)
= 107.9u
Check Your Solution
In this case, the abundance of each isotope is close to 50%. An
average atomic mass of about 108 u seems right, because it is
Why is carbon-12 the only
between 106.9 u and 108.9 u. Checking the periodic table reveals
isotope with an atomic mass
that the average atomic mass of silver is indeed 107.9 u. that is a whole number?
Practice Problems
1. The two stable isotopes of boron exist in the following
proportions: 19.78% 10B (10.01 u) and 80.22% 11B (11.01 u).
5 5
Calculate the average atomic mass of boron.
2. In nature, silicon is composed of three isotopes. These isotopes
(with their isotopic abundances and atomic masses) are 28Si
14
(92.23%, 27.98 u), 29Si (4.67%, 28.97 u), and 30Si (3.10%,
14 14
29.97 u). Calculate the average atomic mass of silicon.
Continued ...
Chapter 5 Counting Atoms and Molecules: The Mole • MHR 167
Continued ...
CHEM
FROM PAGE 167
FACT
3. Copper is a corrosion-resistant metal that is used extensively in
In some periodic tables,
plumbing and wiring. Copper exists as two naturally occurring
the average atomic mass
isotopes: 63Cu (62.93 u) and 65Cu (64.93 u). These isotopes have
is referred to as the atomic 29 29
isotopic abundances of 69.1% and 30.9% respectively. Calculate
weight of an element. This
the average atomic mass of copper.
terminology, while technically
incorrect, is still in use and is
4. Lead occurs naturally as four isotopes. These isotopes (with
generally accepted.
their isotopic abundances and atomic masses) are 204Pb (1.37%,
82
204.0 u), 206Pb (26.26%, 206.0 u), 207Pb (20.82%, 207.0 u), and
82 82
208Pb (51.55%, 208.0 u). Calculate the average atomic mass
82
of lead.
ExpressLab A Penny for your Isotopes
2. Sort your pennies into groups of pre-1997
“isotopes” and post-1997 “isotopes” of
centium.
3. Count the number of pennies in each group.
4. Find the mass of ten pennies from each group.
Divide the total mass by 10 to get the mass of
each centium“isotope.”
5. Use the data you have just gathered to calcu-
late the mass of the pennies, using a weighted
average. This represents the “average atomic
mass” of centium.
Analysis
1. In step 4, you used the average mass of
ten pennies to represent the mass of one
“isotope” of centium.
The mass of a Canadian penny has decreased (a) Why did you need to do this? Why did you
several times over the years. Therefore you can not just find the mass of one penny from
use pennies to represent different “isotopes” of a each group?
fictitious element, centium. That is, each “atom” (b) If you were able to find the mass of real
of centiumreacts the same way—it is still worth isotopes for this experiment, would you
1¢—but the various isotopes have different need to do step 4? Explain.
characteristic masses. 2. Compare your “average atomic mass” for
centiumwith the “average atomic mass”
Safety Precautions
obtained by other groups.
(a) Are all the masses the same? Explain any
differences.
Procedure
(b) What if you were able to use real isotopes
1. Obtain a bag of pennies from your teacher. of an element, such as copper, for this
Since the mass of a penny decreased in 1982 experiment? Would you expect results to be
and 1997, your bag will contain pennies dated consistent throughout the class? Explain.
anywhere from 1982 to the present date.
168 MHR • Unit 2 Chemical Quantities
Calculating Isotopic Abundance
Chemists use a mass spectrometer to determine accurate values for the
isotopic abundance associated with each element. Knowing the average
atomic mass of an element, you can use the masses of its isotopes to
calculate the isotopic abundances.
Sample Problem
Isotopic Abundance
CHEM
Problem
FACT
Boron exists as two naturally occurring isotopes: 10B (10.01 u)
5 If you wear contact lenses,
and 11B (11.01 u). Calculate the relative abundance of each isotope
5 you may use boron every day.
of boron.
Boron is part of boric acid,
HBO , which is contained in
3 3
What Is Required? many cleaning solutions for
contact lenses.
You need to find the isotopic abundance of boron.
What Is Given?
Atomic mass of 10B = 10.01u
5
Atomic mass of 11B = 11.01u
5
From the periodic table, the average atomic mass of boron
is B = 10.81u.
Plan Your Strategy
Express the abundance of each isotope as a decimal rather than a
percent. The total abundance of both isotopes is therefore 1. Let the
abundance of boron-10 be x. Let the abundance of boron-11 be 1−x.
Set up an equation, and solve for x.
Act on Your Strategy
Average atomic mass = x(atomic mass B-10)+(1−x)(atomic mass B-11)
10.81 = x(10.01) +(1−x)(11.01)
10.81 = 10.01x +11.01 −11.01x
11.01x −10.01x = 11.01 −10.81
x = 0.2000
The abundance of boron-10 is 0.2000.
The abundance of boron-11 is 1−x, or 1−0.2000 = 0.8000.
The abundance of 10B is therefore 20.00%. The abundance
5
of 11B is 80.00%.
5
Check Your Solution
The fact that boron-11 comprises 80% of naturally occurring boron
makes sense, because the average atomic mass of boron is 10.81 u.
This is closer to 11.01 u than to 10.01 u.
Continued ...
Chapter 5 Counting Atoms and Molecules: The Mole • MHR 169
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 169
Practice Problems
5. Hydrogen is found primarily as two isotopes in nature:
1H (1.0078 u) and 2H (2.0140 u). Calculate the percentage abun-
1 1
dance of each isotope based on hydrogen’s average atomic mass.
6. Lanthanum is composed of two isotopes: 138La (137.91 u) and
57
139La (138.91 u). Look at the periodic table. What can you say
57
about the abundance of 138La?
57
7. Rubidium ignites spontaneously when exposed to oxygen to form
rubidium oxide, Rb O. Rubidium exists as two isotopes: 85Rb
2 37
(84.91 u) and 87Rb (86.91 u). If the average atomic mass of
37
rubidium is 85.47 u, determine the percentage abundance of 85Rb.
37
8. Oxygen is composed of three isotopes: 16O (15.995 u),
8
17O (16.999 u), and 18O (17.999 u). One of these isotopes, 17O,
8 8 8
comprises 0.037% of oxygen. Calculate the percentage
abundance of the other two isotopes, using the average
atomic mass of 15.9994 u.
Section Wrap-up
In this section, you learned how isotopic abundance relates to average
atomic mass. Since you know the average mass of an atom in any given
element, you can now begin to relate the mass of a single atom to the
mass of a large number of atoms. First you need to establish how many
atoms are in easily measurable samples. In section 5.2, you will learn how
chemists group atoms into convenient amounts.
Section Review
1 K/U The average atomic mass of potassium is 39.1 u. Explain why no
single atom of potassium has a mass of 39.1 u.
2 I Naturally occurring magnesium exists as a mixture of three
isotopes. These isotopes (with their isotopic abundances and atomic
masses) are Mg-24 (78.70%, 23.985 u), Mg-25 (10.13%, 24.985 u),
and Mg-26 (11.17%, 25.983 u). Calculate the average atomic mass
of magnesium.
3 C Assume that an unknown element, X, exists naturally as three
different isotopes. The average atomic mass of element X is known,
along with the atomic mass of each isotope. Is it possible to calculate
the percentage abundance of each isotope? Why or why not?
4 C You know that silver exists as two isotopes: silver-107 and silver-
109. However, radioisotopes of silver, such as silver-105, silver-106,
silver-108, and silver-110 to silver-117 are known. Why do you not
use the abundance and mass of these isotopes when you calculate the
average atomic mass of silver? Suggest two reasons.
170 MHR • Unit 2 Chemical Quantities
The Avogadro 5.2
Constant and the Mole
In section 5.1, you learned how to use isotopic abundances and isotopic Section Preview/
masses to find the average atomic mass of an element. You can use the Specific Expectations
average atomic mass, found in the periodic table, to describe the average
In this section, you will
mass of an atom in a large sample.
(cid:2) describethe relationship
Why is relating average atomic mass to the mass of large samples
between moles and number
important? In a laboratory, as in everyday life, we deal with macroscopic of particles
samples. These samples contain incredibly large numbers of atoms or
(cid:2) solveproblems involving
molecules. Can you imagine a cookie recipe calling for six septillion number of moles and
molecules of baking soda? What if copper wire in a hardware store were number of particles
priced by the atom instead of by the metre, as in Figure 5.5? What if we
(cid:2) explainwhy chemists use
paid our water bill according to the number of water molecules that we the mole to group atoms
used? The numbers involved would be ridiculously inconvenient. In this
(cid:2) communicateyour under-
section, you will learn how chemists group large numbers of atoms into
standing of the following
amounts that are easily measurable. terms: mole, Avogadro
constant
Figure 5.5 Copper wire is often
priced by the metre because the
metre is a convenient unit. What
unit do chemists use to work with
large numbers of atoms?
Grouping for Convenience
In a chemistry lab, as well as in other contexts, it is important to be able
to measure amounts accurately and conveniently. When you purchase
headache tablets from a drugstore, you are confident that each tablet
contains the correct amount of the active ingredient. Years of testing and
development have determined the optimum amount of the active ingredi-
ent that you should ingest. If there is too little of the active ingredient, the
tablet may not be effective. If there is too much, the tablet may be harm-
ful. When the tablets are manufactured, the active ingredient needs to be
weighed in bulk. When the tablets are tested, however, to ensure that they
contain the right amount of the active ingredient, chemists need to know
how many molecules of the substance are present. How do chemists
group particles so that they know how many are present in a given mass
of substance?
On its own, the mass of a chemical is not very useful to a chemist.
The chemical reactions that take place depend on the number of atoms
present, not on their masses. Since atoms are far too small and numerous
to count, you need a way to relate the numbers of atoms to masses that
can be measured.
Chapter 5 Counting Atoms and Molecules: The Mole • MHR 171
When many items in a large set need to be counted, it is often useful
to work with groups of items rather than individual items. When you hear
the word “dozen,” you think of the number 12. It does not matter what
the items are. A dozen refers to the quantity 12 whether the items are eggs
or pencils or baseballs. Table 5.1 lists some common quantities that we
use to deal with everyday items.
Table 5.1 Some Common Quantities
Item Quantity Amount
gloves pair 2
soft drinks six-pack 6
eggs dozen 12
pens gross (12 dozen) 144
paper ream 500
You do not buy eggs one at a time. You purchase them in units of a dozen.
Similarly, your school does not order photocopy paper by the sheet. The
paper is purchased in bundles of 500 sheets, called a ream. It would be
impractical to sell sheets of paper individually.
Figure 5.6 Certain items,
because of their size, are often
handled in bulk. Would you
rather count reams of paper or
individual sheets?
The Definition of the Mole
Convenient, or easily measurable, amounts of elements contain huge num-
bers of atoms. Therefore chemists use a quantity that is much larger than a
dozen or a ream to group atoms and molecules together. This quantity is
Language
LINK the mole (symbol mol).
• One mole (1 mol) of a substance contains 6.02214199×1023 particles
The term moleis an
of the substance. This value is called the Avogadro constant. Its symbol
abbreviation of another word.
is N .
What do you think this other A
• The mole is defined as the amount of substance that contains as many
word is? Check your guess by
elementary entities (atoms, molecules, or formula units) as exactly 12 g
consulting a dictionary.
of carbon-12.
172 MHR • Unit 2 Chemical Quantities
For example, one mole of carbon contains 6.02×1023 atoms of C. One Web
LINK
mole of sodium chloride contains 6.02×1023 formula units of NaCl.
One mole of hydrofluoric acid contains 6.02×1023 molecules of HF. www.school.mcgrawhill.ca/
The Avogadro constant is an experimentally determined quantity. resources/
Chemists continually devise more accurate methods to determine how Chemists have devised
many atoms are in exactly 12 g of carbon-12. This means that the accepted various ways to determine the
Avogadro constant. To learn
value has changed slightly over the years since it was first defined.
more about how this constant
has been found in the past
The Chemist’s Dozen
and how it is found today, go
The mole is literally the chemist’s dozen. Just as egg farmers and grocers to the web site above. Go to
Science Resources, then to
use the dozen (a unit of 12) to count eggs, chemists use the mole (a much
Chemistry 11to find out where
larger number) to count atoms, molecules, or formula units. When farmers
to go next. What are some
think of two dozen eggs, they are also thinking of 24 eggs.
(cid:2) (cid:3) methods that chemists have
(2dozen)× 12eggs = 24eggs used to determine the number
dozen of particles in a mole? How
has the accepted value of the
Chemists work in a similar way. As you have learned above, 1 mol Avogadro constant changed
has 6.02×1023 particles. Thus 2 mol of aluminum atoms contain over the years?
12.0×1023 atoms of Al.
2mol×(6.02×1023 atoms ) = 1.20×1024 atoms of Al
mol
How Big Is the Avogadro Constant?
The Avogadro constant is a huge number. Its magnitude becomes easier
to visualize if you imagine it in terms of ordinary items. For example,
suppose that you created a stack of 6.02×1023 loonies, as in Figure 5.7.
To determine the height of the stack, you could determine the height of
one loonie and multiply by 6.02×1023. The Avogadro constant needs to
be this huge to group single atoms into convenient amounts. What does
1 mol of a substance look like? Figure 5.8 shows some samples of elements.
Each sample contains 6.02×1023 atoms. Notice that each sample has a
different mass. You will learn why in section 5.3. Examine the following
Sample Problem to see how to work with the Avogadro constant.
Figure 5.7 Measure the height
of a pile of five loonies. How tall,
in kilometres, would a stack of
6.02×1023loonies be?
Figure 5.8 Each sample contains 1.00 mol, or
6.02×1023atoms. Why do you think the mass of
each sample is different?
Chapter 5 Counting Atoms and Molecules: The Mole • MHR 173
Sample Problem
Using the Avogadro Constant
Math
LINK
Problem
The distance “as the crow flies” from St. John’s in Newfoundland
Suppose that you invested
$6.02×1023so that it earned to Vancouver in British Columbia is 5046 km. Suppose that you had
1% compound interest 1 mol of peas, each of diameter 1 cm. How many round trips could
annually. How much money be made between these cities, laying the peas from end to end?
would you have at the end
of ten years?
What Is Required?
You need to find the number of round trips from St. John’s to
Vancouver (2×5046km) that can be made by laying 6.02×1023
peas end to end.
What Is Given?
Each round trip is 2×5046 km or 10 092 km. A pea has a diameter
of 1 cm.
Plan Your Strategy
First convert the round trip distance from kilometres to centimetres.
Since each pea has a diameter of 1 cm, a line of 6.02×1023 peas is
6.02×1023 cm in length. Divide the length of the line of peas by the
round-trip distance to find the number of round trips.
Act on Your Strategy
Figure 5.9 Toronto’s SkyDome Converting the round-trip distance from kilometres to
cost about $500 million to build. centimetres gives
Spending $6.02×1023at the rate
(10092km)×(105cm/km) = 1.01×109cm
of one billion dollars per second
is roughly equivalent to building Number of round trips = 6.02×1023cm
two SkyDomes per second for (1.01×109cm/roundtrip)
over 19 million years. = 5.96×1014roundtrips
About 596 trillion round trips between St. John’s and Vancouver
could be made by laying one mole of peas end to end.
Check Your Solution
Looking at the magnitude of the numbers, you have 1023÷109.
This accounts for 1014 in the answer.
Practice Problems
9. The length of British Columbia’s coastline is 17 856 km. If you
laid 6.02×1023 metre sticks end to end along the coast of BC,
how many rows of metre sticks would you have?
10. The area of Nunavut is 1 936 113 km2. Suppose that you had
6.02×1023 sheets of pastry, each with the dimensions 30 cm × 30
cm. How many times could you cover Nunavut completely with
pastry?
Continued ...
174 MHR • Unit 2 Chemical Quantities
Continued ...
Technology
FROM PAGE 174 LINK
11. If you drove for 6.02×1023 days at a speed of 100 km/h, how far
Scientific calculators are
would you travel?
made to accommodate scien-
12. If you spent $6.02×1023 at a rate of $1.00/s, how long, in years, tific notation easily. To enter
the Avogadro constant, for
would the money last? Assume that every year has 365 days.
example, type 6.02, followed by
the key labelled “EE” or “EXP.”
(The label on the key depends
on the make of calculator you
Converting Moles to Number of Particles
have.) Then enter 23. The 23
In the Thought Lab below, you can practise working with the mole by will appear at the far right
relating the Avogadro constant to familiar items. Normally the mole is of the display, withoutthe
exponential base of 10. Your
used to group atoms and compounds. For example, chemists know that
1 mol of barium contains 6.02×1023 atoms of Ba. Similarly, 2 mol of calculator understandsthe
number to be in scientific
barium sulfate contain 2×(6.02×1023) = 12.0×1023 molecules of BaSO .
4 notation.
number of particles
Multiply by
number of moles (atoms, molecules,
6.02 ×10 2 3
formula units)
The mole is used to help us “count” atoms and molecules. The relation-
ship between moles, number of particles, and the Avogadro constant is
N = number of particles
n = number of moles
N = Avogadro constant
A
N = n×N
A
Try the next Sample Problem to learn how the number of moles of a
substance relates to the number of particles in the substance.
ThoughtLab The Magnitude of the Avogadro Constant
This activity presents some challenges related Analysis
to the magnitude of the Avogadro constant.
1. If you covered Canada’s land mass with
These questions are examples of Fermi problems,
1.00 mol of golf balls, how deep would the
which involve large numbers (like the Avogadro
layer of golf balls be?
constant) and give approximate answers. The
2. Suppose that you put one mole of five-dollar
Italian physicist, Enrico Fermi, liked to pose and
bills end to end. How many round trips from
solve these types of questions.
Earth to the Moon would they make?
Procedure 3. If you could somehow remove 6.02×1023
teaspoons of water from the world’s oceans,
Work in small groups. Use any reference
would you completely drain the oceans?
materials, including materials supplied by your
Explain.
teacher and information on the Internet. For each
question, brainstorm to determine the required 4. What is the mass of one mole of apples? How
information. Obtain this information, and answer does this compare with the mass of Earth?
the question. Be sure to include units throughout 5. How many planets would we need for one
your calculation, along with a brief explanation. mole of people, if each planet’s population
were limited to the current population of
Earth?
Chapter 5 Counting Atoms and Molecules: The Mole • MHR 175
Sample Problem
Moles to Atoms
Language
LINK
Problem
A sample contains 1.25 mol of nitrogen dioxide, NO .
The term order of magnitude 2
refers to the size of a (a) How many molecules are in the sample?
number—specifically to (b) How many atoms are in the sample?
its exponent when in scientific
notation. For example, a
What Is Required?
scientist will say that 50 000
(5×104) is two orders of You need to find the number of atoms and molecules in the sample.
magnitude (102times) larger
than 500 (5×102). How many
What Is Given?
orders of magnitude is the
Avogadro constant greater The sample consists of 1.25 mol of nitrogen dioxide molecules.
than one billion? Each nitrogen dioxide molecule is made up of three atoms:
1 N atom + 2 O atoms.
N = 6.02×1023molecules/mol
A
Plan Your Strategy
(a) A molecule of NO contains three atoms. Find the number
2
of NO molecules in 1.25 mol of nitrogen dioxide.
2
(b) Multiply the number of molecules by 3 to arrive at the total
number of atoms in the sample.
Act on Your Strategy
(a) Number of molecules of NO
(cid:2) 2 (cid:3)
= (1.25mol)× 6.02×1023 molecules
mol
= 7.52×1023molecules
Therefore there are 7.52×1023 molecules in 1.25 mol of NO .
(cid:2) (cid:3) 2
(b) (7.52×1023molecules)× 3 atoms = 2.26×1024atoms
molecule
Therefore there are 2.26×1024 atoms in 1.25 mol of NO .
2
Check Your Solution
Work backwards. One mol contains 6.02×1023 atoms. How many
moles represent 2.2×1024 atoms?
2.2×1024atoms× 1mol = 3.7mol
6.02×1023atoms
There are 3 atoms in each molecule of NO
2
3.7molatoms× 1molmolecule = 1.2molecules
3molatoms
This is close to the value of 1.25 mol of molecules, given in the
question.
Continued ...
176 MHR • Unit 2 Chemical Quantities
Continued ...
Electronic Learning Partner
FROM PAGE 176
Practice Problems Go to the Chemistry 11
Electronic Learning Partner
for a video clip that describes
13. A small pin contains 0.0178 mol of iron, Fe. How many atoms of
the principles behind the
iron are in the pin?
Avogadro constant and
14. A sample contains 4.70×10 −4 mol of gold, Au. How many atoms the mole.
of gold are in the sample?
15. How many formula units are contained in 0.21 mol of magnesium
nitrate, Mg(NO ) ?
3 2
16. A litre of water contains 55.6 mol of water. How many molecules
of water are in this sample?
17. Ethyl acetate, C H O , is frequently used in nail polish remover.
4 8 2
A typical bottle of nail polish remover contains about 2.5 mol of
ethyl acetate.
(a) How many molecules are in the bottle of nail polish remover?
(b) How many atoms are in the bottle?
(c) How many carbon atoms are in the bottle?
18. Consider a 0.829 mol sample of sodium sulfate, Na SO .
2 4
(a) How many formula units are in the sample?
+
(b) How many sodium ions, Na , are in the sample?
Converting Number of Particles to Moles
Chemists very rarely express the amount of a substance in number of
particles. As you have seen, there are far too many particles to work with
conveniently. For example, you would never say that you had dissolved
3.21×1023 molecules of sodium chloride in water. You might say, howev-
er, that you had dissolved 0.533 mol of sodium chloride in water. When
chemists communicate with each other about amounts of substances,
they usually use units of moles (see Figure 5.10). To convert the number
of particles in a substance to the number of moles, rearrange the equation
you learned previously.
N = N ×n
A
n = N
N
A
To learn how many moles are in a substance when you know how many
particles are present, find out how many times the Avogadro constant goes
into the number of particles.
Figure 5.10 Chemists rarely
Try the next Sample Problem to practise converting the number of
use the number of particles to
atoms, formula units, or molecules in a substance to the number of moles.
communicate how much of a
substance they have. Instead,
they use moles.
Chapter 5 Counting Atoms and Molecules: The Mole • MHR 177
Sample Problem
Molecules to Moles
History
LINK
Problem
How many moles are present in a sample of carbon dioxide, CO ,
The Avogadro constant is 2
named to honour the Italian made up of 5.83×1024 molecules?
chemist Amedeo Avogadro.
In 1811, Avogadro postulated What Is Required?
what is now known as
Avogadro’s law: Equal volumes You need to find the number of moles in 5.83×1024 molecules
of gases, at equal tempera- of carbon dioxide.
tures and pressures, contain
the same number of molecules. What Is Given?
You will learn more about
Avogadro’s law in Unit 4. You are given the number of molecules in the sample.
N = 6.02×1023 molecules CO /mol CO
A 2 2
Plan Your Strategy
n = N
N
A
Act on Your Strategy
n = (cid:4)
5.83×1024moleculesCO
2 (cid:5)
6.02×1023moleculesCO /molCO
2 2
Web LINK = 9.68molCO
2
There are 9.68 mol of CO in the sample.
www.school.mcgrawhill.ca/ 2
resources/
The International System of Check Your Solution
Units (SI) is based on seven
5.83×1024 molecules is approximately equal to 6×1024 molecules.
base units for seven quantities.
Since the number of molecules is about ten times larger than the
(One of these quantities is the
mole.) The quantities are Avogadro constant, it makes sense that there are about 10 mol in
assumed to be all independent the sample.
of each other. To learn about
the seven base quantities, go
Practice Problems
to the web site above. Go to
Science Resources,then to
Chemistry 11to find out where 19. A sample of bauxite ore contains 7.71×1024 molecules of
to go next. All other SI units are
aluminum oxide, Al O . How many moles of aluminum oxide
2 3
derived from the seven base
are in the sample?
units.
20. A vat of cleaning solution contains 8.03×1026 molecules of
ammonia, NH . How many moles of ammonia are in the vat?
3
21. A sample of cyanic acid, HCN, contains 3.33×1022 atoms. How
many moles of cyanic acid are in the sample? Hint: Find the
number of molecules of HCN first.
22. A sample of pure acetic acid, CH COOH, contains 1.40×1023
3
carbon atoms. How many moles of acetic acid are in the sample?
178 MHR • Unit 2 Chemical Quantities
Section Wrap-up
In section 5.1, you learned about the average atomic mass of an element.
Then, in section 5.2, you learned how chemists group particles using the
mole. In the final section of this chapter, you will learn how to use the
average atomic masses of the elements to determine the mass of a mole of
any substance. You will learn about a relationship that will allow you to
relate the mass of a sample to the number of particles it contains.
Section Review
1 K/U In your own words, define the mole. Use three examples.
2 I Imagine that $6.02×1023 were evenly distributed among six billion
people. How much money would each person receive?
3 I A typical adult human heart beats an average of 60 times per
minute. If you were allotted a mole of heartbeats, how long, in years,
could you expect to live? You may assume each year has 365 days.
4 I Calculate the number of atoms in 3.45 mol of iron, Fe.
5 I A sample of carbon dioxide, CO 2 , contains 2.56×1024 molecules.
(a) How many moles of carbon dioxide are present?
(b) How many moles of atoms are present?
6 I A balloon is filled with 0.50 mol of helium. How many atoms of
helium are in the balloon?
7 I A sample of benzene, C 6 H 6 , contains 5.69 mol.
(a) How many molecules are in the sample?
(b) How many hydrogen atoms are in the sample?
8 I Aluminum oxide, Al 2 O 3 , forms a thin coating on aluminum when
aluminum is exposed to the oxygen in the air. Consider a sample
made up of 1.17 mol of aluminum oxide.
(a) How many molecules are in the sample?
Unit Investigation Prep
(b) How many atoms are in the sample?
In your Unit Investigation,
(c) How many oxygen atoms are in the sample? you will need to determine
the amount of several pure
9 C Why do you think chemists chose to define the mole the way
substances in a mixture. Do
they did?
you think it will be more
10 I A sample of zinc oxide, ZnO, contains 3.28×1024 molecules of convenient for you to work
with quantities expressed
zinc oxide. A sample of zinc metal contains 2.78 mol of zinc atoms.
in moles or molecules?
Which sample contains more zinc: the compound or the element?
Chapter 5 Counting Atoms and Molecules: The Mole • MHR 179
5.3 Molar Mass
Section Preview/ In section 5.2, you explored the relationship between the number of atoms
Specific Expectations or particles and the number of moles in a sample. Now you are ready to
relate the number of moles to the mass, in grams. Then you will be able to
In this section, you will
determine the number of atoms, molecules, or formula units in a sample
(cid:2) explainthe relationship
by finding the mass of the sample.
between the average atomic
mass of an element and its
molar mass Mass and the Mole
(cid:2) solveproblems involving You would never express the mass of a lump of gold, like the one in
number of moles, number
Figure 5.11, in atomic mass units. You would express its mass in grams.
of particles, and mass
How does the mole relate the number of atoms to measurable quantities
(cid:2) calculatethe molar mass of a substance? The definition of the mole pertains to relative atomic
of a compound
mass, as you learned in section 5.1. One atom of carbon-12 has a mass of
(cid:2) communicateyour under- exactly 12 u. Also, by definition, one mole of carbon-12 atoms (6.02×1023
standing of the following
carbon-12 atoms) has a mass of exactly 12 g.
term: molar mass
The Avogadro constant is the factor that converts the relative mass of
individual atoms or molecules, expressed in atomic mass units, to mole
quantities, expressed in grams.
How can you use this relationship to relate mass and moles? The
periodic table tells us the average mass of a single atom in atomic mass
units (u). For example, zinc has an average atomic mass of 65.39 u. One
mole of an element has a mass expressed in grams numerically equivalent
to the element’s average atomic mass expressed in atomic mass units. One
mole of zinc atoms has a mass of 65.39 g. This relationship allows
chemists to use a balance to count atoms. You can use the periodic table
to determine the mass of one mole of an element.
Table 5.2 Average Atomic What is Molar Mass?
Mass and Molar Mass of
The mass of one mole of any element, expressed in grams, is numerically
Four Elements
equivalent to the average atomic mass of the element, expressed in atomic
Average Molar mass units. The mass of one mole of a substance is called its molar mass
atomic mass
(symbol M). Molar mass is expressed in g/mol. For example, the average
Element mass (u) (g)
atomic mass of gold, as given in the periodic table, is 196.97 u. Thus the
hydrogen, H 1.01 1.01 mass of one mole of gold atoms, gold’s molar mass, is 196.97 g. Table 5.2
oxygen, O 16.00 16.00 gives some additional examples of molar masses.
sodium, Na 22.99 22.99
argon, Ar 39.95 39.95
197
Au
79
Figure 5.11 The Avogadro
Express mass in Express mass in grams.
constant is a factor that converts
atomic mass units.
from atomic mass to molar mass.
180 MHR • Unit 2 Chemical Quantities
Finding the Molar Mass of Compounds
CHEM
FACT
While you can find the molar mass of an element just by looking at the
periodic table, you need to do some calculations to find the molar mass The National Institute of
of a compound. For example, 1 mol of beryllium oxide, BeO, contains Standards and Technology
1 mol of beryllium and 1 mol of oxygen. To find the molar mass of BeO, (NIST) and most other stan-
add the mass of each element that it contains. dardization bodies use Mto
represent molar mass. You
M = 9.01g/mol+16.00g/mol
BeO may see other symbols, such
= 25.01g/mol as mm, used to represent
Examine the following Sample Problem to learn how to determine the molar mass.
molar mass of a compound. Following Investigation 5-A on the next page,
there are some Practice Problems for you to try.
Sample Problem
Molar Mass of a Compound
Problem
What is the mass of one mole of calcium phosphate, Ca (PO ) ?
3 4 2
What Is Required?
You need to find the molar mass of calcium phosphate.
What Is Given?
You know the formula of calcium phosphate. You also know, from
the periodic table, the average atomic mass of each atom that makes
up calcium phosphate.
Plan Your Strategy
Find the total mass of each element to determine the molar mass
of calcium phosphate. Find the mass of 3 mol of calcium, the mass
of 2 mol of phosphorus, and the mass of 8 mol of oxygen. Then add
these masses together.
Act on Your Strategy
M ×3 = (40.08g/mol)×3 = 120.24g/mol PROBLEM TIP
Ca
M ×2 = (30.97g/mol)×2 = 61.94g/mol Once you are used to
P
calculating molar masses,
M ×8 = (16.00g/mol)×8 = 128.00g/mol
O you will want to do the four
M = 120.24g/mol + 61.94g/mol + 128.00g/mol calculations at left all at once.
Ca3(PO4)2
= 310.18g/mol Try solving the Sample
Problem using only one
Therefore the molar mass of calcium phosphate is 310.18g/mol.
line of calculations.
Check Your Solution
Using round numbers for a quick check, you get
(40×3)+(30×2)+(15×8) = 300
This estimate is close to the answer of 310.18g/mol.
Continued ...
ON PAGE 184
Chapter 5 Counting Atoms and Molecules: The Mole • MHR 181
S K I L L F O C U S
Modelling concepts
Analyzing and interpreting
Communicating results
Modelling Mole and
Mass Relationships
Chemists use the mole to group large numbers Part 2 Counting Objects Based on Their
of atoms and molecules into manageable, macro- Relative Masses
scopic quantities. In this way, they can tell how Materials
many atoms or molecules are in a given sample,
electronic balance
even though the particles are too small to see. In
10 small metal nuts (to represent the fictitious
this investigation, you will explore how to apply
element nutium)
this idea to everyday objects such as grains of
rice and nuts and bolts. 10 washers (to represent the fictitious element
washerium)
Question 2 opaque film canisters with lids
How can you use what you know about the mole
and molar mass to count large numbers of tiny Procedure
objects using mass, and to relate numbers of 1. Measure the mass of 10 nuts (nutium atoms).
objects you cannot see based on their masses? Then measure the mass of 10 washers
(washerium atoms).
Part 1 Counting Grains of Rice
2. Calculate the average mass of a single “atom”
Materials
of nutium and washerium.
electronic balance
3. Determine the mass ratio of nutium to
40 mL dry rice
washerium.
50 mL beaker
4. Obtain, from your teacher, a sealed film
canister containing an unknown number
Procedure
of nutium atoms. Your teacher will tell you
1. Try to measure the mass of a grain of rice.
the mass of the empty film canister and lid.
Does the balance register this mass?
5. Find the mass of the unknown number of
2. Count out 20 grains of rice. Measure and
nutium atoms.
record their mass.
6. You know that you need an equal number of
3. Find the mass of the empty beaker. Add the
washerium atoms to react with the unknown
rice to the beaker. Find the mass of the beaker
number of nutium atoms. What mass of
and the rice. Determine the mass of the rice.
washerium atoms do you need?
4. Calculate the number of grains of rice in the
40 mL sample. Report your answer to the
number of significant digits that reflects the
precision of your calculation.
182 MHR • Unit 2 Chemical Quantities
Analysis 6. The molar mass of carbon is 12.0 g. The
molar mass of molecular oxygen is 32.0 g.
1. Was it possible to get an accurate mass for an
Equal numbers of carbon atoms and oxygen
individual grain of rice? How did you solve
molecules react to form carbon dioxide.
this problem?
(a) If you have 5.8 g of carbon, what mass of
2. How did you avoid having to count every
oxygen will react?
single grain of rice in order to determine how
(b) How does part (a) relate to step 6 in the
many there were in the sample?
Procedure for Part 2?
3. Using your data, how many grains of rice
would be in 6.5×103g of rice?
Conclusion
4. A mole of helium atoms weighs 4.00 g. 7. How do chemists use the mole and molar
(a) How many atoms are in 23.8 g of helium? masses to count numbers and relative num-
bers of atoms and molecules? Relate your
(b) What known relationship did you use to
answer to the techniques you used to count
find your answer to part (a)?
rice, nuts, and washers.
(c) What analogous relationship did you set up
in order to calculate the number of grains
Applications
of rice based on the mass of the rice?
8. Think about your answer to Analysis
5. You know the relative mass of nuts and wash-
question 5(a). Did you need to use the
ers. Suppose that you are given some washers
Avogadro constant in your calculation?
in a sealed container. You know that you have
Explain why or why not.
the same number of nuts in another sealed
container. 9. Chemists rarely use the Avogadro constant
directly in their calculations. What
(a) Can you determine how many washers are
relationship do they use to avoid working
in the container without opening either
with such a large number?
container? Why or why not?
(b) What, if any, additional information do
you need?
Chapter 5 Counting Atoms and Molecules: The Mole • MHR 183
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 181
Practice Problems
23. State the molar mass of each element.
(a) xenon, Xe
(b) osmium, Os
(c) barium, Ba
(d) tellurium, Te
24. Find the molar mass of each compound.
(a) ammonia, NH
3
(b) glucose, C H O
6 12 6
(c) potassium dichromate, K Cr O
2 2 7
(d) iron(III) sulfate, Fe (SO )
2 4 3
25. Strontium may be found in nature as celestite, SrSO . Find the
4
molar mass of celestite.
26. What is the molar mass of the ion [Cu(NH )
]2+
?
3 4
Counting Particles Using Mass
Using the mole concept and the periodic table, you can determine the
mass of one mole of a compound. You know, however, that one mole
represents 6.02×1023 particles. Therefore you can use a balance to count
atoms, molecules, or formula units!
For example, consider carbon dioxide, CO . One mole of carbon
2
dioxide has a mass of 44.0 g and contains 6.02×1023 molecules. You can
set up the following relationship:
6.02×1023 molecules of CO → 1molofCO → 44.0gofCO
2 2 2
How can you use this relationship to find the number of molecules and
the number of moles in 22.0 g of carbon dioxide?
MASS (g) MASS (g)
of element of compound
M (g/mol) M (g/mol)
chemical
AMOUNT (mol)
AMOUNT (mol) AMOUNT (mol) formula
of elements
of element of compound
in compound
Avogadro Avogadro
constant constant
(atoms/mol) (molecules/mol)
Figure 5.12 The molar mass
MOLECULES
relates the amount of an element ATOMS
(or formula units)
or a compound, in moles, to its of element
of compound
mass. Similarly, the Avogadro
constant relates the number of
A For an element B For a compound
particles to the molar amount.
184 MHR • Unit 2 Chemical Quantities
Converting from Moles to Mass
Suppose that you want to carry out a reaction involving ammonium
sulfate and calcium chloride. The first step is to obtain one mole of each
Write the chemical formulas
chemical. How do you decide how much of each chemical you need?
for calcium chloride and
You convert the molar amount to mass. Then you use a balance to
ammonium sulfate. Predict
determine the mass of the proper amount of each chemical. what kind of reaction will
The following equation can be used to solve problems involving mass, occur between them. Write a
molar mass, and number of moles: balanced chemical equation
Mass = Numberofmoles×Molarmass to show the reaction. Ionic
compounds containing the
m = n×M
ammonium ion are soluble.
Ammonium sulfate is soluble,
Multiply by
moles (mol) mass (g) but barium chloride is not.
molar mass (g/mol).
Sample Problem
Moles to Mass
Problem
A flask contains 0.750 mol of carbon dioxide gas, CO . What mass of
2
carbon dioxide gas is in this sample?
What Is Required?
You need to find the mass of carbon dioxide.
What Is Given?
The sample contains 0.750 mol. You can determine the molar mass
of carbon dioxide from the periodic table.
Plan Your Strategy
In order to convert moles to grams, you need to determine the molar
mass of carbon dioxide from the periodic table.
Multiply the molar mass of carbon dioxide by the number of moles
of carbon dioxide to determine the mass.
m = n×M
Act on Your Strategy
M = 2×(16.00g/mol)+12.01g/mol
CO2
= 44.01g/mol
m = (0.750mol)×(44.01g/mol)
= 33.0g
The mass of 0.75 mol of carbon dioxide is 33.0 g.
Check Your Solution
1 mol of carbon dioxide has a mass of 44 g. You need to determine
the mass of 0.75 mol, or 75% of a mole. 33 g is equal to 75% of 44 g.
Continued ...
Chapter 5 Counting Atoms and Molecules: The Mole • MHR 185
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 185
Practice Problems
27. Calculate the mass of each molar quantity.
(a) 3.90 mol of carbon, C
(b) 2.50 mol of ozone, O
3
(c) 1.75×107 mol of propanol, C H O
3 8
(d) 1.45×10 −5 mol of ammonium dichromate, (NH ) Cr O
4 2 2 7
28. For each group, which sample has the largest mass?
(a) 5.00 mol of C, 1.50 mol of Cl , 0.50 mol of C H O
2 6 12 6
(b) 7.31 mol of O , 5.64 mol of CH OH, 12.1 mol of H O
2 3 2
29. A litre, 1000 mL, of water contains 55.6 mol. What is the mass of
a litre of water?
30. To carry out a particular reaction, a chemical engineer needs
255 mol of styrene, C H . How many kilograms of styrene does
8 8
the engineer need?
You might find the triangle shown in Figure 5.13 useful for problems
involving number of moles, number of particles, and molar mass. To
m
use it, cover the quantity that you need to find. The required operation—
(mass of
sample) multiplication or division—will be obvious from the position of the
remaining variables. For example, if you want to find the mass of a
n sample, cover the m in the triangle. You can now see that
(number of M Mass = Number of moles × Molar mass.
moles) (molar mass)
Be sure to check that your units cancel.
Figure 5.13 Use this triangle
Converting from Mass to Moles
for problems involving number
of moles, mass of sample, and In the previous Sample Problem, you saw how to convert moles to mass.
molar mass. For what other
Often, however, chemists know the mass of a substance but are more
scientific relationships might
interested in knowing the number of moles. Suppose that a reaction
you use a triangle like this?
produces 223 g of iron and 204 g of aluminum oxide. The masses of
the substances do not tell you very much about the reaction. You know,
however, that 223 g of iron is 4 mol of iron. You also know that 204 g of
aluminum oxide is 2 mol of aluminum oxide. You may conclude that
the reaction produces twice as many moles of iron as it does moles of
aluminum oxide. You can perform the reaction many times to test your
conclusion. If your conclusion is correct, the mole relationship between
the products will hold. To calculate the number of moles in a sample, find
out how many times the molar mass goes into the mass of the sample.
Divide by
moles (mol) mass (g)
molar mass (g/mol).
Numberofmoles = Mass
Molarmass
n = m
M
The following Sample Problem explains how to convert from the mass
of a sample to the number of moles it contains.
186 MHR • Unit 2 Chemical Quantities
Sample Problem
Mass to Moles
Problem
How many moles of acetic acid, CH COOH, are in a 23.6 g sample?
3
What Is Required?
You need to find the number of moles in 23.6 g of acetic acid.
What Is Given?
You are given the mass of the sample.
Plan Your Strategy
To obtain the number of moles of acetic acid, divide the mass of
acetic acid by its molar mass.
Act on Your Strategy
The molar mass of CH COOH is
3
(12.01×2)+(16.00×2)+(1.01×4) = 60.06 g.
n = m
M
CH3COOH
23.6g
nmolCH COOH =
3 60.06g/mol
= 0.393mol
Therefore there are 0.393 mol of acetic acid in 23.6 g of acetic acid.
Check Your Solution
Work backwards. There are 60.06 g in each mol of acetic acid. So in
0.393 mol of acetic acid, you have 0.393 mol × 60.06 g/mol = 23.6 g
of acetic acid. This value matches the question.
Practice Problems
31. Calculate the number of moles in each sample.
(a) 103 g of Mo (c) 0.736 kg of Cr
(b) 1.32×104 g of Pd (d) 56.3 mg of Ge
32. How many moles of compound are in each sample?
(a) 39.2 g of silicon dioxide, SiO
2
(b) 7.34 g of nitrous acid, HNO
2
(c) 1.55×105 kg of carbon tetrafluoride, CF
4
(d) 8.11×10 −3 mg of 1-iodo-2,3-dimethylbenzene C H I
8 9
33. Sodium chloride, NaCl, can be used to melt snow. How many
moles of sodium chloride are in a 10 kg bag?
34. Octane, C H , is a principal ingredient of gasoline. Calculate the
8 18
number of moles in a 20.0 kg sample of octane.
Chapter 5 Counting Atoms and Molecules: The Mole • MHR 187
Chemistry Bulletin
Chemical Amounts in Vitamin Supplements will make the supplements. They label the
samples according to the “lot” of materials
Vitamins and minerals (micronutrients) help
from which the samples were taken. They pow-
to regulate your metabolism. They are the
der and weigh the samples. Then they extract
building blocks of blood and bone, and they
the vitamins. At the same time, they prepare
maintain muscles and nerves. In Canada, a
standard solutions containing a known amount
standard called Recommended Nutrient Intake
of each vitamin.
(RNI) outlines the amounts of micronutrients
Next the chemists compare the samples to
that people should ingest each day. Eating a
the standards by subjecting both to the same
balanced diet is the best way to achieve your
tests. One test that is used is high-performance
RNI. Sometimes, however, you may need to
liquid chromatography (HPLC). HPLC produces
take multivitamin supplements when you are
a spectrum, or “fingerprint,” that identifies
unable to attain your RNI through diet alone.
each compound. Analysts compare the
The label on a bottle of supplements lists
spectrum that is produced by the samples to
all the vitamins and minerals the supplements
the spectrum that is produced by the standard.
contain. It also lists the form and source of
Analysts test tablets and capsules for
each vitamin and mineral, and the amount
dissolution and disintegration properties. The
of each. The form of a mineral is especially
analyst may use solutions that simulate the
important to know because it affects the
contents of the human stomach or intestines
quantity your body can use. For example, a
for these tests. Only when the analysts are sure
supplement may claim to contain 650 mg of
that the tablets pass all the necessary require-
calcium carbonate, CaCO , per tablet. This
3
ments are the tablets shipped to retail stores.
does not mean that there is 650 mg of calcium.
The amount of actual calcium, or elemental
Making Connections
calcium, in calcium carbonate is only 260 mg.
Calcium carbonate has more elemental calcium 1. Why might consuming more of the daily
RNI of a vitamin or mineral be harmful?
than the same amount of calcium gluconate,
which only has 58 mg for every 650 mg of the 2. The daily RNI of calcium for adolescent
compound. Calcium gluconate may be easier females is 700 to 1100 mg. A supplement
for your body to absorb, however. tablet contains 950 mg of calcium citrate.
Each gram of calcium citrate contains
Quality Control 5.26×10 −3 mol calcium. How many tablets
Multivitamin manufacturers employ chemists, would a 16-year-old female have to take to
or analysts, to ensure that the products they meet her daily RNI?
make have the right balance of micronutrients.
Manufacturers have departments devoted
to quality control (QC). QC chemists analyze
all the raw materials in the supplements, using
standardized tests. Most manufacturers use
tests approved by a “standardization body,”
such as the US Pharmacopoeia. Such standard-
ization bodies have developed testing guide-
lines to help manufacturers ensure that their
products contain what the labels claim, within
strict limits.
An analyst tests whether tablets will
To test for quality, QC chemists prepare
sufficiently dissolve within a given time limit.
samples of the raw materials from which they
188 MHR • Unit 2 Chemical Quantities
Converting Between Moles, Mass, and Number of Particles
You can use what you now know about the mole to carry out calculations
involving molar mass and the Avogadro constant. One mole of any
compound or element contains 6.02×1023 particles. The compound or
element has a mass, in grams, that is determined from the periodic table.
Now that you have learned how the number of particles, number of
moles, and mass of a substance are related, you can convert from one
value to another. Usually chemists convert from moles to mass and from
mass to moles. Mass is a property that can be measured easily. The
following graphic shows the factors used to convert between particles,
moles, and mass. Moles are a convenient way to communicate the amount
of a substance.
molar
number of Avogadro mass
moles (mol) mass (g)
particles constant (g/mol)
For example, suppose that you need 2.3 mol of potassium chloride to
carry out a reaction. You need to convert the molar amount to mass so
that you can measure the correct amount with a balance.
To be certain you understand the relationship among particles, moles,
and mass, examine the following Sample Problem.
Sample Problem
Particles to Mass
Math
Problem LINK
What is the mass of 5.67×1024 molecules of cobalt(II) chloride,
Average atomic mass values
CoCl ?
2 in some periodic tables can
have five or more significant
What Is Required? digits. How do you know how
many significant digits to use?
You need to find the mass of 5.67×1024 molecules of cobalt(II)
When you enter values, such
chloride.
as average atomic mass, into
your calculator, be sure that
What Is Given? you use at least one more
significant digit than is
You are given the number of molecules.
required in your answer.
Plan Your Strategy
Convert the number of molecules into moles by dividing by the
Avogadro constant. Then convert the number of moles into grams
by multiplying by the molar mass of cobalt(II) chloride.
Act on Your Strategy
NumberofmoleculesCoCl 2 ×massCoCl /molCoCl
NumberofmoleculesCoCl /molCoCl 2 2
2 2
=
5.67×1024moleculesCoCl
2 ×129.84gCoCl /molCoCl
6.02×1023moleculesCoCl /molCoCl 2 2
2 2
= 1.22×103gCoCl
2
Continued ...
Chapter 5 Counting Atoms and Molecules: The Mole • MHR 189
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 189
Check Your Solution
5.67×1024 molecules is roughly 10 times the Avogadro constant.
This means that you have about 10 mol of cobalt(II) chloride. The
molar mass of cobalt(II) chloride is about 130 g, and 10 times 130 g
is 1300 g.
Practice Problems
35. Determine the mass of each sample.
(a) 6.02×1024 formula units of ZnCl
2
(b) 7.38×1021 formula units of Pb (PO )
3 4 2
(c) 9.11×1023 molecules of C H N O
15 21 3 15
(d) 1.20×1029 molecules of N O
2 5
36. What is the mass of lithium in 254 formula units of lithium
chloride, LiCl?
37. Express the mass of a single atom of titanium, Ti, in grams.
38. Vitamin B , C H N O , is also called riboflavin. What is the
2 17 20 4 6
mass, in grams, of a single molecule of riboflavin?
What if you wanted to compare amounts of substances, and you only
knew their masses? You would probably convert their masses to moles.
The Avogadro constant relates the molar amount to the number of
particles. Examine the next Sample Problem to learn how to convert
mass to number of particles.
Sample Problem
Mass to Particles
Problem
Chlorine gas, Cl , can react with iodine, I , to form iodine chloride,
2 2
ICl. How many molecules of iodine chloride are contained in a
2.74×10 −1 g sample?
What Is Required?
You need to find the number of molecules in 2.74×10 −1 g of iodine.
What Is Given?
You are given the mass of the sample.
Continued ...
190 MHR • Unit 2 Chemical Quantities
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 190
Plan Your Strategy
First convert the mass to moles, using the molar mass of iodine.
Multiplying the number of moles by the Avogadro constant will
yield the number of molecules.
Act on Your Strategy
The molar mass of ICl is 162.36 g.
Dividing the given mass of ICl by the molar mass gives
2.74×10 −1g
n =
162.36g/mol
= 1.69×10 −3mol
Now multiply the number of moles by the Avogadro constant. This
gives the number of molecules in the sample.
(1.69×10 −3mol)×
(6.02×1023molecules)
= 1.01×1021molecules
1mol
Therefore there are 1.01×1021 molecules in 2.74×10 −1g of
iodine chloride.
Check Your Solution
Work backwards. Each mole of iodine chloride has a mass of
162.36 g/mol. Therefore 1.01×1021 molecules of iodine chloride
have a mass of:
1.01×1021molecules× 1mol × 162.36g
6.02×1023molecules 1mol
= 2.72×10 −1g
The answer is close to the value given in the question. Your answer
is reasonable.
Practice Problems
39. Determine the number of molecules or formula units in
each sample.
(a) 10.0 g of water, H O
2
(b) 52.4 g of methanol, CH OH
3
(c) 23.5 g of disulfur dichloride, S Cl
2 2
(d) 0.337 g of lead(II) phosphate, Pb (PO )
3 4 2
40. How many atoms of hydrogen are in 5.3×104 molecules of
sodium glutamate, NaC H NO ?
5 8 4
41. How many molecules are in a 64.3 mg sample of tetraphosphorus
decoxide, P O ?
4 10
42.(a) How many formula units are in a 4.35×10 −2 g sample of
potassium chlorate, KClO ?
3
(b) How many ions (chlorate and potassium) are in this sample?
Chapter 5 Counting Atoms and Molecules: The Mole • MHR 191
Concept Organizer Relationships Among Particles, Moles, and Mass
divide by the multiply by
Avogadro constant molar mass
Number of Mass of
Moles
particles substance
multiply by the divide by
Avogadro constant molar mass
Section Wrap-up
In this chapter, you have learned about the relationships among the
number of particles in a substance, the amount of a substance in moles,
and the mass of a substance. Given the mass of any substance, you can
now determine how many moles and particles make it up. In the next
chapter, you will explore the mole concept further. You will learn how
the mass proportions of elements in compounds relate to their formulas.
Section Review
Unit Investigation Prep 1 C Draw a diagram that shows the relationship between the atomic
Before you design your mass and molar mass of an element and the Avogadro constant.
experiment to determine the
composition of a mixture, 2 I Consider a 78.6 g sample of ammonia, NH 3 .
be sure you understand the (a) How many moles of ammonia are in the sample?
relationship between moles
(b) How many molecules of ammonia are in the sample?
and mass.
3 I Use your understanding of the mole to answer the
following questions.
(a) What is the average mass, in grams, of a single atom of silicon, Si?
(b) What is the mass, in atomic mass units, of a mole of silicon atoms?
4 I Consider a 0.789 mol sample of sodium chloride, NaCl.
(a) What is the mass of the sample?
(b) How many formula units of sodium chloride are in the sample?
(c) How many ions are in the sample?
5 I A 5.00 carat diamond has a mass of 1.00 g. How many carbon
atoms are in a 5.00 carat diamond?
6 I A bottle of mineral supplement tablets contains 100 tablets and
200 mg of copper. The copper is found in the form of cupric oxide.
What mass of cupric oxide is contained in each tablet?
192 MHR • Unit 2 Chemical Quantities
Review
Reflecting on Chapter 5 4. Explain how the Avogadro constant, average
atomic mass, and molar mass are related.
Summarize this chapter in the format of your
choice. Here are a few ideas to use as guidelines: 5. Explain how a balance allows a chemist to
• Describe the relationships among isotopic count atoms or molecules indirectly.
abundance, isotopic masses, and average 6.(a) Describe the relationship between the mole,
atomic mass. the Avogadro constant, and carbon-12.
• Explain why you need to use a weighted average (b) Why do chemists use the concept of the
to calculate average atomic mass. mole to deal with atoms and molecules?
• Calculate isotopic abundance based on isotopic 7. How is the molar mass of an element related to
masses and average atomic mass. average atomic mass?
• Explain how chemists use a mass spectrometer
8. Explain what the term molar mass means for
to determine isotopic abundance and the masses
each of the following, using examples.
of different isotopes.
(a) a metallic element
• Describe how and why chemists group atoms
(b) a diatomic element
and molecules into molar amounts.
(c) a compound
• Explain how chemists define the mole and why
this definition is useful. Inquiry
• Use the Avogadro constant to convert between
9. The isotopes of argon have the following
moles and particles.
relative abundances: Ar-36, 0.34%; Ar-38,
• Explain the relationship between average atomic
0.06%; and Ar-40, 99.66%. Estimate the
mass and the mole.
average atomic mass of argon.
• Find a compound’s molar mass using the
periodic table. 10. The isotopes of gallium have the following
• Convert between particles, moles, and mass. relative abundances: Ga-69, 60.0%; and Ga-71,
40.0%. Estimate the average atomic mass of
Reviewing Key Terms gallium using the mass numbers of the isotopes.
For each of the following terms, write a sentence 11. Estimate the average atomic mass of
that shows your understanding of its meaning. germanium, given its isotopes with their
average atomic mass Avogadro constant relative abundances: Ge-70 (20.5%), Ge-72
(27.4%), Ge-73 (7.8%), Ge-74 (36.5%), and
isotopic abundance mass spectrometer
Ge-76 (7.8%).
mole molar mass
12. Potassium exists as two naturally occurring
weighted average
isotopes: K-39 and K-41. These isotopes have
atomic masses of 39.0 u and 41.0 u respectively.
Knowledge/Understanding
If the average atomic mass of potassium is
1. Distinguish between atomic mass and average 39.10 u, calculate the relative abundance of
atomic mass. Give examples to illustrate each
each isotope.
term.
13. How many moles of the given substance are
2. Explain why you use a weighted average, based present in each sample below?
on the masses and abundances of the isotopes,
(a) 0.453g of Fe O
2 3
to calculate the average atomic mass of an
(b) 50.7g of H SO
2 4
element. (c) 1.24×10 −2g of Cr O
2 3
3. The periodic table lists the average atomic mass (d) 8.2×102g of C Cl F
2 3 3
of chlorine as 35.45 u. Are there any chlorine (e) 12.3g of NH Br
4
atoms that have a mass of 35.45 u? Explain
your answer.
Chapter 5 Counting Atoms and Molecules: The Mole • MHR 193
14. Convert each quantity to an amount in moles. 23. How many nitrate ions are in a solution that
(a) 4.27×1021 atoms of He contains 3.76×10 −1 mol of calcium nitrate,
(b) 7.39×1023 molecules of ICl Ca(NO ) ?
3 2
(c) 5.38×1022 molecules of NO 2 24. Ethanol, C 2 H 5 OH, is frequently used as the
(d) 2.91×1023 formula units of Ba(OH) 2 fuel in wick-type alcohol lamps. One molecule
(e) 1.62×1024 formula units of KI of C H OH requires three molecules of O for
2 5 2
(f) 5.58×1020 molecules of C 3 H 8 complete combustion. What mass of O 2 is
15. Copy the following table into your notebook required to react completely with 92.0 g of
and complete it. C H OH?
2 5
Formula units Amount of Amount of atoms
Sample Molar mass (g/mol) Mass of sample (g) or molecules molecules (mol) (mol)
NaCl 58.4 58.4 6.02×1023 1.00 2.00
NH 24.8
3
H O 5.28×1022
2
Mn O 0.332
2 3
K CrO 9.67×10 −1
2 4
C H O 7.90×1024
8 8 3
Al(OH)3 8.54×102
16. Calculate the molar mass of each compound. 25. Bromine exists as two isotopes: Br-79 and
(a) PtBr (c) Na SO (e) Ca (PO ) Br-81. Calculate the relative abundance of each
2 2 4 3 4 2
(b) C H O H (d) (NH ) Cr O (f) Cl O isotope. You will need to use information from
3 5 2 4 2 2 7 2 7
17. Express each quantity as a mass in grams. the periodic table.
(a) 3.70 mol of H O 26. Examine the following double displacement
2
(b) 8.43×1023 molecules of PbO reaction.
2
(c) 14.8 mol of BaCrO NaCl +AgNO → AgCl +NaNO
4 (aq) 3(aq) (s) 3(aq)
(d) 1.23×1022 molecules of Cl 2 In this reaction, one formula unit of NaCl reacts
(e) 9.48×1023 molecules of HCl with one formula unit of AgNO .
3
(f) 7.74×1019 molecules of Fe 2 O 3 (a) How many moles of NaCl react with one
18. How many atoms of C are contained in 45.6 g mole of AgNO ?
3
of C H ? (b) What mass of AgNO reacts with 29.2 g of
6 6 3
19. How many atoms of F are contained in
NaCl?
0.72 mol of BF ? 27. The planet Zoltan is located in a solar system
3
20. Calculate the following. in the Andromeda galaxy. On Zoltan, the
(a) the mass (u) of one atom of xenon standard unit for the amount of substance is
(b) the mass (g) of one mole of xenon atoms the wog and the standard unit for mass is the
(c) the mass (g) of one atom of xenon wibble. The Zoltanians, like us, chose carbon-
(d) the mass (u) of one mole of xenon atoms 12 to define their standard unit for the amount
(e) the number of atomic mass units in one gram of substance. By definition, one wog of C-12
atoms contains 2.50×1021 atoms. It has a mass
21. How many atoms of C are in a mixture contain-
of exactly 12 wibbles.
ing 0.237 mol of CO and 2.38 mol of CaC ?
2 2
(a) What is the mass, in wibbles, of 1 wog of
22. How many atoms of H are in a mixture of
nitrogen atoms?
3.49×1023 molecules of H 2 O and 78.1 g of (b) What is the mass, in wibbles, of 5.00×10 −1
CH OH?
3 wogs of O ?
2
(c) What is the mass, in grams, of 1 wog of
hydrogen atoms?
194 MHR • Unit 2 Chemical Quantities
Communication tablets contain vitamin B in the form of niaci-
3
namide, C H N O, which is easier for the body
28. Use the definition of the Avogadro constant 6 6 2
to absorb.
to explain why its value must be determined
(a) A vitamin supplement tablet contains
by experiment.
100 mg of niacinamide. What mass of niacin
29. Why is carbon-12 the only isotope with an
contains an equivalent number of moles as
atomic mass that is a whole number?
100 mg of niacinamide?
30. Draw a concept map for the conversion of mass
(b) Do some research to find out how much
(g) of a sample to amount (mol) of a sample to
niacin an average adult should ingest
number of molecules in a sample to number of
each day.
atoms in a sample. Be sure to include proper
(c) Do some research to find out what kinds of
units.
food contain niacin.
31. Explain why 1 mol of carbon dioxide contains
6.02×1023 molecules and not 6.02×1023 atoms. (d) What are the consequences of ingesting too
much niacin?
Making Connections (e) Choose another vitamin to research. Find
32. The RNI (Recommended Nutrient Intake) of out its chemical formula, its associated
iron for women is listed as 14.8 mg per day. recommended nutrient intake, and where
Ferrous gluconate, Fe(C H O ) is often used it is found in our diet. Prepare a poster to
6 11 7 2
as an iron supplement for those who do not get communicate your findings.
enough iron in their diet because it is relatively Answers to Practice Problems and
easy for the body to absorb. Some iron-fortified Short Answers to Section Review Questions
breakfast cereals contain elemental iron metal Practice Problems: 1.10.81 u 2.28.09 u 3.63.55 u
as their source of iron. 4.207.2 5.99.8%, 0.2% 6.very low, 7.72%
(a) Calculate the number of moles of elemental
8.99.8%, 0.2% 9.3.37×1016 rows 10.2.80×1014
11.1.44×1027 km 12.1.91×1016 a 13.1.07×1022
iron, Fe, required by a woman, according to
14.2.83×1020 15.1.3×1023 16.3.35×1025
the RNI. 17.(a)1.5×1024 (b)2.1×1025 (c)6.0×1024
(b) What mass, in milligrams, of ferrous 18.(a)4.99×1023 (b)9.98×1023 19.12.8 mol
gluconate, would satisfy the RNI for iron? 20.1.33×103mol 21.1.84×10−2 mol 22.1.16×10−1 mol
(c) The term bioavailability refers to the extent 23.(a)131.29 g/mol (b)190.23 g/mol (c)137.33 g/mol
that the body can absorb a certain vitamin or (d)127.60 g/mol 24.(a)17.04 g/mol (b)180.2 g/mol
mineral supplement. There is evidence to (c)294.2 g/mol (d)399.9 g/mol 25.183.68 g/mol
26.131.7 g/mol 27.(a)46.8 g (b)1.20×102 g(c)1.05×109
suggest that the elemental iron in these
iron-fortified cereals is absorbed only to a
(d)3.66×10−3 28.(a)1.5molCl
2
(b)7.31molO
2
29.1.00×103g 30.26.6 kg 31.(a)1.07 mol (b)1.24×102mol
small extent. If this is the case, should cereal (c)14.2 mol (d)7.75×10−4 mol 32.(a)0.652 mol
manufacturers be allowed to add elemental (b)0.156 mol (c)1.76×106(d)3.49×10−8 33.1.7×102
iron at all? How could cereal manufacturers mol 34.1.75×102 mol 35.(a)1.36×103g (b)9.95 g
assure that the consumer absorbs an appro- (c)7.32×102g (d)2.15×107 36.2.93×10−21g
priate amount of iron? Would adding more 37.7.95×10−23g 38.6.25×10−22g 39.(a)3.34×1023 mole-
elemental iron be a good solution? List the
cules (b)9.84×1023 molecules (c)1.05×1023 molecules
(d)2.50×1020 formula units 40. 4.2×105 atoms
pros and cons of adding more elemental
41.1.36×1020 42.(a)2.14×1020 (b)4.27×1020
iron, then propose an alternative solution.
Section Review: 5.1: 2.24.31 u 3.No 5.2: 2.$1.00 ×1014
33. Vitamin B 3 , also known as niacin, helps main- 3.1.9×1016 years 4.2.08×1024 atoms 5.(a)4.25 mol
tain the normal function of the skin, nerves, (b)12.8 mol 6.3.0×1023 atoms 7.(a)3.43×1024 mole-
and digestive system. The disease pellagra cules (b)2.06×1025 atoms 8.(a)7.04×1023 molecules
results from a severe niacin deficiency. People
(b)3.52×1024 atoms (c)2.11×1024 atoms 10.Compound
5.3: 2.(a)4.61 mol (b)2.78×1024 3.(a)4.67×10−23g
with pellagra experience mouth sores, skin
(b)1.69×1025 u 4.(a)46.1 g (b)4.75×1023 formula units
irritation, and mental deterioration. Niacin has (c)9.50×1023 5.5.01×1022 atoms 6.2.50×10−3g
the following formula: C H NO . Often vitamin
6 5 2
Chapter 5 Counting Atoms and Molecules: The Mole • MHR 195
196
Chemical Proportions
in Compounds
H
ow do chemists use what they know about molar masses?InChapter5, Chapter Preview
you learned how to use the periodic table and the mole to relate the mass
6.1 Percentage Composition
of a compound to the number of particles in the compound. Chemists can
6.2 The Empirical Formula of
use their understanding of molar mass to find out important information
a Compound
about compounds.
Sometimes chemists analyze a compound that is found in nature to 6.3 The Molecular Formula of
a Compound
learn how to produce it more cheaply in a laboratory. For example, con-
sider the flavour used in vanilla ice cream, which may come from natural 6.4 Finding Empirical and
Molecular Formulas by
or artificial vanilla extract. Natural vanilla extract is made from vanilla
Experiment
seed pods, shown on the left. The seed pods must be harvested and
processed before being sold as vanilla extract. The scent and flavour of
synthetic vanilla come from a compound called vanillin, which can be
produced chemically in bulk. Therefore its production is much cheaper.
Similarly, many medicinal chemicals that are found in nature can be
produced more cheaply and efficiently in a laboratory.
Suppose that you want to synthesize a compound such as vanillin
in a laboratory. You must first determine the elements in the compound. Concepts and Skills
Then you need to know the proportion of each element that is present. You Will Need
This information, along with your understanding of molar mass, will help
Before you begin this chapter,
you determine the chemical formula of the compound. Once you know review the following concepts
the chemical formula, you are on your way to finding out how to produce and skills:
the compound. (cid:2) naming chemical
In this chapter, you will learn about the relationships between chemi- compounds (Chapter 3,
cal formulas, molar masses, and the masses of elements in compounds. section 3.5)
(cid:2) understanding the mole
(Chapter 5, section 5.2)
The chemical formula of
vanillin is CHO . How did (cid:2) explaining the relationship
8 8 3
between the mole and
chemists use information
molar mass (Chapter 5,
about the masses of carbon,
section 5.3)
hydrogen, and oxygen in the
compound to determine this (cid:2) solving problems involving
formula? number of moles, number
of particles, and mass
(Chapter 5, section 5.3)
Chapter 6 Chemical Proportions in Compounds • MHR 197
6.1 Percentage Composition
When you calculate and use the molar mass of a compound, such as
Section Preview/
Specific Expectations water, you are making an important assumption. You are assuming that
every sample of water contains hydrogen and oxygen in the ratio of two
In this section, you will
hydrogen atoms to one oxygen atom. Thus you are also assuming that the
(cid:2) explainthe law of definite
masses of hydrogen and oxygen in pure water always exist in a ratio of
proportions
2 g:16 g. This may seem obvious to you, because you know that the
(cid:2) calculatethe percentage
molecular formula of water is always H O, regardless of whether it comes
composition of a compound 2
from any of the sources shown in Figure 6.1. When scientists first discov-
using the formula and the
relative atomic masses of ered that compounds contained elements in fixed mass proportions, they
the elements did not have the periodic table. In fact, the discovery of fixed mass pro-
(cid:2) communicateyour under- portions was an important step toward the development of atomic theory.
standing of the following
terms: law of definite pro- The Law of Definite Proportions
portions, mass percent,
In the late eighteenth century, Joseph Louis Proust, a French chemist,
percentage composition
analyzed many samples of copper(II) carbonate, CuCO . He found
3
that the samples contained the same proportion of copper, carbon, and
oxygen, regardless of the source of the copper(II) carbonate. This discov-
ery led Proust to propose the law of definite proportions: the elements
If a bicycle factory has 1000
in a chemical compound are always present in the same proportions
wheels and 400 frames, how
many bicycles can be made? by mass.
How many wheels does each
bicycle have? Is the number
of wheels per bicycle affected
by any extra wheels that the
factory may have in stock?
Relate these questions to the
law of definite proportions.
Figure 6.1 Suppose that you
distil pure water from each of
these sources to purify it. Are
the distilled water samples the
same or different? What is the
molar mass of the distilled water
from each source?
198 MHR • Unit 2 Chemical Quantities
The mass of an element in a compound, expressed as a percent of the total
CHEM
mass of the compound, is the element’s mass percent. The mass percent FACT
of hydrogen in water from any of the sources shown in Figure 6.1 is
Chemical formulas such as CO
11.2%. Similarly, the mass percent of oxygen in water is always 88.8%. and CO reflect an important
2
Whether the water sample is distilled from a lake, an ice floe, or a drink- law called the law of multiple
ing fountain, the hydrogen and oxygen in pure water are always present proportions. This law applies
in these proportions. when two elements (such as
carbon and oxygen) combine
to form two or more different
Different Compounds from the Same Elements
compounds. In these cases,
The law of definite proportions does not imply that elements in com- the masses of the element
pounds are always present in the same relative amounts. It is possible to (such as O 2 in CO and CO 2 )
that combine with a fixed
have different compounds made up of different amounts of the same ele-
amount of the second element
ments. For example, water, H O, and hydrogen peroxide, H O , are both
2 2 2 are in ratios of small whole
made up of hydrogen and oxygen. Yet, as you can see in Figure 6.2, each
numbers. For example, two
compound has unique properties. Each compound has a different mass
moles of carbon can combine
percent of oxygen and hydrogen. You may recognize hydrogen peroxide with one mole of oxygen to
as a household chemical. It is an oxidizing agent that is used to bleach form carbon monoxide, or with
hair andtreatminor cuts. It is alsosoldas analternativeto chlorine bleach. two moles of oxygen to form
Figure 6.3 shows a molecule of benzene, C H . Benzene contains carbon dioxide. The ratio of the
6 6
two different amounts of
7.76% hydrogen and 92.2% carbon by mass. Octane, C H , is a major
8 18
oxygen that combine with the
component of the fuel used for automobiles. It contains 84.1% carbon
fixed amount of carbon is 1:2.
and 15.9% hydrogen.
Figure 6.2 Water contains hydrogen and oxygen, but it does not decompose in the Figure 6.3 Benzene C 6 H 6 , is
presence of manganese dioxide. Hydrogen peroxide is also composed of hydrogen made up of six carbon atoms and
and oxygen. It is fairly unstable and decomposes vigorously in the presence of six hydrogen atoms. Why does
manganese(IV) oxide. benzene not contain 50% of each
element by mass?
Similarly, carbon monoxide, CO, and carbon dioxide, CO , are both
2
made up of carbon and oxygen. Yet each compound is unique, with its
own physical and chemical properties. Carbon dioxide is a product of
cellular respiration and the complete combustion of fossil fuels. Carbon
monoxide is a deadly gas formed when insufficient oxygen is present
during the combustion of carbon-containing compounds. Carbon
monoxide always contains 42.88% carbon by mass. Carbon dioxide
always contains 27.29% carbon by mass.
Chapter 6 Chemical Proportions in Compounds • MHR 199
Percentage Composition
H Carbon dioxide and carbon monoxide contain the same elements but have
5.3% different proportions of these elements. In other words, they are composed
differently. Chemists express the composition of compounds in various
ways. One way is to describe how many moles of each element make up a
O mole of a compound. For example, one mole of carbon dioxide contains
31.6% one mole of carbon and two moles of oxygen. Another way is to describe
C
the percent mass of each element in a compound.
63.1%
The percentage composition of a compound refers to the relative mass
of each element in the compound. In other words, percentage composition
is a statement of the values for mass percent of every element in the com-
pound. For example, the compound vanillin, C H O , has a percentage
8 8 3
Figure 6.4 This pie graph composition of 63.1% carbon, 5.3% hydrogen, and 31.6% oxygen, as
shows the percentage composi- shown in Figure 6.4.
tion of vanillin.
A compound’s percentage composition is an important piece of
information. For example, percentage composition can be determined
experimentally, and then used to help identify the compound.
Examine the following Sample Problem to learn how to calculate the
percentage composition of a compound from the mass of the compound
and the mass of the elements that make up the compound. Then do the
Practice Problems to try expressing the composition of substances as
mass percents.
Sample Problem
Percentage Composition from Mass Data
Problem
A compound with a mass of 48.72 g is found to contain 32.69 g of
zinc and 16.03 g of sulfur. What is the percentage composition of
the compound?
What Is Required?
You need to find the mass percents of zinc and sulfur in
the compound.
What Is Given?
You know the mass of the compound. You also know the mass of
each element in the compound.
Mass of compound = 48.72 g
Mass of Zn = 32.69 g
Mass of S = 16.03 g
Does the unknown compound
in the Sample Problem contain
Plan Your Strategy
any elements other than zinc
and sulfur? How do you know? To find the percentage composition of the compound, find the mass
Use the periodic table to pre- percent of each element. To do this, divide the mass of each element
dict the formula of the com- by the mass of the compound and multiply by 100%.
pound. Does the percentage
composition support your
prediction?
Continued ...
200 MHR • Unit 2 Chemical Quantities
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 200
Act on Your Strategy Iron is commonly found as
Mass percent of Zn = MassofZn ×100% two oxides, with the general
Massofcompound formula Fe O . One oxide is
x y
32.69g 77.7% iron. The other oxide
= ×100%
48.72g is 69.9% iron. Use the periodic
table to predict the formula
= 67.10%
of each oxide. Match the given
Mass percent of S = MassofS ×100% values for the mass percent
Massofcompound of iron to each compound.
= 16.03g ×100% How can you use the molar
48.72g mass of iron and the molar
= 32.90% masses of the two iron oxides
to check the given values for
The percentage composition of the compound is 67.10% zinc and mass percent?
32.90% sulfur.
Check Your Solution
The mass of zinc is about 32 g per 50 g of the compound. This is
roughly 65%, which is close to the calculated value.
Practice Problems
1. A sample of a compound is analyzed and found to contain
0.90 g of calcium and 1.60 g of chlorine. The sample has a mass
of 2.50 g. Find the percentage composition of the compound.
2. Find the percentage composition of a pure substance that contains
7.22 g nickel, 2.53 g phosphorus, and 5.25 g oxygen only.
3. A sample of a compound is analyzed and found to contain
carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen. The mass of the sample is Web
LINK
650 mg, and the sample contains 257 mg of carbon and
50.4 mg of hydrogen. What is the percentage composition of
www.school.mcgrawhill.ca/
the compound? resources/
Vitamin C is the common name
4. A scientist analyzes a 50.0 g sample and finds that it contains
for ascorbic acid, CHO . To
6 8 6
13.3 g of potassium, 17.7 g of chromium, and another element.
learn about this vitamin, go to
Later the scientist learns that the sample is potassium dichromate, the web site above. Go to
K 2 Cr 2 O 7 . Potassium dichromate is a bright orange compound Science Resources, then to
that is used in the production of safety matches. What is the Chemistry 11to find out where
percentage composition of potassium dichromate? to go next. Do you think there
is a difference between natural
and synthetic vitamin C?
Both are ascorbic acid.
Natural vitamin C comes from
It is important to understand clearly the difference between percent
foods we eat, especially citrus
by mass and percent by number. In the Thought Lab that follows, you
fruits. Synthetic vitamin C is
will investigate the distinction between these two ways of describing
made in a laboratory. Why do
composition. the prices of natural and
synthetic products often differ?
Make a list to show the pros
and cons of vitamins from
natural and synthetic sources.
Chapter 6 Chemical Proportions in Compounds • MHR 201
ThoughtLab Percent by Mass and Percent by Number
A company manufactures gift boxes that contain Analysis
two pillows and one gold brick. The gold brick
1. The truckload of gift boxes, each containing
has a mass of 20 kg. Each pillow has a mass
2 light pillows and 1 heavy gold brick, can be
of 1.0 kg.
used to represent a pure substance, water,
containing 2 mol of a “light” element, such as
Procedure
hydrogen, and 1 mol of a “heavy” element,
1. You are a quality control specialist at the gift such as oxygen.
box factory. You need to know the following
(a) What is the percent of hydrogen, in terms
information:
of the number of atoms, in 1 mol of water?
(a) What is the percent of pillows, in terms of
(b) What is the mass percent of hydrogen in
the number of items, in the gift box?
1 mol of water?
(b) What is the percent of pillows, by mass, in
(c) What is the mass percent of oxygen in
the gift box?
1 mol of water?
(c) What is the percent of gold, by mass, in the
2. Would the mass percent of hydrogen or
gift box?
oxygen in question 1 change if you had 25 mol
2. You have a truckload of gift boxes to inspect.
of water? Explain.
You now need to know this information:
3. Why do you think chemists use mass percent
(a) What is the percent of pillows, in terms of
rather than percent by number of atoms?
the number of items, in the truckload of gift
boxes?
(b) What is the percent of pillows, by mass, in
the truckload of gift boxes?
(c) What is the percent of gold, by mass, in the
truckload of gift boxes?
Calculating Percentage Composition from a Chemical Formula
In the previous Practice Problems, you used mass data to calculate
percentage composition. This skill is useful for interpreting experimental
data when the chemical formula is unknown. Often, however, the
percentage composition is calculated from a known chemical formula.
This is useful when you are interested in extracting a certain element
from a compound. For example, many metals, such as iron and mercury,
exist in mineral form. Mercury is most often found in nature as
mercury(II) sulfide, HgS. Knowing the percentage composition of HgS
helps a metallurgist predict the mass of mercury that can be extracted
from a sample of HgS.
When determining the percentage composition by mass of a
homogeneous sample, the size of the sample does not matter. According
to the law of definite proportions, there is a fixed proportion of each
element in the compound, no matter how much of the compound you
have. This means that you can choose a convenient sample size when
calculating percentage composition from a formula.
If you assume that you have one mole of a compound, you can use the
molar mass of the compound, with its chemical formula, to calculate its
percentage composition. For example, suppose that you want to find the
202 MHR • Unit 2 Chemical Quantities
percentage composition of HgS. You can assume that you have one mole
History
LINK
of HgS and find the mass percents of mercury and sulfur in one mole of
the compound.
Before AD1500, many
MassofHgin1molofHgS
Mass percent of Hg in HgS = ×100% alchemists thought that
Massof1molofHgS
matter was composed of
= 200.6g ×100% two “elements”: mercury and
228.68g sulfur. To impress their patrons,
= 87.7% they performed an experiment
with mercury sulfide, also
Mercury(II) sulfide is 87.7% mercury by mass. Since there are only two called cinnabar, HgS. They
elements in HgS, you can subtract the mass percent of mercury from heated the red cinnabar, which
100 percent to find the mass percent of sulfur. drove off the sulfur and left the
shiny liquid mercury. On further
Mass percent of S in HgS = 100%−87.7% = 12.3%
heating, the mercury reacted
Therefore, the percentage composition of mercury(II) sulfide is to form a red compound again.
87.7% mercury and 12.3% sulfur. Alchemists wrongly thought
Sometimes there are more than two elements in a compound, or that the mercury had been
converted back to cinnabar.
more than one atom of each element. This makes determining percentage
What Hg(II) compound do you
composition more complex than in the example above. Work through
think was really formed when
the Sample Problem below to learn how to calculate the percentage
the mercury was heated in the
composition of a compound from its molecular formula.
air? What is the mass percent
of mercury in this new com-
pound? What is the mass per-
cent of mercury in cinnabar?
Sample Problem
Finding Percentage Composition
from a Chemical Formula
Problem
Cinnamaldehyde, C H O, is responsible for the characteristic odour
9 8
of cinnamon. Determine the percentage composition of cinnamal-
dehyde by calculating the mass percents of carbon, hydrogen, and
oxygen.
What Is Required?
You need to find the mass percents of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen
in cinnamaldehyde.
What Is Given?
The molecular formula of cinnamaldehyde is C H O.
9 8
Molar mass of C = 12.01g/mol
Molar mass of H = 1.01g/mol
Molar mass of O = 16.00g/mol
Plan Your Strategy
From the molar masses of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen, calculate
the molar mass of cinnamaldehyde.
Then find the mass percent of each element. To do this, divide
the mass of each element in 1 mol of cinnamaldehyde by the molar
mass of cinnamaldehyde, and multiply by 100%. Remember that
Continued ...
Chapter 6 Chemical Proportions in Compounds • MHR 203
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 203
there are 9 mol carbon, 8 mol hydrogen, and 1 mol oxygen in each
mole of cinnamaldehyde.
Act on Your Strategy
M
C9H8O
= (9×M )+(8×M )+(M )
c H O
= (9×12.01g)+(8×1.01g)+16.00g
= 132g
Mass percent of C =
9×M
C ×100%
M
C9H8O
9×12.01g/mol
= ×100%
132g/mol
= 81.9%
Mass percent of H=
8×M
H ×100%
M
C9H8O
8×1.01g/mol
= ×100%
132g/mol
= 6.12%
Mass percent of O=
1×M
O ×100%
M
C9H8O
1×16.00g/mol
= ×100%
132g/mol
= 12.1%
The percentage composition of cinnamaldehyde is 81.9% carbon,
6.12% hydrogen, and 12.1% oxygen.
Check Your Solution
The mass percents add up to 100%.
Practice Problems
5. Calculate the mass percent of nitrogen in each compound.
(a) N O (c) NH NO
2 4 3
(b) Sr(NO ) (d) HNO
3 2 3
6. Sulfuric acid, H SO , is an important acid in laboratories and
2 4
industries. Determine the percentage composition of sulfuric acid.
7. Potassium nitrate, KNO , is used to make fireworks. What is the
3
mass percent of oxygen in potassium nitrate?
When it is heated, solid 8. A mining company wishes to extract manganese metal from
potassium nitrate reacts to pyrolusite ore, MnO .
2
form solid potassium oxide,
(a) What is the percentage composition of pyrolusite ore?
gaseous nitrogen, and gaseous
oxygen. Write a balanced (b) Use your answer from part (a) to calculate the mass of
chemical equation for this pure manganese that can be extracted from 250 kg of
reaction. What type of pyrolusite ore.
reaction is it?
204 MHR • Unit 2 Chemical Quantities
Section Wrap-up
In this section, you learned that you can calculate percentage composition
using a chemical formula. Often, however, chemists do not know the You know that both elements
chemical formula of the compound they are analyzing, as in Figure 6.5. and compounds are pure
substances. Write a statement,
Through experiment, they can determine the masses of the elements that
using the term “percentage
make up the compound. Then they can use the masses to calculate the
composition,” to distinguish
percentage composition. (You will learn about one example of this kind of
between elements and
experimental technique in section 6.4.) From the percentage composition,
compounds.
chemists can work backward to determine the formula of the unknown
compound. In section 6.2, you will learn about the first step in using the
percentage composition of a compound to determine its chemical formula.
Figure 6.5 One of these compounds is vanillin, C H 0 , and one is glucose, C H O .
8 8 3 6 12 6
How could a chemist use percentage composition to find out which is which?
Section Review
1 C Acetylene, C 2 H 2 , is the fuel in a welder’s torch. It contains an equal Unit Investigation Prep
number of carbon and hydrogen atoms. Explain why acetylene is not
Before you design your experi-
50% carbon by mass.
ment to find the composition of
2 K/U When determining percentage composition, why is it acceptable a mixture, think about using
mass percents in analysis. If
to work with either molar quantities, expressed in grams, or average
you wanted to determine the
molecular (or atomic or formula unit) quantities, expressed in atomic
percent by mass of each com-
mass units?
ponent in a mixture, what
3 I Indigo, C 16 H 10 N 2 O 2 , is the common name of the dye that gives blue would you need to do first?
Compare this situation to find-
jeans their characteristic colour. Calculate the mass of oxygen in 25.0 g
ing percentage composition of
of indigo.
a pure substance.
Chapter 6 Chemical Proportions in Compounds • MHR 205
4 I Potassium perchlorate, KClO 4 , is used extensively in explosives.
Calculate the mass of oxygen in a 24.5 g sample of potassium
perchlorate.
5 I 18.4 g of silver oxide, Ag 2 O, is decomposed into silver and oxygen
by heating. What mass of silver will be produced?
6 MC The label on a box of baking soda (sodium hydrogen carbonate,
NaHCO ) claims that there are 137 mg of sodium per 0.500 g of baking
3
soda. Comment on the validity of this claim.
7 I A typical soap molecule consists of a polyatomic anion associated
with a cation. The polyatomic anion contains hydrogen, carbon, and
oxygen. One particular soap molecule has 18 carbon atoms. It contains
70.5% carbon, 11.5% hydrogen, and 10.4% oxygen by mass. It also
contains one alkali metal cation. Identify the cation.
8 I Examine the photographs below. When concentrated sulfuric acid
is added to sucrose, C H O , a column of pure carbon is formed, as
12 22 11
well as some water vapour and other gases. How would you find the
mass percent of carbon in sucrose using this reaction? You may
assume that all the carbon in the sucrose is converted to carbon.
Design an experiment to determine the mass percent of carbon in
sucrose, based on this reaction. Do not try to perform this experiment.
What difficulties might you encounter?
A B C
206 MHR • Unit 2 Chemical Quantities
The Empirical Formula 6.2
of a Compound
As part of his atomic theory, John Dalton stated that atoms combine with Section Preview/
one another in simple whole number ratios to form compounds. For Specific Expectations
example, the molecular formula of benzene, C H , indicates that one
6 6 In this section, you will
molecule of benzene contains 6 carbon atoms and 6 hydrogen atoms. The
(cid:2) performan experiment to
empirical formula (also known as the simplest formula) of a compound
determine the percentage
shows the lowest whole number ratio of the elements in the compound. composition and the
The molecular formula (also known as the actual formula) describes the empirical formula of a
number of atoms of each element that make up a molecule or formula compound
unit. Benzene, with a molecular formula of C 6 H 6 , has an empirical (cid:2) calculatethe empirical
formula of CH. Table 6.1 shows the molecular formulas of several formula of a compound
compounds, along with their empirical formulas. using percentage
composition
Table 6.1 Comparing Molecular Formulas and Empirical Formulas
(cid:2) communicateyour
Molecular (actual) Empirical (simplest) Lowest ratio understanding of the
Name of compound formula formula of elements following terms:
hydrogen peroxide H O HO 1:1 empirical formula,
2 2
molecular formula
glucose C H O CH O 1:2:1
6 12 6 2
benzene C H CH 1:1
6 6
acetylene (ethyne) C H CH 1:1
2 2
aniline C H N C H N 6:7:1
6 7 6 7
Language
water H 2 O H 2 O 2:1 LINK
It is possible for different compounds to have the same empirical formula, The word “empirical” comes
as you can see in Figure 6.6. For example, benzene and acetylene both from the Greek word
empeirikos, meaning, roughly,
have the empirical formula CH. Each, however, is a unique compound.
“by experiment.” Why do you
Benzene, C H , is a clear liquid with a molar mass of 78 g/mol and a boil-
6 6
think the simplest formula of a
ing point of 80˚C. Acetylene, C H , has a molar mass of 26 g/mol. It is a
2 2 compound is called its
highly flammable gas, commonly used in a welder’s torch. There is, in
empirical formula?
fact, no existing compound with the molecular formula CH. The empirical
formula of a compound shows the lowest whole
number ratio of the atoms in the compound. It
does not express the composition of a molecule.
Many compounds have molecular formulas
that are the same as their empirical formulas.
One example is ammonia, NH . Try to think of
3
three other examples.
Figure 6.6 The same empirical formula can represent
more than one compound. These two compounds are
different—at room temperature, one is a gas and one is
a liquid. Yet they have the same empirical formula.
Chapter 6 Chemical Proportions in Compounds • MHR 207
Math The relationship between the molecular formula of a compound and
LINK
its empirical formula can be expressed as
In mathematics, you frequently Molecular formula subscripts = n× Empirical formula subscripts,
need to reduce an expression where n = 1,2,3...
to lowest terms. For example,
This relationship shows that the molecular formula of a compound is
4 x x2 is equivalent to 4x. A ratio the same as its empirical formula when n = 1. What information do you
of 5:10 is equivalent to 1:2. In
need in order to determine whether the molecular formula of a compound
chemistry, however, the
is the same as its empirical formula?
“lowest terms” version of a
chemical formula is not equiv-
Determining a Compound’s Empirical Formula
alent to its “real” molecular
formula. Why not?
In the previous section, you learned how to calculate the percentage com-
position of a compound from its chemical formula. Now you will do the
reverse. You will use the percentage composition of a compound, along
with the concept of the mole, to calculate the empirical formula of the
compound. Since the percentage composition can often be determined by
experiment, chemists use this calculation when they want to identify
a compound.
The following Sample Problem illustrates how to use percentage com-
position to obtain the empirical formula of a compound.
Sample Problem
Finding a Compound‘s Empirical Formula
from Percentage Composition: Part A
How do the molar masses Problem
of CH and CH compare
6 6 2 2 Calculate the empirical formula of a compound that is 85.6% carbon
with the molar mass of their
and 14.4% hydrogen.
empirical formula? How does
the molar mass of water com-
pare with the molar mass of its What Is Required?
empirical formula? Describe
You need to find the empirical formula of the compound.
the relationship between the
molar mass of a compound
and the molar mass of the What Is Given?
empirical formula of the
You know the percentage composition of the compound. You have
compound.
access to a periodic table.
Plan Your Strategy
Since you know the percentage composition, it is convenient to
assume that you have 100 g of the compound. This means that you
have 85.6 g of carbon and 14.4 g of hydrogen. Convert each mass to
moles. The number of moles can then be converted into a lowest
terms ratio of the elements to get the empirical formula.
Act on Your Strategy
85.6g
Number of moles of C in 100 g sample = = 7.13mol
12.01g/mol
14.4g
Number of moles of H in 100 g sample = = 14.3mol
1.01g/mol
Continued ...
208 MHR • Unit 2 Chemical Quantities
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 208
Now determine the lowest whole number ratio. Divide both molar
amounts by the lowest molar amount.
C7.13H14.3 → C
1.00
H
2.01
→ CH
2
7.13 7.13
Alternatively, you can set up your solution as a table.
PROBLEM TIP
Grams per Number of Molar amount
Mass 100 g Molar mass moles ÷ lowest The fact that 2.01 was rounded
Element percent (%) sample (g) (g/mol) (mol) molar amount to 2 in CH 2 is fine. The percent-
age composition is often
C 85.6 85.6 12.01 7.13 7 7 . . 1 1 3 3 = 1 determined by experiment, so
H 14.4 14.4 1.01 14.3 1 7 4 .1 .3 3 = 2.01 it is unlikely to be exact.
The empirical formula of the compound is CH .
2
Check Your Solution
Work backward. Calculate the percentage composition of CH .
2
12.01g/mol
Mass percent of C = ×100%
14.03g/mol
= 85.6%
2×1.01g/mol
Mass percent of H = ×100%
14.03g/mol
= 14.0%
The percentage composition calculated from the empirical formula
closely matches the given data. The formula is reasonable.
Practice Problems
9. A compound consists of 17.6% hydrogen and 82.4% nitrogen.
Determine the empirical formula of the compound.
10. Find the empirical formula of a compound that is 46.3% lithium
and 53.7% oxygen.
11. What is the empirical formula of a compound that is 15.9% boron
and 84.1% fluorine?
12. Determine the empirical formula of a compound made up of
52.51% chlorine and 47.48% sulfur.
Tips for Solving Empirical Formula Problems
In the Sample Problem above, the numbers were rounded at each step to
simplify the calculation. To calculate an empirical formula successfully,
however, you should not round the numbers until you have completed
the calculation. Use the maximum number of significant digits that your
calculator will allow, throughout the calculation. Rounding too soon when
calculating an empirical formula may result in getting the wrong answer.
Chapter 6 Chemical Proportions in Compounds • MHR 209
Table 6.2 Converting Subscripts Often only one step is needed to determine the number of moles in an
in Empirical Formulas empirical formula. This is not always the case, however. Since you must
divide by the lowest number of moles, initially one of your ratio terms
When you see Try multiplying
this decimal... all subscripts by... will always be 1. If your other terms are quite close to whole numbers,
as in the last Sample Problem, you can round them to the closest whole
x.80(4) 5
5 numbers. If your other terms are not close to whole numbers, you will
x.75(3) 4 need to do some additional steps. This is because empirical formulas
4
do not always contain the subscript 1. For example, Fe O contains the
x.67(2) 3 2 3
3 subscripts 2 and 3.
x.60(3) 5 Decimals such as 0.95 to 0.99 can be rounded up to the nearest
5
whole number. Decimals such as 0.01 to 0.05 can be rounded down to the
x.40(2) 5
5 nearest whole number. Other decimals require additional manipulation.
x.50(1) 2 What if you have the empirical formula C 1.5 H 3 O 1 ? To convert all sub-
2
scripts to whole numbers, multiply each subscript by 2. This gives you
x.33(1) 3 the empirical formula C H O . Thus, a ratio that involves a decimal
3 3 6 2
x.25(1) 4 ending in 0.5 must be doubled. What if a decimal ends in 0.45 to 0.55?
4 Round the decimal so that it ends in .5, and then double the ratio.
x.20(1) 5 Table 6.2 gives you some strategies for converting subscripts to whole
5
x.17(1) 6 numbers. The variable x stands for any whole number. Examine the
6 following Sample Problem to learn how to convert the empirical formula
subscripts to the lowest possible whole numbers.
Sample Problem
Finding a Compound‘s Empirical Formula
from Percentage Composition: Part B
Problem
The percentage composition of a fuel is 81.7% carbon and
18.3% hydrogen. Find the empirical formula of the fuel.
What Is Required?
You need to determine the empirical formula of the fuel.
What Is Given?
You know the percentage composition of the fuel. You have access to
a periodic table.
Plan Your Strategy
Convert mass percent to mass, then to number of moles. Then find
the lowest whole number ratio.
Act on Your Strategy
Grams per Number of Molar amount
Mass 100 g Molar mass moles ÷ lowest
Element percent (%) sample (g) (g/mol) (mol) molar amount
C 81.7 81.7 12.0 6.81 6.81 = 1
6.81
H 18.3 18.3 1.01 18.1 18.1 = 2.66
6.81
Continued ...
210 MHR • Unit 2 Chemical Quantities
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 210
PROBLEM TIP
You now have the empirical formula C H . Convert the subscript
1 2.66
2.66 ( 8 3 ) to a whole number. C 1×3 H 2.66×3 = C 3 H 8 . Notice that Table 6.2 suggests
multiplying by 3 when you
obtain a subscript ending in
Check Your Solution
.67, which is very close to .66.
Work backward. Calculate the percentage composition of C H .
3 8
3×12.01g/mol
MasspercentofC = ×100%
44.09g/mol
= 81.7%
8×1.008g/mol
MasspercentofH = ×100%
44.09g/mol
= 18.3%
The percentage composition calculated from the empirical formula
matches the percentage composition given in the problem.
Practice Problems
13. An oxide of chromium is made up of 68.4% chromium and
31.6% oxygen. What is the empirical formula of this oxide?
14. Phosphorus reacts with oxygen to give a compound that
is 43.7% phosphorus and 56.4% oxygen. What is the empirical
formula of the compound?
15. An inorganic salt is composed of 17.6% sodium, 39.7%
chromium, and 42.8% oxygen. What is the empirical formula of
this salt?
16. Compound X contains 69.9% carbon, 6.86% hydrogen, and
23.3% oxygen. Determine the empirical formula of compound X.
Determining the Empirical Formula by Experiment
In practice, you can determine a compound’s empirical formula by analyz-
ing its percentage composition. There are several different ways to do this.
One way is to use a synthesis reaction in which a sample of an element
with a known mass reacts with another element to form a compound.
Since you know the mass of one of the elements and you can measure
the mass of the compound produced, you can calculate the percentage
composition.
For example, copper reacts with the oxygen in air to form the
green compound copper oxide. Many buildings in Canada, such as the
Parliament buildings in Ottawa, have green roofs that contain some
copper(II) oxide. (See Figure 6.7.) Imagine you have a 5.0 g sample of
Figure 6.7 Although this green
copper shavings. You allow the copper shavings to react completely with roof may contain some copper(II)
oxygen. If the resulting compound has a mass of 6.3 g, you know that the oxide, it is mostly composed
compound contains 5.0 g copper and 1.3 g oxygen. Although you can use of basic copper sulfates and
the periodic table to predict that the formula for copper(II) oxide is CuO, carbonates that form when the
copper reacts with acid
the masses help you confirm your prediction. Try converting the masses
precipitation.
given above into an empirical formula.
In Investigation 6-A, you will use a synthesis reaction to determine
the empirical formula of magnesium oxide by experiment.
Chapter 6 Chemical Proportions in Compounds • MHR 211
S K I L L F O C U S
Predicting
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
Determining the Empirical Communicating results
Formula of Magnesium Oxide
When magnesium metal is heated over a flame, it Note: Make sure that the mass of the magnesium
reacts with oxygen in the air to form magnesium ribbon is at least 0.10 g.
oxide, Mg O :
x y
Mg +O → Mg O
(s) 2(g) x y(s)
ring clamp
In this investigation, you will react a strip crucible
of pure magnesium metal with oxygen, O 2 , in with lid
the air to form magnesium oxide. Then you will
clay triangle
measure the mass of the magnesium oxide pro-
duced to determine the percentage composition retort
of magnesium oxide. You will use this percentage stand laboratory
composition to calculate the empirical formula burner
of magnesium oxide. CAUTION Do not perform
this investigation unless welder’s goggles are
available.
Question Safety Precautions
What is the percentage composition and
empirical formula of magnesium oxide?
•Do not look directly at the burning magnesium.
•Do not put a hot crucible on the bench or
Predictions
the balance.
Using what you have learned about writing
formulas, predict the molecular formula and Procedure
percentage composition of magnesium oxide.
1. Make a table like the one below.
Materials Observations
electronic balance Mass of clean, empty crucible and lid
small square of sandpaper or emery paper Mass of crucible, lid, and magnesium
8 cm strip of magnesium ribbon
Mass of crucible and magnesium oxide
laboratory burner
sparker 2. Assemble the apparatus as shown in the
retort stand diagram.
ring clamp
3. Obtain a strip of magnesium, about 8 cm long,
clay triangle
from your teacher. Clean the magnesium strip
clean crucible with lid
with sandpaper or emery paper to remove any
crucible tongs
oxide coating.
ceramic pad
distilled water 4. Measure and record the mass of the empty
wash bottle crucible and lid. Add the strip of cleaned
disposal beaker magnesium to the crucible. Record the mass
welder’s goggles of the crucible, lid, and magnesium.
212 MHR • Unit 2 Chemical Quantities
5. With the lid off, place the crucible containing (d) Use your data to calculate the percentage
the magnesium on the clay triangle. Heat the composition of magnesium oxide.
crucible with a strong flame. Using the cru- (e) Determine the empirical formula of
cible tongs, hold the lid of the crucible nearby. magnesium oxide. Remember to round your
CAUTION When the magnesium ignites, quickly empirical formula to the nearest whole
cover the crucible with the lid. Continue number ratio, such as 1:1, 1:2, 2:1, or 3:3.
heating for about 1 min.
2.(a) Verify your empirical formula with your
6. Carefully remove the lid. CAUTION Heat the teacher. Use the empirical formula of
crucible until the magnesium ignites once magnesium oxide to determine the mass
more. Again, quickly cover the crucible. percent of magnesium in magnesium oxide.
Repeat this heating and covering of the cru-
(b) Calculate your percent error (PE) by finding
cible until the magnesium no longer ignites.
the difference between the experimental
Heat for a further 4 to 5 min with the lid off.
mass percent (EP) of magnesium and the
7. Using the crucible tongs, put the crucible on actual mass percent (AP) of magnesium.
the ceramic pad to cool. Then you divide the difference by the
actual mass percent of magnesium and
8. When the crucible is cool enough to touch,put
multiply by 100%.
it on the bench. Carefully grind the product
into small particles using the glass rod. Rinse PE =
EP−AP
×100%
AP
any particles on the glass rod into the crucible
3. Why did you need to round the empirical for-
with distilled water from the wash bottle.
mula you obtained to a whole number ratio?
9. Add enough distilled water to the crucible to
thoroughly wet the contents. The white prod- Conclusion
uct is magnesium oxide. The yellowish-orange
4. Compare the empirical formula you obtained
product is magnesium nitride.
with the empirical formula you predicted.
10. Return the crucible to the clay triangle. Place
the lid slightly ajar. Heat the crucible gently Applications
until the water begins to boil. Continue heat-
5. Write a balanced chemical equation for the
ing until all the water has evaporated, and the
reaction of magnesium with oxygen gas, O .
2
product is completely dry. Allow the crucible
6.(a) Suppose that you had allowed some
to cool on the ceramic pad.
magnesium oxide smoke to escape during
11. Using the crucible tongs, carry the crucible the investigation. How would the Mg:O
and lid to the balance. Measure and record the
ratio have been affected? Would the ratio
mass of the crucible and lid.
have increased, decreased, or remained
12. Do not put the magnesium oxide in the unchanged? Explain using sample
garbage or in the sink. Put it in the disposal calculations.
beaker designated by your teacher. (b) How would your calculated value for the
empirical formula of magnesium oxide
Analysis have been affected if all the magnesium in
the crucible had not burned? Support your
1.(a) What mass of magnesium did you use in
answer with sample calculations.
the reaction?
(c) Could either of the situations mentioned in
(b) What mass of magnesium oxide was
parts (a) and (b) have affected your results?
produced?
Explain.
(c) Calculate the mass of oxygen that reacted
with the magnesium.
Chapter 6 Chemical Proportions in Compounds • MHR 213
Section Wrap-up
In section 6.2, you learned how to calculate the empirical formula of a
compound based on percentage composition data obtained by experiment.
In section 6.3, you will learn how chemists use the empirical formula of a
compound and its molar mass to determine the molecular formula of a
compound.
Section Review
1 (a) K/U Why is the empirical formula of a compound also referred to as
its simplest formula?
(b) K/U Explain how the empirical formula of a compound is related to
its molecular formula.
2 I Methyl salicylate, or oil of wintergreen, is produced by the winter-
green plant. It can also be prepared easily in a laboratory. Methyl sali-
cylate is 63.1% carbon, 5.31% hydrogen, and 31.6% oxygen. Calculate
the empirical formula of methyl salicylate.
3 I Determine the empirical formula of the compound that is formed
by each of the following reactions.
(a) 0.315 mol chlorine atoms react completely with 1.1 mol
oxygen atoms
(b) 4.90 g silicon react completely with 24.8 g chlorine
4 I Muscle soreness from physical activity is caused by a buildup
of lactic acid in muscle tissue. Analysis of lactic acid reveals it to be
40.0% carbon, 6.71% hydrogen, and 53.3% oxygen by mass. Calculate
the empirical formula of lactic acid.
5 MC Imagine that you are a lawyer. You are representing a client
charged with possession of a controlled substance. The prosecutor
introduces, as forensic evidence, the empirical formula of the
substance that was found in your client’s possession. How would
you deal with this evidence as a lawyer for the defence?
6 I Olive oil is used widely in cooking. Oleic acid, a component
of olive oil, contains 76.54% carbon, 12.13% hydrogen and 11.33%
oxygen by mass. What is the empirical formula of oleic acid?
7 I Phenyl valerate is a colourless liquid that is used as a flavour
and odorant. It contains 74.13% carbon, 7.92% hydrogen and 17.95%
oxygen by mass. Determine the empirical formula of phenyl valerate.
8 I Ferrocene is the common name given to a unique compound that
consists of one iron atom sandwiched between two rings containing
hydrogen and carbon. This orange, crystalline solid is added to fuel
oil to improve combustion efficiency and eliminate smoke. As well,
it is used as an industrial catalyst and a high-temperature lubricant.
(a) Elemental analysis reveals ferrocene to be 64.56% carbon, 5.42%
hydrogen and 30.02% iron by mass. Determine the empirical
formula of ferrocene.
(b) Read the description of ferrocene carefully. Does this description
provide enough information for you to determine the molecular
formula of ferrocene? Explain your answer.
214 MHR • Unit 2 Chemical Quantities
The Molecular Formula 6.3
of a Compound
Determining the identity of an unknown compound is important in all Section Preview/
kinds of research. It can even be used to solve crimes. Forensic scientists Specific Expectations
specialize in analyzing evidence for criminal and legal cases. To under- In this section, you will
stand why forensic scientists might need to find out the molecular
(cid:2) determinethe molecular
formula of a compound, consider the following example. formula of a compound,
Suppose that a suspect in a theft investigation is a researcher in a biol- given the empirical formula
ogy laboratory. The suspect frequently works with formaldehyde, CH O. of the compound and some
2
Police officers find traces of a substance at the crime scene, and send sam- additional information
ples to the Centre for Forensic Science. The forensic analysts find that the (cid:2) identifyreal-life situations in
substance contains a compound that has an empirical formula of CH O. which the analysis of
2
Will this evidence help to convict the suspect? Not necessarily. unknown substances is
important
As you can see from Table 6.3, there are many compounds that have
the empirical formula CH O. The substance might be formaldehyde, but it (cid:2) communicateyour under-
2
standing of the following
could also be lactic acid (found in milk) or acetic acid (found in vinegar).
terms: forensic scientists
Neither lactic acid nor acetic acid connect the theft to the suspect. Further
information is required to prove that the substance is formaldehyde.
Analyzing the physical properties of the substance would help to discover
whether it is formaldehyde. Another important piece of information is the
molar mass of the substance. Continue reading to find out why.
Table 6.3 Six Compounds with the Empirical Formula CHO
2
Whole-number Μ
Name Molecular formula multiple (g/mol) Use or function
formaldehyde CH O 1 30.03 disinfectant; biological preservative
2
acetic acid C H O 2 60.05 acetate polymers; vinegar (5% solution)
2 4 2
lactic acid C H O 3 90.08 causes milk to sour; forms in muscles during exercise
3 6 3
erythrose C H O 4 120.10 forms during sugar metabolism
4 8 4
ribose C H O 5 150.13 component of many nucleic acids and vitamin B
5 10 5 2
glucose C H O 6 180.16 major nutrient for energy in cells
6 12 6
CH O C H O C H O C H O C H O C H O
2 2 4 2 3 6 3 4 8 4 5 10 5 6 12 6
Determining a Molecular Formula
Recall the equation
Molecular formula subscripts = n× Empirical formula subscripts,
where n = 1,2,3...
Additional information is required to obtain the molecular formula of a
compound, given its empirical formula. We can use the molar mass and
build on the above equation, as follows:
Molar mass of compound = n× Molar mass of empirical formula,
where n = 1,2,3...
Chapter 6 Chemical Proportions in Compounds • MHR 215
Careers in Chemistry
Analytical Chemistry For most substances, just their presence in a
urine sample means a positive result. Other
substances must be present in an amount higher
than a certain threshold. According to Dr. Ayotte,
a male athlete would have to consume “10 very
strong French coffees within 15 min” to go over
the 12 mg/L limit for caffeine. Ephedrines and
pseudoephedrines, two decongestants that are
found in cough remedies and that act as stimu-
lants, have a cut-off level. This allows athletes
to take them up to one or two days before a
competition.
Challenges
Ben Johnson, Steve Vezina, Eric Lamaze—all
Dr. Ayotte and her team face many challenges.
of these athletes tested positive for performance-
They look for reliable tests for natural substances,
enhancing substances that are banned by the
develop new analytical techniques, and deter-
International Olympic Committee (IOC). Who
mine the normal levels of banned substances
conducts the tests for these substances? Meet
for male and female athletes. Dr. Ayotte must
Dr. Christiane Ayotte, head of Canada’s Doping
defend her tests in hearings and with the press,
Control Laboratory since 1991.
especially when high-profile athletes get positive
results. Her dreams include an independent
The Doping Control Lab
international doping control agency and better
What happens to a urine sample after it arrives at
drug-risk education for athletes.
the doping control lab? Technicians and scientists
For Dr. Ayotte, integrity and a logical mind
must be careful to ensure careful handling of the
are essential aspects of being a good scientist.
sample. Portions of the sample are taken for six
different analytical procedures. More than 150
Make Career Connections
substances are banned by the IOC. These sub-
stances are grouped according to their physical 1. For information about careers in analytical
chemistry, contact university and college
and chemical properties. There are two main
chemistry departments.
steps for analyzing a sample:
1. purification, which involves steps such as 2. For information about doping control and
filtration and extraction using solvents, and the movement for drug-free sport, contact
the Canadian Centre for Ethics in Sport
2. analysis by either gas chromatography, mass
(CCES), the World Anti-Doping Agency
spectrometry, or high-performance liquid
(WADA), and the Centre for Sport and Law.
chromatography. Chromatography refers to
certain methods by which chemists separate
mixtures into pure substances.
Thus, the molar mass of a compound is a whole number multiple of the
“molar mass” of the empirical formula.
Chemists can use a mass spectrometer to determine the molar mass of a
compound. They can use the molar mass, along with the “molar mass” of a
known empirical formula, to determine the compound’s molecular formula.
For example, the empirical formula CH has a “molar mass” of 13 g/mol. We
know, however, that acetylene, C H , and benzene, C H , both have the
2 2 6 6
empirical formula CH. Suppose it is determined, through mass spectrometry,
216 MHR • Unit 2 Chemical Quantities
that a sample has a molar mass of 78 g/mol. We know that the compound Table 6.4 Relating Molecular
is C H , since 6×13g = 78g, as shown in Table 6.4. and Empirical Formulas
6 6
Examine the Sample Problem and Practice Problems that follow
Molar
to learn how to find the molecular formula of a compound using the Mass
empirical formula and the molar mass of the compound. Formula (g) Ratio
C H
6 6 78
molecular 78 = 6
Sample Problem 13
CH
13
empirical
Determining a Molecular Formula
Problem
The empirical formula of ribose (a sugar) is CH O. In a separate
2
experiment, using a mass spectrometer, the molar mass of ribose
was determined to be 150 g/mol. What is the molecular formula
of ribose?
What Is Required?
You need to find the molecular formula of ribose.
What Is Given?
You know the empirical formula and the molar mass of ribose.
Plan Your Strategy CHEM
FACT
Divide the molar mass of ribose by the “molar mass” of the empirical
formula. The answer you get is the factor by which you multiply the Three classifications of food
are proteins, fats, and
empirical formula.
carbohydrates. Many
carbohydrates have the
Act on Your Strategy
empirical formula CHO. This
2
The “molar mass” of the empirical formula CH O, determined using empirical formula looks like a
2
hydrate of carbon, hence the
the periodic table, is
name “carbohydrate.”
12g/mol+2(1)g/mol+16g/mol = 30g/mol Glucose, fructose, galactose,
The molar mass of ribose is 150 g/mol. mannose, and sorbose all have
the empirical formula CHO
2
150g/mol = 5 since they all have the same
30g/mol molecular formula, CH O .
6 12 6
What makes these sugars
different is the way in which
Molecular formula subscripts = 5 × Empiricalformulasubscripts
their atoms are bonded to one
= C 1×5 H 2×5 O 1×5 another. In Chapter 13, you
= C H O will learn more about different
5 10 5
compounds with the same
Therefore, the molecular formula of ribose is C H O .
5 10 5
formulas.
Check Your Solution
Work backward by calculating the molar mass of C H O .
5 10 5
(5×12.01g/mol)+(10×1.01g/mol)+(5×16.00g/mol) = 150g/mol
The calculated molar mass matches the molar mass that is given in
the problem. The answer is reasonable.
Continued ...
Chapter 6 Chemical Proportions in Compounds • MHR 217
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 217
Practice Problems
17. The empirical formula of butane, the fuel used in disposable
lighters, is C H . In an experiment, the molar mass of butane
2 5
was determined to be 58 g/mol. What is the molecular formula
CHEM of butane?
FACT
18. Oxalic acid has the empirical formula CHO . Its molar mass is
2
Codeine is a potent pain reliev- 90 g/mol. What is the molecular formula of oxalic acid?
er. It acts on the pain centre in
the brain, rather than interrupt- 19. The empirical formula of codeine is C 18 H 21 NO 3 . If the molar mass
ing pain messages from, for of codeine is 299 g/mol, what is its molecular formula?
example, a headache or a 20. A compound’s molar mass is 240.28 g/mol. Its percentage
sore arm. It is potentially
composition is 75.0% carbon, 5.05% hydrogen, and 20.0%
habit-forming and classified
oxygen. What is the compound’s molecular formula?
as a narcotic.
Section Wrap-up
How do chemists obtain the data they use to identify compounds? In
Investigation 6-A, you explored one technique for finding the percentage
composition, and hence the empirical formula, of a compound containing
magnesium and oxygen. In section 6.4, you will learn about another tech-
nique that chemists use to determine the empirical formula of compounds
containing carbon and hydrogen. You will learn how chemists combine
this technique with mass spectrometry to determine the compound’s
molecular formula. You will also learn about a new type of compound
and perform an experiment to determine the molecular formula of one
of these compounds.
Section Review
Unit Investigation Prep 1 K/U Explain the role that a mass spectrometer plays in determining
the molecular formula of an unknown compound.
Before you design your experi-
ment to find the composition
2 I Tartaric acid, also known as cream of tartar, is used in baking.
of a mixture, think about the
Its empirical formula is C H O . If 1.00 mol of tartaric acid contains
relationships between different 2 3 3
3.61×1024 oxygen atoms, what is the molecular formula of
compounds. Suppose you have
tartaric acid?
5.0 g of copper. This copper
reacts to form copper(II)
3 MC Why is the molecular formula of a compound much more useful to
chloride, also containing 5.0 g
a forensic scientist than the empirical formula of the compound?
of copper. How can you
determine the mass of 4 K/U Vinyl acetate, C 4 H 6 O 2 , is an important industrial chemical. It is
copper(II) chloride formed? used to make some of the polymers in products such as adhesives,
paints, computer discs, and plastic films.
(a) What is the empirical formula of vinyl acetate?
(b) How does the molar mass of vinyl acetate compare with the molar
mass of its empirical formula?
5 I A compound has the formula C 6x H 5x O x , where x is a whole num-
ber. Its molar mass is 186 g/mol; what is its molecular formula?
218 MHR • Unit 2 Chemical Quantities
Finding Empirical and Molecular 6.4
Formulas by Experiment
You have learned how to calculate the percentage composition of a Section Preview/
compound using its formula. Often, however, the formula of a compound Specific Expectations
is not known. Chemists must determine the percentage composition In this section, you will
and molar mass of an unknown compound through experimentation.
(cid:2) identifyreal-life situations in
Then they use this information to determine the molecular formula of which the analysis of
the compound. Determining the molecular formula is an important step in unknown substances is
understanding the properties of the compound and developing a way to important
synthesize it in a laboratory. (cid:2) determinethe empirical for-
In Investigation 6-A, you reacted a known mass of magnesium with mula of a hydrate through
oxygen and found the mass of the product. Then you determined the per- experimentation
centage composition and empirical formula of magnesium oxide. This is (cid:2) explainhow a carbon-
just one method for determining percentage composition. It is suitable for hydrogen analyzer can be
analyzing simple compounds that react in predictable ways. Chemists used to determine the empir-
have developed other methods for analyzing different types of ical formula of a compound
compounds, as you will learn in this section. (cid:2) communicateyour under-
standing of the following
terms: carbon-hydrogen
The Carbon-Hydrogen Combustion Analyzer
combustion analyzer,
A large number of important chemicals are composed of hydrogen, hydrate, anhydrous
carbon, and oxygen. The carbon-hydrogen combustion analyzer is a
useful instrument for analyzing these chemicals. It allows chemists to
determine the percentage composition of compounds that are made up
of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen. The applications of this instrument
include forensic science, food chemistry, pharmaceuticals and academic
research—anywhere that an unknown compound needs to be analyzed.
The carbon-hydrogen combustion analyzer works because we know
that compounds containing carbon and hydrogen will burn in a stream of
pure oxygen, O , to yield only carbon dioxide and water. If we can find
2
the mass of the carbon dioxide and water separately, we can determine
the mass percent of carbon and hydrogen in the compound.
Examine Figure 6.8 to see how a carbon-hydrogen combustion analyz-
er works. A sample, made up of only carbon and hydrogen, is placed in a
furnace. The sample is heated and simultaneously reacted with a stream
sample of compound containing
C, H, and other elements
H O absorber CO absorber other substances not absorbed
2 2
stream of O
2
furnace
Figure 6.8 A schematic diagram of a carbon-hydrogen combustion analyzer. After the
combustion, all the carbon in the sample is contained in the carbon dioxide. All the
hydrogen in the sample is contained in the water.
Chapter 6 Chemical Proportions in Compounds • MHR 219
of oxygen. Eventually the sample is completely combusted to yield only
water vapour and carbon dioxide.
Carbon dioxide reacts with
The water vapour is collected by passing it through a tube that con-
sodium hydroxide to form
tains magnesium perchlorate, Mg(ClO ) . The magnesium perchlorate
sodium carbonate and water. 4 2
Write a balanced chemical absorbs all of the water. The mass of the tube is determined before and
equation for this reaction. after the reaction. The difference is the mass of the water that is produced
in the reaction. We know that all the hydrogen in the sample is converted
to water. Therefore, we can use the percentage composition of hydrogen
in water to determine the mass of the hydrogen in the sample.
The carbon dioxide is captured in a second tube, which contains
sodium hydroxide, NaOH. The mass of this tube is also measured before
and after the reaction. The increase in the mass of the tube corresponds
to the mass of the carbon dioxide that is produced. We know that all the
carbon in the sample reacts to form carbon dioxide. Therefore, we can use
the percentage composition of carbon in carbon dioxide to determine the
PROBEWARE
mass of the carbon in the sample.
The carbon-hydrogen combustion analyzer can also be used to find
If you have access to
the empirical formula of a compound that contains carbon, hydrogen,
probeware, do the Chemistry
and one other element, such as oxygen. The difference between the mass
11 lab, Determining Molecular
Mass, or a similar lab available of the sample and the mass of the hydrogen and carbon produced is the
from a probeware company. mass of the third element.
Examine the following Sample Problem to learn how to determine the
empirical formula of a compound based on carbon-hydrogen combustion
data.
Sample Problem
Carbon-Hydrogen Combustion
Analyzer Calculations
Problem
If you have a compound con-
taining carbon, hydrogen, and A 1.000 g sample of a pure compound, containing only carbon and
oxygen, what two instruments
hydrogen, was combusted in a carbon-hydrogen combustion analyz-
would you need to determine
er. The combustion produced 0.6919 g of water and 3.338 g of carbon
its molecular formula?
dioxide.
(a) Calculate the masses of the carbon and the hydrogen
in the sample.
(b) Find the empirical formula of the compound.
What Is Required?
You need to find
(a) the mass of the carbon and the hydrogen in the sample
(b) the empirical formula of the compound
What Is Given?
You know the mass of the sample. You also know the masses of
the water and the carbon dioxide produced in the combustion of
the sample.
Continued ...
220 MHR • Unit 2 Chemical Quantities
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 220
Plan Your Strategy
All the hydrogen in the sample was converted to water. Multiply the
mass percent (as a decimal) of hydrogen in water by the mass of the
water to get the mass of the hydrogen in the sample.
Similarly, all the carbon in the sample has been incorporated
into the carbon dioxide. Multiply the mass percent (as a decimal) of
carbon in carbon dioxide by the mass of the carbon dioxide to get
the mass of carbon in the sample. Convert to moles and determine
the empirical formula.
Act on Your Strategy
(a) Mass of H in sample
2.02gH
= 2 ×0.6919gH O = 0.07756gH
18.02gH O 2 2
2
12.01gC
Mass of C in sample = ×3.338gCO = 0.9109gC
44.01gCO 2
2
The sample contained 0.077 56 g of hydrogen and 0.9109 g of
carbon.
0.07756g
(b) Moles of H in sample = = 0.07694 mol
1.008g/mol
0.9109g
Moles of C in sample = = 0.07584 mol
12.01g/mol
Empirical formula = C0.07584H0.07584
0.07584 0.07694
= C H
1.0 1.0
= CH
Check Your Solution
The sum of the masses of carbon and hydrogen is 0.077 56 g +
0.9109 g = 0.988 46 g. This is close to the mass of the sample.
Therefore your answers are reasonable.
Practice Problems
21. A 0.539 g sample of a compound that contained only carbon and
hydrogen was subjected to combustion analysis. The combustion
produced 1.64 g of carbon dioxide and 0.807 g of water. Calculate
the percentage composition and the empirical formula of the
sample. CHEM
FACT
22. An 874 mg sample of cortisol was subjected to carbon-hydrogen
combustion analysis. 2.23 g of carbon dioxide and 0.652 g of Cortisol is an important steroid
hormone. It helps your body
water were produced. The molar mass of cortisol was found to be
synthesize protein. Cortisol can
362 g/mol using a mass spectrometer. If cortisol contains carbon,
also reduce inflammation, and
hydrogen, and oxygen, determine its molecular formula.
is used to treat allergies and
rheumatoid arthritis.
Chapter 6 Chemical Proportions in Compounds • MHR 221
Chemistry Bulletin
Accident or Arson? In the Forensic Laboratory
All chemists who try to identify unknown In the laboratory, the sample residue must be
compounds are like detectives. Forensic concentrated on charcoal or another material.
chemists, however, actually work with investi- Then the sample is ready for GC analysis. GC
gators. They use their chemical knowledge to is used to separate and detect trace amounts of
help explain evidence. Forensic chemists are volatile hydrocarbons and separate them from
especially helpful in an arson investigation. a mixture. Most accelerants are complex
mixtures. They have many components, in
different but specific ratios.
GC involves taking the concentrated
residue and passing it through a gas column.
As the sample residue moves through the col-
umn, the different components separate based
on their boiling points. The compound with
the lowest boiling point emerges from the
column and onto a detector first. The other
components follow as they reach their boiling
points. It is possible to identify each compo-
nent of a mixture based on the time that it
emerges from the column. A detector records
this information on a chromatogram. Each
component is represented by a peak on a
graph. The overall pattern of peaks is always
the same for a specific type of accelerant.
Therefore, accelerants are identified by their
components and the relative proportions of
Investigating Arson their components.
Only trace amounts of an accelerant need
One of the main jobs of the investigator in a
to be collected because current analytical tools
possible arson case is to locate and sample
are extremely sensitive. If an accelerant is used
residual traces of accelerants. Accelerants are
to start a fire, it is highly likely that there will
flammable substances that are used to quickly
be trace amounts left over after the fire. The
ignite and spread a fire. They include com-
presence of an accelerant at a fire scene strongly
pounds called hydrocarbons, which contain
suggests that the fire was started intentionally.
hydrogen and carbon. Examples of hydrocar-
bons include petrol, kerosene and diesel.
Making Connections
Portable instruments called sniffers can be
1. What other types of crime could be solved
used to determine the best places to collect
by a forensic chemist? Brainstorm a list.
samples. These sniffers, however, are not able
to determine the type of hydrocarbon present. 2. What other instruments might a forensic
As well, they can be set off by vapours from chemist use to identify compounds? Using
burnt plastics. Deciding whether or not a sub- the Internet or reference books, do some
stance is an accelerant is best done by a research to find out.
chemist in a laboratory, using a technique
called gas chromatography (GC).
222 MHR • Unit 2 Chemical Quantities
Hydrated Ionic Compounds
You have learned how to find the molecular formula of a compound that
contains only hydrogen, carbon, and oxygen. When chemists use this
method, they usually have no mass percent data for the compound when Suppose there is MgSO·7HO
4 2
they begin. In some cases, however, chemists know most of the molecular in the chemistry prep room.
formula of a compound, but one significant piece of information is The experiment you want to
do, however, calls for MgSO .
missing. 4
How do you think you might
For example, many ionic compounds crystallize from a water solution
remove the water from
with water molecules incorporated into their crystal structure, forming a
MgSO·7HO?
4 2
hydrate. Hydrates have a specific number of water molecules chemically
bonded to each formula unit. A chemist may know the formula of the
ionic part of the hydrate but not how many water molecules are present
for each formula unit.
Epsom salts, for example, consist of crystals of magnesium sulfate
heptahydrate, MgSO ·7H O. Every formula unit of magnesium sulfate has
4 2
seven molecules of water weakly bonded to it. A raised dot in a chemical
formula, in front of one or more water molecules, denotes a hydrated
compound. Note that the dot does not include multiplication, but rather a
weak bond between an ionic compound and one or more water molecules.
Some other examples of hydrates are shown in Table 6.4.
Compounds that have no water molecules incorporated into them
are called anhydrous to distinguish them from their hydrated forms. For
example, a chemist might refer to CaSO as anhydrous calcium sulfate.
4
This is because it is often found in hydrated form as calcium sulfate
dihydrate, shown in Figure 6.9.
Table 6.4 Selected Hydrates
Formula Chemical name
CaSO ·2H O calcium sulfate dihydrate (gypsum)
4 2
CaCl ·2H O calcium chloride dihydrate
2 2
LiCl ·4H O lithium chloride tetrahydrate
2 2
MgSO ·7H O magnesium sulfate heptahydrate (Epsom salts)
4 2
Ba(OH) ·8H O barium hydroxide octahydrate
2 2
Na CO ·10H O sodium carbonate decahydrate
2 3 2
KAl(SO 4 ) 2 ·12H 2 O potassium aluminum sulfate dodecahydrate (alum) Figure 6.9 Alabaster is a
compact form of gypsum often
The molar mass of a hydrated compound must include the mass of any used in sculpture. Gypsum is the
water molecules that are in the compound. For example, the molar mass common name for calcium sulfate
of magnesium sulfate heptahydrate includes the mass of 7 mol of water. dihydrate, CaSO ·2HO.
4 2
It is very important to know whether a compound exists as a hydrate. For
example, if a chemical reaction calls for 0.25 mol of copper(II) chloride,
you need to know whether you are dealing with anhydrous copper(II)
chloride or with copper(II) chloride dihydrate, shown in Figure 6.10. The
mass of 0.25 mol of CuCl is33.61g. The mass of 0.25 mol of CuCl ·2H O
2 2 2
is 38.11 g.
Calculations involving hydrates involve using the same techniques
you have already practised for determining percent by mass, empirical
formulas, and molecular formulas.
The following Sample Problem shows how to find the percent by mass
of water in a hydrate. It also shows how to determine the formula
of a hydrate based on an incomplete chemical formula.
Chapter 6 Chemical Proportions in Compounds • MHR 223
Sample Problem
Determining the Formula of a Hydrate
Problem
A hydrate of barium hydroxide, Ba(OH) ·xH O, is used to make
2 2
barium salts and to prepare certain organic compounds. Since it
reacts with CO from the air to yield barium carbonate, BaCO , it
2 3
must be stored in tightly stoppered bottles.
(a) A 50.0 g sample of the hydrate contains 27.2 g of Ba(OH) .
2
Calculate the percent, by mass, of water in Ba(OH) ·xH O.
2 2
(b) Find the value of x in Ba(OH) ·xH O.
2 2
What Is Required?
Figure 6.10 If you need 5 mol
ofCuCI 2, how much of the com- (a) You need to calculate the percent, by mass, of water in the
pound above would you use? hydrate of barium hydroxide.
(b) You need to find how many water molecules are bonded to each
formula unit of Ba(OH) .
2
What Is Given?
The formula of the sample is Ba(OH) ·xH O.
2 2
The mass of the sample is 50.0 g.
The sample contains 27.2 g of Ba(OH) .
2
Plan Your Strategy
(a) To find the mass of water in the hydrate, find the difference
between the mass of barium hydroxide and the total mass of the
sample. Divide by the total mass of the sample and multiply by
100%.
(b) Find the number of moles of barium hydroxide in the sample.
Then find the number of moles of water in the sample. To find out
how many water molecules bond to each formula unit of
barium hydroxide, divide each answer by the number of moles of
barium hydroxide.
Act on Your Strategy
(a) MasspercentofwaterinBa(OH) ·xH O
2 2
(Totalmassofsample)−(MassofBa(OH) insample)
= 2 ×100%
(Totalmassofsample)
50.0g−27.2g
= ×100%
50.0g
= 45.6%
(b) MolesofBa(OH) = MassofBa(OH) 2
2 MolarmassofBa(OH)
2
27.2g
=
171.3g/mol
= 0.159molBa(OH)
2
Continued ...
224 MHR • Unit 2 Chemical Quantities
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 224
MolesofH O = MassofH 2 O
2 MolarmassofH O
2
50.0g−27.2g
=
18.02g/mol
= 1.27molH O
2
PROBLEM TIP
0.159 molBa(OH) : 1.27 molH O = 1.0molBa(OH) :8.0molH O
0.159 2 0.159 2 2 2 This step is similar to finding
an empirical formula based on
The value of x in Ba(OH) ·xH Ois8.
2 2 percentage composition.
Therefore, the molecular formula of the hydrate is Ba(OH) ·8H O.
2 2
Check Your Solution
Work backward.
According to the formula, the percent by mass of water in
Ba(OH) ·8H O is:
2 2
144.16g/mol
×100% = 45.7%
315.51g/mol
According to the question, the percent by mass of water in the
hydrate of Ba(OH) is:
2
(50.0g−27.2g)
×100% = 45.6%
50.0g
Therefore, your answer is reasonable.
Practice Problems
Write an equation that shows
23. What is the percent by mass of water in magnesium sulfite
what happens when you heat
hexahydrate, MgSO ·6H O?
3 2 magnesium sulfate hexahy-
drate enough to convert it to
24. A 3.34 g sample of a hydrate has the formula SrS O ·xH O,
2 3 2
its anhydrous form.
and contains 2.30 g of SrS O . Find the value of x.
2 3
25. A hydrate of zinc chlorate, Zn(ClO ) ·xH O, contains 21.5% zinc
3 2 2
by mass. Find the value of x.
Determining the Molecular Formula of a Hydrate
As you have just discovered, calculations involving hydrates usually
Electronic Learning Partner
involve comparing the anhydrous form of the ionic compound to the
hydrated form. Many chemicals are available in hydrated form. Usually
A video clip describing
chemists are only interested in how much of the ionic part of the hydrate hydrated ionic compounds can
they are working with. This is because, in most reactions involving be found on the Chemistry 11
hydrates, the water portion of the compound does not take part in the Electronic Learning Partner.
reaction. Only the ionic portion does.
How do chemists determine how many water molecules are bonded to
each ionic formula unit in a hydrate? One method is to heat the com-
pound in order to convert it to its anhydrous form. The bonds that join
the water molecules to the ionic compound are very weak compared with
the strong ionic bonds within the ionic compound. Heating a hydrate usu-
ally removes the water molecules, leaving the anhydrous compound
behind. In Investigation 6-B, you will heat a hydrate to determine
its formula.
Chapter 6 Chemical Proportions in Compounds • MHR 225
S K I L L F O C U S
Predicting
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
Determining the Chemical Communicating results
Formula of a Hydrate
Many ionic compounds exist as hydrates. Often electronic balance
you can convert hydrates to anhydrous ionic glass rod
compounds by heating them. Thus, hydrates are hot pad
well suited to determining percentage composi- 3 g to 5 g hydrated copper(II) sulfate
tion experimentally.
In this investigation, you will find the mass Safety Precautions
percent of water in a hydrate of copper(II) sulfate
hydrate, CuSO ·xH O.You will use copper(II) sul-
4 2
fate hydrate for an important reason: The Heat the hydrate at a low to medium
crystals of the hydrate are blue, while anhydrous temperature only.
copper(II) sulfate is white.
Procedure
Question
Note: If you are using a hot plate as your heat
What is the molecular formula of the hydrate of source, use the 400 mL beaker. If you are using a
copper(II) sulfate, CuSO ·xH O? laboratory burner, use the porcelain evaporating
4 2
dish.
Prediction 1. Make a table like the one below, for recording
your observations.
Predict what reaction will occur when you heat
the hydrate of copper(II) sulfate. Observations
Mass of empty beaker or evaporating dish
Materials
Mass of beaker or evaporating dish
400 mL beaker (if hot plate is used) + hydrated copper(II) sulfate
tongs
Mass of beaker or evaporating dish
scoopula + anhydrous copper(II) sulfate
A hydrate of copper(II) sulfate (far left) is light blue.
It loses its colour on heating.
226 MHR • Unit 2 Chemical Quantities
2. Measure the mass of the beaker and stirring Conclusion
rod. Record the mass in your table.
3. Based on your observations, determine the
3. Add 3 g to 5 g hydrated copper(II) sulfate to molecular formula of CuSO 4 ·xH 2 O.
the beaker.
Applications
4. Measure the mass of the beaker with the
hydrated copper(II) sulfate. Record the mass 4. Suppose that you heated a sample of a hydrat-
in your table. ed ionic compound in a test tube. What might
you expect to see inside the test tube, near the
5. If you are using a hot plate, heat the beaker
mouth of the test tube? Explain.
with the hydrated copper(II) sulfate until
the crystals lose their blue colour. You may 5. You obtained the mass percent of water in the
need to stir occasionally with the glass rod. copper sulfate hydrate.
Be sure to keep the heat at a medium setting. (a) Using your observations, calculate the
Otherwise, the beaker may break. percentage composition of the copper
sulfate hydrate.
6. When you see the colour change, stop heating
the beaker. Turn off or unplug the hot plate. (b) In the case of a hydrate, and assuming you
Remove the beaker with the beaker tongs. know the formula of the associated
Allow the beaker and crystals to cool on a anhydrous ionic compound, do you think it
hot pad. is more useful to have the mass percent
of water in the hydrate or the percentage
7. Find the mass of the beaker with the white
composition? Explain your answer.
crystals. Record the mass in your table.
6. Compare the formula that you obtained for
8. Return the anhydrous copper(II) sulfate to
the copper sulfate hydrate with the formulas
your teacher when you are finished. Do not
that other groups obtained. Are there any
put it in the sink or in the garbage.
differences? How might these differences
have occurred?
Analysis
7. Suppose that you did not completely convert
1.(a) Determine the percent by mass of water in
the hydrate to the anhydrous compound.
your sample of hydrated copper(II) sulfate.
Explain how this would affect
Show your calculations clearly.
(a) the calculated percent by mass of water in
(b) Do you expect the mass percent of water
the compound
that you determined to be similar to
(b) the molecular formula you determined
the mass percents that other groups
determined? Explain. 8. Suppose the hydrate was heated too quickly
and some of it was lost as it spattered out of
2.(a) On the chalkboard, write the mass of your
the container. Explain how this would affect
sample of hydrated copper(II) sulfate, the
mass of the anhydrous copper(II) sulfate, (a) the calculated percent by mass of water in
and the mass percent of water that you the compound
calculated. (b) the molecular formula you determined
(b) How do your results compare with other
9. Suggest a source of error (not already
groups’ results?
mentioned) that would result in a value of x
that is
(a) higher than the actual value
(b) lower than the actual value
Chapter 6 Chemical Proportions in Compounds • MHR 227
Section Wrap-up
In section 6.4, you learned several practical methods for determining
empirical and molecular formulas of compounds. You may have noticed
that these methods work because compounds react in predictable ways.
For example, you learned that a compound containing carbon and
hydrogen reacts with oxygen to produce water and carbon dioxide. From
the mass of the products, you can determine the amount of carbon and
hydrogen in the reactant. You also learned that a hydrate decomposes
when it is heated to form water and an anhydrous compound. Again, the
mass of one of the products of this reaction helps you identify the reactant.
In Chapter 7, you will learn more about how to use the information from
chemical reactions in order to do quantitative calculations.
Section Review
1 K/U Many compounds that contain carbon and hydrogen also contain
nitrogen. Can you find the nitrogen content by carbon-hydrogen
analysis, if the nitrogen does not interfere with the combustion
reaction? If so, explain how. If not, explain why not.
2 I What would be the mass of a bag of anhydrous magnesium sulfate,
MgSO , if it contained the same amount of magnesium as a 1.00 kg bag
4
of Epsom salts, MgSO ·7H O? Give your answer in grams.
4 2
3 K/U A compound that contains carbon, hydrogen, chlorine, and oxy-
gen is subjected to carbon-hydrogen analysis. Can the mass percent of
oxygen in the compound be determined using this method? Explain
your answer.
4 C Imagine that you are an analytical chemist. You are presented with
an unknown compound, in the form of a white powder, for analysis.
Your job is to determine the molecular formula of the compound.
Create a flow chart that outlines the questions that you would ask and
the analyses you would carry out. Briefly explain why each question or
analysis is needed.
5 MC A carbon-hydrogen analyzer uses a water absorber (which
contains magnesium perchlorate, Mg(ClO ) ) and a carbon dioxide
4 2
absorber (which contains sodium hydroxide, NaOH). The water
absorber is always located in front of the carbon dioxide absorber.
What does this suggest about the sodium hydroxide that is contained
in the CO absorber?
2
6 I A hydrate of zinc nitrate has the formula Zn(NO 3 ) 2 ·xH 2 O. If the
mass of 1 mol of anhydrous zinc nitrate is 63.67% of the mass of 1 mol
of the hydrate, what is the value of x?
7 K/U A 2.524 g sample of a compound contains carbon, hydrogen, and
oxygen. The sample is subjected to carbon-hydrogen analysis. 3.703 g
of carbon dioxide and 1.514 g of water are collected.
(a) Determine the empirical formula of the compound.
(b) If one molecule of the compound contains 12 atoms of hydrogen,
what is the molecular formula of the compound?
228 MHR • Unit 2 Chemical Quantities
Review
Reflecting on Chapter 6 (b) Acetylene, C H , and benzene, C H , both
2 2 6 6
have the same empirical formula. How
Summarize this chapter in the format of your
would their results compare in a carbon-
choice. Here are a few ideas to use as guidelines:
hydrogen combustion analysis? Explain
• Determine the mass percent of each element
your answer.
in a compound.
• Predict the empirical formula of a compound 4. If you know the molar mass of a substance, and
the elements that make up the substance, can
using the periodic table, and test your prediction
you determine its molecular formula? Explain
through experimentation.
• Use experimental data to determine the empiri- your answer.
cal (simplest) formula of a compound.
Inquiry
• Use the molar mass and empirical formula of a
compound to determine the molecular (actual) 5. A 5.00 g sample of borax (sodium tetraborate
formula of the compound. decahydrate, Na 2 B 4 O 7 ·10H 2 O) was thoroughly
• Determine experimentally the percent by mass heated to remove all the water of hydration.
of water in a hydrate. Use this information to What mass of anhydrous sodium tetraborate
determine its molecular formula. remained?
• Explain how a carbon-hydrogen combustion 6. Determine the percentage composition of
analyzer can be used to determine the mass each compound.
percent of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen in a (a) freon-12, CCl F
2 2
compound. (b) white lead, Pb (OH) (CO )
3 2 3 2
7.(a) What mass of water is present in 25.0 g of
Reviewing Key Terms
MgCl ·2H O?
2 2
For each of the following terms, write a sentence (b) What mass of manganese is present in 5.00 g
that shows your understanding of its meaning. of potassium permanganate, KMnO ?
4
anhydrous 8. Silver nitrate, AgNO , can be used to test
3
carbon-hydrogen combustion analyzer for the presence of halide ions in solution. It
combines with the halide ions to form a silver
empirical formula
halide precipitate. In medicine, it is used as
forensic scientists
an antiseptic and an antibacterial agent. Silver
hydrate
nitrate drops are placed in the eyes of newborn
law of definite proportions babies to protect them against an eye disease.
mass percent (a) Calculate the mass percent of silver in silver
nitrate.
molecular formula
(b) What mass of pure silver is contained in
percentage composition 2.00×102 kg of silver nitrate?
Knowledge/Understanding 9. Barium sulfate, BaSO 4 , is opaque to X-rays. For
this reason, it is sometimes given to patients
1. When determining the percentage composition
before X-rays of their intestines are taken. What
of a compound from its formula, why do you
mass of barium is contained in 45.8 g of barium
base your calculations on a one mole sample?
sulfate?
2. The main engines of the space shuttle burn
10. Bismuth nitrate, Bi(NO ) , is used in the pro-
3 2
hydrogen and oxygen, with water as the prod-
duction of some luminous paints. How many
uct. Is this synthetic (human-made) water the
grams of pure bismuth are in a 268 g sample of
same as water found in nature? Explain.
bismuth nitrate?
3.(a) What measurements need to be taken during
11. The molar mass of a compound is approxi-
a carbon-hydrogen combustion analysis?
mately 121 g. The empirical formula of the
Chapter 6 Chemical Proportions in Compounds • MHR 229
compound is CH O. What is the molecular the reaction, 4.730 g of HCl and 9.977 g of CCl
2 4
formula of the compound? are obtained. Determine the empirical formula
12. A complex organic compound, with the name of the organic compound.
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenza-para-dioxin, belongs 21. A 2.78 g sample of hydrated iron(II) sulfate,
to a family of toxic compounds called dioxins. FeSO ·xH O, was heated to remove all the
4 2
The empirical formula of a certain dioxin is water of hydration. The mass of the anhydrous
C H OCl . If the molar mass of this dioxin is iron(II) sulfate was 1.52 g. Calculate the
6 2 2
322 g/mol, what is its molecular formula? number of water molecules associated with
13. A student obtains an empirical formula of each formula unit of FeSO 4 .
C H for a gaseous compound. 22. Citric acid is present in citrus fruits. It is
1 2.67
(a) Why is this not a valid empirical formula? composed of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen.
(b) Use the student’s empirical formula to When a 0.5000 g sample of citric acid was
determine the correct empirical formula. subjected to carbon-hydrogen combustion
analysis, 0.6871 g of carbon dioxide and
14. Progesterone, a hormone, is made up of 80.2%
0.1874 g of water were produced. Using a
carbon, 10.18% oxygen, and 9.62% hydrogen.
mass spectrometer, the molar mass of citric
Determine the empirical formula of
acid was determined to be 192 g/mol.
progesterone.
(a) What are the percentages of carbon,
15. An inorganic salt is composed of 17.6%
hydrogen, and oxygen in citric acid?
sodium, 39.7% chromium, and 42.8% oxygen.
(b) What is the empirical formula of citric acid?
What is the empirical formula of this salt?
(c) What is the molecular formula of citric acid?
16. What is the empirical formula of a compound
23. Methanol, CH OH (also known as methyl
3
that contains 67.6% mercury, 10.8% sulfur, and
alcohol), is a common laboratory reagent. It can
21.6% oxygen?
be purchased at a hardware store under the
17.(a) An inorganic salt is made up of 38.8% name “methyl hydrate” or “wood alcohol.”
calcium, 20.0% phosphorus, and 41.2% If 1.00 g of methanol is subjected to carbon-
oxygen. What is the empirical formula of hydrogen combustion analysis, what masses
this salt? of carbon dioxide and water are produced?
(b) On further analysis, each formula unit of this
24. Copper can form two different oxides:
salt is found to contain two phosphate ions.
copper(II) oxide, CuO, and copper(I) oxide,
Predict the molecular formula of this salt.
Cu O. Suppose that you find a bottle labelled
2
18. Capsaicin is the compound that is responsible “copper oxide” in the chemistry prep room.
for the “hotness” of chili peppers. Chemical You call this mystery oxide Cu O. Design an
x
analysis reveals capsaicin to contain 71.0% experiment to determine the empirical formula
carbon, 8.60% hydrogen, 15.8% oxygen, and of Cu O. Assume that you have a fully
x
4.60% nitrogen. equipped chemistry lab at your disposal. Keep
(a) Determine the empirical formula of in mind the following information:
capsaicin. • Both CuO and Cu O react with carbon to
2
(b) Each molecule of capsaicin contains one produce solid copper and carbon
atom of nitrogen. What is the molecular dioxide gas:
formula of capsaicin? Cu O +C → Cu +CO
x (s) (s) (s) 2(g)
19. A compound has the formula X O , where This reaction proceeds with strong heating.
2 5
X is an unknown element. The compound is • Carbon reacts with oxygen to produce carbon
44.0% oxygen by mass. What is the identity dioxide gas:
of element X? C (s) +O 2(g) → CO 2(g)
This reaction also proceeds with
20. A 1.254 g sample of an organic compound that
strong heating.
contains only carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen
• Carbon is available in the form of activated
reacts with a stream of chlorine gas, Cl . After
2(g)
charcoal.
230 MHR • Unit 2 Chemical Quantities
(a) State at least one safety precaution that you posed of Na CO , NaHCO , NaCl, and CaCl .
2 3 3 2
would take. The Na CO absorbs water from tissues to
2 3
(b) State the materials required, and sketch your form Na CO ·7H O.
2 3 2
apparatus. (a) Name the compound Na CO ·7H O.
2 3 2
(c) Outline your procedure. (b) Calculate the mass percent of water
(d) What data do you need to collect? in Na CO ·7H O.
2 3 2
(e) State any assumptions that you would make. (c) What mass of anhydrous Na CO is required
2 3
25. Magnesium sulfate, MgSO , is available as to dessicate (remove all the water) from an
4
anhydrous crystals or as a heptahydrate. 80 kg body that is 78% water by mass?
Assume that you are given a bottle of MgSO 4 , 30. Imagine that you are an analytical chemist at
but you are not sure whether or not it is a pharmaceutical company. One of your jobs
the hydrate. is to determine the purity of the acetylsalicylic
(a) What method could you use, in a laboratory, acid (ASA), C H O . ASA is prepared by react-
9 8 4
to determine whether this is the hydrate? ing salicylic acid (SA), C H O , with acetic
7 6 3
(b) If it is the hydrate, what results would you anhydride, C H O . Acetic acid, C H O H, is
4 6 3 2 3 2
expect to see? also produced
(c) If it is the anhydrous crystals, what results C H O +C H O → C H O +C H O H
7 6 3 4 6 3 9 8 4 2 3 2
would you expect to see?
SA acetic ASA acetic acid
anhydride
Communication
ASA often contains unreacted SA. Since it is
26. Draw a concept map to relate the following not acceptable to sell ASA contaminated with
terms: molar mass of an element, molar mass SA, one of your jobs is to analyze the ASA
of a compound, percentage composition, empir- to check purity. Both ASA and SA are white
ical formula, and molecular formula. Use an powders.
example for each term. (a) You analyze a sample that you believe to be
pure ASA, but which is actually contaminat-
27. Draw a schematic diagram of a carbon-hydro-
ed with some SA. How will this affect the
gen combustion analyzer. Write a few sentences
empirical formula that you determine for the
to describe each stage of the analysis as
sample?
dimethyl ether, C H O, passes through the
2 6
(b) Another sample contains ASA contaminated
apparatus.
with 0.35 g SA. The mass of the sample is
Making Connections 5.73 g. What empirical formula will you
obtain?
28. For many years, tetraethyl lead, Pb(C H ) ,
2 5 4
a colourless liquid, was added to gasoline to Answers to Practice Problems and
improve engine performance. Over the last Short Answers to Section Review Questions:
Practice Problems: 1.36% Ca; 64% Cl 2.48.1% Ni; 16.9%
20 years it has been replaced with
P; 35.0% O 3.39.5% C; 7.8% H; 52.7% O
non-lead-containing additives due to health
4.26.6% K; 35.4% Cr; 38.0% O 5.(a)63.65% N
risks associated with exposure to lead.
(b)13.24% N (c)35.00% N (d)22.23% N
Tetraethyl lead was added to gasoline up to 6.2.06% H; 32.69% S; 62.25% O 7.47.47% O
2.0 mL per 3.8 L (1.0 US gallon) of gasoline. 8.(a)63.19% Mn; 36.81% O (b) 158 g 9.NH 3
(a) Calculate the mass of tetraethyl lead in 1.0 L 10.Li 2 O 11.BF 3 12.SCl 13.Cr 2 O 3 14.P 2 O 5 15.Na 2 Cr 2 O 7
of gasoline. The density of Pb(C 2 H 5 ) 4 is 16.C 12 H 14 O 3 17.C 4 H 10 18.C 2 H 2 O 4 19.C 18 H 21 NO 3
1.653 g/mL.
20.C
15
H
12
O
3
21.C
5
H
12
; 83.3% C; 16.7% H. 22.C
21
H
30
O
5
23.50.9% 24.5 25.4
(b) Calculate the mass of elemental lead in 1.0 L
Section Review: 6.1: 3.3.05 g 4.11.3 g 5.17.1 g. 7.Na+
of gasoline.
6.2: 2.C
8
H
8
O
3
3.(a)Cl
2
O
7
(b)SiCl
4
4.CH
2
O 6.C
9
H
17
O
29. Natron is the name of the mixture of salts that 7.C
11
H
14
O
2
8.(a)FeC
10
H
10
(b)Yes. 6.3: 2.C
4
H
6
O
6
was used by the ancient Egyptians to dehydrate 4.(a)C 2 H 3 O (b)Double 5.C 12 H 10 O 2 6.4: 1.Yes 2.488 g
corpses before mummification. Natron is com- 4.No 6. 6 7.(a)CH 2 O (b)C 6 H 12 O 6 8.(a)CH 2 (b)CH 12 H 2
Chapter 6 Chemical Proportions in Compounds • MHR 231
232
Quantities in
Chemical Reactions
A
Chapter Preview
spacecraft, such as the space shuttle on the left, requires a huge
7.1 Stoichiometry
amount of fuel to supply the thrust needed to launch it into orbit.
7.2 The Limiting Reactant
Engineers work very hard to minimize the launch mass of a spacecraft
because each kilogram requires additional fuel. As well, each kilogram 7.3 Percentage Yield
costs thousands of dollars to launch.
In 1969, the Apollo 11 space mission was the first to land astronauts
on the Moon. The engineers on the project faced a challenge when decid-
ing on a fuel for the lunar module. The lunar module took the astronauts
from the Moon, back to the command module that was orbiting the Moon.
The engineers chose a fuel consisting of hydrazine, N H , and dinitrogen
2 4
tetroxide, N O . These compounds, when mixed, reacted instantaneously
2 4
and produced the energy needed to launch the lunar module from
the Moon.
How do engineers know how much of each reactant they need for
a chemical reaction? In this chapter, you will use the concept of the
mole to calculate the amounts of reactants that are needed to produce
given amounts of products. You will learn how to predict the amounts
of products that will be produced in a chemical reaction. You will also
Concepts and Skills
learn how to apply this knowledge to any chemical reaction for which
You Will Need
you know the balanced chemical equation. Finally, you will learn how
Before you begin this chapter,
calculated amounts deviate from the amounts in real-life situations.
review the following concepts
and skills:
How can you use the balanced equation (cid:2) balancing chemical equa-
below to calculate the amount of fuel tions (Chapter 4, section 4.1)
needed to propel a lunar module back
(cid:2) understanding the Avogadro
to a command module?
constant and the mole
2N 2 H 4((cid:2)) +N 2 O 4((cid:2)) → 3N 2(g) +4H 2 O (g) (Chapter 5, section 5.2)
(cid:2) explaining the relationship
between the mole and
molar mass (Chapter 5,
section 5.3)
(cid:2) solving problems involving
number of moles, number
of particles, and mass
(Chapter 5, section 5.3)
Chapter 7 Quantities in Chemical Reactions • MHR 233
7.1 Stoichiometry
Section Preview/ Balanced chemical equations are essential for making calculations related
Specific Expectations to chemical reactions. To understand why, consider the following analogy.
Imagine that you are making salads. You need one head of lettuce, two
In this section, you will
cucumbers, and five radishes for each salad. Figure 7.1 shows how you
(cid:2) explainquantitative
can express this as an equation.
relationships in a chemical
equation, in moles, grams,
atoms, or molecules
(cid:2) performlaboratory
experiments to determine
the meaning of the
coefficients in a balanced
chemical equation
(cid:2) calculate, for any given
reactant or product in a
chemical equation, the 1 head of lettuce 2 cucumbers 5 radishes 1 salad
corresponding mass or
quantity of any other
reactant or product
(cid:2) demonstratean awareness
of the importance of quanti-
tative chemical relationships
in the home or in industry
(cid:2) communicateyour under-
standing of the following
terms:mole ratios,
stoichiometry
2 heads of lettuce 4 cucumbers 10 radishes 2 salads
Figure 7.1 A salad analogy showing how equations can be multiplied
Now imagine that you are making two salads. How much of each
ingredient do you need? You need twice the amount that you used
to make one salad, as shown in Figure 7.1.
How many salads can you make if you have three heads of lettuce,
six cucumbers, and 15 radishes? According to the salad equation, you can
make three salads.
You can get the same kind of information from a balanced chemical
equation. In Chapter 4, you learned how to classify chemical reactions
and balance the chemical equations that describe them. In Chapters 5 and
6, you learned how chemists relate the number of particles in a substance
to the amount of the substance in moles and grams. In this section, you
will use your knowledge to interpret the information in a chemical equa-
tion, in terms of particles, moles, and mass. Try the following Express Lab
to explore the molar relationships between products and reactants.
234 MHR • Unit 2 Chemical Quantities
ExpressLab Mole Relationships in a Chemical Reaction
The following balanced equation shows the reac- 8. Continue to add the hydrochloric acid until all
tion between sodium hydrogen carbonate, the sodium hydrogen carbonate has dissolved
NaHCO , and hydrochloric acid, HCl. and the solution produces no more bubbles.
3
NaHCO 3(s) +HCl (aq) → CO 2(g) +H 2 O ((cid:2)) +NaCl (aq) 9. Return the pipette, stem up, to well A3. Again
find the total mass of the microplate and
In this Express Lab, you will determine the mole
samples.
relationships between the products and reactants
in the reaction. Then you will compare the mole 10. Dispose of the reacted chemicals as directed
relationships with the balanced chemical by your teacher.
equation.
Analysis
Safety Precautions
1. Calculate the number of moles of sodium
hydrogen carbonate used.
Be careful when using concentrated 2. Find the difference between the total mass of
hydrochloric acid. It burns skin and clothing. the microplate and samples before and after
Do not inhale its vapour. the reaction. This difference represents the
mass of carbon dioxide gas produced.
Procedure
3. Calculate the number of moles of carbon
1. Obtain a sample of sodium hydrogen dioxide produced.
carbonate that is approximately 1.0 g.
4. Express your answers to questions 1 and 3 as
2. Place a 24-well microplate on a balance. a mole ratio of mol NaHCO :mol CO .
3 2
Measure and record its mass.
5. According to the balanced equation,
3. Place all the sodium hydrogen carbonate in how many molecules of sodium hydrogen
well A4 of the microplate. Measure and record carbonate react to form one molecule of
the mass of the microplate and sample. carbon dioxide?
4. Fill a thin-stem pipette with 8 mol/L (a) Express your answer as a ratio.
hydrochloric acid solution. (b) Compare this ratio to your mole ratio in
question 4.
5. Wipe the outside of the pipette. Stand it,
stem up, in well A3. 6. How many moles of carbon dioxide do you
think would be formed from 4.0 mol of sodium
6. Measure and record the total mass of the
hydrogen carbonate?
microplate and sample.
7. Add the hydrochloric acid from the pipette
to the sodium hydrogen carbonate in well A4.
Allow the gas to escape after each drop.
You can use your understanding of the relationship between moles
and number of particles to see how chemical equations communicate
information about how many moles of products and reactants are
involved in a reaction.
Particle Relationships in a Balanced Chemical Equation
As you learned in Chapter 4, the coefficients in front of compounds and
elements in chemical equations tell you how many atoms and molecules
participate in a reaction. A chemical equation can tell you much more,
however. Consider, for example, the equation that describes the produc-
tion of ammonia. Ammonia is an important industrial chemical. Several
of its uses are shown in Figure 7.2 on the following page.
Chapter 7 Quantities in Chemical Reactions • MHR 235
Figure 7.2 Ammonia can be
applied directly to the soil as
a fertilizer. An aqueous (water)
solution of ammonia can be
used as a household cleaner.
Ammonia can be prepared industrially from its elements, using a process
called the Haber Process. The Haber Process is based on the balanced
chemical equation below.
N +3H → 2NH
2(g) 2(g) 3(g)
This equation tells you that one molecule of nitrogen gas reacts with
three molecules of hydrogen gas to form two molecules of ammonia gas.
As you can see in Figure 7.3, there is the same number of each type
of atom on both sides of the equation.
Figure 7.3 The reaction of
nitrogen gas with hydrogen gas.
You can use a ratio to express the numbers of atoms in the equation,
as follows:
1 molecule N :3 molecules H :2 molecules NH
2 2 3
What happens if you multiply the ratio by 2? You get
2 molecules N :6 molecules H :4 molecules NH
2 2 3
This means that two molecules of nitrogen gas react with six molecules of
hydrogen gas to produce four molecules of ammonia gas. Multiplying the
original ratio by one dozen gives the following relationship:
1 dozen molecules N :3 dozen molecules H :2 dozen molecules NH
2 2 3
Suppose that you want to produce 20 molecules of ammonia. How
many molecules of nitrogen do you need? You know that you need one
molecule of nitrogen for every two molecules of ammonia produced. In
other words, the number of molecules of nitrogen that you need is one
half the number of molecules of ammonia that you want to produce.
20moleculesNH × 1moleculeN 2 = 10moleculesN
3 2moleculesNH 2
3
236 MHR • Unit 2 Chemical Quantities
Try the following problems to practise working with ratios in balanced
chemical equations.
Practice Problems
1. Consider the following reaction.
2H 2(g) +O 2(g) → 2H 2 O ((cid:2))
(a) Write the ratio of H molecules: O molecules: H O molecules.
2 2 2
(b) How many molecules of O are required to react with
2
100 molecules of H , according to your ratio in part (a)?
2
(c) How many molecules of water are formed when 2478 molecules
of O react with H ?
2 2
(d) How many molecules of H are required to react completely with
2
6.02×1023 molecules of O ?
2
2. Iron reacts with chlorine gas to form iron(III) chloride, FeCl .
3
2Fe +3Cl → 2FeCl
(s) 2(g) 3(s)
(a) How many atoms of Fe are needed to react with three molecules
of Cl ?
2
(b) How many molecules of FeCl are formed when 150 atoms of
3
Fe react with sufficient Cl ?
2
(c) How many Cl molecules are needed to react with 1.204×1024
2
atoms of Fe?
(d) How many molecules of FeCl are formed when 1.806×1024
3
molecules of Cl react with sufficient Fe?
2
3. Consider the following reaction.
Ca(OH) 2(aq) +2HCl (aq) → CaCl 2 +2H 2 O ((cid:2))
(a) How many formula units of calcium chloride, CaCl , would be
2
produced by 6.7×1025 molecules of hydrochloric acid, HCl?
(b) How many molecules of water would be produced in the reaction
in part (a)?
Mole Relationships in Chemical Equations
Until now, you have assumed that the coefficients in a chemical equation
represent particles. They can, however, also represent moles. Consider the
following ratio to find out why.
1 molecule N :3 molecules H :2 molecules NH
2 2 3
You can multiply the above ratio by the Avogadro constant to obtain
1×N molecules N :3×N molecules H :2×N molecules NH
A 2 A 2 A 3
This is the same as
1molN :3molH :2molNH
2 2 3
So the chemical equation N +3H → 2NH also means that
2(g) 2(g) 3(g)
1 mol of nitrogen molecules reacts with 3 mol of hydrogen molecules to
form 2 mol of ammonia molecules. The relationships between moles in a
balanced chemical equation are called mole ratios. For example, the mole
ratio of nitrogen to hydrogen in the equation above is 1 mol N :3 mol H .
2 2
The mole ratio of hydrogen to ammonia is 3 mol H :2 mol NH .
2 3
Chapter 7 Quantities in Chemical Reactions • MHR 237
You can manipulate mole ratios in the same way that you can manip-
ulate ratios involving molecules. For example, suppose that you want to
know how many moles of ammonia are produced by 2.8 mol of hydrogen.
You know that you can obtain 2 mol of ammonia for every 3 mol of
hydrogen. Therefore, you multiply the number of moles of hydrogen by
the mole ratio of ammonia to hydrogen. Another way to think about this
is to equate the known mole ratio of hydrogen to ammonia to the
unknown mole ratio of hydrogen to ammonia and solve for the unknown.
unknown ratio known ratio
nmolNH 3 = 2molNH 3
2.8molH 3molH
2 2
(2.8molH ) nmolNH 3 = (2.8molH ) 2molNH 3
2 2.8molH 2 3molH
2 2
nmolNH = 1.9molNH
3 3
Try the following Practice Problems to work with mole ratios.
Practice Problems
CHEM
4. Aluminum bromide can be prepared by reacting small pieces of
FACT
aluminum foil with liquid bromine at room temperature. The
Because the coefficients of a reaction is accompanied by flashes of red light.
balanced chemical equation 2Al (s) +3Br 2((cid:2)) → 2AlBr 3(s)
can represent moles, it is
acceptable to use fractions in How many moles of Br 2 are needed to produce 5 mol of AlBr 3 , if
an equation. For example, you sufficient Al is present?
can write the equation
5. Hydrogen cyanide gas, HCN , is used to prepare clear, hard plas-
2H 2(g) +O 2(g) → 2H 2 O ((cid:2)) tics, such as Plexiglas. Hyd (g r ) ogen cyanide is formed by reacting
as
ammonia, NH , with oxygen and methane, CH .
3 4
H 2(g) + 1 2 O 2(g) → H 2 O ((cid:2)) 2NH 3(g) +3O 2(g) +2CH 4(g) → 2HCN (g) +6H 2 O (g)
Half an oxygen molecule is an
(a) How many moles of O are needed to react with 1.2 mol of NH ?
oxygen atom, which does not 2 3
accurately reflect the reaction. (b) How many moles of H O can be expected from the reaction of
2
Half a mole of oxygen mole- 12.5 mol of CH ? Assume that sufficient NH and O are present.
4 3 2
cules, however, makes sense.
6. Ethane gas, C H , is present in small amounts in natural gas.
2 6
It undergoes complete combustion to produce carbon dioxide
and water.
2C H +7O → 4CO +6H O
2 6(g) 2(g) 2(g) 2 (g)
(a) How many moles of O are required to react with 13.9 mol
2
of C H ?
2 6
(b) How many moles of H O would be produced by 1.40 mol of O
2 2
and sufficient ethane?
7. Magnesium nitride reacts with water to produce magnesium
hydroxide and ammonia gas, NH according to the balanced
3
chemical equation
Mg 3 N 2(s) +6H 2 O ((cid:2)) → 3Mg(OH) 2(s) +2NH 3(g)
a) How many molecules of water are required to react with 2.3 mol
Mg N ?
3 2
b) How many molecules of Mg(OH) will be expected in part (a)?
2
238 MHR • Unit 2 Chemical Quantities
Different Ratios of Reactants
Technology
LINK
The relative amounts of reactants are important. Different mole ratios of
the same reactants can produce different products. For example, carbon
In many areas, it is mandatory
can combine with oxygen in two different ratios, forming either carbon
for every home to have a car-
monoxide or carbon dioxide. In the following reaction, the mole ratio of bon monoxide detector, like the
carbon to oxygen is 2 mol C:1 mol O 2 . one shown below. If you do not
2C +O → 2CO have a carbon monoxide
(s) 2(g) (g)
detector in your home, you can
In the next reaction, the mole ratio of carbon to oxygen is
buy one at a hardware store
1 mol C:1 mol O 2 . for a modest price. It could end
C +O → CO up saving your life.
(s) 2(g) 2(g)
A carbon monoxide detector
Thus, carbon dioxide forms if carbon and oxygen are present in a mole
emits a sound when the level
ratio of about 1 mol C:1 mol O . Carbon dioxide is a product of cellular
2 of carbon monoxide exceeds a
respiration in animals and humans, and it is a starting material for photo-
certain limit. Find out how a
synthesis. It is also one of the products of the complete combustion of a
carbon monoxide detector
hydrocarbon fuel. works, and where it should
If there is a relative shortage of oxygen, however, and the mole ratio be placed. Present your
of carbon to oxygen is closer to 2 mol C:1 mol O, carbon monoxide forms. findings as a public service
Carbon monoxide is colourless, tasteless, and odourless. It is a highly announcement.
poisonous gas, that is responsible for the deaths of hundreds of people
in Canada and the United States every year. Carbon monoxide can escape
from any fuel-burning appliance: furnace, water heater, fireplace, wood
stove, or space heater. If you have one of these appliances in your home,
make sure that it has a good supply of oxygen to avoid the formation of
carbon monoxide.
There are many reactions in which different mole ratios of the reactants
result in different products. The following Sample Problem will help you
understand how to work with these reactions.
Sample Problem
Mole Ratios of Reactants
Problem
Vanadium can form several different compounds with oxygen,
including V O , VO , and V O . Determine the number of moles of
2 5 2 2 3
oxygen that are needed to react with 0.56 mol of vanadium to form
divanadium pentoxide, V O .
2 5
What Is Required?
You need to find the number of moles of oxygen that are needed to
react with 0.56 mol of vanadium to form divanadium pentoxide.
What Is Given?
Reactant: vanadium, V → 0.56mol
Reactant: oxygen, O
2
Product: divanadium pentoxide, V O
2 5
Continued ...
Chapter 7 Quantities in Chemical Reactions • MHR 239
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 239
Plan Your Strategy
Write a balanced chemical equation for the formation of
vanadium(V) oxide. Use the known mole ratio of vanadium to
oxygen to calculate the unknown amount of oxygen.
Act on Your Strategy
The balanced equation is 4V +5O → 2V O
(s) 2(g) 2 5(s)
To determine the number of moles of oxygen required, equate the
known ratio of oxygen to vanadium from the balanced equation to
the unknown ratio from the question.
unknown ratio known ratio
nmolO 2 = 5molO 2
0.56molV 4molV
Multiply both sides of the equation by 0.56 mol V.
(0.56molV) nmolO 2 = (0.56molV) 5molO 2
0.56molV 4molV
nmolO = (0.56molV) 5molO 2
2 4molV
= 0.70molO
2
Check Your Solution
The units are correct. The mole ratio of vanadium to oxygen is 4 mol
V:5 mol O . Multiply 0.70 mol by 4/5, and you get 0.56 mol. The
2
answer is therefore reasonable.
Practice Problems
8. Refer to the Sample Problem above.
(a) How many moles of V are needed to produce 7.47 mol of VO ?
2
Assume that sufficient O is present.
2
(b) How many moles of V are needed to react with 5.39 mol of O
2
to produce V O ?
2 3
9. Nitrogen, N , can combine with oxygen, O , to form several differ-
2 2
ent oxides of nitrogen. These oxides include NO , NO, and N O.
2 2
(a) How many moles of O are required to react with 9.35×10 −2
2
moles of N to form N O?
2 2
(b) How many moles of O are required to react with 9.35×10 −2
2
moles of N to form NO ?
2 2
10. When heated in a nickel vessel to 400˚C, xenon can be made
to react with fluorine to produce colourless crystals of xenon
tetrafluoride.
Do you think that xenon could
be made to react with bromine a) How many moles of fluorine gas, F , would be required to react
2
or iodine under the same with 3.54×10 −1 mol of xenon?
conditions outlined in Practice
b) Under somewhat similar reaction conditions, xenon hexafluo-
Problem 10? Explain why or
ride can also be obtained. How many moles of fluorine would
why not, using your under-
standing of periodic trends. be required to react with the amount of xenon given in part (a)
to produce xenon hexafluoride?
240 MHR • Unit 2 Chemical Quantities
Mass Relationships in Chemical Equations
As you have learned, the coefficients in a balanced chemical equation rep-
resent moles as well as particles. Therefore, you can use the molar masses
of reactants and products to determine the mass ratios for a reaction. For
example, consider the equation for the formation of ammonia:
N +3H → 2NH
2(g) 2(g) 3(g)
You can find the mass of each substance using the equation m = M ×n
as follows: Refer back to Chapter 5.
1molN ×28.0g/molN = 28.0gN Calculate the molar mass
2 2 2
3molH ×2.02g/molH = 6.1gH of N 2 , H 2 , andNH 3 .
2 2 2
2molNH ×17.0g/molNH = 34.1gNH
3 3 3
In Table 7.1, you can see how particles, moles, and mass are related in a
chemical equation. Notice that the mass of the product is equal to the
total mass of the reactants. This confirms the law of conservation of mass.
Table 7.1 What a Balanced Chemical Equation Tells You
Balanced equation N + 3H 2NH
2(g) 2(g) 3(g)
Number of particles 1 molecule N + 3 molecules H 2 molecules NH
2 2 3
(molecules)
Amount (mol) 1 mol N 2 + 3 mol H 2 2 mol NH 3
Mass (g) 28.0 g N 2 + 6.1 g H 2 34.1 g NH 3
Total mass (g) 34.1 g reactants 34.1 g product
Stoichiometric Mass Calculations
You now know what a balanced chemical equation tells you in terms
of number of particles, number of moles, and mass of products and
reactants. How do you use this information? Because reactants and
products are related by a fixed ratio, if you know the number of moles
of one substance, the balanced equation tells you the number of moles
of all the other substances. In Chapters 5 and 6, you learned how to
convert between particles, moles, and mass. Therefore, if you know the
amount of one substance in a chemical reaction (in particles, moles, or
mass), you can calculate the amount of any other substance in the
reaction (in particles, moles, or mass), using the information in the
balanced chemical equation.
You can see that a balanced chemical equation is a powerful tool. It
allows chemists to predict the amount of products that will result from a
reaction involving a known amount of reactants. As well, chemists can
use a balanced equation to calculate the amount of reactants they will
need to produce a desired amount of products. They can also use it to
predict the amount of one reactant they will need to react completely
with another reactant.
Chapter 7 Quantities in Chemical Reactions • MHR 241
Language Stoichiometry is the study of the relative quantities of reactants and
LINK
products in chemical reactions. Stoichiometric calculations are used
The word “stoichiometry” is for many purposes. One purpose is determining how much of a reactant is
derived from two Greek words: needed to carry out a reaction. This kind of knowledge is useful for any
stoikheion, meaning “element,” chemical reaction, and it can even be a matter of life or death.
and metron, meaning “to In a spacecraft, for example, carbon dioxide is produced as the astro-
measure.” What other words
nauts breathe. To maintain a low level of carbon dioxide, air in the cabin
might be derived from the
is passed continuously through canisters of lithium hydroxide granules.
Greek word metron?
The carbon dioxide reacts with the lithium hydroxide in the following
way:
CO +2LiOH → Li CO +H O
2(g) (s) 2 3(s) 2 (g)
The canisters are changed periodically as the lithium hydroxide reacts.
Engineers must calculate the amount of lithium hydroxide needed to
ensure that the carbon dioxide level is safe. As you learned earlier, every
kilogram counts in space travel. Therefore, a spacecraft cannot carry much
more than the minimum amount.
History
LINK
The concept of stoichiometry
was first described in 1792 by
the German scientist Jeremias
Benjamin Richter (1762–1807).
He stated that “stoichiometry
is the science of measuring
the quantitative proportions or
mass ratios in which chemical
elements stand to one anoth-
er.” Can you think of another
reason why Richter was
famous?
Figure 7.4 A spacecraft is a closed system. All chemical reactions must be taken into
account when engineers design systems to keep the air breathable.
To determine how much lithium hydroxide is needed, engineers need to
ask and answer two important questions:
• How much carbon dioxide is produced per astronaut each day?
• How much lithium hydroxide is needed per kilogram of carbon
dioxide?
Engineers can answer the first question by experimenting. To answer the
second question, they need to do stoichiometric calculations. Examine the
following Sample Problems to see how these calculations would be done.
242 MHR • Unit 2 Chemical Quantities
Sample Problem
Mass to Mass Calculations for Reactants
Problem
Carbon dioxide that is produced by astronauts can be removed with
lithium hydroxide. The reaction produces lithium carbonate and
water. An astronaut produces an average of 1.00×103g of carbon
dioxide each day. What mass of lithium hydroxide should engineers
put on board a spacecraft, per astronaut, for each day?
What Is Required?
You need to find the mass of lithium hydroxide that is needed to
react with 1.00×103g of carbon dioxide.
What Is Given?
Reactant: carbon dioxide, CO → 1.00×103g
2
Reactant: lithium hydroxide, LiOH
Product: lithium carbonate, Li CO
2 3
Product: water, H O
2
Plan Your Strategy
Step 1 Write a balanced chemical equation.
Step 2 Convert the given mass of carbon dioxide to the number
of moles of carbon dioxide.
Step 3 Calculate the number of moles of lithium hydroxide based
on the mole ratio of lithium hydroxide to carbon dioxide.
Step 4 Convert the number of moles of lithium hydroxide to grams.
Act on Your Strategy
The balanced chemical equation is
1 CO + 2LiOH Li CO + H O
2(g) (s) 2 3(s) 2 (g)
22.7 mol 45.4 mol
unknown ratio known ratio
3
n mol LiOH = 2mol LiOH
22.7 mol CO 1mol CO
2 2
n mol LiOH = 2mol LiOH
(22.7 mol CO ) (22.7 mol CO )
2 22.7 mol CO 1mol CO 2
2 2
n mol LiOH = 45.4 mol LiOH
2 4
1.00 × 103 g CO
2 45.4 mol LiOH
44.0 g mol × 23.9 g/mol LiOH
= 22.7 mol CO 2 = 1.09 × 103 g LiOH
1.00 × 103 g CO 1.09 × 103 g LiOH
2
Continued ...
Chapter 7 Quantities in Chemical Reactions • MHR 243
Continued ...
CHEM
FROM PAGE 243
FACT
Therefore, 1.09×103g LiOH are required.
The Group 18 elements in the
periodic table are currently
called the noble gases. In the Check Your Solution
past, however, they were
The units are correct. Lithium hydroxide has a molar mass that is
referred to as the inert gases.
about half of carbon dioxide’s molar mass, but there are twice as
They were believed to be
totally unreactive. Scientists many moles of lithium hydroxide. Therefore it makes sense that the
have found that this is not true. mass of lithium hydroxide required is about the same as the mass of
Some of them can be made to carbon dioxide produced.
react with reactive elements,
such as fluorine, under the
Practice Problems
proper conditions. In 1962, the
synthesis of the first compound
that contained a noble gas was
11. Ammonium sulfate, (NH ) SO , is used as a source of nitrogen in
4 2 4
reported. Since then, a number
some fertilizers. It reacts with sodium hydroxide to produce
of noble gas compounds have
sodium sulfate, water and ammonia.
been prepared, mostly from
xenon. A few compounds of (NH 4 ) 2 SO 4(s) +2NaOH (aq) → Na 2 SO 4(aq) +2NH 3(g) +2H 2 O ((cid:2))
krypton, radon, and argon have
also been prepared. What mass of sodium hydroxide is required to react completely
with 15.4 g of (NH ) SO ?
4 2 4
12. Iron(III) oxide, also known as rust, can be removed from iron by
reacting it with hydrochloric acid to produce iron(III) chloride
and water.
Fe 2 O 3(s) +6HCl (aq) → 2FeCl 3(aq) +3H 2 O ((cid:2))
What mass of hydrogen chloride is required to react with
1.00×102 g of rust?
13. Iron reacts slowly with hydrochloric acid to produce iron(II)
chloride and hydrogen gas.
Fe +2HCl → FeCl +H
(s) (aq) 2(aq) 2(g)
What mass of HCl is required to react with 3.56 g of iron?
14. Dinitrogen pentoxide is a white solid. When heated it
decomposes to produce nitrogen dioxide and oxygen.
In the early 1960s, Neil
2N O → 4NO + O
Bartlett, of the University of 2 5(s) 2(g) 2(g)
British Columbia, synthesized How many grams of oxygen gas will be produced in this reaction
the first compound that when 2.34 g of NO are made?
2
contained a noble gas.
Sample Problem
Mass to Mass Calculations
for Products and Reactants
Problem
In the Chapter 7 opener, you learned that a fuel mixture consisting
of hydrazine, N H , and dinitrogen tetroxide, N O , was used to
2 4 2 4
launch a lunar module. These two compounds react to form nitrogen
gas and water vapour. If 50.0 g of hydrazine reacts with sufficient
dinitrogen tetroxide, what mass of nitrogen gas is formed?
Continued ...
244 MHR • Unit 2 Chemical Quantities
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 244
What Is Required?
You need to find the mass of nitrogen gas that is formed from 50.0 g
of hydrazine.
What Is Given? Electronic Learning Partner
Reactant: hydrazine, N H → 150.0g
2 4 Go to your Chemistry 11
Reactant: dinitrogen tetroxide, N O
2 4 Electronic Learning Partner
Product: nitrogen, N 2 for a video clip showing
Product: water, H O an experiment that uses
2
stoichiometry.
Plan Your Strategy
Step 1 Write a balanced chemical equation.
Step 2 Convert the mass of hydrazine to the number of moles of
hydrazine.
Step 3 Calculate the number of moles of nitrogen, using the mole
ratio of hydrazine to nitrogen.
Step 4 Convert the number of moles of nitrogen to grams.
Act on Your Strategy
The balanced chemical equation is
1 2N 2 H 4( (cid:2) ) + N 2 O 4( (cid:2) ) 3N 2(g) + 4H 2 O (g)
4.679 mol 7.019 mol
unknown ratio known ratio
3
n mol N 3 mol N
2 = 2
4.680 mol N H 2 mol N H
2 4 2 4
n mol N 3 mol N
(4.679 mol N 2 H 4 ) 2 = 2 (4.679 mol N 2 H 4 ) 4
4.679 mol N H 2 mol N H
2 4 2 4
= 7.019 mol N 7.019 mol N 2
2 2 × 28.01 g/mol N
2
150.0 g N 2 H 4 = = 196.6 g
4.6 mol
32.06 g/mol
150.0 g N H 196.6 g N
2 4 2
Therefore, 196.6 g of nitrogen are formed.
Check Your Solution
The units are correct. Nitrogen has a molar mass that is close to
hydrazine’s molar mass. Therefore, to estimate the amount of nitro-
gen from the mass of hydrazine, multiply the mole ratio of nitrogen
to hydrazine (3:2) by hydrazine’s mass (150 g) to get 225 g, which is
close to the calculated answer, 196.6 g. The answer is reasonable.
Chapter 7 Quantities in Chemical Reactions • MHR 245
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 245
Practice Problems
15. Powdered zinc reacts rapidly with powdered sulfur in a highly
exothermic reaction.
8Zn +S → 8ZnS
(s) 8(s) (s)
What mass of zinc sulfide is expected when 32.0 g of S reacts
8
with sufficient zinc?
16. The addition of concentrated hydrochloric acid to manganese(IV)
oxide leads to the production of chlorine gas.
4HCl (aq) +MnO 2(g) → MnCl 2(aq) +Cl 2(g) +2H 2 O ((cid:2))
What mass of chlorine can be obtained when 4.76×10 −2 g of HCl
react with sufficient MnO ?
2
17. Aluminum carbide, Al C , is a yellow powder that reacts with
4 3
water to produce aluminum hydroxide and methane.
Al 4 C 3(s) +12H 2 O ((cid:2)) → 4Al(OH) 3(s) +3CH 4(g)
What mass of water is required to react completely with 25.0 g of
aluminum carbide?
18. Magnesium oxide reacts with phosphoric acid, H PO , to produce
3 4
magnesium phosphate and water.
3MgO (s) +2H 3 PO 4(aq) → Mg 3 (PO 4 ) 2(s) +3H 2 O ((cid:2))
How many grams of magnesium oxide are required to react
completely with 33.5 g of phosphoric acid?
Canadians in Chemistry
As a chemist with Environment Canada’s Mercury emission sources include electrical
Atmospheric Science Division in Dartmouth, power generation, manufacturing, and municipal
Nova Scotia, Dr. Stephen Beauchamp studies waste incineration. Sources such as these, how-
toxic chemicals, such as mercury. Loons in Nova ever, do not totally account for the high mercury
Scotia’s Kejimkujik National Park are among the levels found in Kejimkujik loons and other area
living creatures that he studies. Kejimkujik loons wildlife. Beauchamp is working to discover what
have higher blood mercury levels (5 µg Hg/1 g other factors are operating so that he will be able
blood) than any other North American loons to recommend ways to improve the situation.
(2 µg Hg/1 g blood). Mercury is also found in high
levels in the fish the loons eat. Mercury causes
behavioural problems in the loons. As well, it
may affect the loons’ reproductive success and
immune function.
Bacteria convert environmental mercury into
methyl mercury, CH Hg. This is the form that is
3
most easily absorbed into living organisms.
Beauchamp examines forms and concentrations
of mercury in the air, soil, and water. Dr. Stephen Beauchamp in Halifax Harbour. The flux
chamber beside him helps him measure the changing
concentrations of mercury in the air and water.
246 MHR • Unit 2 Chemical Quantities
A General Process for Solving Stoichiometric Problems
You have just solved several stoichiometric problems. In these problems,
masses of products and reactants were given, and masses were also
required for the answers. Chemists usually need to know what mass
of reactants they require and what mass of products they can expect.
Sometimes, however, a question requires you to work with the number
of moles or particles. Use the same process for solving stoichiometric
problems, whether you are working with mass, moles, or particles:
Step 1 Write a balanced chemical equation.
Step 2 If you are given the mass or number of particles of a substance,
convert it to the number of moles.
Step 3 Calculate the number of moles of the required substance based
on the number of moles of the given substance, using the
appropriate mole ratio.
Step 4 Convert the number of moles of the required substance to mass
or number of particles, as directed by the question.
Examine the following Sample Problem to see how to work with mass
and particles.
Sample Problem
Mass and Particle Stoichiometry
Problem
Passing chlorine gas through molten sulfur produces liquid disulfur
dichloride. How many molecules of chlorine react to produce 50.0 g
of disulfur dichloride?
What Is Required?
You need to determine the number of molecules of chlorine gas that
produce 50.0 g of disulfur dichloride.
What Is Given?
Reactant: chlorine, Cl
2
Reactant: sulfur, S
Product: disulfur dichloride, S Cl → 50.0g
2 2
Plan Your Strategy
Step 1 Write a balanced chemical equation.
Step 2 Convert the given mass of disulfur dichloride to the number
of moles.
Step 3 Calculate the number of moles of chlorine gas using the mole
ratio of chlorine to disulfur dichloride.
Step 4 Convert the number of moles of chlorine gas to the number
of particles of chlorine gas.
Continued ...
Chapter 7 Quantities in Chemical Reactions • MHR 247
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 247
Act on Your Strategy
1 Cl 2(g) + 2S ( (cid:2) ) S 2 Cl 2((cid:2) )
0.370 mol 0.370 mol
unknown ratio known ratio
3
amount Cl 1 mol Cl
2 = 2
0.370 mol S Cl 1 mol S Cl
2 2 2 2
amount Cl 1 mol Cl
(0.370 mol S Cl ) 2 = (0.370 mol S Cl ) 2 2
2 2 2 2
0.370 mol S Cl 1 mol S Cl
2 2 2 2
50.0 g S Cl
amount Cl = 0.370 mol Cl 2 2
2 2
135 g/mol
4 = 0.370 mol S 2 Cl 2
molecules Cl
0.370 mol Cl × 6.02 × 1023 2
2
mol Cl
2
= 2.22 × 1023 molecules Cl
2
2.22 × 1023 molecules Cl 50.0 g S Cl
2 2 2
Therefore, 2.22×1023 molecules of chlorine gas are required.
Check Your Solution
The units are correct. 2.0×1023 is about 1/3 of a mole, or 0.33 mol.
One-third of a mole of disulfur dichloride has a mass of 45 g, which
is close to 50 g. The answer is reasonable.
Practice Problems
19. Nitrogen gas is produced in an automobile air bag. It is generated
by the decomposition of sodium azide, NaN .
3
2NaN → 3N +2Na
3(s) 2(g) (s)
(a) To inflate the air bag on the driver’s side of a certain car, 80.0 g
of N is required. What mass of NaN is needed to produce
2 3
80.0 g of N ?
2
(b) How many atoms of Na are produced when 80.0 g of N are
2
generated in this reaction?
The thermite reaction generates 20. The reaction of iron(III) oxide with powdered aluminum is known
enough heat to melt the elemental as the thermite reaction.
iron that is produced.
2Al (s) +Fe 2 O 3(s) → Al 2 O 3(s) +2Fe ((cid:2))
(a) Calculate the mass of aluminum oxide, Al O , that is produced
2 3
when 1.42×1024 atoms of Al react with Fe O .
2 3
(b) How many formula units of Fe O are needed to react with
2 3
0.134 g of Al?
Continued ...
248 MHR • Unit 2 Chemical Quantities
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 248
21. The thermal decomposition of ammonium dichromate is an
impressive reaction. When heated with a Bunsen burner or
propane torch, the orange crystals of ammonium dichromate
slowly decompose to green chromium(III) oxide in a volcano-like
display. Colourless nitrogen gas and water vapour are also
given off.
(NH ) Cr O → Cr O +N +4H O
4 2 2 7(s) 2 3(s) 2(g) 2 (g)
(a) Calculate the number of molecules of Cr O that is produced
2 3
from the decomposition of 10.0 g of (NH ) Cr O .
4 2 2 7
(b) In a different reaction, 16.9 g of N is produced when a
2
sample of (NH ) Cr O is decomposed. How many water
4 2 2 7
molecules are also produced in this reaction?
(c) How many formula units of (NH ) Cr O are needed to produce
4 2 2 7
1.45 g of H O?
2
22. Ammonia gas reacts with oxygen to produce water and nitrogen
oxide. This reaction can be catalyzed, or sped up, by Cr O ,
2 3
produced in the reaction in problem 21.
4NH 3(g) +5O 2(g) → 4NO (g) +6H 2 O ((cid:2))
(a) How many molecules of oxygen are required to react with
34.0 g of ammonia?
(b) What mass of nitrogen oxide is expected from the reaction of
8.95×1024 molecules of oxygen with sufficient ammonia?
Section Wrap-up
You have learned how to do stoichiometric calculations, using balanced
chemical equations to find amounts of reactants and products. In these
calculations, you assumed that the reactants and products occurred in the
exact molar ratios shown by the chemical equation. In real life, however,
reactants are often not present in these exact ratios. Similarly, the amount
of product that is predicted by stoichiometry is not always produced.
In the next two sections, you will learn how chemists deal with these
challenges.
Section Review
1 K/U Why is a balanced chemical equation needed to solve stoichio-
metric calculations?
2 K/U The balanced chemical equation for the formation of water from
its elements is sometimes written as
H 2(g) + 1 2 O 2(g) → H 2 O ((cid:2))
Explain why it is acceptable to use fractional coefficients in a balanced
chemical equation.
Chapter 7 Quantities in Chemical Reactions • MHR 249
Unit Investigation Prep 3 C In the following reaction, does 1.0 g of sodium react completely
Before you design your quanti- with 0.50 g of chlorine? Explain your answer.
tative analysis investigation at Na + 1 Cl → NaCl
(s) 2 2(g)
the end of Unit 2, decide how
you will make use of the 4 K/U Sulfur and oxygen can combine to form sulfur dioxide, SO 2 , and
concepts you learned in this sulfur trioxide, SO .
3
section. Assume that you know
(a) Write a balanced chemical equation for the formation of SO from
2
the identity of reactants and
S and O .
you know what products will 2
be formed in the reaction. If (b) Write a balanced chemical equation for the formation of SO 3 .
you can measure how much (c) How many moles of O must react with 1 mol of S to form 1 mol
2
product is formed in the reac-
of SO ?
3
tion, can you determine how
much reactant was initially (d) What mass of O 2 is needed to react with 32.1 g of S to form SO 3 ?
present? Explain how, using
5 K/U The balanced chemical equation for the combustion of propane is
an example.
C H +5O → 3CO +4H O
3 8(g) 2(g) 2(g) 2 (g)
(a) Write the mole ratios for the reactants and products in the
combustion of propane.
(b) How many moles of O are needed to react with 0.500 mol of C H ?
2 3 8
(c) How many molecules of O are needed to react with 2.00 mol
2
of C H ?
3 8
(d) If 3.00 mol of C H burn completely in O , how many moles of CO
3 8 2 2
are produced?
6 I Phosphorus pentachloride, PCl 5 , reacts with water to form
phosphoric acid, H PO , and hydrochloric acid, HCl.
3 4
PCl 5(s) +4H 2 O ((cid:2)) → H 3 PO 4(aq) +5HCl (aq)
(a) What mass of PCl is needed to react with an excess quantity of H O
5 2
to produce 23.5 g of H PO ?
3 4
(b) How many molecules of H O are needed to react with 3.87 g
2
of PCl ?
5
7 I A chemist has a beaker containing lead nitrate, Pb(NO 3 ) 2 , dissolved
in water. The chemist adds a solution containing sodium iodide, NaI,
and a bright yellow precipitate is formed. The chemist continues to add
NaI until no further yellow precipitate is formed. The chemist filters the
precipitate, dries it in an oven, and finds it has a mass of 1.43 g.
(a) Write a balanced chemical equation to describe what happened in
this experiment. Hint: compounds with sodium ions are always
soluble.
(b) Use the balanced chemical equation to determine what mass of
lead nitrate, Pb(NO ) , was dissolved in the water in the beaker.
3 2
8 MC The Apollo-13 mission overcame an astonishing number of
difficulties on its return to Earth. One problem the astronauts
encountered was removing carbon dioxide from the air they were
breathing. Do some research to find out:
(a) What happened to lead to an unexpected accumulation of carbon
dioxide?
(b) What did the astronauts do to overcome this difficulty?
250 MHR • Unit 2 Chemical Quantities
The Limiting Reactant 7.2
A balanced chemical equation shows the mole ratios of the reactants Section Preview/
and products. To emphasize this, the coefficients of equations are some- Specific Expectations
times called stoichiometric coefficients. Reactants are said to be present
In this section, you will
in stoichiometric amounts when they are present in a mole ratio that
(cid:2) calculate,for any given
corresponds exactly to the mole ratio predicted by the balanced chemical
reactant or product in a
equation. This means that when a reaction is complete, there are no chemical equation, the cor-
reactants left. In practice, however, there often are reactants left. responding mass or quantity
In the previous section, you looked at an “equation” for making a (in moles or molecules)
salad. You looked at situations in which you had the right amounts of of any other reactant or
product
ingredients to make one or more salads, with no leftover ingredients.
1headoflettuce+2cucumbers+5radishes → 1salad (cid:2) performan investigation to
determine the limiting reac-
What if you have two heads of lettuce, 12 cucumbers, and 25 radishes, tant in a chemical reaction
as in Figure 7.5? How many salads can you make? Because each salad
(cid:2) assessthe importance of
requires two heads of lettuce, you can make only two salads. Here the
determining the limiting
amount of lettuce limits the number of salads you can make. Some of the reactant
other two ingredients are left over.
(cid:2) solveproblems involving
percentage yield and limiting
excess ingredients
reactants
(cid:2) communicateyour under-
standing of the following
terms: stoichiometric
coefficients,stoichiometric
amounts, limiting reactant,
excess reactant
Figure 7.5 Which ingredient limits how many salads can be made?
Chemical reactions often work in the same way. For example, consider
the first step in extracting zinc from zinc oxide:
ZnO +C → Zn +CO
(s) (s) (s) (g)
If you were carrying out this reaction in a laboratory, you could obtain
samples of zinc oxide and carbon in a 1:1 mole ratio. In an industrial
setting, however, it is impractical to spend time and money ensuring that
zinc oxide and carbon are present in stoichiometric amounts. It is also
unnecessary. In an industrial setting, engineers add more carbon, in the
form of charcoal, than is necessary for the reaction. All the zinc oxide
reacts, but there is carbon left over.
Chapter 7 Quantities in Chemical Reactions • MHR 251
Having one or more reactants in excess is very common.
Another example is seen in gasoline-powered vehicles. Their
operation depends on the reaction between fuel and oxygen.
Normally, the fuel-injection system regulates how much air
enters the combustion chamber, and oxygen is the limiting
reactant. When the fuel is very low, however, fuel becomes
the limiting reactant and the reaction cannot proceed, as in
Figure 7.6.
In nature, reactions almost never have reactants in
stoichiometric amounts. Think about respiration, represented
Figure 7.6 All the gasoline in this car’s tank has by the following chemical equation:
reacted. Thus, even though there is still oxygen C 6 H 12 O 6(s) +6O 2(g) → 6CO 2(g) +6H 2 O ((cid:2))
available in the air, the combustion reaction cannot
When an animal carries out respiration, there is an unlimit-
proceed.
ed amount of oxygen in the air. The amount of glucose,
however, depends on how much food the animal has eaten.
ThoughtLab The Limiting Item
Imagine that you are in the business of producing (b) Which items are present in excess amounts?
cars. A simplified “equation” for making a car is (c) How much of each “excess” item remains
1 car body +4 wheels +2 wiper blades →1 car after the “reaction”?
Procedure Analysis
1. Assume that you have 35 car bodies, 120 1. Does the amountthat an item is in excess
wheels, and 150 wiper blades in your factory. affect the quantity of the product that is made?
How many complete cars can you make? Explain.
2.(a) Which item “limits” the number of 2. There are fewer car bodies than wheels and
complete cars that you can make? Stated wiper blades. Explain why car bodies are not
another way, which item will “run out” first? the limiting item, in spite of being present in
the smallest amount.
2 wiper
1 car body 4 wheels 1 complete car
blades
Determining the Limiting Reactant
The reactant that is completely used up in a chemical reaction is called
the limiting reactant. In other words, the limiting reactant determines
how much product is produced. When the limiting reactant is used up,
the reaction stops. In real-life situations, there is almost always a limiting
reactant.
A reactant that remains after a reaction is over is called the excess
reactant. Once the limiting reactant is used, no more product can be
made, regardless of how much of the excess reactants may be present.
252 MHR • Unit 2 Chemical Quantities
When you are given amounts of two or more reactants to solve a
stoichiometric problem, you first need to identify the limiting reactant.
One way to do this is to find out how much product would be produced
by each reactant if the other reactant were present in excess. The reactant
that produces the least amount of product is the limiting reactant.
Examine the following Sample Problem to see how to use this approach to
identify the limiting reactant.
Sample Problem
Identifying the Limiting Reactant
Problem
Lithium nitride reacts with water to form ammonia and lithium
hydroxide, according to the following balanced chemical equation:
Li 3 N (s) +3H 2 O ((cid:2)) → NH 3(g) +3LiOH (aq)
If 4.87 g of lithium nitride reacts with 5.80 g of water, find the
limiting reactant.
What Is Required?
You need to determine whether lithium nitride or water is the
limiting reactant.
What Is Given?
Reactant: lithium nitride, Li N → 4.87g
3
Reactant: water, H O → 5.80g
2
Product: ammonia, NH
3
Product: lithium hydroxide, LiOH
Plan Your Strategy
Convert the given masses into moles. Use the mole ratios of reactants
and products to determine how much ammonia is produced by
each amount of reactant. The limiting reactant is the reactant that
produces the smaller amount of product.
Act on Your Strategy PROBLEM TIP
4.87gLi N To determine the limiting
n mol Li N = 3
3 34.8g/mol reactant, you can calculate
= 0.140molLi N how much of either ammonia
3
or lithium hydroxide would be
n mol H O = 5.80gH 2 O produced by the reactants. In
2 18.0g/mol this problem, ammonia was
= 0.322molH O chosen because only one
2
mole is produced, simplifying
Calculate the amount of NH produced, based on the amount of Li N.
3 3
the calculation.
n mol of NH = 1molNH 3 (0.140molLi N)
3 1molLi N 3
3
= 0.140molNH
3
Calculate the amount of NH produced, based on the amount of H O.
3 2
Continued ...
Chapter 7 Quantities in Chemical Reactions • MHR 253
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 253
nmolNH = 1molNH 3 ×(0.322molH O)
3 3molH O 2
2
= 0.107molNH
3
The water would produce less ammonia than the lithium nitride.
Therefore, the limiting reactant is water. Notice that there is more
water than lithium nitride, in terms of mass and moles. Water is the
limiting reactant, however, because 3 mol of water are needed to
react with 1 mol of lithium nitride.
Check Your Solution
According to the balanced chemical equation, the ratio of lithium
nitride to water is 1/3. The ratio of lithium nitride to water, based
on the mole amounts calculated, is 0.14:0.32. Divide this ratio by
0.14 to get 1.0:2.3. For each mole of lithium nitride, there are only
2.3 mol water. However, 3 mol are required by stoichiometry.
Therefore, water is the limiting reactant.
Practice Problems
23. The following balanced chemical equation shows the reaction of
aluminum with copper(II) chloride. If 0.25 g of aluminum reacts
with 0.51 g of copper(II) chloride, determine the limiting reactant.
2Al +3CuCl → 3Cu +2AlCl
(s) 2(aq) (s) 3(aq)
24. Hydrogen fluoride, HF, is a highly toxic gas. It is produced by the
double displacement reaction of calcium fluoride, CaF , with
2
concentrated sulfuric acid, H SO .
2 4
CaF 2(s) +H 2 SO 4((cid:2)) → 2HF (g) +CaSO 4(s)
Determine the limiting reactant when 10.0 g of CaF reacts with
2
15.5 g of H SO .
2 4
25. Acrylic, a common synthetic fibre, is formed from acrylonitrile,
C H N. Acrylonitrile can be prepared by the reaction of
3 3
propylene, C H , with nitric oxide, NO.
3 6
4C H +6NO → 4C H N +6H O +N
3 6(g) (g) 3 3 (g) 2 (g) 2(g)
What is the limiting reactant when 126 g of C H reacts with
3 6
175 g of NO?
26. 3.76 g of zinc reacts with 8.93×1023 molecules of hydrogen
chloride. Which reactant is present in excess?
You now know how to use a balanced chemical equation to find the
limiting reactant. Can you find the limiting reactant by experimenting?
You know that the limiting reactant is completely consumed in a reaction,
while any reactants in excess remain after the reaction is finished. In
Investigation 7-A, you will observe a reaction and identify the limiting
reactant, based on your observations.
254 MHR • Unit 2 Chemical Quantities
S K I L L F O C U S
Predicting
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
Limiting and Communicating results
Excess Reactants
In this investigation, you will predict and 3. Record any colour changes as the reaction pro-
observe a limiting reactant. You will use the ceeds. Stir occasionally with the stirring rod.
single replacement reaction of aluminum with
4. When the reaction is complete, return the
aqueous copper(II) chloride:
beaker, with its contents, to your teacher for
2Al +3CuCl → 3Cu +2AlCl
(s) 2(aq) (s) 3(aq) proper disposal. Do not pour anything down
Note that copper(II) chloride, CuCl , is light blue the drain.
2
in aqueous solution. This is due to the
Cu2+
(aq)
ion. Aluminum chloride, AlCl 3(aq) , is colourless Analysis
in aqueous solution.
1. According to your observations, which reac-
tant was present in excess? Which reactant
Question
was the limiting reactant?
How can observations tell you which is the
2. How does your prediction compare with your
limiting reactant in the reaction of aluminum
observations?
with aqueous copper(II) chloride?
3. Do stoichiometric calculations to support your
Prediction observations of the limiting reactant. Refer to
the previous ThoughtLab if you need help.
Your teacher will give you a beaker that contains
a 0.25 g piece of aluminum foil and 0.51 g of 4. If your prediction of the limiting reactant was
copper(II) chloride. Predict which one of these incorrect, explain why.
reactants is the limiting reactant.
Conclusions
Materials
5. Write a conclusion to explain how your
100 mL beaker or 125 mL Erlenmeyer flask experimental observation supported your
stirring rod theoretical calculations.
0.51 g CuCl
2
0.25 g Al foil Applications
6. Magnesium (Mg ) and hydrogen chloride
(s)
Safety Precautions
(HCl ) react according to the following
(aq)
skeleton equation:
Mg +HCl → MgCl +H
The reaction mixture may get hot. Do not (s) (aq) 2(aq) 2(g)
hold the beaker as the reaction proceeds. (a) Balance the skeleton equation.
(b) Examine the equation carefully. What
Procedure evidence would you have that a reaction
was taking place between the hydrochloric
1. To begin the reaction, add about 50 mL
acid and the magnesium?
of water to the beaker that contains the
aluminum foil and copper(II) chloride. (c) You have a piece of magnesium of unknown
mass, and a beaker of water in which is
2. Record the colour of the solution and any
dissolved an unknown amount of hydrogen
metal that is present at the beginning of the
chloride. Design an experiment to determine
reaction.
which reactant is the limiting reactant.
Chapter 7 Quantities in Chemical Reactions • MHR 255
The Limiting Reactant in Stoichiometric Problems
Write a balanced chemical equation.
You are now ready to use what you know about finding the limiting reac-
tant to predict the amount of product that is expected in a reaction. This
Identify the limiting reactant. type of prediction is a routine part of a chemist’s job, both in academic
Express it as an amount in moles.
research and industry. To produce a compound, for example, chemists
need to know how much product they can expect from a given reaction.
In analytical chemistry, chemists often analyze an impure substance by
Calculate the amount of the
allowing it to react in a known reaction. They predict the expected mass
required substance based on the
amount of the limiting reactant. of the product(s) and compare it with the actual mass of the product(s)
obtained. Then they can determine the purity of the compound.
Since chemical reactions usually occur with one or more of the
Convert the amount of the reactants in excess, you often need to determine the limiting reactant
required substance to mass or
before you carry out stoichiometric calculations. You can incorporate
number of particles, as directed
this step into the process you have been using to solve stoichiometric
by the question.
problems, as shown in Figure 7.7.
Figure 7.7 Be sure to determine
the limiting reactant in any
stoichiometric problem before Sample Problem
you solve it.
The Limiting Reactant
in a Stoichiometric Problem
PROBEWARE
Problem
If you have access to probe- White phosphorus consists of a molecule made up of four phospho-
ware, do the Chemistry 11 lab, rus atoms. It burns in pure oxygen to produce tetraphosphorus
Stoichiometry, now. decaoxide.
P +5O → P O
4(s) 2(g) 4 10(s)
A 1.00 g piece of phosphorus is burned in a flask filled with
2.60×1023 molecules of oxygen gas. What mass of tetraphosphorus
decaoxide is produced?
What Is Required?
You need to find the mass of tetraphosphorus decaoxide that is
produced.
What Is Given?
You know the balanced chemical equation. You also know the mass
of phosphorus and the number of oxygen molecules that reacted.
Plan Your Strategy
First convert each reactant to moles and find the limiting reactant.
Using the mole to mole ratio of the limiting reactant to the product,
determine the number of moles of tetraphosphorus decaoxide that is
expected. Convert this number of moles to grams.
Act on Your Strategy
1.00gP
nmolP = 4
4 123.9g/molP
4
= 8.07×10 −3molP
4
Continued ...
256 MHR • Unit 2 Chemical Quantities
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 256
nmolO =
2.60×1023molecules
2 6.02×1023molecules/mol
= 0.432molO
2
Calculate the amount of P O that would be produced by the P .
4 10 4
nmolP 4 O 10 = 1molP 4 O 10
8.07×10−3molP 1molP
4 4
(8.07×10 −3molP 4 ) 8.07 n × m 1 o 0 l − P 3 4 m O o 10 lP = 1 1 m m ol o P l 4 P O 10(8.07×10−3molP 4 )
4 4
= 8.07×10 −3molP O
4 10
Calculate the amount of P O that would be produced by the O .
4 10 2
nmolP 4 O 10 = 1molP 4 O 10
0.432molO 5molO
2 2
(0.432molO ) nmolP 4 O 10 = 1molP 4 O 10(0.432molO )
2 0.432molO 5molO 2
2 2
= 8.64×10 −2molP O
4 10
Since P would produce less P O than O would, P is the limiting
4 4 10 2 4
reactant.
P [FIGURE + 7-22: CALCUL5AOTIONS FOR THIS P O
4(s) 2(g) 4 10(s)
SAMPLE PROBLEM
0.00807 mol 0.00807 mol
unknown ratio known ratio
023(7)1222/TA
n mol P O 1 mol P O
4 10 = 4 10
0.00807 mol P 1 mol P
4 4
n mol P O 1 mol P O
(0.00807 mol P ) 4 10 = (0.00807 mol P ) 4 10 0.00807 mol P O
4 4 4 10
0.00807 mol P 4 1 mol P 4 × 284 g/mol P O
4 10
= 0.00807 mol P O
4 10
2.29 g P O
4 10
Check Your Solution
There were more than 5 times as many moles of O as moles of P ,
2 4
so it makes sense that P was the limiting reactant. An expected
4
mass of 2.29 g of tetraphosphorus decaoxide is reasonable. It is
formed in a 1:1 ratio from phosphorus. It has a molar mass that is
just over twice the molar mass of phosphorus.
Practice Problems
27. Chloride dioxide, ClO , is a reactive oxidizing agent. It is used to
2
purify water.
6ClO 2(g) +3H 2 O ((cid:2)) → 5HClO 3(aq) +HCl (aq)
(a) If 71.00 g of ClO is mixed with 19.00 g of water, what is the
2
limiting reactant?
(b) What mass of HClO is expected in part (a)?
3
(c) How many molecules of HCl are expected in part (a)?
Continued ...
Chapter 7 Quantities in Chemical Reactions • MHR 257
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 257
28. Hydrazine, N H , reacts exothermically with hydrogen peroxide,
2 4
H O
2 2
N 2 H 4((cid:2)) +7H 2 O 2(aq) → 2HNO 3(g) +8H 2 O (g)
(a) 120 g of N H reacts with an equal mass of H O . Which is the
2 4 2 2
COURSE limiting reactant?
CHALLENGE
(b) What mass of HNO is expected?
3
You will use the concepts of
(c) What mass, in grams, of the excess reactant remains at the end
stoichiometry and limiting
of the reaction?
reactants in the Chemistry
Course Challenge. If you have 29. In the textile industry, chlorine is used to bleach fabrics. Any
two reactants and you want to
of the toxic chlorine that remains after the bleaching process is
use up all of one reactant,
destroyed by reacting it with a sodium thiosulfate solution,
which is the limiting reactant?
Na S O .
2 2 3(aq)
Na 2 S 2 O 3(aq) +4Cl 2(g) +5H 2 O ((cid:2)) → 2NaHSO 4(aq) +8HCl (aq)
135 kg of Na S O reacts with 50.0 kg of Cl and 238 kg of water.
2 2 3 2
How many grams of NaHSO are expected?
4
30. Manganese(III) fluoride can be formed by the reaction of
manganese(II) iodide with fluorine.
CHEM 2MnI 2(s) +13F 2(g) → 2MnF 3(s) +4IF 5((cid:2))
FACT
(a) 1.23 g of MnI reacts with 25.0 g of F . What mass of MnF
2 2 3
Carbon disulfide, CS , is an
2 is expected?
extremely volatile and flamma-
ble substance. It is so flamma- (b) How many molecules of IF 5 are produced in part (a)?
ble that it can ignite when (c) What reactant is in excess? How much of it remains at the
exposed to boiling water!
end of the reaction?
Because carbon disulfide
vapour is more than twice as
dense as air, it can “blanket”
the floor of a laboratory. There
have been cases where the
Section Wrap-up
spark from an electrical motor
has ignited carbon disulfide You now know how to identify a limiting reactant. This allows you to
vapour in a laboratory, causing predict the amount of product that will be formed in a reaction. Often,
considerable damage. For this
however, your prediction will not accurately reflect reality. When a
reason, specially insulated
chemical reactions occurs—whether in a laboratory, in nature, or in
electrical motors are required
industry—the amount of product that is formed is often different from
in laboratory refrigerators and
the amount that was predicted by stoichiometric calculations. You will
equipment.
learn why this happens, and how chemists deal with it, in section 7.3.
Section Review
1 C Why do you not need to consider reactants that are present in
excess amounts when carrying out stoichiometric calculations? Use
an everyday analogy to explain the idea of excess quantity.
2 (a) C Magnesium reacts with oxygen gas, O 2 , from the air. Which
reactant do you think will be present in excess?
258 MHR • Unit 2 Chemical Quantities
(b) C Gold is an extremely unreactive metal. Gold does react, however,
with aqua regia (a mixture of concentrated nitric acid, HNO , and
3(aq)
−
hydrochloric acid, HCl ). The complex ion AuCl , as well as NO
(aq) 4 2
and H O, are formed. This reaction is always carried out with aqua
2
regia in excess. Why would a chemist not have the gold in excess?
(c) C In general, what characteristics or properties of a chemical
compound or atom make it suitable to be used as an excess reactant?
3 I Copper is a relatively inert metal. It is unreactive with most acids.
It does, however, react with nitric acid.
3Cu (s) +8HNO 3(aq) → 3Cu(NO 3 ) 2(aq) +2NO (g) +4H 2 O ((cid:2))
What mass of NO is produced when 57.4 g of Cu reacts with 165 g
Nitric acid reacts with copper
of HNO ?
3 metal to produce poisonous,
brown nitrogen dioxide, NO , gas.
4 I Iron can be produced when iron(III) oxide reacts with carbon 2
monoxide gas.
Fe O +3CO → 2Fe +3CO
2 3(s) (g) (s) 2(g)
11.5 g of Fe O reacts with 2.63×1024 molecules of CO. What
2 3
mass of Fe is expected?
5 I The reaction of an aqueous solution of iron(III) sulfate with
aqueous sodium hydroxide produces aqueous sodium sulfate and a
solid precipitate, iron(III) hydroxide.
Fe (SO ) +6NaOH → 3Na SO +2Fe(OH)
2 4 3(aq) (aq) 2 4(aq) 3(s)
What mass of Fe(OH) is produced when 10.0 g of Fe (SO ) reacts
3 2 4 3
with an equal mass of NaOH?
6 I Carbon disulfide is used as a solvent for water-insoluble
Unit Investigation Prep
compounds, such as fats, oils, and waxes. Calculate the mass of
Consider what you have
carbon disulfide that is produced when 17.5 g of carbon reacts with
learned about limiting reac-
225 g of sulfur dioxide according to the following equation:
tants when you design your
5C (s) +2SO 2(g) → CS 2((cid:2)) +4CO (g) quantitative analysis experi-
ment at the end of Unit 2.
7 I A chemist adds some zinc shavings to a beaker containing a blue
Imagine you add one reactant
solution of copper chloride. The contents of the beaker are stirred.
(A) to an unknown amount of a
After about an hour, the chemist observes that the blue colour has not
second reactant (B). You intend
completely disappeared.
to analyze the products (C) in
(a) Write a balanced chemical equation to describe this reaction. order to calculate the amount
of B. In this case, which reac-
(b) What other observations would you expect the chemist to make?
tant should be the limiting
(c) According to the chemist’s observations, which reactant was the reactant, A or B? How do you
limiting reactant? know which reactant is the
limiting reactant when you
(d) The beaker contained 3.12 g of copper chloride dissolved in water.
do not know the amount of
What does this tell you, quantitatively, about the amount of zinc that
reactant B?
was added?
Chapter 7 Quantities in Chemical Reactions • MHR 259
7.3 Percentage Yield
Section Preview/ When you write an examination, the highest grade that you can earn
Specific Expectations is usually 100%. Most people, however, do not regularly earn a grade of
100%. A percentage on an examination is calculated using the following
In this section, you will
equation:
(cid:2) solveproblems involving
percentage yield and limiting Percentagegrade = Marksearned ×100%
Maximumpossiblemarks
reactants
Similarly, a batter does not succeed at every swing. A batter’s success rate
(cid:2) compare, using laboratory
is expressed as a decimal fraction. The decimal can be converted to a per-
results, the theoretical yield
of a reaction with the actual cent by multiplying by 100%, as shown in Figure 7.8. In this section, you
yield will learn about a percentage that chemists use to predict and express the
“success” of reactions.
(cid:2) calculatethe percentage
yield of a reaction, and
suggest sources of experi-
mental error
(cid:2) solvestoichiometric
problems involving the
percentage purity of the
reactants
(cid:2) communicateyour under-
standing of the following
terms: theoretical yield,
actual yield, competing
reaction, percentage yield,
percentage purity
Figure 7.8 A baseball player’s batting average is calculated as hits/attempts. For
example, a player with 6 hits for 21 times at bat has a batting average of 6/21 = 0.286.
This represents a success rate of 28.6%.
Theoretical Yield and Actual Yield
Chemists use stoichiometry to predict the amount of product that can
be expected from a chemical reaction. The amount of product that is
CHEM
predicted by stoichiometry is called the theoretical yield. This predicted
FACT
yield, however, is not always the same as the amount of product that is
Actual yield is a measured actually obtained from a chemical reaction. The amount of product that
quantity. Theoretical yield is a
is obtained in an experiment is called the actual yield.
calculatedquantity.
Why Actual Yield and Theoretical Yield Are Often Different
The actual yield of chemical reactions is usually less than the theoretical
yield. This is caused by a variety of factors. For example, sometimes less
than perfect collection techniques contribute to a lower than expected
yield.
A reduced yield may also be caused by a competing reaction: a
reaction that occurs at the same time as the principal reaction and
involves its reactants and/or products. For example, phosphorus reacts
with chlorine to form phosphorus trichloride. Some of the phosphorus
trichloride, however, can then react with chlorine to form phosphorus
pentachloride.
260 MHR • Unit 2 Chemical Quantities
Here are the chemical equations for these competing reactions:
2P (s) +3Cl 2(g) → 2PCl 3((cid:2))
PCl 3((cid:2)) +Cl 2(g) → PCl 5(s)
Therefore, not all the phosphorus is converted to phosphorus
trichloride. So the actual yield of phosphorus trichloride is less than
the theoretical yield.
Experimental design and technique may affect the actual yield, as
well. For example, suppose that you need to obtain a product by filtration.
Some of the product may remain in solution and therefore not be caught
on the filter paper.
Another common cause of reduced yield is impure reactants. The
theoretical yield is calculated based on the assumption that reactants are
pure. You will learn about the effects of impure reactants on page 265.
Calculating Percentage Yield
The percentage yield of a chemical reaction compares the mass of product
obtained by experiment (the actual yield) with the mass of product
determined by stoichiometric calculations (the theoretical yield). It is
calculated as follows: (cid:2) (cid:3)
Actualyield
Percentageyield = ×100%
Theoreticalyield
In section 7.1, you looked at the reaction of hydrogen and nitrogen
to produce ammonia. You assumed that all the nitrogen and hydrogen
reacted. Under certain conditions of temperature and pressure, this is a
reasonable assumption. When ammonia is produced industrially, how-
ever, temperature and pressure are manipulated to maximize the speed
of production. Under these conditions, the actual yield is much less than
the theoretical yield. Examine the next Sample Problem to learn how to
calculate percentage yield.
Sample Problem
Calculating Percentage Yield
Problem
Ammonia can be prepared by reacting nitrogen gas, taken from the
atmosphere, with hydrogen gas.
N +3H → 2NH
2(g) 2(g) 3(g)
When 7.5×101g of nitrogen reacts with sufficient hydrogen, the
theoretical yield of ammonia is 9.10 g. (You can verify this by doing
the stoichiometric calculations.) If 1.72 g of ammonia is obtained by
experiment, what is the percentage yield of the reaction?
What Is Required?
You need to find the percentage yield of the reaction.
What Is Given?
actualyield = 1.72g
theoreticalyield = 9.10g
Continued ...
Chapter 7 Quantities in Chemical Reactions • MHR 261
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 261
Plan Your Strategy
Divide the actual yield by the theoretical yield, and multiply
by 100%.
Act on Your Strategy
Actualyield
Percentageyield = ×100%
Theoreticalyield
1.72g
= ×100%
9.10g
= 18.9%
The percentage yield of the reaction is 18.9%.
Check Your Solution
By inspection, you can see that 1.72 g is roughly 20% of 9.10 g.
Practice Problems
31. 20.0 g of bromic acid, HBrO , is reacted with excess HBr.
3
HBrO 3(aq) +5HBr (aq) → 3H 2 O ((cid:2)) +3Br 2(aq)
(a) What is the theoretical yield of Br for this reaction?
2
(b) If 47.3 g of Br is produced, what is the percentage yield of Br ?
2 2
32. Barium sulfate forms as a precipitate in the following reaction:
Ba(NO ) +Na SO → BaSO +2NaNO
3 2(aq) 2 4(aq) 4(s) 3(aq)
When 35.0 g of Ba(NO ) is reacted with excess Na SO , 29.8 g
3 2 2 4
of BaSO is recovered by the chemist.
4
(a) Calculate the theoretical yield of BaSO .
4
(b) Calculate the percentage yield of BaSO .
4
33. Yeasts can act on a sugar, such as glucose, C H O , to produce
6 12 6
ethyl alcohol, C H OH, and carbon dioxide.
2 5
C H O → 2C H OH+2CO
6 12 6 2 5 2
If 223 g of ethyl alcohol are recovered after 1.63 kg of glucose
react, what is the percentage yield of the reaction?
Sometimes chemists know what percentage yield to expect from a
chemical reaction. This is especially true of an industrial reaction, where
a lot of experimental data are available. As well, the reaction has usually
been carried out many times, with large amounts of reactants. Examine
the next Sample Problem to learn how to predict the actual yield of a
reaction from a known percentage yield.
262 MHR • Unit 2 Chemical Quantities
Sample Problem
Predicting Actual Yield
Based on Percentage Yield
Problem
Calcium carbonate can be thermally decomposed to calcium oxide
and carbon dioxide.
CaCO → CaO +CO
3(s) (s) 2(g)
Under certain conditions, this reaction proceeds with a 92.4% yield
of calcium oxide. How many grams of calcium oxide can the chemist
expect to obtain if 12.4 g of calcium carbonate is heated?
What Is Required?
You need to calculate the amount of calcium oxide, in grams, that
will be formed in the reaction.
What Is Given?
Percentage yield CaO = 92.4%
m CaCO = 12.4g
3
Plan Your Strategy
Calculate the theoretical yield of calcium oxide using stoichiometry.
Then multiply the theoretical yield by the percentage yield to
predict the actual yield.
Act on Your Strategy
1 CaCO CaO + CO
3(s) (s ) 2(g)
0.124 mol 0.124 mol
[FIGURE 7-25: CA3LCUuLnAkTnIOowNnS .r aStEioE FIGURE known ratio
MANUSCRIPT [STACaKm FRoAuCnTtI OCNaSC.]O 1 mol CaO
=
0.124 mol CaCO 1 mol CaO
3 3
amount CaO 1 mol CaO
(0.124 mol CaCO ) = (0.124 mol CaCO )
3 3
0.124 mol CaCO 1 mol CaO
026(7)1222/TA 3 3
= 0.124 mol CaO
2 12.4gCaCO 3 4 0.124 mol CaO
100gCaCO /molCaCO × 56.1 g CaO/mol CaO
3 3
=0.124molCaCO = 6.95 g CaO
3
5 Actualyield = 6.95gCaO× 92.4
100
12.4 g CaCO = 6.42gCaO 6.95 g CaO
3
Check Your Solution
92.5% of 6.95 g is about 6.4 g. The answer is reasonable.
Continued ...
Chapter 7 Quantities in Chemical Reactions • MHR 263
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 263
Practice Problems
34. The following reaction proceeds with a 70% yield.
You hear a great deal about C 6 H 6((cid:2)) +HNO 3(aq) → C 6 H 5 NO 2((cid:2)) +H 2 O ((cid:2))
the fuel consumption of
Calculate the mass of C H NO expected if 12.8 g of C H reacts
automobiles. What about air 6 5 2 6 6
consumption? Your challenge with excess HNO 3 .
is to determine the information
35. The reaction of toluene, C H , with potassium permanganate,
you need to answer the follow- 7 8
KMnO , gives less than a 100% yield.
ing question: What mass of 4
air does an automobile require C 7 H 8((cid:2)) +2KMnO 4(aq) → KC 7 H 5 O 2(aq) +2MnO 2(s) +KOH (aq) +H 2 O ((cid:2))
to travel from Thunder Bay,
(a) 8.60 g of C H is reacted with excess KMnO . What is the
Ontario, to Smooth Rock Falls, 7 8 4
theoretical yield, in grams, of KC H O ?
Ontario? This is a distance of 7 5 2
670 km. (b) If the percentage yield is 70.0%, what mass of KC H O can
7 5 2
When you are finished, go to be expected?
question 23 on page 273. You (c) What mass of C H is needed to produce 13.4 g of KC H O ,
7 8 7 5 2
can check your answer and
assuming a yield of 60%?
solve the problem, too.
36. Marble is made primarily of calcium carbonate. When calcium
carbonate reacts with hydrogen chloride, it reacts to form calcium
chloride, carbon dioxide and water. If this reaction occurs with
81.5% yield, what mass of carbon dioxide will be collected if
15.7 g of CaCO is added to sufficient hydrogen chloride?
3
37. Mercury, in its elemental form or in a chemical compound is
highly toxic. Water-soluble mercury compounds, such as mercu-
ry(II) nitrate, can be removed from industrial wastewater by
COURSE adding sodium sulfide to the water, which forms a precipitate of
CHALLENGE
mercury(II) sulfide, which can then be filtered out.
How would you determine the Hg(NO ) +Na S → HgS +2NaNO
3 2(aq) 2 (aq) (s) 3(aq)
percentage yield of a double
If 3.45×1023 formula units of Hg(NO ) are reacted with excess
displacement reaction that 3 2
produces a precipitate? Na 2 S, what mass of HgS can be expected if this process occurs
Consider this question to with 97.0% yield?
prepare for your Chemistry
Course Challenge.
Applications of Percentage Yield
The percentage yield of chemical reactions is extremely important in
industrial chemistry and the pharmaceutical industry. For example, the
synthesis of certain drugs involves many sequential chemical reactions.
Often each reaction has a low percentage yield. This results in a tiny
overall yield. Research chemists, who generally work with small quanti-
ties of reactants, may be satisfied with a poor yield. Chemical engineers,
on the other hand, work with very large quantities. They may use hun-
dreds or even thousands of kilograms of reactants! A difference of 1%
in the yield of a reaction can translate into thousands of dollars.
The work of a chemist in a laboratory can be likened to making
spaghetti for a family. The work of a chemical engineer, by contrast, is like
making spaghetti for 10 000 people! Learn more about chemical engineers
in Careers in Chemistry on the next page. Then perform an investigation
to determine the percentage yield of a reaction on page 266.
264 MHR • Unit 2 Chemical Quantities
Careers in Chemistry
Chemical Engineer mathematical models. For example, making liquid
pharmaceutical products (such as syrups, solu-
tions, and suspensions) on a large scale involves
adding specific amounts of raw materials to large
mixing tanks. Then the raw materials are heated
to a set temperature and mixed at a set speed
for a given amount of time. The final product is
filtered and stored in holding tanks. Chemical
engineers ensure that each process produces
the maximum amount of product.
Becoming a Chemical Engineer
To become a chemical engineer, you need a
Chemical engineers are sometimes described bachelor’s degree in chemical engineering. Most
as “universal engineers” because of their unique provinces also require a Professional Engineer
knowledge of math, physics, engineering, and (P. Eng.) designation. Professional engineers
chemistry. This broad knowledge allows them must have at least four years of experience and
to work in a variety of areas, from designing must pass an examination. As well, they must
paint factories to developing better tasting, more commit to continuing their education to keep up
nutritious foods. Canadian chemical engineers with current developments. Chemical engineers
are helping to lead the world in making cheap, must be able to work well with people and to
long-lasting, and high-quality CDs and DVDs. communicate well.
In addition to designing and operating commer-
cial plants, chemical engineers can be found Make Career Connections
in university labs, government agencies, and
1. Discuss engineering studies and careers with
consulting firms.
working engineers, professors, and engineer-
ing students. Look for summer internship
Producing More for Less
programs and job shadowing opportunities.
Once chemists have developed a product in a lab- Browse the Internet. Contact your provincial
oratory, it is up to chemical engineers to design engineering association, engineering societies,
a process to make the product in commercial and universities for more information.
quantities as efficiently as possible. “Scaling up”
2. Participate in National Engineering Week in
production is not just a matter of using larger
Canada in March of each year. This is when
beakers. Chemical engineers break down the
postsecondary institutions, companies, science
chemical process into a series of smaller “unit
centres, and other organizations hold special
operations” or processes and techniques.
events, including engineering contests and
They use physics, chemistry, and complex
workshops.
Percentage Purity
Often impure reactants are the cause of a percentage yield of less than
100%. Impurities cause the mass data to be incorrect. For example, sup-
pose that you have 1.00 g of sodium chloride and you want to carry out a
reaction with it. You think that the sodium chloride may have absorbed
some water, so you do not know exactly how much pure sodium chloride
you have. If you calculate a theoretical yield for your reaction based on
1.00 g of sodium chloride, your actual yield will be less. There is not
1.00 g of sodium chloride in the sample.
Chapter 7 Quantities in Chemical Reactions • MHR 265
S K I L L F O C U S
Predicting
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
Determining the Percentage
Yield of a Chemical Reaction
The percentage yield of a reaction is determined Procedure
by numerous factors: The nature of the reaction
1. Label a clean, dry 250 mL beaker with your
itself, the conditions under which the reaction
initials. Use a glass marker, or write with
was carried out, and the nature of the reactants
pencil on the frosted area of the beaker. Do
used.
not use tape, since the beaker will be dried
In this investigation, you will determine the
in an oven later.
percentage yield of the following chemical
reaction: 2. Copy the table below into your notebook.
Record the mass of the labelled beaker in
Fe +CuCl → FeCl +Cu
(s) 2(aq) 2(aq) (s)
your table.
You will use steel wool, since it is virtually
Observations
pure iron.
Mass of empty beaker
Question Mass of steel wool
What is the percentage yield of the reaction of Mass of beaker containing clean, dry copper
iron and copper chloride when steel wool and
3. Put about 50 mL of distilled water in the
copper chloride dihydrate are used as reactants?
beaker. Add 5.00 g of CuCl ·2H O to the
2 2
water. Stir to dissolve.
Predictions
4. Record the mass of the steel wool in your
Predict the mass of copper that will be produced
table.
if 1.00 g of iron (steel wool) reacts completely
with a solution containing excess CuCl . Also 5. Add the steel wool to the CuCl solution in
2 2
predict the maximum possible yield. the beaker. Allow it to sit until all the steel
wool has reacted. This could take up to
Materials 20 min.
2 beakers (250 mL) 6. When the reaction is complete, decant the
stirring rod solution into a 250 mL beaker, as shown in
electronic balance, accurate to two decimal places the diagram.
distilled water
wash bottle with distilled water
drying oven or heat lamp
about 1.00 g rust-free, degreased steel wool
5.00 g copper chloride dihydrate, CuCl ·2H O
2 2
15 mL 1 mol/L hydrochloric acid, HCl
Safety Precautions
If you get either CuCl or the HCl solution on
2
your skin, flush with plenty of cold water.
266 MHR • Unit 2 Chemical Quantities
S K I L L F O C U S
Predicting
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
Analysis Communicating results
beaker 1.(a) Using the mass of the iron (steel wool) you
used, calculate the theoretical yield of the
stirring rod
copper, in grams.
(b) How does the mass of the copper you
collected compare with the expected
theoretical yield?
2. Based on the amount of iron that you used,
prove that the 5.00 g of CuCl ·2H O was
2 2
the excess reactant.
Conclusion
3. Calculate the percentage yield for this
reaction.
Applications
Pouring downa stirring rod ensures that no liquid
4. If your percentage yield was not 100%,
dribbles down the outside of the beaker. The glove in
suggest sources of error.
this illustration is omitted so you can clearly see where
to place your fingers. Always wear gloves when handling
5. How would you attain an improved percent-
chemicals in the laboratory.
age yield if you performed this reaction again?
Consider your technique and materials.
7. Using a wash bottle, rinse the copper several
times with distilled water. Decant the water as 6. Do some research to find out the percent by
shown in the diagram. mass of iron in steel wool. Predict what your
percentage yield would be if you had used
8. Add 10 to 15 mL of 1 mol/L HCl to further
pure iron in this reaction. Would it make a
wash the copper. Decant the HCl, and wash
difference?
the copper again with distilled water. (If the
copper is still not clean, wash it again with
the HCl. Remember to do a final wash with
distilled water.)
9. Place your labelled reaction beaker,
containing the cleaned copper, in a drying
oven overnight.
10. Find the mass of the beaker containing the
dry copper.
11. Return the beaker, containing the copper, to
your teacher for proper disposal.
Continued ... In the mining industry, metals are usually
recovered in the form of an ore. An ore is a
FROM PAGE 265
naturally occurring rock that contains a high
concentration of one or more metals. Whether an ore can be
profitably mined depends on several factors: the cost of
mining and refining the ore, the price of the extracted metal,
and the cost of any legal and environmental issues related to
land use. The inaccurate chemical analysis of an ore sample
can cost investors millions of dollars if the ore deposit does
not yield what was expected.
The percentage purity of a sample describes what
proportion, by mass, of the sample is composed of a specific
compound or element. For example, suppose that a sample
of gold has a percentage purity of 98%. This means that
every 100 g of the sample contains 98 g of gold and 2 g of
impurities.
You can apply your knowledge of stoichiometry and
percentage yield to solve problems related to percentage
purity.
Figure 7.9 Copper is removed
from mines like this one in the
form of an ore. There must be Sample Problem
sufficient copper in the ore to
make the mine economically Finding Percentage Purity
viable.
Problem
Iron pyrite, FeS , is known as “fool’s gold” because it looks similar
2
to gold. Suppose that you have a 13.9 g sample of impure iron pyrite.
(The sample contains a non-reactive impurity.) You heat the sample
in air to produce iron(III) oxide, Fe O , and sulfur dioxide, SO .
2 3 2
4FeS +11O → 2Fe O +8SO
2(s) 2(g) 2 3(s) 2(g)
If you obtain 8.02 g of iron(III) oxide, what was the percentage of
iron pyrite in the original sample? Assume that the reaction proceeds
to completion. That is, all the available iron pyrite reacts completely.
What Is Required?
You need to determine the percentage purity of the iron pyrite sample.
What Is Given?
The mass of Fe O is 8.02 g. The reaction proceeds to completion.
2 3
You can assume that sufficient oxygen is present.
Plan Your Strategy
Steps 1–4 Use your stoichiometry problem-solving skills to find the
mass of Fe S expected to have produced 8.02 g Fe O .
2 2 3
Step 5 Determine percentage purity of the Fe S using the following
2
formula:
theoreticalmass(g)
×100%
samplesize(g)
Continued ...
268 MHR • Unit 2 Chemical Quantities
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 268
Act on Your Strategy
1 4FeS + 11O 2Fe O + 8SO
2(s) 2(g) 2 3(s) 2(g)
0.100 mol 0.0502 mol
unknown ratio known ratio
3
n molFeS 2 = 4molFeS 2
0.0502molFe O 2molFe O
2 3 2 3
(0.0502molFe O ) n mol FeS 2 = 4molFeS 2 (0.0502molFe O ) 2
2 3 (0.0502molFe O ) 2molFe O 2 3
2 3 2 3 8.02gFe O
2 3
= 0.100molFeS 160g/mol
4 2
0.100molFeS 2 ×120g/mol = 0.0502molFe 2 O 3
= 12.0gFeS
2
5
Theoreticalm FeS
12.0gFeS Percentagepurity = 2 ×100% 8.02gFe O
2 SamplesizeFeS 2 3
2
12.0g
= ×100%
13.9g
= 86.3%
Therefore, the percentage purity of the iron pyrite is 86.3%.
Check Your Solution
The units are correct. The molar mass of iron pyrite is 3/4 the
molar mass of iron(III) oxide. Mutiplying this ratio by the mole
ratio of iron pyrite to iron(III) oxide (4/2) and 8 g gives 12 g. The
answer is reasonable.
Practice Problems
38. An impure sample of silver nitrate, AgNO , has a mass 0.340 g.
3
It is dissolved in water and then treated with excess hydrogen
chloride, HCl . This results in the formation of a precipitate of
(aq)
silver chloride, AgCl.
AgNO +HCl → AgCl +HNO
3(aq) (aq) (s) 3(aq)
The silver chloride is filtered, and any remaining hydrogen chlo-
ride is washed away. Then the silver chloride is dried. If the mass
of the dry silver chloride is measured to be 0.213 g, what mass of
silver nitrate was contained in the original (impure) sample?
39. Copper metal is mined as one of several copper-containing ores.
One of these ores contains copper in the form of malachite.
Malachite exists as a double salt, Cu(OH) ·CuCO . It can be
2 3
thermally decomposed at 200˚C to yield copper(II) oxide, carbon
dioxide gas, and water vapour.
Cu(OH) ·CuCO → 2CuO +CO +H O
2 3(s) (s) 2(g) 2 (g)
Continued ...
Chapter 7 Quantities in Chemical Reactions • MHR 269
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 269
(a) 5.000 kg of malachite ore, containing 5.20% malachite,
Cu(OH) ·CuCO , is thermally decomposed. Calculate the mass
2 3
of copper(II) oxide that is formed. Assume 100% reaction.
(b) Suppose that the reaction had a 78.0% yield, due to incomplete
decomposition. How many grams of CuO would be produced?
40. Ethylene oxide, C H O, is a multi-purpose industrial chemical
2 4
used, among other things, as a rocket propellant. It can be pre-
pared by reacting ethylene bromohydrin, C H OBr, with sodium
2 5
hydroxide.
C H OBr+NaOH → C H O+NaBr+H O
2 5 2 4 2
If this reaction proceeds with an 89% yield, what mass of C H O
2 4
can be obtained when 3.61×1023 molecules of C H OBr react
2 5
with excess sodium hydroxide?
Section Wrap-up
In this section, you have learned how the amount of products formed
by experiment relates to the theoretical yield predicted by stoichiometry.
You have learned about many factors that affect actual yield, including the
nature of the reaction, experimental design and execution, and the purity
of the reactants. Usually, when you are performing an experiment in a
laboratory, you want to maximize your percentage yield. To do this, you
need to be careful not to contaminate your reactants or lose any products.
Either might affect your actual yield.
Section Review
1 K/U When calculating the percentage yield of a reaction, what units
should you use: grams, moles, or number of particles? Explain.
2 I Methyl salicylate, otherwise known as oil of wintergreen, is
produced by the wintergreen plant. It can also be synthesized by
heating salicylic acid, C H O , with methanol, CH OH.
7 6 3 3
C 7 H 6 O 3(s) +CH 3 OH ((cid:2)) → C 8 H 8 O 3((cid:2)) +H 2 O ((cid:2))
A chemist reacts 3.50 g of salicylic acid with excess methanol. She
calculates the theoretical yield of methyl salicylate to be 3.86 g. If
2.84 g of methyl salicylate are recovered, what is the percentage yield
of the reaction?
3 C Unbeknownst to a chemist, the limiting reactant in a certain
chemical reaction is impure. How will this affect the percentage yield
of the reaction? Explain.
4 I You have a sample of copper that is impure, and you wish to
determine its purity. You have some silver nitrate, AgNO , at your
3
disposal. You also have some copper that you know is 100% pure.
(a) Design an experiment to determine the purity of the copper sample.
(b) Even with pure copper, the reaction may not proceed with 100%
yield. How will you address this issue?
270 MHR • Unit 2 Chemical Quantities
Review
Reflecting on Chapter 7 Inquiry
Summarize this chapter in the format of your 6. A freshly exposed aluminum surface reacts
choice. Here are a few ideas to use as guidelines: with oxygen to form a tough coating of
• Use the coefficients of a balanced chemical aluminum oxide. The aluminum oxide
equation to determine the mole ratios between protects the metal from further corrosion.
4Al +3O → 2Al O
reactants and products. (s) 2(g) 2 3(s)
• Predict quantities required or produced in a How many grams of oxygen are needed to react
chemical reaction. with 0.400 mol of aluminum?
• Calculate the limiting reactant in cases where 7. Calcium metal reacts with chlorine gas to
the amount of various reactants was given. produce calcium chloride.
• Calculate the percentage yield of a chemical Ca +Cl → CaCl
(s) 2(g) 2(s)
reaction based on the amount of product(s) How many formula units of CaCl are expected
2
obtained relative to what was predicted by from 5.3 g of calcium and excess chlorine?
stoichiometry. 8. Propane is a gas at room temperature, but it
• Use the percentage yield of a reaction to predict exists as a liquid under pressure in a propane
the amount of product(s) formed. tank. It reacts with oxygen in the air to form
• Determine the percentage purity of a reactant carbon dioxide and water vapour.
based on the actual yield of a reaction. C 3 H 8((cid:2)) +5O 2(g) → 3CO 2(g) +4H 2 O (g)
What mass of carbon dioxide gas is expected
Reviewing Key Terms
when 97.5 g of propane reacts with sufficient
For each of the following terms, write a sentence oxygen?
that shows your understanding of its meaning.
9. Powdered zinc and sulfur react in an extremely
actual yield competing reaction rapid, exothermic reaction. The zinc sulfide
excess reactant limiting reactant that is formed can be used in the phosphor
mole ratios percentage purity coating on the inside of a television tube.
percentage yield stoichiometric amounts Zn +S → ZnS
(s) (s) (s)
stoichiometric stoichiometry A 6.00 g sample of Zn is allowed to react with
coefficients theoretical yield 3.35 g of S.
(a) Determine the limiting reactant.
Knowledge/Understanding
(b) Calculate the mass of ZnS expected.
1. Explain the different interpretations of the (c) How many grams of the excess reactant will
coefficients in a balanced chemical equation. remain after the reaction?
2. Why is a balanced chemical equation needed 10. Titanium(IV) chloride reacts violently with
for stoichiometric calculations? water vapour to produce titanium(IV) oxide
and hydrogen chloride gas. Titanium(IV) oxide,
3. In what cases would it not be necessary
when finely powdered, is extensively used in
to determine the limiting reactant before
paint as a white pigment.
beginning any stoichiometric calculations?
TiCl 4(s) +H 2 O ((cid:2)) → TiO 2(s) +4HCl (g)
4. Why was the concept of percentage yield
The reaction has been used to create smoke
introduced?
screens. In moist air, the TiCl reacts to
4
5. A student is trying to determine the mass produce a thick smoke of suspended TiO
2
of aluminum oxide that is produced when particles. What mass of TiO can be expected
2
aluminum reacts with excess oxygen. when 85.6 g of TiCl is reacted with excess
4
4Al +3O → 2Al O
(s) 2(g) 2 3(s) water vapour?
The student states that 4 g of aluminum reacts
with 3 g of oxygen to produce 2 g of aluminum
oxide. Is the student’s reasoning correct?
Explain your answer.
Chapter 7 Quantities in Chemical Reactions • MHR 271
11. Silver reacts with hydrogen sulfide gas, which After the reaction is complete, the solid barium
is present in the air. (Hydrogen sulfide has the sulfate, BaSO , is filtered and dried. Its mass
4
odour of rotten eggs.) The silver sulfide, Ag S, is found to be 2.62 g. What is the percentage
2
that is produced forms a black tarnish on purity of the original barium chloride?
the silver. 17. Benzene reacts with bromine to form
4Ag (s) +2H 2 S (g) +O 2(g) → 2Ag 2 S (s) +2H 2 O (g) bromobenzene, C 6 H 5 Br.
How many grams of silver sulfide are formed C 6 H 6((cid:2)) +Br 2((cid:2)) → C 6 H 5 Br ((cid:2)) +HBr (g)
when 1.90 g of silver reacts with 0.280 g of (a) What is the maximum amount of C H Br that
6 5
hydrogen sulfide and 0.160 g of oxygen?
can be formed from the reaction of 7.50 g of
12. 20.8 g of calcium phosphate, Ca (PO ) , 13.3 g C H with excess Br ?
3 4 2 6 6 2
of silicon dioxide, SiO , and 3.90 g of carbon (b) A competing reaction is the formation of
2
react according to the following equation: dibromobenzene, C H Br .
6 4 2
2Ca 3 (PO 4 ) 2(s) +6SiO 2(s) +10C (s) → C 6 H 6((cid:2)) +2Br 2((cid:2)) → C 6 H 4 Br 2((cid:2)) +2HBr (g)
P +6CaSiO +10CO If 1.25 g of C H Br was formed by the
4(s) 3(s) (g) 6 4 2
Determine the mass of calcium silicate, CaSiO , competing reaction, how much C H was
3 6 6
that is produced. not converted to C H Br?
6 5
13. 1.56 g of As S , 0.140 g of H O, 1.23 g (c) Based on your answer to part (b), what was
2 3 2
of HNO , and 3.50 g of NaNO are reacted the actual yield of C H Br? Assume that all
3 3 6 5
according to the equation below: the C H Br that formed was collected.
6 5
3As 2 S 3(s) +4H 2 O ((cid:2)) +10HNO 3(aq) +18NaNO 3(aq) (d) Calculate the percentage yield of C 6 H 5 Br.
→ 9Na SO +6H AsO +28NO
2 4(aq) 3 4(aq) (g) 18. Refer to Practice Problem 39. Design an
What mass of H AsO is produced? experiment to determine the mole to mole ratio
3 4
14. 2.85×102 g of pentane, C H , reacts with of pure malachite to copper(II) oxide. Include
5 12
an outline of the procedure and any safety
3.00 g of oxygen gas, according to the following
precautions. Clearly indicate which data need
equation:
C 5 H 12((cid:2)) +8O 2(g) → 5CO 2(g) +6H 2 O ((cid:2)) to be recorded.
What mass of carbon dioxide gas, is produced? 19. A chemist wishes to prepare a compound
15. Silica (also called silicon dioxide), along with called compound E. The molar mass of
other silicates, makes up about 95% of Earth’s compound E is 100 g/mol. The synthesis
crust—the outermost layer of rocks and soil. requires four consecutive reactions, each
Silicon dioxide is also used to manufacture with a yield of 60%.
A → B C → D
transistors. Silica reacts with hydrofluoric acid
B → C D → E
to produce silicon tetrafluoride and water
vapour. (a) The chemist begins the synthesis with 50 g
SiO +4HF → SiF +2H O of starting material, called compound A. If
2(s) (aq) 4(g) 2 (g)
(a) 12.2 g of SiO is reacted with a small excess the molar mass of compound A is 200 g/mol,
2
how many grams of compound E will be
of HF. What is the theoretical yield, in
grams, of H O? produced?
2
(b) If the actual yield of water is 2.50 g, what (b) How many grams of compound A are needed
is the percentage yield of the reaction? to produce 70 g of compound E?
(c) Assuming the yield obtained in part (b),
Communication
what mass of SiF is formed?
4
20. Develop a new analogy for the concept of
16. An impure sample of barium chloride, BaCl ,
2
limiting and excess reactant.
with a mass of 4.36 g, is added to an aqueous
solution of sodium sulfate, Na SO . 21. Examine the balanced chemical “equation”
2 4
BaCl +Na SO → BaSO +2NaCl 2A+B → 3C+D
2(s) 2 4(aq) 4(s) (aq)
272 MHR • Unit 2 Chemical Quantities
Using a concept map, explain how to calculate (a) Explain why the chemical reaction above
the number of grams of C that can be obtained can be used to remove mercury ions from the
when a given mass of A reacts with a certain waste water. What laboratory technique must
number of molecules of B. Assume that you be used in order that this reaction is as effec-
know the molar mass of A and C. Include tive as possible for removing mercury from
proper units. For simplicity, assume that A the waste stream?
is limiting, but don’t forget to show how to (b) Why is mercury(II) sulfide less of an envi-
determine the limiting reactant. ronmental concern than mercury(II) nitrate?
22. Assume that your friend has missed several (c) What assumptions are being made regarding
chemistry classes and that she has asked you the toxicity of sodium sulfide and sodium
to help her prepare for a stoichiometry test. nitrate relative to either mercury nitrate or
Unfortunately, because of other commitments, mercury sulfide?
you do not have time to meet face to face. You
(d) Every litre of waste water contains approxi-
agree to email your friend a set of point-form
mately 0.03 g of Hg(NO ) . How many kg of
3 2
instructions on how to solve stoichiometry
Na S will be required to remove the soluble
2
problems, including those that involve a limit-
mercury ions from 10 000 L of waste water?
ing reactant. She also needs to understand the
(e) What factors would a company need to
concept of percentage yield. Write the text of
consider in adopting any method of cleaning
this email. Assume that your friend has a good
its wastewater?
understanding of the mole concept.
Answers to Practice Problems and
Making Connections Short Answers to Section Review Questions
23. How many grams of air are required for an
Practice Problems: 1.(a)2:1:2 (b)50 (c)4956 (d)1.20×1024
2.(a)2 (b)150 (c)1.806×1024 (d)1.204×1024
automobile to travel from Thunder Bay,
3.(a)3.4×1025 (b)6.7×1025 4.7.5 mol 5.(a)1.8 mol
Ontario, to Smooth Rock Falls, Ontario? This is (b)37.5 mol 6.(a)48.7 mol (b)1.20 mol 7.(a)8.3×1024
a distance of 670 km. Assume the following: (b)4.2×1024 8.(a)7.47 mol (b)7.19 mol
• Gasoline is pure octane, C 8 H 18 . (Gasoline is 9.(a)4.68×10−2 mol (b)0.187 mol 10.(a)0.708 mol
actually a mixture of hydrocarbons.) (b)1.06 mol 11.9.32 g 12.137 g 13.4.65 g 14.0.814 g
• The average fuel consumption is 10 L per 15.97.2 g 16.2.31×10−2 g 17.37.6 g 18.20.7 g 19.(a)124 g
100 km. (b)1.14×1024 20.(a)120 g (b)1.49×1021 21.(a)2.39×1022
• Air has a density of 1.21 g/L. (b)1.45×1024 (c)1.21×1022 22.(a)1.50×1024 (b)357 g
• Air is 21% O 2 (v/v). 2 (c 3 ) . 1 C . u 0 C 6 l × 2 1 2 0 4. 23 Ca 2 F 8. 2 (a) 2 H 5. 2 C O 3 2 H ( 6 b)6 26 3 . . H 5 C g l (c 2 ) 7 1 .( 0 a) 4 C g l O 2 (b)74.1 g
• 1.00 mol of any gas occupies 24 L at 20˚C 29.4.23×104g 30.(a)0.446 g (b)4.80×1021 (c)F
2
, 24.0 g
and 100 kPa. 31.(a)74.4 g (b)63.6% 32.(a)31.3 g (b)95.2% 33.26.7%
• The density of the gasoline is 0.703 g/mL. 34.14.1 g 35.(a)15.0 g (b)10.5 g (c)12.8 g 36.5.63 g
The balanced chemical equation for the 37.129 g 38.0.252 g 39.(a)187 g (b)146 g 40.23.5 g
complete combustion of octane is Section Review: 7.1: 4.(a)S+O 2 → SO 2
2C 8 H 18((cid:2)) + 25O 2(g) → 16CO 2(g) + 18H 2 O (g) ( ( b b ) ) 2 2 S .50 + m 3O o 2 l ( → c)6 2 . S 02 O 3 × ( 1 c 0 )1 24 .5 (d m )9 o . l 0 0 (d ) m 4 o 8 l . 0 6 g .( a ) 5. 4 (a 9 ) . 1 9 : 5 g :3:4
24. You must remove mercury ions present as (b)4.48×1022
mercury(II) nitrate in the waste water of an 7.(a)Pb(NO
3
)
2(aq)
+2NaI
(aq)
→ PbI
2(s)
+2NaNO
3(aq)
industrial facility. You have decided to use (b)1.03 g 7.2: 2.(a)oxygen 3.18.1 g 4.8.04 g 5.5.34 g
sodium sulfide in the reaction below. Write a 6.22.2 g 7.(a)Zn (s) +CuCl 2(aq) → ZnCl 2(aq) +Cu (s)
short essay that addresses the following points. (b)zinc gone (c)zinc (d)less than 1.52 g Zn 7.3: 2.73.6%
Include a well-organized set of calculations
where appropriate.
Hg(NO ) +Na S → HgS +2NaNO
3 2(aq) 2 (aq) (s) 3(aq)
Chapter 7 Quantities in Chemical Reactions • MHR 273
S K I L L F O C U S
Initiating and planning
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
Analyzing a Mixture Communicating results
Using Stoichiometry
Background You will need to use the following double
displacement reaction. This reaction produces
Analytical chemists are employed in industrial
a precipitate of barium sulfate.
research, academic research, and forensic sci-
ence. Their job usually involves two different BaCl 2(aq) +Na 2 SO 4(aq) → BaSO 4(s) +2NaCl (aq)
types of work: qualitative analysis and quantita- To design your procedure, carefully consider
tive analysis. A qualitative analysis determines the physical and chemical properties of the two
which substances are present. A quantitative substances in the mixture.
analysis determines how much of a specific
substance is present. Question
Many other chemists also need to use the
How can you determine the percent by mass
principles of analytical chemistry. An environ-
of barium chloride and the percent by mass of
mental chemist, for example, tests water or soil
sodium chloride in the sand?
for the presence and amounts of impurities. In
this investigation, you will design a procedure
Hypothesis
to analyze a sample of contaminated sand.
Formulate a hypothesis in response to the
question above.
Materials
electronic balance
retort stand
ring clamp
filter funnel
filter paper (to fit filter funnel)
glass rod
3 beakers (250 mL)
drying oven (optional)
wash bottle with distilled water
sample of sand containing BaCl and NaCl
2
solid sodium sulfate, Na SO
2 4
This analyst is collecting run-off water for testing.
Safety Precautions
Pre-Lab Focus
A shipment of sand has become contaminated
with barium chloride, BaCl , and sodium • Be careful not to inhale grains of the sodium
2
chloride, NaCl. As an analytical chemist, your sulfate, Na 2 SO 4 .
job is to design a procedure to determine the • Wear gloves at all times. Wash your hands
percent by mass of each substance in the sand. thoroughly after you have finished the
investigation.
274 MHR • Unit 2 Chemical Quantities
Assessment
After you complete this investigation:
(cid:2) Assess your procedure by having a classmate
try to duplicate your results.
(cid:2) Use the rubric you developed to assess the
Procedure
success of your experimental design.
1. Design a rubric, an assessment checklist,
(cid:2) List ways you would improve your procedure
or some other means of assessing your if you were to perform this investigation again.
experimental design and procedure.
(cid:2) Assess your presentation based on the clarity
2. Using the materials, design a procedure that of chemical concepts to be conveyed.
will help you solve the problem. Remember
that you will need to perform several trials.
Conclusion
3. Before beginning your procedure, show it to 7. Write a statement that gives the percent by
your teacher for approval. mass of barium chloride, BaCl , and the
2
percent by mass of sodium chloride, NaCl,
4. Obtain a sample of the mixture from your
in the sample of contaminated sand.
teacher. Record the number of the sample.
Carry out your procedure.
5. When you have finished, dispose of the
materials as directed by your teacher.
6. Use the following questions to write a
complete laboratory report. Include all the
equations and calculations that you used.
Analysis
Here are some questions that you will need
to answer in your laboratory report.
1. What mass of sand was in the sample? What
property of sand did you use to determine
this mass?
2. Explain why you used sodium sulfate,
Na SO , in your procedure.
2 4
3. What physical and chemical properties of
the reactants and products did you use in
your procedure?
4. What assumption did you make about the
reactivity of sodium chloride with sodium
sulfate?
5. What possible sources of error did your proce-
dure introduce? How might they have affected
your results?
6. Would your procedure have worked if you
had used contaminated sugar instead of
contaminated sand? Explain. How could you
have changed your procedure?
Unit 2 Design Your Own Investigation • MHR 275
Review
Knowledge/Understanding 14. The molar mass of a compound with the
empirical formula CH O has a mass of approxi-
2
True/False mately 121 g. What is the molecular formula of
In your notebook, indicate whether each statement the compound?
is true or false. If a statement is false, rewrite it to (a) C 4 H 8 O 4
make it true. (b) C 2 H 6 O 2
1. The molecular formula of a compound is the (c) C 3 H 3 O 6
same as its empirical formula. (d) C 3 H 6 O 3
(e) CH O
2. A 2.02 g sample of hydrogen, H , contains 6
2
the same number of molecules as 32.0 g of 15. Read the following statements about balancing
oxygen, O . chemical equations. Which of these statements
2
is true?
3. The average atomic mass of an element is equal
(a) To be balanced, an equation must have the
to the mass of its most abundant isotope.
same number of moles on the left side and
4. The numerical value of the molar mass of a
the right side.
compound (expressed in atomic mass units)
(b) A chemical formula may be altered in order
is the same as its molar mass (expressed in
to balance a chemical equation.
grams).
(c) To be balanced, a chemical equation must
5. The fundamental unit for chemical quantity have the same number of each type of atom
is the gram. on both sides.
6. The mass of 1.00 mol of any chemical (d) It is unacceptable to use fractional coeffi-
compound is always the same. cients when balancing a chemical equation.
(e) A skeleton equation contains all the
7. 1.00 mol of any chemical compound or element
contains 6.02×1023 particles. spectator ions.
16. What is the molar mass of ammonium
8. The value of the Avogadro constant depends on
dichromate, (NH ) Cr O ?
temperature. 4 2 2 7
(a) 248 g/mol
9. The empirical formula of an unknown
(b) 234 g/mol
compound must be determined by experiment.
(c) 200 g/mol
10. The actual yield of most chemical reactions is (d) 252 g/mol
less than 100%. (e) 200 g/mol
11. The theoretical yield of a chemical reaction 17. A sample of benzene, C H , contains 3.0×1023
6 6
must be determined by experiment. molecules of benzene. How many atoms are in
12. Stoichiometric calculations are used to the sample?
determine the products of a chemical reaction. (a) 36×1024
(b) 1.8×1023
Multiple Choice (c) 3.6×1024
In your notebook, write the letter for the best (d) 2.5×1022
answer to each question. (e) 3.0×1023
13. The number of molecules in 2.0 mol of 18. What is the molar mass of zinc sulfate
nitrogen gas, N 2(g) , is heptahydrate, ZnSO 4 ·7H 2 O?
(a) 1.8×1024 (a) 161 g/mol
(b) 2.4×1023 (b) 288 g/mol
(c) 1.2×1024 (c) 182 g/mol
(d) 1.2×1023 (d) 240 g/mol
(e) 4.0×1023 (e) 312 g/mol
276 MHR • Unit 2 Chemical Quantities
19. The molecular formula of citric acid monohy- 25. A sample of sulfur trioxide, SO , has a mass of
3
drate is C H O ·H O. Its molecular mass is 20 g. How many moles are in the sample?
6 8 7 2
as follows: (a) 0.20
(a) 192 g/mol (b) 0.25
(b) 210 g/mol (c) 0.50
(c) 188 g/mol (d) 0.75
(d) 206 g/mol (e) 0.80
(e) 120 g/mol 26. How many molecules are in 1.00 mg of glucose,
20. The relative mass of one isotope of sulfur is C H O ?
6 12 6
31.9721 u. Its abundance is 95.02%. Naturally (a) 2.18×1018
occurring elemental sulfur has a relative atomic (b) 3.34×1018
mass of 32.066. The mass number of the one (c) 2.18×1021
other isotope of sulfur is (d) 3.34×1021
(a) 31 (e) 3.34×1020
(b) 32 27. A sample that contains carbon, hydrogen,
(c) 33 and oxygen is analyzed in a carbon-hydrogen
(d) 34 combustion analyzer. All the oxygen in the
(e) 35 sample is
21. A sample of ethane, C H , has a mass of 9.3 g. (a) converted to the oxygen in carbon dioxide
2 6
It contains the same number of atoms as (b) converted to oxygen in water
(a) 23.0 g of sodium, Na (c) mixed with the excess oxygen used to
(b) 32.0 g of oxygen, O combust the sample
2
(c) 48.0 g of ozone, O (d) converted to oxygen in carbon dioxide
3
(d) 30.0 g of formaldehyde, CH O and/or water
2
(e) 14.0 g of nitrogen gas, N (e) both (c) and (d)
2
22. A sample of ozone, O , has a mass of 48.0 g. 28. A compound that contains carbon, hydrogen,
3
It contains the same number of atoms as and oxygen is going to be analyzed in a
(a) 58.7 g of nickel carbon-hydrogen combustion analyzer. Before
(b) 27.0 g of aluminum beginning the analysis, which of the following
(c) 38.0 g of fluorine steps must be carried out?
(d) 3.02 g of hydrogen I. Find the mass of the unknown sample.
(e) 32.0 g of oxygen II. Add the precise amount of oxygen that is
23. Which substance contains 9.03×1023 atoms? needed for combustion.
(a) 16.0 g of oxygen, O III. Find the mass of the carbon dioxide and
2
(b) 4.00 g of helium, He water absorbers.
(c) 28.0 g of nitrogen, N (a) I only
2
(d) 22.0 g of carbon dioxide, CO (b) I and II only
2
(e) 8.0 g of methane, CH (c) I, II, and III
4
(d) I and III only
24. Examine the following formulas. Which
(e) none of the above
formula is an empirical formula?
(a) C H
2 4
(b) C H
6 6
(c) C H
2 2
(d) H O
2 2
(e) Na Cr O
2 2 7
Unit 2 Review • MHR 277
Short Answer tetraethyl lead. MTBE has the formula C H O.
5 12
What is the percentage composition of each
29. Answer the following questions, related to the
element in MTBE?
concept of the mole.
(a) How many N molecules are in a 1.00 mol 38. Ammonia can be produced in the laboratory
2
sample of N ? How many N atoms are in this by heating ammonium chloride with calcium
2
sample? hydroxide.
(b) How many PO 4 3− ions are in 2.5 mol of 2NH 4 Cl (s) +Ca(OH) 2(s)
Ca 3 (PO 4 ) 2 ? → CaCl 2(s) +2NH 3(g) +2H 2 O (g)
(c) How many O atoms are in 0.47 mol of
8.93 g of ammonium chloride is heated with
Ca (PO ) ?
3 4 2 7.48 g of calcium hydroxide. What mass of
30. Explain how a balanced chemical equation ammonia, NH , can be expected? Assume that
3
follows the law of conservation of mass. Use the reaction has 100% yield.
an example to illustrate your explanation.
Inquiry
31. List all the information that can be obtained
from a balanced chemical equation. 39. Design an experiment to determine the value of
32. Answer the following questions, related to the x in sodium thiosulfate, Na 2 S 2 O 3 ·xH 2 O. Include
limiting reactant. an outline of your procedure. Describe the data
(a) Explain the concept of the limiting reactant. that you need to collect. What assumptions do
Use a real-life analogy that is not used in you need to make?
this textbook. 40. Design an experiment to determine the
(b) What is the opposite of a limiting reactant? mole-to-mole ratio of lead(II) nitrate, Pb(NO ) ,
3 2
(c) Explain why, in many chemical reactions, to potassium iodide, KI, in the reaction:
the reactants are not present in stoichiomet- Pb(NO ) + KI → PbI + KNO
3 2(aq) (aq) 2(s) 3(aq)
ric amounts. Assume that you have solutions of lead(II)
33. Consider a 7.35 g sample of propane, C H . nitrate and potassium iodide. Both of these
3 8
(a) How many moles of propane are in this solutions contain 0.0010 mol of solute per
sample? 10 mL of solution.
(b) How many molecules of propane are in 41. The following reaction can be used to obtain
this sample? lead(II) chloride, PbCl . Lead(II) chloride is
2
(c) How many atoms of carbon are in this moderately soluble in warm water.
sample? Pb(NO ) +2NaCl → PbCl +2NaNO
3 2(aq) (aq) 2(s) 3(aq)
34. How many atoms are in 10.0 g of white Explain why carrying out this reaction in a
phosphorus, P ? warm aqueous solution is unlikely to produce
4
a 100% yield of lead(II) chloride.
35. A 2.00 g sample of the mineral troegerite,
(UO ) (AsO ) ·12H O, has 1.38×1021 uranium 42. Imagine that you are given a sheet of aluminum
2 3 4 2 2
atoms. How many oxygen atoms are present in foil that measures 10.0 cm × 10.0 cm. It has a
2.00 g of troegerite? mass of 0.40 g.
(a) The density of aluminum is 2.70 g/cm3.
36. Fuels that contain hydrogen can be classified
Determine the thickness of the aluminum
according to their mass percent of hydrogen.
foil, in millimeters.
Which of the following compounds has the
(b) Using any of the above information, deter-
greatest mass percent of hydrogen: ethanol,
mine the radius of an aluminum atom, in
C H OH, or cetyl palmitate, C H O ? Explain
2 5 32 64 2
nanometers. Assume that each aluminum
your answer.
atom is cube-shaped.
37. Methyl tertiary butyl ether, or MTBE, is
(c) How will your answer to part (b) change
currently used as an octane booster in gasoline.
if you assume that each aluminum atom
It has replaced the environmentally unsound
is spherical?
278 MHR • Unit 2 Chemical Quantities
(d) What question(s) do your answers to parts consider when you write a policy that deals
(b) and (c) raise? with employee drug testing? What factors
43. Consider the double displacement reaction influence whether drug testing is warranted,
below. how often it is warranted, and what sub-
CaCl +Na SO → CaCO +2NaCl stances should be tested for? How will you
2(aq) 2 4(aq) 3(s) (aq)
(a) Design an experiment to determine the decide on levels that are acceptable? Do the
percentage yield of this reaction. Clearly federal and provincial Human Rights
indicate the measurements that need to Commissions have anything to say about
be taken, along with suggested amounts. these issues?
(b) How could the skills of a chemist influence 51. The combustion of gasoline in an automobile
the outcome of this experiment? engine can be represented by the equation
2C H +25O → 16CO +18H O
8 18(g) 2(g) 2(g) 2 (g)
Communication (a) In a properly tuned engine with a full
44. It is impossible for a single atom of neon, tank of gas, what reactant do you think
with a mass of exactly 20.18 u, to exist. is limiting? Explain your reasoning.
Explain why. (b) A car that is set to run properly at sea level
will run poorly at higher altitudes, where
45. The molecular mass of a compound is meas-
the air is less dense. Explain why.
ured in atomic mass units but its molar mass is
(c) The reaction of atmospheric oxygen with
measured in grams. Explain why this
atmospheric nitrogen to form nitrogen
is true.
monoxide, NO, occurs along with the
46. Explain the relationship between an empirical
combustion of fuel.
formula and a molecular formula. Use sodium N +O → 2NO
2(g) 2(g) (g)
tartrate, Na C H O , and cyanocolabamin,
2 4 4 6 What adjustments need to be made to a
C H C·N O P (vitamin B ), to illustrate
63 88 14 14 12 vehicle’s carburetor or fuel injectors (which
your answer.
control the amount of fuel and air that are
47. Explain why an empirical formula can mixed) to compensate for this reaction?
represent many different molecules. Explain your answer.
48. Chemists need to know the percentage yield of
a reaction. Why is this true, particularly for
industrial reactions?
49. Examine the following reaction. List the steps
needed to calculate the number of grams of C COURSE
that can be expected when a given mass of A CHALLENGE
reacts with a given mass of B. Include proper Planet Unknown
units for each step. Express the answer in terms Consider the following as you continue to plan for your
of A, B, C, and/or D as necessary. Chemistry Course Challenge:
2A+3B → 4C+D • In a reaction that produces a precipitate that you
want to recover, what techniques would you use to
Making Connections maximize your percentage yield?
50. Reread the Unit 2 opener. • When you have a given amount of one reactant and
(a) Suppose that you ate a dessert containing you decide the amount of a second reactant, which
poppy seeds. As a result, you tested positive reactant should be the limiting reactant if you want
to maximize your percentage yield?
for opiates when you applied for a summer
job. What can you do? • Write a balanced chemical equation for the
reaction between sodium phosphate and
(b) Now suppose that you are a policy-writer for
calcium nitrate. Recall that ionic compounds con-
a manufacturing company that uses large,
taining sodium are soluble.
dangerous machines. What do you need to
Unit 2 Review • MHR 279
Solutions
and Solubility
K
UNIT 3 CONTENTS
eeping fish as pets seems like a
CHAPTER 8
simple and straightforward task. You
Solutions and Their Concentrations
start off with a suitable fish tank,
CHAPTER 9 some water, and some fish. Once
Aqueous Solutions you have added a few water-plants
for decoration, all you have to do is
CHAPTER 10
feed the fish daily. It sounds simple.
Acids and Bases
In fact, providing a safe, life-
sustaining environment for fish
UNIT 3 ISSUE
Island at Risk involves a variety of complex,
interdependent factors. Many of
these are directly related to chem-
istry. For example, the presence of
UNIT 3 OVERALL EXPECTATIONS
ammonia, NH , is one of the most
3
What are the properties of common causes of death in poorly
solutions, and what methods maintained fish tanks. Ammonia is
are used to describe their
produced when uneaten fish food
concentrations?
decays. This compound dissolves
What skills are involved in readily in water. It is toxic to fish
working experimentally with
in even minute concentrations.
solutions, and in solving quan-
Chlorine is another chemical
titative solution problems?
that can harm fish when it is
How can a scientific under-
dissolved in the tank water.
standing of solutions help us
Unfortunately, almost all tap water
interpret and make decisions
is treated with chlorine. Other factors
about environmental issues
involving solutes and solvents? that affect the quality of water for
fish include its acidity (pH), its
hardness, and its temperature. For
example, warm water contains too
Unit Issue Prep
little dissolved oxygen. This will
Look ahead to the issue at the end cause the fish to suffocate.
of Unit 3. Start preparing for this Water quality is essential to
issue now by listing the kinds of
every living thing. In this unit, you
questions you will need to address,
will find out more about water qual-
and the ways in which you may like
ity. You will learn to identify impor-
to present your responses.
tant solutions in your life, and how
to calculate their concentrations.
You will also investigate what can
happen when acids and bases inter-
280 act with water and with each other.
282
Solutions and
Their Concentrations
Y
our environment is made up of many important solutions, or Chapter Preview
homogeneous mixtures. The air you breathe and the liquids you drink are
8.1 Types of Solutions
solutions. So are many of the metallic objects that you use every day. The
8.2 Factors That Affect
quality of a solution, such as tap water, depends on the substances that
Rate of Dissolving
are dissolved in it. “Clean” water may contain small amounts of dissolved
and Solubility
substances, such as iron and chlorine. “Dirty” water may have dangerous
8.3 The Concentration of
chemicals dissolved in it.
Solutions
The difference between clean water and undrinkable water often
depends on concentration: the amount of a dissolved substance in a 8.4 Preparing Solutions
particular quantity of a solution. For example, tap water contains a low
concentration of fluoride to help keep your teeth healthy. Water with a
high concentration of fluoride, however, could be harmful to your health.
Water is a good solvent for many substances. You may have noticed,
however, that grease-stained clothing cannot be cleaned by water alone.
Grease is one substance that does not dissolve in water. Why doesn’t it
dissolve? In this chapter, you will find out why. You will learn how
solutions form. You will explore factors that affect a substance’s ability
to dissolve. You will find out more about the concentration of solutions,
Concepts and Skills
and you will have a chance to prepare your own solutions as well.
You Will Need
Before you begin this chapter,
review the following concepts
As water runs and skills:
through soil and
(cid:2) classifying mixtures
rocks, it dissolves
(Chapter 1, section 1.3)
minerals such as
(cid:2) predicting molecular
iron, calcium, and
polarity (Chapter 3,
magnesium. What
section 3.3)
makes water such
(cid:2) distinguishing between
a good solvent?
intermolecular and
intramolecular forces
(Chapter 3, section 3.2)
(cid:2) describing the shape and
bonding of the water
molecule (Chapter 3,
section 3.3)
(cid:2) calculating molar mass
(Chapter 5, section 5.3)
(cid:2) calculating molar
amounts (Chapter 5,
section 5.3)
Chapter 8 Solutions and Their Concentrations • MHR 283
8.1 Types of Solutions
Section Preview/ As stated in the chapter opener, a solution is a homogeneous mixture. It
Specific Expectations is uniform throughout. If you analyze any two samples of a solution, you
will find that they contain the same substances in the same relative
In this section, you will
amounts. The simplest solutions contain two substances. Most common
(cid:2) explainsolution formation,
solutions contain many substances.
referring to polar and non-
polar solvents A solvent is any substance that has other substances dissolved in it.
In a solution, the substance that is present in the largest amount (whether
(cid:2) identify examplesof solid,
liquid, and gas solutions by volume, mass, or number of moles) is usually referred to as the solvent.
from everyday life The other substances that are present in the solution are called the solutes.
Pure substances (such as pure water, H O) have fixed composition.
(cid:2) communicateyour under- 2
standing of the following You cannot change the ratio of hydrogen, H, to oxygen, O, in water
terms: solution, solvent, without producing an entirely new substance. Solutions, on the other
solutes, variable composi- hand, have variable composition. This means that different ratios of
tion, aqueous solution, solvent to solute are possible. For example, you can make a weak or a
miscible, immiscible, alloys,
strong solution of sugar and water, depending on how much sugar you
solubility, saturated solution,
add. Figure 8.1 shows a strong solution of tea and water on the left, and a
unsaturated solution
weak solution of tea and water on the right. The ratio of solvent to solute
in the strong solution is different from the ratio of solvent to solute in the
weak solution.
Figure 8.1 How can a solution have variable composition yet be uniform throughout?
COURSE
CHALLENGE
When a solute dissolves in a solvent, no chemical reaction occurs.
How can you find out what Therefore, the solute and solvent can be separated using physical
solutes are dissolved in a properties, such as boiling point or melting point. For example, water
sample of water? What physi-
and ethanol have different boiling points. Using this property, a solution
cal properties might be useful?
of water and ethanol can be separated by the process of distillation. Refer
You will need answers to these
back to Chapter 1, section 1.2. What physical properties, besides boiling
questions when you do your
point, can be used to separate the components of solutions and other
Chemistry Course Challenge.
mixtures?
284 MHR • Unit 3 Solutions and Solubility
Figure 8.2 Can you identify the components of some of these solutions?
A solution can be a gas, a liquid, or a solid. Figure 8.2 shows some
examples of solutions. Various combinations of solute and solvent states
are possible. For example, a gas can be dissolved in a liquid, or a solid
can be dissolved in another solid. Solid, liquid, and gaseous solutions
are all around you. Steel is a solid solution of carbon in iron. Juice is
a liquid solution of sugar and flavouring dissolved in water. Air is an
example of a gaseous solution. The four main components of dry air are
nitrogen (78%), oxygen (21%), argon (0.9%), and carbon dioxide (0.03%).
Table 8.1 lists some other common solutions.
Table 8.1Types of Solutions
Original state of solute Solvent Examples
gas gas air; natural gas; oxygen-acetylene
mixture used in welding
gas liquid carbonated drinks; water in rivers
and lakes containing oxygen
gas solid hydrogen in platinum
liquid gas water vapour in air; gasoline-air
mixture
liquid liquid alcohol in water; antifreeze in water
liquid solid amalgams, such as mercury in silver
solid gas mothballs in air
Take another look at the four
solid liquid sugar in water; table salt in water; components of dry air. Which
amalgams component would you call the
solvent? Which components
solid solid alloys, such as the copper-nickel alloy
are the solutes?
used to make coins
Chapter 8 Solutions and Their Concentrations • MHR 285
You are probably most familiar with liquid solutions, especially
Electronic Learning Partner
aqueous solutions. An aqueous solution is a solution in which water is
Your Chemistry 11 Electronic the solvent. Because aqueous solutions are so important, you will focus
Learning Partner can help on them in the next two sections of this chapter and again in Chapter 9.
you learn more about the
Some liquids, such as water and ethanol, dissolve readily in each
properties of water.
other in any proportion. That is, any amount of water dissolves in any
amount of ethanol. Similarly, any amount of ethanol dissolves in any
amount of water. Liquids such as these are said to be miscible with
each other. Miscible liquids can be combined in any proportions. Thus,
either ethanol or water can be considered to be the solvent. Liquids that
do not readily dissolve in each other, such as oil and water, are said to
CHEM be immiscible.
FACT
As you know from Chapter 4, solid solutions of metals are called
An alloy that is made of a alloys. Adding even small quantities of another element to a metal
metal dissolved in mercury is changes the properties of the metal. Technological advances throughout
called an amalgam. A tradition- history have been linked closely to the discovery of new alloys. For
al dental amalgam, used to fill example, bronze is an alloy of copper and tin. Bronze contains only
cavities in teeth, contains 50%
about 10% tin, but it is much stronger than copper and more resistant to
mercury. Due to concern over
corrosion. Also, bronze can be melted in an ordinary fire so that castings
the use of mercury, which is
can be made, as shown in Figure 8.3.
toxic, dentists now use other
materials, such as ceramic
materials, to fill dental cavities. Solubility and Saturation
The ability of a solvent to dissolve a solute depends on the forces of
attraction between the particles. There is always some attraction between
solvent and solute particles, so some solute always dissolves. The
solubility of a solute is the amount of solute that dissolves in a given
quantity of solvent, at a certain temperature. For
example, the solubility of sodium chloride in water
at 20˚C is 36 g per 100 mL of water.
A saturated solution is formed when no more
solute will dissolve in a solution, and excess solute is
present. For example, 100 mL of a saturated solution
of table salt (sodium chloride, NaCl) in water at 20˚C
contains 36 g of sodium chloride. The solution is
saturated with respect to sodium chloride. If more
sodium chloride is added to the solution, it will not
dissolve. The solution may still be able to dissolve
other solutes, however.
An unsaturated solution is a solution that is not
yet saturated. Therefore, it can dissolve more solute.
For example, a solution that contains 20 g of sodium
chloride dissolved in 100 mL of water at 20˚C is unsat-
urated. This solution has the potential to dissolve
another 16 g of salt, as Figure 8.4 demonstrates.
Figure 8.3 The introduction of the alloy bronze around 3000 BCE
led to the production of better-quality tools and weapons.
286 MHR • Unit 3 Solutions and Solubility
A B
Figure 8.4 At 20˚C, the solubility of table salt in water
C
is 36 g/100 mL.
A 20 g of NaCl dissolve to form an unsaturated solution.
B 36 g of NaCl dissolve to form a saturated solution.
C 40 g of NaCl are added to 100 mL of water. 36 g
dissolve to form a saturated solution. 4 g of
undissolved solute are left.
Suppose that a solute is described as soluble in a particular solvent.
This generally means that its solubility is greater than 1 g per 100 mL of
solvent. If a solute is described as insoluble, its solubility is less than 0.1 g
per 100 mL of solvent. Substances with solubility between these limits are
Imagine that you are given a
called sparingly soluble, or slightly soluble. Solubility is a relative term,
filtered solution of sodium
however. Even substances such as oil and water dissolve in each other to chloride. How can you decide
some extent, although in very tiny amounts. whether the solution is
The general terms that are used to describe solubility for solids and saturated or unsaturated?
liquids do not apply to gases in the same way. For example, oxygen is
described as soluble in water. Oxygen from the air dissolves in the water
of lakes and rivers. The solubility of oxygen in fresh water at 20˚C is only
9 mg/L, or 0.0009 g/100 mL. This small amount of oxygen is enough to
ensure the survival of aquatic plants and animals. A solid solute with the
same solubility, however, would be described as insoluble in water.
Identifying Suitable Solvents
Water is a good solvent for many compounds, but it is a poor solvent for
others. If you have grease on your hands after adjusting a bicycle chain, Electronic Learning Partner
you cannot use water to dissolve the grease and clean your hands. You
need to use a detergent, such as soap, to help dissolve the grease in the Go to your Chemistry 11
water. You can also use another solvent to dissolve the grease. How can Electronic Learning Partner
to find out more about the
you find a suitable solvent? How can you predict whether a solvent will
properties of two solvents:
dissolve a particular solute? Try the Thought Lab on the next page to find
water and benzene.
out for yourself.
Chapter 8 Solutions and Their Concentrations • MHR 287
ThoughtLab Matching Solutes and Solvents
kerosene
kerosene
water
A B water
Although there is a solvent for every solute, In photo B, the same experiment was repeated
not all mixtures produce a solution. Table salt with crystals of cobalt(II) chloride. This time, the
dissolves in water but not in kerosene. Oil crystal dissolved in the water but not in the
dissolves in kerosene but not in water. What kerosene.
properties must a solvent and a solute share in
order to produce a solution? Analysis
In an investigation, the bottom of a Petri dish 1. Water is a polar molecule. Therefore, it acts
was covered with water, as shown in photo A. An as a polar solvent.
equal amount of kerosene was added to a second (a) Think about the compounds you classified
Petri dish. When a crystal of iodine was added in the Procedure. Which compounds are
to the water, it did not dissolve. When a second soluble in water?
crystal of iodine was added to the kerosene, (b) Assume that the interaction between solutes
however, it did dissolve. and solvents that you examine here applies
to a wide variety of substances. Make a
Procedure
general statement about the type of solute
Classify each compound as ionic (containing that dissolves in polar solvents.
ions), polar (containing polar molecules), or
2. Kerosene is non-polar. It acts as a non-polar
non-polar (containing non-polar molecules).
solvent.
(a) iodine, I 2 (a) Which of the compounds you classified in
(b) cobalt(II) chloride, CoCl 2 the Procedure is soluble in kerosene?
(c) sucrose, C 12 H 22 O 11 (Hint:Sucrose contains (b) Make a general statement about the type of
8 O–H bonds.) solute that dissolves in non-polar solvents.
Section Wrap-up
In this section, you learned the meanings of several important terms,
such as solvent, solute, saturated solution, unsaturated solution, aqueous
solution, and solubility. You need to know these terms in order
to understand the material in the rest of the chapter. In section 8.2, you
will examine the factors that affect the rate at which a solute dissolves in
a solvent. You will also learn about factors that affect solubility.
288 MHR • Unit 3 Solutions and Solubility
Section Review
1 K/U Name the two basic components of a solution.
2 K/U Give examples of each type of solution.
(a) solid solution
(b) liquid solution
(c) gaseous solution (at room temperature)
3 K/U Explain the term “homogeneous mixture.”
4 C How do the properties of a homogeneous mixture differ from the
properties of a heterogeneous mixture, or mechanical mixture? Use
diagrams to explain.
5 K/U Give examples of each type of mixture.
(a) homogeneous mixture
(b) mechanical mixture (heterogeneous mixture)
6 K/U Distinguish between the following terms: soluble, miscible, and
immiscible.
7 K/U Distinguish between an alloy and an amalgam. Give one example
of each.
8 K/U What type of solute dissolves in a polar solvent, such as water?
Give an example.
9 I Potassium bromate, KBrO 3 , is sometimes added to bread dough to
make it easier to work with. Suppose that you are given an aqueous
solution of potassium bromate. How can you determine if the solution
is saturated or unsaturated?
10 K/U Two different clear, colourless liquids were gently heated in
an evaporating dish. Liquid A left no residue, while liquid B left a
white residue. Which liquid was a solution, and which was a pure
substance? Explain your answer.
11 I You are given three liquids. One is a pure substance, and the second
is a solution of two miscible liquids. The third is a solution composed
of a solid solute dissolved in a liquid solvent. Describe the procedure
you would follow to distinguish between the three solutions.
12 MC In 1989, the oil tanker Exxon Valdez struck a reef in Prince
William Sound, Alaska. The accident released 40 million litres of
crude oil. The oil eventually covered 26 000 km2 of water.
(a) Explain why very little of the spilt oil dissolved in the water.
(b) The density of crude oil varies. Assuming a value of 0.86 g/mL,
estimate the average thickness of the oil slick that resulted from
the Exxon Valdez disaster.
(c) How do you think most of the oil from a tanker accident is
dispersed over time? Why would this have been a slow process
in Prince William Sound?
13 MC Food colouring is often added to foods such as candies, ice cream,
and icing. Are food colouring dyes more likely to be polar or non-polar
molecules? Explain your answer.
Chapter 8 Solutions and Their Concentrations • MHR 289
8.2 Factors That Affect Rate of
Dissolving and Solubility
Section Preview/ As you learned in section 8.1, the solubility of a solute is the amount of
Specific Expectations solute that dissolves in a given volume of solvent at a certain temperature.
Solubility is determined by the intermolecular attractions between solvent
In this section, you will
and solute particles. You will learn more about solubility and the factors
(cid:2) explainsome important
that affect it later in this section. First, however, you will look at an
properties of water
important property of a solution: the rate of dissolving, or how quickly a
(cid:2) explainsolution formation in
solute dissolves in a solvent.
terms of intermolecular
forces between polar, ionic, The rate of dissolving depends on several factors, including tempera-
and non-polar substances ture, agitation, and particle size. You have probably used these factors
yourself when making solutions like the fruit juice shown in Figure 8.5.
(cid:2) describethe relationship
between solubility and
temperature for solids,
liquids, and gases
(cid:2) communicateyour under-
standing of the following
terms: rate of dissolving,
dipole, dipole-dipole
attraction, hydrogen bond-
ing, ion-dipole attractions,
hydrated, electrolyte,
non-electrolytes
Figure 8.5 Fruit juice is soluble in water. The concentrated juice in this photograph,
however, will take a long time to dissolve. Why?
Factors That Affect the Rate of Dissolving
You may have observed that a solute, such as sugar, dissolves faster in
hot water than in cold water. In fact, for most solid solutes, the rate of
dissolving is greater at higher temperatures. At higher temperatures, the
solvent molecules have greater kinetic energy. Thus, they collide with the
undissolved solid molecules more frequently. This increases their rate of
dissolving.
Suppose that you are dissolving a spoonful of sugar in a cup of hot
coffee. How can you make the sugar dissolve even faster? You can stir
the coffee. Agitating a mixture by stirring or by shaking the container
increases the rate of dissolving. Agitation brings fresh solvent into contact
with undissolved solid.
Finally, you may have noticed that a large lump of solid sugar
dissolves more slowly than an equal mass of powdered sugar. Decreasing
the size of the particles increases the rate of dissolving. When you break
Figure 8.6 Chemists often grind
up a large mass into many smaller masses, you increase the surface area
solids into powders using a mortar
that is in contact with the solvent. This allows the solid to dissolve faster.
and pestle. This increases the rate
of dissolving. Figure 8.6 shows one way to increase the rate of dissolving.
290 MHR • Unit 3 Solutions and Solubility
Solubility and Particle Attractions
Math
LINK
By now, you are probably very familiar with the process of dissolving.
You already know what it looks like when a solid dissolves in a liquid. Calculate the surface area
Why, however, does something dissolve? What is happening at the of a cube with the dimensions
molecular level?
5.0cm×5.0cm×5.0cm.
Now imagine cutting this
The reasons why a solute may or may not dissolve in a solvent are
cube to form smaller cubes
related to the forces of attraction between the solute and solvent particles.
with the dimensions
These forces include the attractions between two solute particles, the
1.0cm×1.0cm×1.0cm.
attractions between two solvent particles, and the attractions between a
How many smaller cubes could
solute particle and a solvent particle. When the forces of attraction you make? Calculate their total
between different particles in a mixture are stronger than the forces of surface area.
attraction between like particles in the mixture, a solution forms. The
strength of each attraction influences the solubility, or the amount of a
solute that dissolves in a solvent.
To make this easier to understand, consider the following three steps
in the process of dissolving a solid in a liquid.
The Process of Dissolving at the Molecular Level
Step 1 The forces between the particles in the solid must be broken.
This step always requires energy. In an ionic solid, the forces
that are holding the ions together must be broken. In a molecu-
lar solid, the forces between the molecules must be broken.
Step 2 Some of the intermolecular forces between the particles in the
liquid must be broken. This step also requires energy.
Step 3 There is an attraction between the particles of the solid and the
particles of the liquid. This step always gives off energy.
The solid is more likely to dissolve in the liquid if the energy change in
step 3 is greater than the sum of the energy changes in steps 1 and 2.
(You will learn more about energy and dissolving in Unit 5.)
Polar and Non-Polar Substances
In the Thought Lab in section 8.1, you observed that solid iodine is
insoluble in water. Only a weak attraction exists between the non-polar
iodine molecules and the polar water molecules. On the other hand, the
intermolecular forces between the water molecules are very strong. As a
result, the water molecules remain attracted to each other rather than
attracting the iodine molecules.
You also observed that iodine is soluble inkerosene. Both iodine
and kerosene are non-polar substances. The attraction that iodine and Remember that the rateat
kerosene molecules have for each other is greater than the attraction which a solute dissolves is
different from the solubilityof
between the iodine molecules in the solid and the attraction between the
the solute. In your notebook,
kerosene molecules in the liquid.
explain briefly and clearly the
The Concept Organizer shown on the next page summarizes the
difference between rate of
behaviour of polar and non-polar substances in solutions. You will learn
dissolving and solubility.
more about polar and non-polar substances later in this section.
Chapter 8 Solutions and Their Concentrations • MHR 291
Concept Organizer Polar and Non-Polar Compounds
Polar compounds dissolve Polar solvents
e.g. sucrose, C 12 H 22 O 11 in e.g. water, H 2 O ((cid:2))
do not
dissolve
in
Non-Polar compounds dissolve Non-Polar solvents
e.g. iodine, l 2(s) in e.g. benzene, C 6 H 6((cid:2))
Solubility and Intermolecular Forces
H
You have learned that solubility depends on the forces between particles.
Thus, polar substances dissolve in polar solvents, and non-polar
x
substances dissolve in non-polar solvents. What are these forces that act
104.5˚
between particles?
x O In Chapter 3, section 3.3, you learned that a water molecule is polar.
H It has a relatively large negative charge on the oxygen atom, and positive
charges on both hydrogen atoms. Molecules such as water, which have
charges separated into positive and negative regions, are said to have a
permanent dipole. A dipole consists of two opposite charges that are sepa-
Figure 8.7 The bent shape and rated by a short distance. Figure 8.7 shows the dipole of a water molecule.
polar bonds of a water molecule
give it a permanent dipole. Dipole-Dipole Attractions
The attraction between the opposite charges on two different polar mole-
cules is called a dipole-dipole attraction. Dipole-dipole attractions are
intermolecular. This means that they act between molecules. Usually they
are only about 1% as strong as an ionic or covalent bond. In water, there
is a special dipole-dipole attraction called hydrogen bonding. It occurs
between the oxygen atom on one molecule and the hydrogen atoms on a
nearby molecule. Hydrogen bonding is much stronger than an ordinary
Electronic Learning Partner
dipole-dipole attraction. It is much weaker, however, than the covalent
bond between the oxygen and hydrogen atoms in a water molecule.
Go to the Chemistry 11
Figure 8.8 illustrates hydrogen bonding between water molecules.
Electronic Learning Partner
to find out how hydrogen
bonding leads to water’s
amazing surface tension.
Figure 8.8 Hydrogen bonding
between water molecules is
shown as dotted lines. The H
atoms on each molecule are
attracted to O atoms on other
water molecules.
292 MHR • Unit 3 Solutions and Solubility
Ion-Dipole Attractions
Ionic crystals consist of repeating patterns of oppositely charged ions, as
shown in Figure 8.9. What happens when an ionic compound comes in
contact with water? The negative end of the dipole on some water mole-
cules attracts the cations on the surface of the ionic crystal. At the same
time, the positive end of the water dipole attracts the anions. These attrac-
tions are known as ion-dipole attractions: attractive forces between an ion
and a polar molecule. If ion-dipole attractions can replace the ionic bonds
between the cations and anions in an ionic compound, the compound
will dissolve. Generally an ionic compound will dissolve in a polar
solvent. For example, table salt (sodium chloride, NaCl) is an ionic Cl–
compound. It dissolves well in water, which is a polar solvent.
Na+
When ions are present in an aqueous solution, each ion is hydrated.
This means that it is surrounded by water molecules. Hydrated ions can
move through a solution and conduct electricity. A solute that forms an Figure 8.9 Ionic crystals have
very ordered structures.
aqueous solution with the ability to conduct electricity is called an
electrolyte. Figure 8.10 shows hydrated sodium chloride ions, which
are electrolytes.
hydrated
water molecules
ions
Na+ ion
Cl– ion
Figure 8.10 Ion-dipole attrac-
tions help to explain why sodium
chloride dissolves in water.
An Exception: Insoluble Ionic Compounds
Although most ionic compounds are soluble in water, some are not very
soluble at all. The attraction between ions is difficult to break. As a result,
compounds with very strong ionic bonds, such as silver chloride, tend to
be less soluble in water than compounds with weak ionic bonds, such as
sodium chloride.
Predicting Solubility
You can predict the solubility of a binary compound, such as mercury(II)
sulfide, HgS, by comparing the electronegativity of each element in the
compound. If there is a large difference in the two electronegativities, the
bond between the elements is polar or even ionic. This type of compound
probably dissolves in water. If there is only a small difference in the two
electronegativities, the bond is not polar or ionic. This type of compound
probably does not dissolve in water. For example, the electronegativity of
mercury is 1.9. The electronegativity of sulfur is 2.5. The difference in
these two electronegativities is small, only 0.6. Therefore, you can predict
that mercury(II) sulfide is insoluble in water. In Chapter 9, you will learn
another way to predict the solubility of ionic compounds in water.
Chapter 8 Solutions and Their Concentrations • MHR 293
The Solubility of Covalent Compounds
Look back at the Concept Many covalent compounds do not have negative and positive charges to
Organizer on page 292. Where attract water molecules. Thus they are not soluble in water. There are
do ionic compounds belong in some exceptions, however. Methanol (a component of windshield washer
this diagram? fluid), ethanol (the “alcohol” in alcoholic beverages), and sugars (such as
sucrose) are examples of covalent compounds that are extremely soluble
in water. These compounds dissolve because their molecules contain
polar bonds, which are able to form hydrogen bonds with water.
For example, sucrose molecules have a number of sites that can
form a hydrogen bond with water to replace the attraction between the
sucrose molecules. (See Figure 8.11.) The sucrose molecules separate and
Electronic Learning Partner
become hydrated, just like dissolved ions. The molecules remain neutral,
however. As a result, sucrose and other soluble covalent compounds do
The Chemistry 11 Electronic
not conduct electricity when dissolved in water. They are non-electrolytes.
Learning Partner contains a
video clip describing how
water dissolves ionic and H
some covalent compounds. H
H O
This will be useful if you are
H O
having difficulty visualizing
O H
particle attractions.
O H
CH
H 2
CH
O 2
C O O
H H H H H H
H
O C C CCC H C H O
H H O
Figure 8.11 A sucrose mole- CH 2 O
cule contains several O–H atom H O C C O C C
O H
connections. The O–H bond
H H H O H O H H
is highly polar, with the H atom
H
having the positive charge.
H O H
The negative charges on water
H O
molecules form hydrogen bonds H O
with a sucrose molecule, as H
shown by the dotted lines.
Insoluble Covalent Compounds
The covalent compounds that are found in oil and grease are insoluble
in water. They have no ions or highly polar bonds, so they cannot form
hydrogen bonds with water molecules. Non-polar compounds tend to be
soluble in non-polar solvents, such as benzene or kerosene. The forces
between the solute molecules are replaced by the forces between the
solute and solvent molecules.
In general, ionic solutes and polar covalent solutes both dissolve in
polar solvents. Non-polar solutes dissolve in non-polar solvents. The
phrase like dissolves like summarizes these observations. It means that
solutes and solvents that have similar properties form solutions.
If a compound has both polar and non-polar components, it may
dissolve in both polar and non-polar solvents. For example, acetic acid,
CH COOH, is a liquid that forms hydrogen bonds with water. It is fully
3
miscible with water. Acetic acid also dissolves in non-polar solvents,
such as benzene and carbon tetrachloride, because the CH component
3
is non-polar.
294 MHR • Unit 3 Solutions and Solubility
Factors That Affect Solubility
You have taken a close look at the attractive forces between solute and
solvent particles. Now that you understand why solutes dissolve, it is
time to examine the three factors that affect solubility: molecule size,
temperature, and pressure. Notice that these three factors are similar to
the factors that affect the rate of dissolving. Be careful not to confuse them.
Molecule Size and Solubility
Small molecules are often more soluble than larger molecules. Methanol,
CH OH, and ethanol, CH CH OH, are both completely miscible with
3 3 2
water. These compounds have OH groups that form hydrogen bonds with
water. Larger molecules with the same OH group but more carbon atoms,
such as pentanol, CH CH CH CH CH OH, are far less soluble. All three
3 2 2 2 2
compounds form hydrogen bonds with water, but the larger pentanol
is less polar overall, making it less soluble. Table 8.2 compares five
molecules by size and solubility.
Table 8.2 Solubility and Molecule Size
Name of compound methanol ethanol propanol butanol pentanol
Chemical formula CH OH CH CH OH CH CH CH OH CH (CH ) OH CH (CH ) OH
3 3 2 3 2 2 3 2 3 3 24
Solubility infinitely soluble infinitely soluble very soluble 9 g/100 mL (at 25°C) 3 g/100 mL (at 25°C)
Temperature and Solubility
At the beginning of this section, you learned that temperature affects CHEM
the rate of dissolving. Temperature also affects solubility. You may have FACT
noticed that solubility data always include temperature. The solubility
The link between cigarette
of a solute in water, for example, is usually given as the number of grams
smoking and lung cancer is
of solute that dissolve in 100 mL of water at a specific temperature. (See
well known. Other cancers are
Table 8.2 for two examples.) Specifying temperature is essential, since the also related to smoking. It is
solubility of a substance is very different at different temperatures. possible that a smoker who
When a solid dissolves in a liquid, energy is needed to break the consumes alcohol may be at
strong bonds between particles in the solid. At higher temperatures, more greater risk of developing
stomach cancer. When a
energy is present. Thus, the solubility of most solids increases with tem-
person smokes, a thin film of
perature. For example, caffeine’s solubility in water is only 2.2 g/100 mL
tar forms inside the mouth and
at 25˚C. At 100˚C, however, caffeine’s solubility increases to 40 g/100 mL.
throat. The tar from cigarette
The bonds between particles in a liquid are not as strong as the bonds smoke contains many carcino-
between particles in a solid. When a liquid dissolves in a liquid, addition- genic (cancer-causing) com-
al energy is not needed. Thus, the solubility of most liquids is not greatly pounds. These compounds are
affected by temperature. non-polar and do not dissolve
in saliva. They are more solu-
Gas particles move quickly and have a great deal of kinetic energy.
ble in alcohol, however. As a
When a gas dissolves in a liquid, it loses some of this energy. At higher
result, if a smoker drinks
temperatures, the dissolved gas gains energy again. As a result, the gas
alcohol, carcinogenic com-
comes out of solution and is less soluble. Thus, the solubility of gases
pounds can be washed into
decreases with higher temperatures. the stomach.
In the next investigation, you will observe and graph the effect
of temperature on the solubility of a solid dissolved in a liquid solvent,
water. As you have learned, most solid solutes become more soluble at
higher temperatures. By determining the solubility of a solute at various
temperatures, you can make a graph of solubility against temperature. The
curve of best fit, drawn through the points, is called the solubility curve.
You can use a solubility curve to determine the solubility of a solute at
any temperature in the range shown on the graph.
Chapter 8 Solutions and Their Concentrations • MHR 295
S K I L L F O C U S
Predicting
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
Plotting Solubility Curves
In this investigation, you will determine the tem- Procedure
perature at which a certain amount of potassium
1. Read through the steps in this Procedure.
nitrate is soluble in water. You will then dilute
Prepare a data table to record the mass of
the solution and determine the solubility again.
the solute, the initial volume of water, the
By combining your data with other students’
total volume of water after step 9, and the
data, you will be able to plot a solubility curve.
temperatures at which the solutions begin
to crystallize.
Question
2. Put the test tube inside a beaker for support.
What is the solubility curve of KNO ?
3 Place the beaker on a balance pan. Set the
reading on the balance to zero. Then measure
Prediction
14.0 g of potassium nitrate into the test tube.
Draw a sketch to show the shape of the curve
3. Add one of the following volumes of distilled
you expect for the solubility of a typical solid
water to the test tube, as assigned by your
dissolving in water at different temperatures.
teacher: 10.0 mL, 15.0 mL, 20.0 mL, 25.0 mL,
Plot solubility on the y-axis and temperature
30.0 mL. (If you use a graduated cylinder,
on the x-axis.
remember to read the volume from the bottom
of the water meniscus. You can make a more
Safety Precautions
accurate volume measurement using either a
burette or a pipette.)
• Before lighting the Bunsen burner, check that 4. Pour about 300 mL of tap water into the
there are no flammable solvents nearby. If you beaker. Set up a hot-water bath using a hot
are using a Bunsen burner, tie back long hair plate, retort stand, and thermometer clamp.
and loose clothing. Be careful of the open flame. Alternatively, use a Bunsen burner, retort
stand, ring clamp, thermometer clamp, and
•After turning it on, be careful not to touch the
wire gauze.
hot plate.
5. Put the stirring wire through the second
Materials hole of the stopper. Insert the stopper,
thermometer, and wire into the test tube.
large test tube
Make sure that the thermometer bulb is
balance
below the surface of the solution. (Check
stirring wire
the diagram on the next page to make sure
two-hole stopper to fit the test tube, with a
that you have set up the apparatus properly
thermometer inserted in one hole
thus far.)
400 mL beaker
graduated cylinder or pipette or burette 6. Place the test tube in the beaker. Secure the
hot plate or Bunsen burner with ring clamps test tube and thermometer to the retort stand,
and wire gauze using clamps. Begin heating the water bath
retort stand and thermometer clamp gently.
potassium nitrate, KNO
3
7. Using the stirring wire, stir the mixture until
distilled water
the solute completely dissolves. Turn the heat
source off, and allow the solution to cool.
296 MHR • Unit 3 Solutions and Solubility
This equation represents the solubility of
KNO at the temperature at which you
thermometer stirring wire 3
recorded the first appearance of crystals.
Repeat your calculation to determine the solu-
stopper
bility after the solution was diluted. Your
large test tube
teacher will collect and display all the class
data for this investigation.
2. Some of your classmates were assigned the
water
same volume of water that you were assigned.
undissolved
hot water bath Compare the temperatures they recorded for
solid
their solutions with the temperatures you
recorded. Comment on the precision of the
data. Should any data be removed before
averaging?
3. Average the temperatures at which crystal
hot plate
formation occurs for solutions that contain
the same volume of water. Plot these data on
graph paper. Set up your graph sideways on
the graph paper (landscape orientation). Plot
8. Continue stirring. Record the temperature at
solubility on the vertical axis. (The units are
which crystals begin to appear in the solution.
grams of solute per 100 mL of water.) Plot
9. Remove the stopper from the test tube. temperature on the horizontal axis.
Carefully add 5.0 mL of distilled water. The
4. Draw the best smooth curve through the
solution is now more dilute and therefore
points. (Do not simply join the points.) Label
more soluble. Crystals will appear at a lower
each axis. Give the graph a suitable title.
temperature.
10. Put the stopper, with the thermometer and Conclusions
stirring wire, back in the test tube. If crystals
5. Go back to the sketch you drew to predict the
have already started to appear in the solution,
solubility of a typical solid dissolving in
begin warming the water bath again. Repeat
water at different temperatures. Compare the
steps 7 and 8.
shape of your sketch with the shape of your
11. If no crystals are present, stir the solution graph.
while the water bath cools. Record the
6. Use your graph to interpolate the solubility of
temperature at which crystals first begin
potassium nitrate at
to appear.
(a) 60˚C (b) 40˚C
12. Dispose of the aqueous solutions of potassium 7. Use your graph to extrapolate the solubility of
nitrate into the labelled waste container. potassium nitrate at
(a) 80˚C (b) 20˚C
Analysis
1. Use the volume of water assigned by your Application
teacher to calculate how much solute 8. At what temperature can 40 mL of water
dissolved in 100 mL of water. Use the dissolve the following quantities of
following equation to help you: potassium nitrate?
x g = 14.0g (a) 35.0 g (b) 20.0 g
100mL yourvolume
Chapter 8 Solutions and Their Concentrations • MHR 297
Heat Pollution: A Solubility Problem
For most solids, and almost all ionic substances, solubility increases as
the temperature of the solution increases. Gases, on the other hand,
always become less soluble as the temperature increases. This is why a
refrigerated soft drink tastes fizzier than the same drink at room tempera-
ture. The warmer drink contains less dissolved carbon dioxide than the
cooler drink.
This property of gases makes heat pollution a serious problem. Many
industries and power plants use water to cool down overheated machin-
ery. The resulting hot water is then returned to local rivers or lakes.
Figure 8.12 shows steam rising from a “heat-polluted” river. Adding
warm water into a river or lake does not seem like actual pollution. The
heat from the water, however, increases the temperature of the body of
water. As the temperature increases, the dissolved oxygen in the water
decreases. Fish and other aquatic wildlife and plants may not have
enough oxygen to breathe.
The natural heating of water in rivers and lakes can pose problems,
too. Fish in warmer lakes and rivers are particularly vulnerable in the
Figure 8.12 This image shows
summer. When the water warms up even further, the amount of dissolved
the result of heat pollution.
oxygen decreases.
Warmer water contains less
dissolved oxygen.
ExpressLab The Effect of Temperature on Soda Water
In this Express Lab, you will have a chance to 3. Measure and record the mass of each beaker.
see how a change in temperature affects the Measure and record the temperature of the
dissolved gas in a solution. You will be looking soda water.
at the pH of soda water. A low pH (1–6) indicates
4. Place one beaker on a heat source. Heat it to
that the solution is acidic. You will learn more
about 50˚C. Compare the rate of formation of
about pH in Chapter 10.
the bubbles with the rate of formation in the
beaker of cool soda water. Record any change
Safety Precautions
in colour in the heated solution. Estimate
its pH.
• If using a hot plate, avoid touching it when it 5. Allow the heated solution to cool. Again
is hot. record any change in colour in the solution.
• If using a Bunsen burner, check that there are Estimate its pH.
no flammable solvents nearby.
6. Measure and record the masses of both
beakers. Determine any change in mass by
Procedure
comparing the final and initial masses.
1. Open a can of cool soda water. (Listen for the
sound of excess carbon dioxide escaping.) Analysis
Pour about 50 mL into each of two 100 mL
1. Which sample of soda water lost the most
beakers. Note the rate at which bubbles form.
mass? Explain your observation.
Record your observations.
2. Did the heated soda water become more or
2. Add a few drops of universal indicator to both
less acidic when it was heated? Explain why
beakers. Record the colour of the solutions.
you think this change happened.
Then estimate the pH.
298 MHR • Unit 3 Solutions and Solubility
Pressure and Solubility
The final factor that affects solubility is pressure. Changes in pressure
have hardly any effect on solid and liquid solutions. Such changes do
affect the solubility of a gas in a liquid solvent, however. The solubility of
the gas is directly proportional to the pressure of the gas above the liquid.
For example, the solubility of oxygen in lake water depends on the air
pressure above the lake.
When you open a carbonated drink, you can observe the effect of pres-
sure on solubility. Figure 8.13 shows this effect. Inside a soft drink bottle,
the pressure of the carbon dioxide gas is very high: about 400 kPa. When
you open the bottle, you hear the sound of escaping gas as the pressure is
reduced. Carbon dioxide gas escapes quickly from the bottle, since the
pressure of the carbon dioxide in the atmosphere is much lower: only
about 0.03 kPa. The solubility of the carbon dioxide in the liquid soft
drink decreases greatly. Bubbles begin to rise in the liquid as gas comes
out of solution and escapes. It takes a while for all the gas to leave the
solution, so you have time to enjoy the taste of the soft drink before it
goes “flat.”
Figure 8.14 illustrates another example of dissolved gases and
pressure. As a scuba diver goes deeper underwater, the water pressure
Figure 8.13 What happens
increases. The solubility of nitrogen gas, which is present in the lungs,
when the pressure of the carbon
also increases. Nitrogen gas dissolves in the diver’s blood. As the diver
dioxide gas in a soft drink bottle
returns to the surface, the pressure acting on the diver decreases. The is released? The solubility of the
nitrogen gas in the blood comes out of solution. If the diver surfaces too gas in the soft drink solution
quickly, the effect is similar to opening a soft drink bottle. Bubbles of decreases.
nitrogen gas form in the blood. This leads to a painful and sometimes
fatal condition known as “the bends.” You will learn more about gases
and deep-sea diving in Chapter 11.
CHEM
FACT
Do you crack your knuckles?
The sound you hear is
another example of the effect
of pressure on solubility. Joints
contain fluid. When a joint is
suddenly pulled or stretched,
the cavity that holds the fluid
gets larger. This causes the
pressure to decrease. A
bubble of gas forms, making
the sound you hear. You cannot
repeatedly crack your knuckles
because it takes some time for
Figure 8.14 Scuba divers must heed the effects of decreasing water pressure on the gas to re-dissolve.
dissolved nitrogen gas in their blood. They must surface slowly to avoid “the bends.”
Chapter 8 Solutions and Their Concentrations • MHR 299
Chemistry Bulletin
Solvents and Coffee: What’s the Connection? In the common Swiss Water Process,
coffee beans are soaked in hot water. This
The story of coffee starts with the coffee berry.
dissolves the caffeine and the flavouring
First the pulp of the berry is removed. This
compounds from the beans. The liquid is
leaves two beans, each containing 1% to 2%
passed through activated carbon filters. The
caffeine. The beans are soaked in water and
filters retain the caffeine, but let the flavouring
natural enzymes to remove the outer parch-
compounds pass through. The filtered liquid,
ment husk and to start a slight fermentation
now caffeine-free, is sprayed back onto the
process. Once the beans have been fermented,
beans. The beans reabsorb the flavouring
they are dried and roasted. Then the coffee is
compounds. Now they are ready for roasting.
ready for grinding. Grinding increases the sur-
Carbon dioxide gas is a normal component
face area of the coffee. Thus, finer grinds make
of air. In the carbon dioxide decaffeination
it easier to dissolve the coffee in hot water.
process, the gas is raised to a temperature of at
Decaffeinated coffee satisfies people who
least 32˚C. Then it is compressed to a pressure
like the smell and taste of coffee but cannot
of about 7400 kPa. At this pressure, it resem-
tolerate the caffeine. How is caffeine removed
bles a liquid but can flow like a gas. The
from coffee?
carbon dioxide penetrates the coffee beans
All the methods of extracting caffeine take
and dissolves the caffeine. When the pressure
place before the beans are roasted. Caffeine and
returns to normal, the carbon dioxide reverts
the other organic compounds that give coffee
to a gaseous state. The caffeine is left behind.
its taste are mainly non-polar. (Caffeine does
What happens to the caffeine that is
contain some polar bonds, however, which
removed by decaffeination? Caffeine is so
allows it to dissolve in hot water.) Non-polar
valuable that it is worth more than the cost of
solvents, such as benzene and trichloroethene,
taking it out of the beans. It is extensively used
were once used to dissolve and remove
in the pharmaceutical industry, and for colas
caffeine from the beans. These chemicals are
and other soft drinks.
now considered to be too hazardous. Today
most coffee manufacturers use water or carbon
Making Connections
dioxide as solvents.
1. As you have read, water is a polar liquid
and the soluble fractions of the coffee
grounds are non-polar. Explain, in chemical
terms, how caffeine and the coffee flavour
and aroma are transferred to hot coffee.
2. Why does hot water work better in the
brewing process than cold water?
3. In chemical terms, explain why fine grinds
of coffee make better coffee.
How can caffeine form
hydrogen bonds with
water?
300 MHR • Unit 3 Solutions and Solubility
Section Wrap-up
In this section, you examined the factors that affect the rate of dissolving:
temperature, agitation, and particle size. Next you looked at the forces
between solute and solvent particles. Finally, you considered three main
factors that affect solubility: molecule size, temperature, and pressure. In
section 8.3, you will learn about the effects of differing amounts of solute
dissolved in a certain amount of solvent.
Section Review
1 K/U Describe the particle attractions that occur as sodium chloride
dissolves in water.
2 K/U When water vaporizes, which type of attraction, intramolecular
or intermolecular, is broken? Explain.
3 K/U Describe the effect of increasing temperature on the solubility of
(a) a typical solid in water
(b) a gas in water
4 K/U Sugar is more soluble in water than salt. Why does a salt solution
(brine) conduct electricity, while a sugar solution does not?
5 K/U Dissolving a certain solute in water releases heat. Dissolving
a different solute in water absorbs heat. Explain why.
6 I The graph below shows the solubility of various substances
plotted against the temperature of the solution.
(a) Which substance decreases in solubility as the 100
NaNO
temperature increases? 3
90
(b) Which substance is least soluble at room
80
temperature? Which substance is most soluble KNO 3 70
at room temperature?
60
(c) The solubility of which substance is least affected KCI
50
by a change in temperature?
40
(d) At what temperature is the solubility of potassium
NaCI
30
chlorate equal to 40 g/100 g of water?
20 KCIO
(e) 20 mL of a saturated solution of potassium nitrate 3
at 50˚C is cooled to 20˚C. Approximately what mass 10 Ce 2 (SO 3 ) 3
of solid will precipitate from the solution? Why is
0
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
it not possible to use the graph to interpolate an
accurate value?
Temperature (˚C)
7 I A saturated solution of potassium nitrate was
prepared at 70˚C and then cooled to 55˚C. Use your
graph from Investigation 8-A to predict the fraction of the dissolved
solute that crystallized out of the solution.
8 MC Would you expect to find more mineral deposits near a thermal
spring or near a cool mountain spring? Explain.
Chapter 8 Solutions and Their Concentrations • MHR 301
)O
H
g
001/g(
ytilibuloS
2
Unit Issue Prep
Think about how the properties
of water affect its behaviour in
the environment. Look ahead
to the Unit 3 Issue. How could
water’s excellent ability as a
solvent become a problem?
8.3 The Concentration of Solutions
Section Preview/
Specific Expectations
Material Safety Data Sheet
In this section, you will Component Name CAS Number
PHENOL, 100% Pure 108952
(cid:2) solve problemsinvolving the
concentration of solutions
SECTION III: Hazards Identification
(cid:2) expressconcentration as • Very hazardous in case of ingestion, inhalation,
grams per 100 mL, mass and skin contact, or eye contact.
volume percents, parts per • Product is corrosive to internal membranes when
million and billion, and moles ingested.
per litre • Inhalation of vapours may damage central nervous
system. Symptoms: nausea, headache, dizziness.
(cid:2) communicateyour under-
• Skin contact may cause itching and blistering.
standing of the following
• Eye-contact may lead to corneal damage or
terms: concentration,
blindness.
mass/volume percent,
• Severe over-exposure may lead to lung-damage,
mass/mass percent, Figure 8.15 Should phenol be
choking, or coma.
volume/volume percent, banned from drugstores?
parts per million, parts per
billion, molar concentration Phenol is a hazardous liquid, especially when it is at room temperature.
It is a volatile chemical. Inhaling phenol adversely affects the central
nervous system, and can lead to a coma. Inhalation is not the only danger.
Coma and death have been known to occur within 10 min after phenol has
contacted the skin. Also, as little as 1 g of phenol can be fatal if swallowed.
Would you expect to find such a hazardous chemical in over-the-
counter medications? Check your medicine cabinet at home. You may
find phenol listed as an ingredient in throat sprays and in lotions to
relieve itching. You may also find it used as an antiseptic or disinfectant.
Is phenol a hazard or a beneficial ingredient in many medicines? This
depends entirely on concentration: the amount of solute per quantity of
solvent. At high concentrations, phenol can kill. At low concentrations,
it is a safe component of certain medicines.
Modern analytical tests allow chemists to detect and measure almost
any chemical at extremely low concentrations. In this section, you will
learn about various ways that chemists use to express the concentration
of a solution. As well, you will find the concentration of a solution by
experiment.
Concentration as a Mass/Volume Percent
Recall that the solubility of a compound at a certain temperature is often
expressed as the mass of the solute per 100 mL of solvent. For example,
you know that the solubility of sodium chloride is 36 g/100 mL of water at
room temperature. The final volume of the sodium chloride solution may
or may not be 100 mL. It is the volume of the solvent that is important.
Chemists often express the concentration of an unsaturated solution
as the mass of solute dissolved per volume of the solution. This is differ-
ent from solubility. It is usually expressed as a percent relationship. A
mass/volume percent gives the mass of solute dissolved in a volume of
solution, expressed as a percent. The mass/volume percent is also referred
to as the percent (m/v).
302 MHR • Unit 3 Solutions and Solubility
PROBEWARE
Massofsolute(ing)
Mass/volumepercent = ×100%
Volumeofsolution(inmL)
If you have access to probe-
ware, do the Chemistry 11 lab,
Suppose that a hospital patient requires an intravenous drip to replace “Concentration of Solutions”
lost body fluids. The intravenous fluid may be a saline solution that now.
contains 0.9 g of sodium chloride dissolved in 100 mL of solution, or
0.9% (m/v). Notice that the number of grams of solute per 100 mL of
solution is numerically equal to the mass/volume percent. Explore this
idea further in the following problems.
Sample Problem
Solving for a Mass/Volume Percent
Problem
A pharmacist adds 2.00 mL of distilled water to 4.00 g of a powdered
drug. The final volume of the solution is 3.00 mL. What is the
concentration of the drug in g/100 mL of solution? What is the
percent (m/v) of the solution?
What Is Required?
You need to calculate the concentration of the solution, in grams of
solute dissolved in 100 mL of solution. Then you need to express
this concentration as a mass/volume percent.
What Is Given?
The mass of the dissolved solute is 4.00 g. The volume
of the solution is 3.00 mL.
Plan Your Strategy
There are two possible methods for solving this problem.
Method 1
Use the formula
Massofsolute(ing)
Mass/volumepercent = ×100%
Volumeofsolution(inmL)
Method 2
Let x represent the mass of solute dissolved in 100 mL of solution.
The ratio of the dissolved solute, x, in 100 mL of solution must be
the same as the ratio of 4.00 g of solute dissolved in 3.00 mL of
solution. The concentration, expressed in g/100 mL, is numerically
equal to the percent (m/v) of the solution.
Act on Your Strategy
Method 1
4.00g
Percent(m/v) = ×100%
3.00mL
= 133%
Continued ...
Chapter 8 Solutions and Their Concentrations • MHR 303
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 303
Method 2
x = 4.00g
100mL 3.00mL
x = 1.33g/mL
100mL
x = 100mL×1.33g/mL
= 133g
The concentration of the drug is 133 g/100 mL of solution,
or 133% (m/v).
Check Your Solution
The units are correct. The numerical answer is large, but this
is reasonable for an extremely soluble solute.
Sample Problem
Finding Mass for an (m/v) Concentration
Problem
Many people use a solution of trisodium phosphate, Na PO
3 4
(commonly called TSP), to clean walls before putting up wallpaper.
The recommended concentration is 1.7% (m/v). What mass of TSP
is needed to make 2.0 L of solution?
What Is Required?
You need to find the mass of TSP needed to make 2.0 L of solution.
What Is Given?
The concentration of the solution should be 1.7% (m/v). The volume
of solution that is needed is 2.0 L.
Plan Your Strategy
There are two different methods you can use.
Method 1
Use the formula for (m/v) percent. Rearrange the formula to solve for
mass. Then substitute in the known values.
Method 2
The percent (m/v) of the solution is numerically equal to the
concentration in g/100 mL. Let x represent the mass of TSP dis-
solved in 2.0 L of solution. The ratio of dissolved solute in 100 mL
of solution must be the same as the ratio of the mass of solute, x,
dissolved in 2.0 L (2000 mL) of solution.
Continued ...
304 MHR • Unit 3 Solutions and Solubility
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 304
Act on Your Strategy
Method 1
Massofsolute(ing)
(m/v)percent = ×100%
Volumeofsolution(inmL)
(m/v)percent × Volumeofsolution
∴ Mass of solute =
100%
= 1.7% × 2000mL
100%
= 34g
Method 2
A TSP solution that is 1.7% (m/v) contains 1.7 g of solute dissolved
in 100 mL of solution.
1.7g = x
100mL 2000mL
0.017g/mL = x
2000mL
x = 0.017g/mL×2000mL
= 34g
Therefore, 34 g of TSP are needed to make 2.0 L of cleaning solution.
Check Your Solution
The units are appropriate for the problem. The answer appears
to be reasonable.
Practice Problems
1. What is the concentration in percent (m/v) of each solution?
(a) 14.2 g of potassium chloride, KCl (used as a salt substitute),
dissolved in 450 mL of solution
(b) 31.5 g of calcium nitrate, Ca(NO ) (used to make explosives),
3 2
dissolved in 1.80 L of solution
(c) 1.72 g of potassium permanganate, KMnO (used to bleach
4
stone-washed blue jeans), dissolved in 60 mL of solution
2. A solution of hydrochloric acid was formed by dissolving 1.52 g of
hydrogen chloride gas in enough water to make 24.1 mL of solution.
What is the concentration in percent (m/v) of the solution?
3. At 25˚C, a saturated solution of carbon dioxide gas in water has a
concentration of 0.145% (m/v). What mass of carbon dioxide is
present in 250 mL of the solution?
4. Ringer’s solution contains three dissolved salts in the same
proportions as they are found in blood. The salts and their
concentrations (m/v) are as follows: 0.86% NaCl, 0.03% KCl, and
0.033% CaCl . Suppose that a patient needs to receive 350 mL of
2
Ringer’s solution by an intravenous drip. What mass of each salt
does the pharmacist need to make the solution?
Chapter 8 Solutions and Their Concentrations • MHR 305
Concentration as a Mass/Mass Percent
The concentration of a solution that contains a solid solute dissolved in
a liquid solvent can also be expressed as a mass of solute dissolved in a
mass of solution. This is usually expressed as a percent relationship.
A mass/mass percent gives the mass of a solute divided by the mass of
solution, expressed as a percent. The mass/mass percent is also referred to
as the percent (m/m), or the mass percent. It is often inaccurately referred
to as a weight (w/w) percent, as well. Look at your tube of toothpaste, at
home. The percent of sodium fluoride in the toothpaste is usually given as
a w/w percent. This can be confusing, since weight (w) is not the same as
mass (m). In fact, this concentration should be expressed as a mass/mass
percent.
Massofsolute(ing)
Mass/masspercent = ×100%
Massofsolution(ing)
For example, 100 g of seawater contains 0.129 g of magnesium ion
(along with many other substances). The concentration of
Mg2+
in
seawater is 0.129 (m/m). Notice that the number of grams of solute
per 100 g of solution is numerically equal to the mass/mass percent.
The concentration of a solid solution, such as an alloy, is usually
expressed as a mass/mass percent. Often the concentration of a particular
alloy may vary. Table 8.3 gives typical compositions of some common
alloys.
Table 8.3 The Composition of Some Common Alloys
Alloy Uses Typical percent (m/m)
composition
brass ornaments, musical instruments Cu (85%)
Zn (15%)
bronze statues, castings Cu (80%)
Zn (10%)
Sn (10%)
cupronickel “silver” coins Cu (75%)
Ni (25%)
dental amalgam dental fillings Hg (50%)
Ag (35%)
Sn (15%)
duralumin aircraft parts Al (93%)
Cu (5%)
other (2%)
pewter ornaments Sn (85%)
Cu (7%)
Bi (6%)
Sb ((2%)
stainless steel cutlery, knives Fe (78%)
Cr (15%)
Ni (7%)
sterling silver jewellery Ag (92.5%)
Cu (7.5%)
Figure 8.16, on the following page, shows two objects made from brass
that have distinctly different colours. The difference in colours reflects the
varying concentrations of the copper and zinc that make up the objects.
306 MHR • Unit 3 Solutions and Solubility
Figure 8.16 Brass can be made using any percent from 50% to 85% copper, and from
15% to 50% zinc. As a result, two objects made of brass can look very different.
Sample Problem
Solving for a Mass/Mass Percent
Problem
Calcium chloride, CaCl , can be used instead of road salt to melt
2
the ice on roads during the winter. To determine how much calcium
chloride had been used on a nearby road, a student took a sample of
slush to analyze. The sample had a mass of 23.47 g. When the solu-
tion was evaporated, the residue had a mass of 4.58 g. (Assume that
no other solutes were present.) What was the mass/mass percent of
calcium chloride in the slush? How many grams of calcium chloride
were present in 100 g of solution?
What Is Required?
You need to calculate the mass/mass percent of calcium chloride in
the solution (slush). Then you need to use your answer to find the
mass of calcium chloride in 100 g of solution.
What Is Given?
The mass of the solution is 23.47 g. The mass of calcium chloride
that was dissolved in the solution is 4.58 g.
Plan Your Strategy
There are two methods that you can use to solve this problem.
Method 1
Use the formula for mass/mass percent.
Massofsolute(ing)
Mass/masspercent = ×100%
Massofsolution(ing)
Continued ...
Chapter 8 Solutions and Their Concentrations • MHR 307
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 307
The mass of calcium chloride in 100 g of solution will
be numerically equal to the mass/mass percent.
Method 2
Use ratios, as in the previous Sample Problems.
Act on Your Strategy
Method 1
4.58g
Mass/masspercent = ×100%
23.47g
= 19.5%
Method 2
x g 4.58g
=
100g 23.47g
xg
= 0.195
100g
x = 19.5%
The mass/mass percent was 19.5% (m/m). 19.5 g of calcium chloride
was dissolved in 100 g of solution.
Check Your Solution
The mass units divide out properly. The final answer has the correct
number of significant digits. It appears to be reasonable.
Practice Problems
5. Calculate the mass/mass percent of solute for each solution.
(a) 17 g of sulfuric acid in 65 g of solution
(b) 18.37 g of sodium chloride dissolved in 92.2 g of water
Hint: Remember that a solution consists of both solute
and solvent.
(c) 12.9 g of carbon tetrachloride dissolved in 72.5 g of benzene
6. If 55 g of potassium hydroxide is dissolved in 100 g of water,
what is the concentration of the solution expressed as mass/mass
percent?
7. Steel is an alloy of iron and about 1.7% carbon. It also contains
small amounts of other materials, such as manganese and
phosphorus. What mass of carbon is needed to make a 5.0 kg
sample of steel?
8. Stainless steel is a variety of steel that resists corrosion. Your
cutlery at home may be made of this material. Stainless steel
must contain at least 10.5% chromium. What mass of chromium
is needed to make a stainless steel fork with a mass of 60.5 g?
9. 18-carat white gold is an alloy. It contains 75% gold, 12.5% silver,
and 12.5% copper. A piece of jewellery, made of 18-carat white
gold, has a mass of 20 g. How much pure gold does it contain?
308 MHR • Unit 3 Solutions and Solubility
Concentration as a Volume/Volume Percent
When mixing two liquids to form a solution, it is easier to measure their
volumes than their masses. A volume/volume percent gives the volume
of solute divided by the volume of solution, expressed as a percent. The
volume/volume percent is also referred to as the volume percent concen-
tration, volume percent, percent (v/v), or the percent by volume. You can
see this type of concentration on a bottle of rubbing alcohol from a drug-
store. (See Figure 8.17.)
Volume/volumepercent = Volumeofsolute(inmL) ×100%
Volumeofsolution(inmL)
Read through the Sample Problem below, and complete the Practice
Problems that follow. You will then have a better understanding of how
to calculate the volume/volume percent of a solution.
Figure 8.17 The concentration
of this solution of isopropyl
alcohol in water is expressed
as a volume/volume percent.
Sample Problem
Solving for a Volume/Volume Percent CHEM
FACT
Problem
Archaeologists can learn a lot
about ancient civilizations by
Rubbing alcohol is commonly used as an antiseptic for small cuts. It is
chemically analyzing the con-
sold as a 70% (v/v) solution of isopropyl alcohol in water. What vol-
centration of ions in the soil
ume of isopropyl alcohol is used to make 500 mL of rubbing alcohol?
where the people lived. When
crops are grown, the crops
What Is Required? remove elements such as
nitrogen, magnesium, calcium,
You need to calculate the volume of isopropyl alcohol (the solute)
and phosphorus from the soil.
used to make 500 mL of solution.
Thus, soil with a lower-than-
average concentration of
What Is Given? these elements may have held
ancient crops. Chlorophyll,
The volume/volume percent is 70% (v/v). The final volume of the
which is present in all plants,
solution is 500 mL.
contains magnesium ions. In
areas where ancient crops
Plan Your Strategy were processed, the soil has a
higher concentration of Mg2+.
Method 1
Rearrange the following formula to solve for the volume of the
solute. Then substitute the values that you know into the rearranged
formula.
Volume/volumepercent = Volumeofsolute ×100%
Volumeofsolution
Method 2
Use ratios to solve for the unknown volume.
Continued ...
Chapter 8 Solutions and Their Concentrations • MHR 309
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 309
Act on Your Strategy
Method 1
Volume/volumepercent = Volumeofsolute ×100%
Volumeofsolution
Volume/volumepercent×Volumeofsolution
Volumeofsolute =
100%
=
70%×500mL
100%
= 350mL
Method 2
x mL = 70mL
500mL 100mL
x = 0.7×500mL
= 350mL
Therefore, 350 mL of isopropyl alcohol is used to make 500 mL of
70% (v/v) rubbing alcohol.
Check Your Solution
The answer seems reasonable. It is expressed in appropriate units.
Practice Problems
10. 60 mL of ethanol is diluted with water to a final volume of 400 mL.
What is the percent by volume of ethanol in the solution?
11. Milk fat is present in milk. Whole milk usually contains about
5.0% milk fat by volume. If you drink a glass of milk with a vol-
ume of 250 mL, what volume of milk fat have you consumed?
12. Both antifreeze (shown in Figure 8.18) and engine coolant contain
ethylene glycol. A manufacturer sells a concentrated solution that
contains 75% (v/v) ethylene glycol in water. According to the
label, a 1:1 mixture of the concentrate with water will provide
protection against freezing down to a temperature of −37˚C. A
motorist adds 1 L of diluted solution to a car radiator. What is
Figure 8.18 Antifreeze is a the percent (v/v) of ethylene glycol in the diluted solution?
solution of ethylene glycol and
water. 13. The average adult human body contains about 5 L of blood. Of
this volume, only about 0.72% consists of leukocytes (white
blood cells). These essential blood cells fight infection in the
body. What volume of pure leukocyte cells is present in the
body of a small child, with only 2.5 L of blood?
14. Vinegar is sold as a 5% (v/v) solution of acetic acid in water.
How much water should be added to 15 mL of pure acetic acid
(a liquid at room temperature) to make a 5% (v/v) solution of
acetic acid? Note: Assume that when water and acetic acid are
mixed, the total volume of the solution is the sum of the volumes
of each.
310 MHR • Unit 3 Solutions and Solubility
Concentration in Parts per Million and Parts per Billion Math
LINK
The concentration of a very small quantity of a substance in the human
body, or in the environment, can be expressed in parts per million (ppm) One part per million is equal
and parts per billion (ppb). Both parts per million and parts per billion to 1¢ in $10 000. One part per
billion is equal to 1 s in almost
are usually mass/mass relationships. They describe the amount of solute
32 years.
that is present in a solution. Notice that parts per million does not refer
What distance (in km) would
to the number of particles, but to the mass of the solute compared with
you travel if 1 cm represented
the mass of the solution.
1 ppm of your journey?
A swimming pool has the
ppm = Massofsolute ×106 dimensions 10m×5m×2m.
Massofsolution
If the pool is full of water, what
volume of water (in cm3) would
represent 1 ppb of the water in
Massofsolute = xg
or the pool?
Massofsolution 106gofsolution
ppb = Massofsolute ×109
Massofsolution
Massofsolute = x g
or Massofsolution 109gofsolution
Sample Problem
Parts per Billion in Peanut Butter
Problem
A fungus that grows on peanuts produces a deadly toxin. When
ingested in large amounts, this toxin destroys the liver and can cause
cancer. Any shipment of peanuts that contains more than 25 ppb
of this dangerous fungus is rejected. A company receives 20 t of
peanuts to make peanut butter. What is the maximum mass (in g)
of fungus that is allowed?
What Is Required?
You need to find the allowed mass (in g) of fungus in 20 t of peanuts.
What Is Given?
The allowable concentration of the fungus is 25 ppb. The mass of the
peanut shipment is 20 t.
Plan Your Strategy
Method 1
Convert 20 t to grams. Rearrange the formula below to solve for the
allowable mass of the fungus.
Massoffungus
ppb = ×109
Massofpeanuts
Method 2
Use ratios to solve for the unknown mass.
Continued ...
Chapter 8 Solutions and Their Concentrations • MHR 311
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 311
Act on Your Strategy
Method 1
First convert the mass in tonnes into grams.
20t×1000kg/t×1000g/kg = 20×106g
Next rearrange the formula and find the mass of the fungus.
Massoffungus
ppb = ×109
Massofpeanuts
ppb×Massofpeanuts
∴Massoffungus =
109
25ppb×(20×106g)
=
109
Method 2 = 0.5g
x gsolute 25gsolute
=
20×106gsolution 1×109gsolution
25gsolute
x g = (20×106gsolution)×
1×109gsolution
= 0.5g
The maximum mass of fungus that is allowed is 0.5 g.
Check Your Solution
The answer appears to be reasonable. The units divided correctly
to give grams. Note: Parts per million and parts per billion have
no units. The original units, g/g, cancel out.
Practice Problems
15. Symptoms of mercury poisoning become apparent after a person
has accumulated more than 20 mg of mercury in the body.
(a) Express this amount as parts per million for a 60 kg person.
(b) Express this amount as parts per billion.
(c) Express this amount as a (m/m) percent.
16. The use of the pesticide DDT has been banned in Canada since
1969 because of its damaging effect on wildlife. In 1967, the
concentration of DDT in an average lake trout, taken from Lake
Simcoe in Ontario, was 16 ppm. Today it is less than 1 ppm.
What mass of DDT would have been present in a 2.5 kg trout
with DDT present at 16 ppm?
17. The concentration of chlorine in a swimming pool is generally
kept in the range of 1.4 to 4.0 mg/L. The water in a certain pool
has 3.0 mg/L of chlorine. Express this value as parts per million.
(Hint: 1 L of water has a mass of 1000 g.)
18. Water supplies with dissolved calcium carbonate greater than
500 mg/L are considered unacceptable for most domestic
purposes. Express this concentration in parts per million.
312 MHR • Unit 3 Solutions and Solubility
Careers in Chemistry
Product Development Chemists who work with paints must
Chemist examine the properties of many different
solvents. They must choose solvents that dissolve
A solvent keeps paint liquefied so that it can be
paint pigments well, but evaporate quickly and
applied to a surface easily. After the paint has
pose a low safety hazard.
been exposed to the air, the solvent evaporates
Product development chemists must consider
and the paint dries. Product development
human health and environmental impact when
chemists develop and improve products such
choosing between solvents. Many solvents that
as paints. To work in product development, they
have been used in the past, such as benzene
require at least one university chemistry degree.
and carbon tetrachloride, are now known to be
harmful to the health and/or the environment.
A powerful new solvent called d-limonenehas
been developed from the peel of oranges and
lemons. This solvent is less harmful than many
older solvents. It has been used successfully as a
cleaner for airport runways and automotive parts,
and as a pesticide. Chemists are now studying
new applications for d-limonene.
Make Career Connections
1. Use reference books or the Internet to find
the chemical structure of d-limonene. What
else can you discover about d-limonene?
2. To learn more about careers involving work
with solvents, contact the Canadian Chemical
Producers Association (CCPA).
Molar Concentration
The most useful unit of concentration in chemistry is molar concentra-
tion. Molar concentration is the number of moles of solute in 1 L of
solution. Notice that the volume of the solution in litres is used, rather
than the volume of the solvent in millilitres. Molar concentration is also
known as molarity.
Molarconcentration(inmol/L) = Amountofsolute(inmol)
Volumeofsolution(inL)
This formula can be shortened to give
C = n
V
Molar concentration is particularly useful to chemists because it is related
to the number of particles in a solution. None of the other measures of
concentration are related to the number of particles. If you are given the
molar concentration and the volume of a solution, you can calculate the
amount of dissolved solute in moles. This allows you to solve problems
involving quantities in chemical reactions, such as the ones on the
following pages.
Chapter 8 Solutions and Their Concentrations • MHR 313
Sample Problem
Calculating Molar Concentration
Problem
A saline solution contains 0.90 g of sodium chloride, NaCl,
dissolved in 100 mL of solution. What is the molar concentration
of the solution?
What Is Required?
You need to find the molar concentration of the solution in mol/L.
What Is Given?
You know that 0.90 g of sodium chloride is dissolved in 100 mL
of solution.
Plan Your Strategy
Step 1 To find the amount (in mol) of sodium chloride, first
determine its molar mass. Then divide the amount of
sodium chloride (in g) by its molar mass (in g/mol).
Step 2 Convert the volume of solution from mL to L using this formula:
Volume(inL) = Volume(inmL)× 1.000L
1000mL
Step 3 Use the following formula to calculate the molar concentration:
Molarconcentration(inmol/L) = Amountofsolute(inmol)
Volumeofsolution(inL)
Act on Your Strategy
Step 1 MolarmassofNaCl = 22.99+35.45
= 58.44 g/mol
0.90g
AmountofNaCl =
58.44g/mol
= 1.54×10 −2mol
Step 2 Convert the volume from mL to L.
Volume = 100mL× 1.000L
1000mL
= 0.100L
Step 3 Calculate the molar concentration.
Molarconcentration =
1.54×10 −2mol
0.100L
= 1.54×10 −1mol/L
The molar concentration of the saline solution is 0.15 mol/L.
Check Your Solution
The answer has the correct units for molar concentration.
314 MHR • Unit 3 Solutions and Solubility
Sample Problem
Using Molar Concentration to Find Mass
Problem
At 20˚C, a saturated solution of calcium sulfate, CaSO , has a
4
concentration of 0.0153 mol/L. A student takes 65 mL of this
solution and evaporates it. What mass (in g) is left in the
evaporating dish?
What Is Required?
You need to find the mass (in g) of the solute, calcium sulfate.
What Is Given?
The molar concentration is 0.0153 mol/L. The volume of the
solution is 65 mL.
Plan Your Strategy
Step 1 Convert the volume from mL to L using the formula
Volume(inL) = Volume(inmL)× 1.000L
1000mL
Step 2 Rearrange the following formula to solve for the amount
of solute (in mol).
Molarconcentration(inmol/L) = Amountofsolute(inmol)
Volumeofsolution(inL)
Step 3 Determine the molar mass of calcium sulfate. Use the molar
mass to find the mass in grams, using the formula below:
Mass(ing)ofCaSO
4
= Amount(inmol)×MolarmassofCaSO (ing/mol)
4
Act on Your Strategy
Step 1 Convert the volume from mL to L.
Volume = 65mL× 1.000L
1000mL
= 0.065L
Step 2 Rearrange the formula to solve for the amount of solute.
Molarconcentration = Amountofsolute
Volumeofsolution
∴Amountofsolute = Molarconcentration×Volumeofsolution
= 0.0153mol/L×0.065L
= 9.94×10 −4mol
Step 3 Determine the molar mass. Then find the mass in grams.
MolarmassofCaSO = 40.08+32.07+(4×16.00)
4
= 136.15g/mol
Mass(ing)ofCaSO = 9.94×10 −4mol×136g/mol
4
= 0.135g
Continued ...
Chapter 8 Solutions and Their Concentrations • MHR 315
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 315
Therefore, 0.14 g of calcium sulfate are left in the evaporating dish.
Check Your Solution
The answer has the correct units and the correct number of
significant figures.
Practice Problems
19. What is the molar concentration of each solution?
(a) 0.50 mol of NaCl dissolved in 0.30 L of solution
(b) 0.289 mol of iron(III) chloride, FeCl , dissolved in 120 mL
3
of solution
(c) 0.0877 mol of copper(II) sulfate, CuSO , dissolved in 70 mL
4
of solution
(d) 4.63 g of sugar, C H O , dissolved in 16.8 mL of solution
12 22 11
(e) 1.2 g of NaNO dissolved in 80 mL of solution
3
20. What mass of solute is present in each aqueous solution?
(a) 1.00 L of 0.045 mol/L calcium hydroxide, Ca(OH) , solution
2
(b) 500 mL of 0.100 mol/L silver nitrate, AgNO , solution
3
(c) 2.5 L of 1.00 mol/L potassium chromate, K CrO , solution
2 4
(d) 40 mL of 6.0 mol/L sulfuric acid, H SO , solution
2 4
(e) 4.24 L of 0.775 mol/L ammonium nitrate, NH NO , solution
4 3
21. A student dissolves 30.46 g of silver nitrate, AgNO , in water
3
to make 500 mL of solution. What is the molar concentration
of the solution?
22. What volume of 0.25 mol/L solution can be made using 14 g
of sodium hydroxide, NaOH?
23. A 100 mL bottle of skin lotion contains a number of solutes. One
of these solutes is zinc oxide, ZnO. The concentration of zinc
oxide in the skin lotion is 0.915 mol/L. What mass of zinc oxide
is present in the bottle?
24. Formalin is an aqueous solution of formaldehyde, HCHO, used
to preserve biological specimens. What mass of formaldehyde
is needed to prepare 1.5 L of formalin with a concentration of
10 mol/L?
You have done many calculations for the concentration of various
solutions. Now you are in a position to do some hands-on work with
solution concentration. In the following investigation, you will use
what you have learned to design your own experiment to determine the
concentration of a solution.
316 MHR • Unit 3 Solutions and Solubility
S K I L L F O C U S
Initiating and planning
Performing and recording
Communicating results
Determining the Predicting
Concentration of a Solution
Your teacher will give you a sample of a solution. Procedure
Design and perform an experiment to determine
1. Think about what you need to know in order
the concentration of the solution. Express the
to determine the concentration of a solution.
concentration as
Then design your experiment so that you can
(a) mass of solute dissolved in 100 mL
measure each quantity you need. Assume that
of solution
the density of pure water is 1.00 g/mL.
(b) mass of solute dissolved in 100 g of solvent
2. Write the steps that will allow you to measure
(c) amount of solute (in mol) dissolved in 1 L
the quantities you need. Design a data table
of solution
for your results. Include a space for the name
of the solute in your solution.
Safety Precautions
3. When your teacher approves your procedure,
complete your experiment.
When you have designed your investigation,
4. Dispose of your solution as directed by
think about the safety precautions you will
your teacher.
need to take.
Analysis
Materials
1. Express the concentration of the solution
any apparatus in the laboratory
you analyzed as
solution containing a solid dissolved in water
(a) mass of solute dissolved in 100 mL
Note: Your teacher will tell you the name of
of solution
the solute.
(b) mass of solute dissolved in 100 g of solvent
(c) molar concentration
Show your calculations.
Conclusions
2. List at least two important sources of error
in your measurements.
3. List at least two important ways that you
could improve your procedure.
4. Did the solute partially decompose on
heating, producing a gas and another solid?
If so, how do you think this affected the
results of your experiment?
Chapter 8 Solutions and Their Concentrations • MHR 317
Concept Organizer Summary of Sections 8.1 to 8.3
g/100 mL Concentration can Rate of dissolving
be expressed in (how fast the
different ways solute dissolves)
(m/v)%
(m/m)%
(v/v)% Solutions
ppm, ppb mol/L •solid (e.g., steel) depends on
•liquid (e.g., juice) •temperature
•gas (e.g., air) •agitation
ionic compounds
•particle size
dissolve in polar
solvents
e.g., NaCl in HO
2
ion-dipole attraction
polar covalent
compounds dissolve Attraction between Solubility (g/100 mL)
dipole-dipole attraction
in polar solvents particles (how much solute dissolves)
e.g., sugar in HO
2
no polar or ionic attraction
non-polar depends on
compounds dissolve •molecule size
in non-polar solvents •temperature
e.g., oil in benzene •pressure
Section Wrap-up
You have learned about several different ways in which chemists express
concentration: mass/volume, mass/mass, and volume/volume percent;
parts per million and parts per billion; and molar concentration. The
Concept Organizer above summarizes what you have learned in this
chapter so far.
In section 8.4, you will learn how standard solutions of known
concentration are prepared. You will also learn how to dilute a standard
solution.
Section Review
1 I Ammonium chloride, NH 4 Cl, is a very soluble salt. 300 g of
ammonium chloride are dissolved in 600 mL of water. What is the
Unit Issue Prep percent (m/m) of the solution?
The concentration of a pesti-
2 I A researcher measures 85.1 mL of a solution of liquid
cide or other contaminant
hydrocarbons. The researcher then distills the sample to separate
dissolved in water determines
the level of pollution. If you the pure liquids. If 20.3 mL of the hydrocarbon hexane are recovered,
wish to work on your Unit 3 what is its percent (v/v) in the sample?
Issue now, do some research
on pesticides such as DDT, 3 I A stock solution of phosphoric acid is 85.0% (m/v) H 3 PO 4
diazinon, and MCPA. What in water. What is its molar concentration?
concentrations of these
4 MC Cytosol is an intracellular solution containing many important
pesticides are unacceptable
solutes. Research this solution. Write a paragraph describing the
in water systems?
function of cytosol, and the solutes it contains.
318 MHR • Unit 3 Solutions and Solubility
Preparing Solutions 8.4
What do the effectiveness of a medicine, the safety of a chemical reaction,
Section Preview/
and the cost of an industrial process have in common? They all depend
Specific Expectations
on solutions that are made carefully with known concentrations. A
In this section, you will
solution with a known concentration is called a standard solution. There
are two ways to prepare an aqueous solution with a known concentration. (cid:2) preparesolutions by
dissolving a solid solute and
You can make a solution by dissolving a measured mass of pure solute
then diluting a concentrated
in a certain volume of solution. Alternatively, you can dilute a solution of
solution
known concentration.
(cid:2) communicateyour under-
standing of the following
Using a Volumetric Flask
terms: standard solution,
A volumetric flask is a pear-shaped glass container with a flat bottom and volumetric flask
a long neck. Volumetric flasks like the ones shown in Figure 8.19 are used
to make up standard solutions. They are available in a variety of sizes.
Each size can measure a fixed volume of solution to ±0.1 mL at a particu-
lar temperature, usually 20˚C. When using a volumetric flask, you must
first measure the mass of the pure solute. Then you transfer the solute to
the flask using a funnel, as shown in Figure 8.20. At this point, you add
the solvent (usually water) to dissolve the solute, as in Figure 8.21. You
continue adding the solvent until the bottom of the meniscus appears to
touch the line that is etched around the neck of the flask. See Figure 8.22.
This is the volume of the solution, within ±0.1 mL. If you were perform-
ing an experiment in which significant digits and errors were important,
you would record the volume of a solution in a 500 mL volumetric flask
as 500.0 mL ±0.1 mL. Before using a volumetric flask, you need to rinse
it several times with a small quantity of distilled water and discard the Figure 8.19 These volumetric
flasks, from left to right, contain
washings. Standard solutions are never stored in volumetric flasks. Instead,
solutions of chromium(III) salts,
they are transferred to another bottle that has a secure stopper or cap.
iron(III) salts, and cobalt(II) salts.
Figure 8.20 Transfer a Figure 8.21 Add distilled Figure 8.22 Add the rest of
known mass of solid solute water until the flask is about the water slowly. When the
into the volumetric flask. half full. Swirl the mixture flask is almost full, add the
Alternatively, dissolve the around in order to dissolve water drop by drop until the
solid in a small volume of the solute completely. Rinse bottom of the meniscus rests
solvent. Then add the liquid the beaker that contained at the etched line.
to the flask. the solute with solvent. Add
the rinsing to the flask.
Chapter 8 Solutions and Their Concentrations • MHR 319
Diluting a Solution
You can make a less concentrated solution of a known solution by adding
a measured amount of additional solvent to the standard solution. The
number of molecules, or moles, of solute that is present remains the same
before and after the dilution. (See Figure 8.23.)
To reinforce these ideas, read through the Sample Problem below.
Then try the Practice Problems that follow.
Figure 8.23 When a solution is
diluted, the volume increases.
However, the amount of solute
remains the same.
Sample Problem
Diluting a Standard Solution
Problem
For a class experiment, your teacher must make 2.0 L of 0.10 mol/L
sulfuric acid. This acid is usually sold as an 18 mol/L concentrated
solution. How much of the concentrated solution should be used to
make a new solution with the correct concentration?
What Is Required?
You need to find the volume of concentrated solution to be diluted.
What Is Given?
Initial concentration = 18 mol/L
Concentration of diluted solution = 0.10 mol/L
Volume of diluted solution = 2.0 L
Plan Your Strategy
Note: Amount of solute (mol) after dilution = Amount of solute
(mol) before dilution
Step 1 Calculate the amount of solute (in mol) that is needed for the
final dilute solution.
Step 2 Calculate the volume of the concentrated solution that will
provide the necessary amount of solute.
Continued ...
320 MHR • Unit 3 Solutions and Solubility
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 320
Act on Your Strategy
Step 1 Calculate the amount of solute that is needed for the final
dilute solution.
Molarconcentration(inmol/L) = Amountofsolute(inmol)
Volumeofsolution(inL)
∴Amount of solute =Molar concentration ×Volume of solution
For the final dilute solution,
Amountofsolute = 0.10mol/L×2.0L
= 0.20mol
Step 2 Calculate the volume of the original concentrated solution
that is needed.
Rearrange and use the molar concentration equation.
Substitute in the amount of solute you calculated in step 1.
Volumeofsolution(inL) = Amountofsolute(inmol)
Molarconcentration(inmol/L)
= 0.20mol
18mol/L
= 0.011L
Therefore, 0.011 L, or 11 mL, of the concentrated 18 mol/L solution
should be used to make 2.0 L of 0.10 mol/L sulfuric acid.
Check Your Solution
The units are correct. The final solution must be much less
concentrated. Thus, it is reasonable that only a small volume of
concentrated solution is needed.
Practice Problems
25. Suppose that you are given a solution of 1.25 mol/L sodium
chloride in water, NaCl . What volume must you dilute to
(aq)
prepare the following solutions?
(a) 50 mL of 1.00 mol/L NaCl
(aq)
(b) 200 mL of 0.800 mol/L NaCl
(aq)
(c) 250 mL of 0.300 mol/L NaCl
(aq)
26. What concentration of solution is obtained by diluting 50.0 mL of
0.720 mol/L aqueous sodium nitrate, NaNO , to each volume?
3(aq)
(a) 120 mL (b) 400 mL (c) 5.00 L
27. A solution is prepared by adding 600 mL of distilled water to
100 mL of 0.15 mol/L ammonium nitrate. Calculate the molar
concentration of the solution. Assume that the volume quantities
can be added together.
Now that you understand how to calculate standard solutions and dilution,
it is time for you to try it out for yourself. In the following investigation,
you will prepare and dilute standard solutions.
Chapter 8 Solutions and Their Concentrations • MHR 321
S K I L L F O C U S
Initiating and planning
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
Estimating Concentration
of an Unknown Solution
Copper(II) sulfate, CuSO , is a soluble salt. It is Procedure
4
sometimes added to pools and ponds to control
1. With your partner, develop a method to
the growth of fungi. Solutions of this salt are
prepare 100 mL of 0.500 mol/L aqueous
blue in colour. The intensity of the colour
CuSO ·5H O solution. Include the water
4 2
increases with increased concentration. In this
molecules that are hydrated to the crystals,
investigation, you will prepare copper(II) sulfate
as given in the molecular formula, in your
solutions with known concentrations. Then you
calculation of the molar mass. Show all your
will estimate the concentration of an unknown
calculations. Prepare the solution.
solution by comparing its colour intensity with
the colour intensities of the known solutions. 2. Save some of the solution you prepared in
Copper(II) sulfate pentahydrate is a hydrate. step 1, to be tested in Part 2. Use the rest
Hydrates are ionic compounds that have a of the solution to make the dilutions in
specific amount of water molecules associated steps 3 to 5. Remember to label the solutions.
with each ion pair.
3. Develop a method to dilute part of the
0.500 mol/L CuSO solution, to make
4
Question 100 mL of 0.200 mol/L solution. Show your
How can you estimate the concentration of an calculations. Prepare the solution.
unknown solution?
4. Show your calculations to prepare 100 mL of
0.100 mol/L solution, using the solution you
Part 1 Making Solutions with Known
prepared in step 3. (You do not need to
Concentrations
describe the method because it will be similar
Safety Precautions
to the method you developed in step 3. Only
the volume diluted will be different.) Prepare
the solution.
• Copper(II) sulfate is poisonous. Wash your
hands at the end of this investigation. 5. Repeat step 4 to make 100 mL of 0.050 mol/L
CuSO , by diluting part of the 0.100 mol/L
•If you spill any solution on your skin, wash 4
solution you made. Then make 50 mL of
it off immediately with copious amounts of
0.025 mol/L solution by diluting part of the
cool water.
0.050 mol/L solution.
Materials
Part 2 Estimating the Concentration of an
graduated cylinder Unknown Solution
6 beakers Materials
chemical balance
paper towels
stirring rod
6 clean, dry, identical test tubes
copper(II) sulfate pentahydrate, CuSO ·5H O
4 2
medicine droppers
distilled water
5 prepared solutions from Part 1
labels or grease marker
10 mL of copper(II) sulfate, CuSO , solution
4
with an unknown concentration
322 MHR • Unit 3 Solutions and Solubility
Procedure 6. Pour the solutions of CuSO into a beaker
4
supplied by your teacher. Wash your hands.
1. You should have five labelled beakers
containing CuSO solutions with the
4
following concentrations: 0.50 mol/L, Analysis
0.20 mol/L, 0.10 mol/L, 0.05 mol/L, and
1. Describe any possible sources of error for
0.025 mol/L. Your teacher will give you a
Part 1 of this investigation.
sixth solution of unknown concentration.
Record the letter or number that identifies 2. What is your estimate of the concentration of
this solution. the unknown solution?
2. Label each test tube, one for each solution.
Conclusion
Pour a sample of each solution into a test
tube. The height of the solution in the test 3. Obtain the concentration of the unknown
tubes should be the same. Use a medicine solution from your teacher. Calculate the
dropper to add or take away solution as need- percentage error in your estimate.
ed. (Be careful not to add water, or a solution
of different concentration, to a test tube.) Applications
3. The best way to compare colour intensity is 4. Use your estimated concentration of the
by looking down through the test tube. Wrap unknown solution to calculate the mass of
each test tube with a paper towel to stop light CuSO 4 ·5H 2 O that your teacher would need
from entering the side. Arrange the solutions to prepare 500 mL of this solution.
of known concentration in order.
5. If your school has a spectrometer or colori-
4. Place the solutions over a diffuse light source meter, you can measure the absorption of light
such as a lightbox. Compare the colour of the passing through the solutions. By measuring
unknown solution with the colours of the the absorption of solutions of copper(II) sulfate
other solutions. with different concentrations, you can draw a
graph of absorption against concentration.
5. Use your observations to estimate the
concentration of the unknown solution.
Chapter 8 Solutions and Their Concentrations • MHR 323
Diluting Concentrated Acids
The acids that you use in your investigations are bought as concentrated
standard solutions. Sulfuric acid is usually bought as an 18 mol/L solu-
tion. Hydrochloric acid is usually bought as a 12 mol/L solution. These
acids are far too dangerous for you to use at these concentrations. Your
teacher dilutes concentrated acids, following a procedure that minimizes
the hazards involved.
Concentrated acids should be diluted in a fume hood because
breathing in the fumes causes acid to form in air passages and lungs.
Rubber gloves must be used to protect the hands. A lab coat is needed
to protect clothing. Even small splashes of a concentrated acid will form
holes in fabric. Safety goggles, or even a full-face shield, are essential.
Mixing a strong, concentrated acid with water is a very exothermic
process. A concentrated acid is denser than water. Therefore, when it is
Figure 8.24 When diluting acid, poured into water, it sinks into the solution and mixes with the solution.
always add the acid to the The heat that is generated is spread throughout the solution. This is
water—never the reverse. the only safe way to mix an acid and water. If you added water to a
Rubber gloves, a lab coat, and
concentrated acid, the water would float on top of the solution. The heat
safety goggles or a face shield
generated at the acid-water layer could easily boil the solution and splat-
protect against acid splashes.
ter highly corrosive liquid. The sudden heat generated at the acid-water
boundary could crack the glassware and lead to a very dangerous spill.
Figure 8.24 illustrates safety precautions needed to dilute a strong acid.
Section Wrap-up
In this section, you learned how to prepare solutions by dissolving a solid
solute and then diluting a concentrated solution. In the next chapter, you
will see how water is used as a solvent in chemistry laboratories. Many
important reactions take place in water. You will also learn more about
water pollution and water purification.
Section Review
1 I What mass of potassium chloride, KCl, is used to make 25.0 mL
of a solution with a concentration of 2.00 mol/L?
2 I A solution is prepared by dissolving 42.5 g of silver nitrate,
AgNO in a 1 L volumetric flask. What is the molar concentration
3
of the solution?
3 I The solution of aqueous ammonia that is supplied to schools has a
concentration of 14 mol/L. Your class needs 3.0 L of a solution with a
concentration of 0.10 mol/L.
(a) What procedure should your teacher follow to make up this solution?
(b) Prepare an instruction sheet or a help file for your teacher to carry
out this dilution.
4 I 47.9 g of potassium chlorate, KClO 3 , is used to make a solution with
a concentration of 0.650 mol/L. What is the volume of the solution?
5 I Water and 8.00 mol/L potassium nitrate solution are mixed to
produce 700 mL of a solution with a concentration of 6.00 mol/L.
What volumes of water and potassium nitrate solution are used?
324 MHR • Unit 3 Solutions and Solubility
Review
Reflecting on Chapter 8 3. Mixing 2 mL of linseed oil and 4 mL of
turpentine makes a binder for oil paint. What
Summarize this chapter in the format of your
term is used to describe liquids that dissolve in
choice. Here are a few ideas to use as guidelines:
each other? Which liquid is the solvent?
•Describe the difference between a saturated and
an unsaturated solution. 4. How does the bonding in water molecules
•Explain how you can predict whether a solute account for the fact that water is an exellent
will dissolve in a solvent. solvent?
•What factors affect the rate of dissolving? 5. Why does an aqueous solution of an electrolyte
•What factors affect solubility? conduct electricity, but an aqueous solution of
•How does temperature affect the solubility of a a non-electrolyte does not?
solid, a liquid, and a gas?
6. Use the concept of forces between particles to
•Describe how particle attractions affect solubility.
explain why oil and water are immiscible.
•Explain how to plot a solubility curve.
7. Explain the expression “like dissolves like” in
•Write the formulas for (m/v) percent, (m/m)
terms of intermolecular forces.
percent, (v/v) percent, ppm, ppb, and molar
concentration. 8. What factors affect the rate of dissolving of a
•Explain how you would prepare a standard solid in a liquid?
solution using a volumetric flask. 9. Which of the following substances would you
expect to be soluble in water? Briefly explain
Reviewing Key Terms
each answer.
For each of the following terms, write a sentence (a) potassium chloride, KCl
that shows your understanding of its meaning. (b) carbon tetrachloride, CCl 4
(c) sodium sulfate, Na SO
solution hydrogen bonding 2 4
(d) butane, C H
solvent ion-dipole attractions 4 10
solutes hydrated 10. Benzene, C 6 H 6 , is a liquid at room temperature.
variable composition electrolyte It is sometimes used as a solvent. Which of
aqueous solution non-electrolytes the following compounds is more soluble
miscible concentration in benzene: naphthalene, C 10 H 8 , or sodium
immiscible mass/volume percent fluoride, NaF? Would you expect ethanol,
alloys mass/mass percent CH 3 CH 2 OH, to be soluble in benzene? Explain
solubility volume/volume percent your answers.
saturated solution parts per million
unsaturated solution parts per billion Inquiry
rate of dissolving molar concentration
11. Boric acid solution is used as an eyewash.
dipole standard solution
What mass of boric acid is present in 250 g of
dipole-dipole attraction volumetric flask
solution that is 2.25% (m/m) acid in water?
12. 10% (m/m) sodium hydroxide solution,
Knowledge/Understanding
NaOH , is used to break down wood fibre
(aq)
1. Identify at least two solutions in your home to make paper.
that are (a) What mass of solute is needed to make
(a) beverages 250 mL of 10% (m/m) solution?
(b) found in the bathroom or medicine cabinet (b) What mass of solvent is needed?
(c) solids (c) What is the molar concentration of the
2. How is a solution different from a pure solution?
compound? Give specific examples. 13. What volume of pure ethanol is needed to
make 800 mL of a solution of ethanol in water
that is 12% (v/v)?
Chapter 8 Solutions and Their Concentrations • MHR 325
14. Some municipalities add sodium fluoride, NaF, 22. Fertilizers for home gardeners may be sold as
to drinking water to help protect the teeth of aqueous solutions. Suppose that you want to
children. The concentration of sodium fluoride begin a company that sells an aqueous solution
is maintained at 2.9×10 −5mol/L. What mass of potassium nitrate, KNO , fertilizer. You need
3
(in mg) of sodium fluoride is dissolved in 1 L of a solubility curve (a graph of solubility versus
water? Express this concentration in ppm. temperature) to help you decide what concen-
15. A saturated solution of sodium acetate, tration to use for your solution. Describe an
NaCH COO, can be prepared by dissolving experiment that you might perform to develop
3
4.65 g in 10.0 mL of water at 20˚C. What is the a solubility curve for potassium nitrate. State
molar concentration of the solution? which variables are controlled, which are
varied, and which must be measured.
16. What is the molar concentration of each of the
following solutions? 23. Potassium alum, KAl(SO 4 ) 2 ·12H 2 O, is used to
(a) 7.25 g of silver nitrate, AgNO , dissolved stop bleeding from small cuts. The solubility
3
of potassium alum, at various temperatures, is
in 100 mL of solution
(b) 80 g of glucose, C H O , dissolved given in the following table.
6 12 6
in 70 mL of solution Solubility of Potassium Alum
17. Calculate the mass of solute that is needed to
Solubility
prepare each solution below.
(g/100 g water) Temperature (˚C)
(a) 250 mL of 0.250 mol/L calcium acetate,
4 0
Ca(CH COO)
3 2
10 10
(b) 1.8 L of 0.35 mol/L ammonium sulfate,
(NH ) SO 15 20
4 2 4
18. Calculate the molar concentration of each 23 30
solution formed after dilution. 31 40
(a) 20 mL of 6.0 mol/L hydrochloric acid,
49 50
HCl , diluted to 70 mL
(aq)
67 60
(b) 300 mL of 12.0 mol/L ammonia, NH ,
3(aq)
diluted to 2.50 L 101 70
19. Calculate the molar concentration of each 135 80
solution. Assume that the volumes can be
(a) Plot a graph of solubility against temperature.
added.
(b) From your graph, interpolate the solubility
(a) 85.0 mL of 1.50 mol/L ammonium chloride,
of potassium alum at 67˚C.
NH Cl , added to 250 mL of water
4 (aq)
(c) By extrapolation, estimate the solubility of
(b) a 1:3 dilution of 1.0 mol/L calcium
potassium alum at 82˚C.
phosphate (that is, one part stock solution
(d) Look at your graph. At what temperature
mixed with three parts water)
will 120 g of potassium alum form a
20. A standard solution of 0.250 mol/L calcium ion
saturated solution in 100 g of water?
is prepared by dissolving solid calcium carbon-
24. Use the graph on the next page to answer
ate in an acid. What mass of calcium carbonate
questions 24 and 25. At 80˚C, what mass of
is needed to prepare 1.00 L of the solution?
sodium chloride dissolves in 1.0 L of water?
21. Suppose that your teacher gives you three test
25. What minimum temperature is required to
tubes. Each test tube contains a clear, colour-
dissolve 24 g of potassium nitrate in 40 g
less liquid. One liquid is an aqueous solution
of water?
of an electrolyte. Another liquid is an aqueous
solution of a non-electrolyte. The third liquid is 26. A teacher wants to dilute 200 mL of 12 mol/L
distilled water. Outline the procedure for an hydrochloric acid to make a 1 mol/L solution.
experiment to identify which liquid is which. What safety precautions should the teacher take?
326 MHR • Unit 3 Solutions and Solubility
N
H
H
H
31. At 20˚C, the solubility of oxygen in water is
more than twice that of nitrogen. A student
analyzed the concentration of dissolved gases
in an unpolluted pond. She found that the
concentration of nitrogen gas was greater
than the concentration of oxygen. Prepare an
explanation for the student to give to her class.
32. What is the concentration of pure water?
Making Connections
33. A bright red mineral called cinnabar has the
chemical formula HgS. It can be used to make
This graph shows the solubility of four salts at various an artist’s pigment, but it is a very insoluble
temperatures. Use it to answer questions 24 and 25. compound. A saturated solution at 25˚C has a
concentration of 2×10 −27mol/L. In the past,
Communication
why was heavy metal poisoning common in
27. Suppose that you make a pot of hot tea. Later, painters? Why did painters invariably waste
you put a glass of the tea in the refrigerator to more cinnabar than they used?
save it for a cool drink. When you take it out of 34. Vitamin A is a compound that is soluble in fats
the refrigerator some hours later, you notice but not in water. It is found in certain foods,
that it is cloudy. How could you explain this to including yellow fruit and green vegetables.
a younger brother or sister? In parts of central Africa, children frequently
28. Define each concentration term. show signs of vitamin A deficiency, although
(a) percent (m/v) their diet contains a good supply of the
(b) percent (m/m) necessary fruits and vegetables. Why?
(c) percent (v/v)
Answers to Practice Problems and
(d) parts per million, ppm
Short Answers to Section Review Questions:
(e) parts per billion, ppb Practice Problems: 1.(a)3.16% (b)1.75% (c)2.9% 2.6.31%
29. The concentration of iron in the water that 3.0.362 g 4.3.0 g, 0.1 g, 0.12 g 5.(a)26% (b)16.6%
is supplied to a town is 0.25 mg/L. Express
(c)15.1% 6.35% 7.85 g 8.6.35 g 9.15 g 10.15%
11.12 mL 12.38% 13.18 mL 14.285 mL 15.(a)0.33 ppm
this in ppm and ppb.
(b)3.3×102ppb (c)0.000033% 16.0.040 g 17.3.0 ppm
30. Ammonia is a gas at room temperature and 18.500 ppm 19.(a)1.7 mol/L (b)2.41 mol/L (c)1.2 mol/L
pressure, but it can be liquefied easily. Liquid (d)0.805 mol/L (e)0.18 mol/L 20.(a)3.3 g (b)8.49 g
ammonia is probably present on some planets. (c)4.9×102g(d)24 g (e)263 g 21.0.359 mol/L 22.1.4 L
Scientists speculate that it might be a good 23.7.45 g 24.4.5×102g 25.(a)40 mL (b)128 mL
(c)60.0 mL 26.(a)0.300 mol/L (b)9.00×10−2mol/L
solvent. Explain why, based on the structure
(c)7.20×10−3mol/L 27.2.1×10−2mol/L
of the ammonia molecule shown above.
Section Review: 8.1: 1.solute, solvent 8.polar, ionic
13.non-polar 8.2: 3.(a)increases (b)decreases
6.(a)Ce
2
(SO
4
) 3(b)Ce
2
(SO
4
)
3
, NaNO
3
(c)NaCl (d)84˚C
(e)10 g 8.3: 1.33.3 2.23.8% 3.8.67 mol/L 8.4: 1.3.73 g
2.0.25 mol/L 4.601 mL 5.175 mL, 525 mL
Chapter 8 Solutions and Their Concentrations • MHR 327
)O
H
g
001/g(
ytilibuloS
2
240
220
200
180
NaCIO 3
160
140
120 KNO
3
KBr
100
80
60
NaCI
40
20
0
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
Temperature (˚C)
328
Aqueous Solutions
I
Chapter Preview
n 1966, a Russian scientist who was lecturing in England stunned the
9.1 Making Predictions About
scientific community with the report of a new discovery. He said that a
Solubility
colleague had isolated a new form of liquid water. Dubbed “polywater,”
9.2 Reactions in Aqueous
this substance was prepared in a laboratory by heating and then condens-
Solutions
ing H O in very narrow glass capillary tubes. Over the next seven years,
2 (g)
9.3 Stoichiometry in Solution
scientists around the world conducted studies and published over 500
Chemistry
papers about polywater’s properties. For example, its boiling point,
density, and viscosity were greater than those of ordinary water. Its 9.4 Aqueous Solutions and
Water Quality
freezing point was lower.
Then the popular media took an interest. They turned a simmering
scientific curiosity into a boiling concern. Polywater apparently had a
powerful capacity for hydrogen bonding. What if it escaped from a
laboratory? There were dire predictions that polywater would “take over”
Earth’s water resources. The imagined consequences for life on Earth
were grim.
Eventually further studies revealed that polywater was simply a
concentrated solution of silicon (silicic acid) and several ionic com-
pounds in ordinary water. The glass tubing was the source of these
Concepts and Skills
solutes. They had leached into the water.
You Will Need
The polywater event occurred because scientists overlooked, for
Before you begin this chapter,
awhile, water’s remarkable power as a solvent. In this chapter, you will
review the following concepts
learn how to predict which compounds are soluble in water. As well,
and skills:
you will consider how chemical reactions in aqueous (water) solutions
(cid:2) identifying factors that
are useful in industry and in protecting the quality of our water supplies.
affect solubility (Chapter 8,
section 8.2)
In what ways are aqueous (cid:2) performing stoichiometry
solutions an inescapable calculations (Chapter 7,
part of your daily life? section 7.1)
Chapter 9 Aqueous Solutions • MHR 329
9.1 Making Predictions
About Solubility
Section Preview/ In Chapter 8, you examined factors that affect the solubility of a com-
Specific Expectations pound. As well, you learned that the terms “soluble” and “insoluble” are
relative, because no substance is completely insoluble in water. “Soluble”
In this section, you will
generally means that more than about 1 g of solute will dissolve in 100
(cid:2) describeand identifycombi-
mL of water at room temperature. “Insoluble” means that the solubility is
nations of aqueous solutions
that result in the formation of less than 0.1 g per 100 mL. While many ionic compounds are soluble in
precipitates water, many others are not. Cooks, chemists, farmers, pharmacists, and
(cid:2) communicate, using appro- gardeners need to know which compounds are soluble and which are
priate scientific vocabulary, insoluble. (See Figure 9.1.)
ideas related to solubility
and aqueous solutions
(cid:2) communicateyour under-
standing of the following
terms: precipitate, general
solubility guidelines
Figure 9.1 Plant food may
come in the form of a liquid or
a powder. Gardeners dissolve
the plant food in water, and then
either spray or water the plant
with the resulting solution.
Factors That Affect the Solubility of Ionic Substances
Nearly all alkali metal compounds are soluble in water. Sulfide and
phosphate compounds are usually insoluble. How, then, do you account
CHEM for the fact that sodium sulfide and potassium phosphate are soluble,
FACT
while iron sulfide and calcium phosphate are insoluble? Why do some
Because the terms “soluble” ions form soluble compounds, while other ions form insoluble compounds?
and “insoluble” are relative,
some textbooks give different The Effect of Ion Charge on Solubility
definitions and units of con-
Compounds of ions with small charges tend to be soluble. Compounds of
centration to describe them.
ions with large charges tend to be insoluble. Why? Increasing the charge
Here are a few examples:
increases the force that holds the ions
Partly or together. For example, phosphates (com-
Soluble slightly soluble Insoluble pounds of PO 3− ) tend to be insoluble. On
4
more than 1 g between 1 g and 0.1 g less than the other hand, the salts of alkali metals
in 100 mL in 100 mL 0.1 g in 100 mL are soluble. Alkali metal cations have a
or or or
single positive charge, so the force that
greater than 0.1 mol/L between 0.1 mol/L less than
holds the ions together is less.
and 0.01 mol/L 0.01 mol/L
330 MHR • Unit 3 Solutions and Solubility
The Effect of Ion Size on Solubility
When an atom gives up or gains an electron, the size of the ion that results
is different from the size of the original atom. In Figure 9.2A, for example,
you can see that the sodium ion is smaller than the sodium atom. In
general, the ions of metals tend to be smaller than their corresponding
neutral atoms. For the ions of non-metals, the reverse is true. The ions of
non-metals tend to be larger than their corresponding neutral atoms.
Small ions bond more closely together than large ions. Thus, the bond
between small ions is stronger than the bond between large ions with
the same charge. As a result, compounds with small ions tend to be less
soluble than compounds with large ions. Consider the ions of elements
from Group 17 (VIIA), for example. Recall, from Chapters 2 and 3, that the
size of the ions increases as you go down a family in the periodic table.
(See Figure 9.2B.) Therefore, you would expect that fluoride compounds
are less soluble than chloride, bromide, and iodide compounds. This
tends to be the case.
18
182 pm
372 pm 17
Group
15
16 F Ionic size
14
Cl 1 13 Cl F- 266 pm
2
Na Br
Cl- 362 pm
I
Br- 392 pm
Cl−
Na+ I- 440 pm
362 pm
232 pm
A B
Figure 9.2A The size of the cation Figure 9.2B In Group 17 (VIIA), fluoride ions
of a metal, such as sodium, tends are smaller than chloride, bromide, and iodide
to be smaller than the size of the ions. How does this periodic trend affect the
atom from which it was formed. solubility of compounds that are formed from
The size of the anion of a non- these elements?
metal, such as phosphorus, tends
to be larger than the size of its
atom.
Making Predictions About Solubility Sketch an outline of the
periodic table. Add labels
Sulfides (compounds of
S2−
) and oxides (compounds of
O2−
) are influenced
and arrows to indicate what
by both ion size and ion charge. These compounds tend to be insoluble
you think are the trends for
because their ions have a double charge andare relatively small. Even so, a ionic size (radius) across a
few sulfides and oxides are soluble, as you will discover in Investigation 1-A. period and down a group.
Many interrelated factors affect the solubility of substances in water. Then suggest reasons for
This makes it challenging to predict which ionic substances will dissolve these trends. Specifically,
identify the factors that you
in water. By performing experiments, chemists have developed guidelines
think are responsible for the
to help them make predictions about solubility. In Investigation 9-A,
differences in the sizes of ions
you will perform your own experiments to develop quidelines about
and their “parent” atoms.
the solubility of ionic compounds in water.
Chapter 9 Aqueous Solutions • MHR 331
S K I L L F O C U S
Predicting
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
The Solubility of Communicating results
Ionic Compounds
In this investigation, you will work with a set of Safety Precautions
solutions. You will chemically combine small
quantities, two at a time. This will help you
•Do not contaminate the dropper bottles. The
determine which combinations react to produce
tip of a dropper should not make contact with
a precipitate. A precipitate is an insoluble solid
either the plate or another solution. Put the cap
that may result when two aqueous solutions
back on the bottle immediately after use.
chemically react. The appearance of a precipi-
•Dispose of solutions as directed by your
tate indicates that an insoluble compound is
teacher.
present. Then you will compile your data with
•Make sure that you are working in a well-
the data from other groups to develop some
ventilated area.
guidelines about the solubility of several ionic
•If you accidentally spill any of the solutions on
compounds.
your skin, wash the area immediately with
plenty of cool water.
Problem
How can you develop guidelines to help you pre- Procedure
dict the solubility of ionic compounds in water?
1. Your teacher will give you a set of nine
solutions to test. Each solution includes one
Prediction
of five cations or four anions. Design a table
Read the entire Procedure. Predict which to record the results of all the possible
combination of anions and cations will likely combinations of cations with anions in
be soluble and which combination will likely your set of solutions.
be insoluble. Justify your prediction by briefly
2. Decide how to use the well plate or spot plate
explaining your reasoning.
to test systematically all the combinations of
cations with anions in your set. If your plate
Materials
does not have enough wells, you will need
12-well or 24-well plate, or spot plate to clean the plate before you can test all the
toothpicks possible combinations. To clean the plate, first
cotton swabs discard solutions into the container provided
wash bottle with distilled water by your teacher. Then rinse the plate with
piece of black paper distilled water, and clean the wells using a
piece of white paper cotton swab.
labelled dropper bottles of aqueous solutions that
3. To test each combination of anion and cation,
contain the following cations:
Al3+
, NH
+
,
Ba2+
,
Ca2+
,
Cu2+
,
Fe2+
,
Mg2+
, Ag
+
,
add one or two drops into your well plate or
4
Na
+
,
Zn2+ spot plate. Then stir the mixture using a
toothpick. Rinse the toothpick with running
labelled dropper bottles of aqueous solutions that
water before each stirring. Make sure that you
contain the following anions:
CH COO
−
, Br
−
, CO
2−
, Cl
−
, OH
−
, PO
3−
,
keep track of the combinations of ions in each
3 3 4
SO
2−
,
S2− well or spot.
4
332 MHR • Unit 3 Solutions and Solubility
2. Identify any anions that
(a) always appear to form soluble compounds
(b) always appear to form insoluble compounds
3. Based on your observations, which sulfates
are insoluble?
4. Based on your observations, which
phosphates are soluble?
5. Explain why each reagent solution you tested
must contain both cations and anions.
6. Your teacher prepared the cation solutions
using compounds that contain the nitrate ion.
Why is it necessary to clean the well or spot plate as
For example, the solution marked
Ca2+
was
described in step 2?
prepared by dissolving Ca(NO ) in water.
3 2
Why were nitrates used to make these
4. Examine each mixture for evidence of a
solutions?
precipitate. Place the plate on a sheet of
white or black paper. (Use whichever colour
of paper helps you see a precipitate best.) Any
Conclusions
cloudy appearance in the mixture is evidence
7. Which group in the periodic table most
of a precipitate. Many precipitates are white.
likely forms cations with salts that are
• If you can see that a precipitate has formed,
usually soluble?
enter “I” in your table. This indicates that
the combination of ions produces an 8. Which group in the periodic table most
insoluble substance. likely forms anions with salts that are
usually soluble?
• If you cannot see a precipitate, enter “S”
to indicate that the ion you are testing 9. Your answers to questions 7 and 8 represent
is soluble. a preliminary set of guidelines for predicting
the solubility of the compounds you tested.
5. Repeat steps 2 to 4 for each cation solution.
Many reference books refer to guidelines like
6. Discard the solutions and precipitates into the these as “solubility rules.” Why might “solu-
container provided by your teacher. Rinse the bility guidelines” be a better term to use for
plate with water, and clean the wells using a describing solubility patterns?
cotton swab.
7. If time permits, your teacher may give you a Application
second set of solutions to test. 10. Predict another combination of an anion
and a cation (not used in this investigation)
8. Add your observations to the class data table.
that you would expect to be soluble. Predict
Use your completed copy of the class data
another combination that you would expect
table to answer the questions below.
to be insoluble. Share your predictions, and
your reasons, with the class. Account for any
Analysis
agreement or disagreement.
1. Identify any cations that
(a) always appear to form soluble compounds
(b) always appear to form insoluble compounds
Chapter 9 Aqueous Solutions • MHR 333
Soluble or Insoluble: General Solubility Guidelines
As you have seen, nearly all salts that contain the ammonium ion or an
alkali metal are soluble. This observed pattern does not tell you how solu-
ble these salts are, however. As well, it does not tell you whether ammo-
nium chloride is more or less soluble than sodium chloride. Chemists rely
on published data for this information. (See Figure 9.3.)
Figure 9.3 Many web sites on
the Internet provide chemical
and physical data for tens of
thousands of compounds. Print
resources, such as The CRC
Handbook of Chemistry and
Physics, provide these data
as well.
Many factors affect solubility. Thus, predicting solubility is neither
straightforward nor simple. Nevertheless, the general solubility guidelines
in Table 9.1 are a useful summary of ionic-compound interactions with
water. To use Table 9.1, remember that a higher guideline number always
takes precedence over a lower guideline number. For example, barium
chloride, BaCl , is a white crystalline powder. The barium ion,
Ba2+
, is
2
−
listed in guideline 4 as insoluble. The chloride ion, Cl , is listed in
guideline 3 as soluble. The higher guideline number takes precedence.
Thus, you would predict that barium chloride is soluble.
You will be referring to the general solubility guidelines often in this
chapter and in Chapter 10. They will help you identify salts that are solu-
ble and insoluble in aqueous solutions. Always keep in mind, however,
that water is a powerful solvent. Even an “insoluble” salt may dissolve
enough to present a serious hazard if it is highly poisonous.
Table 9.1General Solubility Guidelines
Guideline Cations Anions Result Exceptions
1 Li+,Na+,K+, NO −,CH COO−, soluble Ca(ClO )
3 3 32
Rb+,Cs+,NH + ClO − is insoluble
4 3
2 Ag+,Pb2+,Hg+ CO 22−,PO3−, insoluble BaO and Ba(OH)
3 4 2
O2−,S2 − ,OH − are soluble.
Group 2 sulfides
tend to decompose.
3 Cl−,Br−,I− soluble
4 Ba2+,Ca2+,Sr2+ insoluble
5 Mg2+,Cu2+,Zn2+, SO 2− soluble
4
Fe2+,Fe3+,Al3+
334 MHR • Unit 3 Solutions and Solubility
Practice Problems
Web
LINK
1. Decide whether each of the following salts is soluble or insoluble in
distilled water. Give reasons for your answer.
www.school.mcgrawhill.ca/
(a) lead(II) chloride, PbCl 2 (a white crystalline powder used in paints) resources/
(b) zinc oxide, ZnO (a white pigment used in paints, cosmetics, and Different references present
calamine lotion) solubility guidelines in different
ways. During a 1 h “surf
(c) silver acetate, AgCH COO (a whitish powder that is used to help
3
session” on the Internet, a
people quit smoking because of the bitter taste it produces)
student collected ten different
2. Which of the following compounds are soluble in water? Explain versions. See how many
versions you can find.
your reasoning for each compound.
Compare their similarities and
(a) potassium nitrate, KNO 3 (used to manufacture gunpowder) differences. Which version(s)
(b) lithium carbonate, Li CO (used to treat people who suffer do you prefer, and why? To
2 3
from depression) start your search, go to the
web site above. Go to Science
(c) lead(II) oxide, PbO (used to make crystal glass)
Resources, then to Chemistry
3. Which of the following compounds are insoluble in water?
11to find out where to go next.
(a) calcium carbonate, CaCO (present in marble and limestone)
3
(b) magnesium sulfate, MgSO (found in the hydrated salt,
4
MgSO ·7H O, also known as Epsom salts; used for the relief of
4 2
aching muscles and as a laxative)
(c) aluminum phosphate, AlPO (found in dental cements)
4
Section Wrap-up
In Chapter 8, you focussed mainly on physical changes that involve
solutions. In the first section of this chapter, you observed that mixing
aqueous solutions of ionic compounds may result in either a physical
change (dissolving) or a chemical change (a reaction that forms a precipi-
tate). Chemical changes that involve aqueous solutions, especially ionic
reactions, are common. They occur in the environment, in your body,
and in the bodies of other organisms. In the next section, you will look
more closely at reactions that involve aqueous solutions. As well, you will
learn how to represent these reactions using a special kind of chemical
equation, called an ionic equation.
Chapter 9 Aqueous Solutions • MHR 335
Section Review
Language 1 (a) K/U Name the two factors that affect the solubility of an ionic
LINK
compound in water.
This poem is by an unknown (b) Briefly explain how each factor affects solubility.
author. It is not great literature.
2 K/U Which would you expect to be less soluble: sodium fluoride,
For decades, however, it has
NaF (used in toothpaste), or sodium iodide, NaI (added to table salt
helped many students remem-
ber the solubility guidelines. to prevent iodine deficiency in the diet)? Explain your answer.
Maybe it will do the same for
3 K/U Which of the following compounds are soluble in water?
you. If not, you can try writing
your own poem! (a) calcium sulfide, CaS (used in skin products)
Potassium, sodium, and (b) iron(II) sulfate, FeSO (used as a dietary supplement)
4
ammonium salts
(c) magnesium chloride, MgCl (used as a disinfectant and a
2
Whatever they may be,
food tenderizer)
Can always be relied upon
For solubility. 4 MC Which of the following compounds are insoluble in water? For
Every single sulfate each compound, relate its solubility to the use described.
Is soluble it’s said,
(a) barium sulfate, BaSO (can be used to obtain images of the stomach
4
Except barium and calcium
and intestines because it is opaque to X-rays)
And strontium and lead.
(b) aluminum hydroxide, Al(OH) (found in some antacid tablets)
Most every chloride’s soluble, 3
That’s what we’ve always read, (c) zinc carbonate, ZnCO (used in suntan lotions)
3
Save silver, mercurous mercury,
And (slightly) chloride of lead. 5 C Calcium nitrate is used in fireworks. Silver nitrate turns dark when
exposed to sunlight. When freshly made, both solutions are clear and
When asked about the nitrates,
colourless. Imagine that someone has prepared both solutions but
The answer’s always clear;
They each and all are soluble, has not labelled them. You do not want to wait for the silver nitrate
That’s all we want to hear. solution to turn dark in order to identify the solutions. Name a chemi-
Metallic bases won’t dissolve, cal that can be used to precipitate a silver compound with the silver
That is, all but three; nitrate solution, but will produce no precipitate with the calcium
Potassium, sodium, and nitrate solution. State the reason for your choice.
ammonium
Dissolve quite readily. 6 C Suppose that you discover four dropper bottles containing clear,
colourless liquids in your school laboratory. The following four labels
But then you must remember,
You must surely not forget, lie nearby:
Calcium and barium • barium, Ba2+
Dissolve a little bit.
• chloride, Cl −
Carbonates are insoluble,
• silver, Ag +
It’s lucky that it’s so,
Or all our marble buildings • sulfate, SO 2− .
4
Would melt away like snow.
Unfortunately the labels have not been attached to the bottles. You
decide to number the bottles 1, 2, 3, and 4. Then you mix the solutions
in pairs. Three combinations give white precipitates: bottles 1 and 2, 1
and 4, and 2 and 3. Which ion does each bottle contain?
336 MHR • Unit 3 Solutions and Solubility
Reactions in Aqueous Solutions 9.2
When you mix two aqueous ionic compounds together, there are two Section Preview/
possible outcomes. Either the compounds will remain in solution without Specific Expectations
reacting, or one aqueous ionic compound will chemically react with the
In this section, you will
other. How can you predict which outcome will occur? Figure 9.4 shows
(cid:2) describecombinations
what happens when an aqueous solution of lead(II) nitrate is added to an
of aqueous solutions that
aqueous solution of potassium iodide. As you can see, a yellow solid—a result in the formation of
precipitate—is forming. This is a double displacement reaction. Recall, precipitates
from Chapter 4, that a double displacement reaction is a chemical reaction (cid:2) performa qualitative
that involves the exchange of ions to form two new compounds. It has the analysis of ions in solutions
general equation
(cid:2) representdouble displace-
WX+YZ → WZ+YX ment reactions by their net
ionic equations
In a double displacement reaction, the cations exchange anions. In the
reaction shown in Figure 9.4, for example, the lead cation is exchanged (cid:2) writebalanced chemical
equations and net ionic
with the iodide anion.
equations for double
You can usually recognize a double displacement reaction by
displacement reactions
observing one of these possible results:
(cid:2) communicateyour under-
• the formation of a precipitate (so that ions are removed from solution
standing of the following
as an insoluble solid) terms: spectator ions,
• the formation of a gas (so that ions are removed from solution in the total ionic equation, net
form of a gaseous product) ionic equation, qualitative
• the formation of water (so that H + and OH − ions are removed from analysis
solution as water)
In this section, you will examine each of these results. At the same time,
you will learn how to represent a double displacement reaction using a
special kind of chemical equation: an ionic equation.
Language
LINK
Double displacement reactions
are also called metathesis
reactions. The word “meta-
thesis” (pronounced with the
stress on the second syllable:
meh-TATH-e-sis) means
“interchange.” In chemistry,
a metathesis reaction occurs
Figure 9.4 Lead(II) nitrate when ions or atoms are
and potassium iodide are clear, exchanged between different
colourless aqueous solutions. compounds. Chemists are
Mixing them causes a double not the only people who use
displacement reaction. An this word. Use a dictionary
insoluble yellow precipitate or encyclopedia to find non-
(lead(II) iodide) and a soluble chemistry examples of
salt (potassium nitrate) are metathesis.
produced.
Chapter 9 Aqueous Solutions • MHR 337
Double Displacement Reactions That Produce a Precipitate
A double displacement reaction that results in the formation of an insolu-
ble substance is often called a precipitation reaction. Figure 9.4 is a clear
example of a precipitation reaction. What if you did not have this photo-
graph, however, and you were unable to do an experiment? Could you
have predicted that mixing Pb(NO ) and 2KI would result in an
3 (aq) (aq)
insoluble compound? Yes. When you are given (on paper) a pair of solu-
tions to be mixed together, start by thinking about the exchange of ions
that may occur. Then use the general solubility guidelines (Table 9.1) to
predict which compounds, if any, are insoluble.
For example, consider lead(II) nitrate, Pb(NO ) , and potassium
3 2
iodide, KI. Lead(II) nitrate contains
Pb2+
cations and NO
−
anions.
3
+ −
Potassium iodide contains K cations and I anions. Exchanging positive
ions results in lead(II) iodide, PbI , and potassium nitrate, KNO . From
2 3
the solubility guidelines, you know that all potassium salts and nitrates
are soluble. Thus, potassium nitrate is soluble. The
Pb2+
ion is listed in
−
guideline 2 as an insoluble cation. The I ion is listed in guideline 3 as
a soluble anion. Remember that a higher guideline number takes prece-
dence over a lower guideline number. Thus, you can predict that lead(II)
iodide is insoluble. It will form a precipitate when the solutions are
mixed. The balanced chemical equation for this reaction is
Pb(NO ) +2KI → 2KNO +PbI
3 2(aq) (aq) 3(aq) 2(s)
Sample Problem
Predicting the Formation of a Precipitate
Problem
Which of the following pairs of aqueous solutions produce a precipi-
tate when mixed together? Write the balanced chemical equation if
you predict a precipitate. Write “NR” if you predict that no reaction
takes place.
(a) potassium carbonate and copper(II) sulfate
(b) ammonium chloride and zinc sulfate
What Is Required?
You need to predict whether or not each pair of aqueous solutions
forms an insoluble product (a precipitate). If it does, you need to
write a balanced chemical equation.
What Is Given?
You know the names of the compounds in each solution.
Plan Your Strategy
Start by identifying the ions in each pair of compounds. Then
exchange the positive ions in the two compounds. Compare the
resulting compounds against the solubility guidelines, and make
your prediction.
Continued ...
338 MHR • Unit 3 Solutions and Solubility
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 338
Act on Your Strategy
(a) Potassium carbonate contains K
+
and CO
2−
ions. Copper(II) sul-
3
fate contains
Cu2+
and SO
2−
ions. Exchanging positive ions results
4
in potassium sulfate, K SO , and copper(II) carbonate, CuCO .
2 4 3
All potassium salts are soluble, so these ions remain dissolved
in solution.
The copper(II) ion is listed in guideline 5 as a soluble cation. The
carbonate anion is listed in guideline 2 as insoluble. Because
guideline 2 is higher, copper(II) carbonate should be insoluble. So
you can predict that a precipitate forms. The balanced chemical
equation for this reaction is
K CO +CuSO → K SO +CuCO
2 3(aq) 4(aq) 2 4(aq) 3(s)
+ −
(b) Ammonium chloride contains NH and Cl ions. Zinc sulfate
4
consists of
Zn2+
and SO
2−
ions. Exchanging positive ions results
4
in ammonium sulfate, (NH ) SO , and zinc chloride, ZnCl .
4 2 4 2
Since all ammonium salts are soluble, the ammonium sulfate
stays dissolved in solution.
Zinc chloride consists of a guideline 5 soluble cation and a guide-
line 3 soluble anion. Because guideline 3 is higher, zinc chloride
should be soluble. Thus, you can predict that no precipitate forms.
NH Cl +ZnSO → NR
4 (aq) 4(aq)
Check Your Solution
An experiment is always the best way to check a prediction. If
possible, obtain samples of these solutions from your teacher, and
mix them together.
Practice Problems
4. Predict the result of mixing each pair of aqueous solutions. Write
a balanced chemical equation if you predict that a precipitate
forms. Write “NR” if you predict that no reaction takes place.
(a) sodium sulfide and iron(II) sulfate
(b) sodium hydroxide and barium nitrate
(c) cesium phosphate and calcium bromide
(d) sodium carbonate and sulfuric acid
(e) sodium nitrate and copper(II) sulfate
(f) ammonium iodide and silver nitrate
(g) potassium carbonate and iron(II) nitrate
(h) aluminum nitrate and sodium phosphate
(i) potassium chloride and iron(II) nitrate
(j) ammonium sulfate and barium chloride
(k) sodium sulfide and nickel(II) sulfate
(l) lead(II) nitrate and potassium bromide
Chapter 9 Aqueous Solutions • MHR 339
Double Displacement Reactions That Produce a Gas
Double displacement reactions are responsible for producing a number
of gases. (See Figure 9.5.) These gases include
•hydrogen
•hydrogen sulfide (a poisonous gas that smells like rotten eggs)
•sulfur dioxide (a reactant in forming acid rain)
•carbon dioxide
•ammonia
A Reaction that Produces Hydrogen Gas
The alkali metals form bonds with hydrogen to produce compounds
called hydrides. Hydrides react readily with water to produce hydrogen
gas. Examine the following equation for the reaction of lithium hydride,
LiH, with water. If you have difficulty visualizing the ion exchange that
Figure 9.5 You can easily takes place, rewrite the equation for yourself using HOH instead of H 2 O.
identify limestone and marble by LiH (s) +H 2 O ((cid:2)) → LiOH (aq) +H 2(g)
their reaction with hydrochloric
acid. The gas that is produced
A Reaction that Produces Hydrogen Sulfide Gas
by this double displacement
reaction is carbon dioxide. Sulfides react with certain acids, such as hydrochloric acid, to produce
hydrogen sulfide gas.
K S +2HCl → 2KCl +H S
2 (aq) (aq) (aq) 2 (g)
A Reaction that Produces Sulfur Dioxide Gas
Some reactions produce a compound that, afterward, decomposes into
a gas and water. Sodium sulfite is used in photography as a preservative.
It reacts with hydrochloric acid to form sulfurous acid. The sulfurous acid
then breaks down into sulfur dioxide gas and water. The net reaction is
the sum of both changes. If the same compound appears on both sides of
an equation (as sulfurous acid, H SO , does here), it can be eliminated.
2 3
This is just like eliminating terms from an equation in mathematics.
Na SO +2HCl → 2NaCl +H SO
2 3(aq) (aq) (aq) 2 3(aq)
H 2 SO 3(aq) → SO 2(g) +H 2 O ((cid:2))
Therefore, the net reaction is
Na 2 SO 3(aq) +2HCl (aq) → 2NaCl (aq) +SO 2(g) +H 2 O ((cid:2))
A Reaction that Produces Carbon Dioxide Gas
The reaction of a carbonate with an acid produces carbonic acid. Carbonic
acid decomposes rapidly into carbon dioxide and water.
Na CO +2HCl → 2NaCl +H CO
2 3(aq) (aq) (aq) 2 3(aq)
H 2 CO 3(aq) → CO 2(g) + H 2 O ((cid:2))
The net reaction is
Na 2 CO 3(aq) +2HCl (aq) → 2NaCl (aq) +CO 2(g) +H 2 O ((cid:2))
A Reaction that Produces Ammonia Gas
Ammonia gas is very soluble in water. You can detect it easily, however,
by its sharp, pungent smell. Ammonia gas can be prepared by the reaction
of an ammonium salt with a base.
NH 4 Cl (aq) +NaOH (aq) → NaCl (aq) +NH 3(aq) +H 2 O ((cid:2))
340 MHR • Unit 3 Solutions and Solubility
Double Displacement Reactions That Produce Water
The neutralization reaction between an acid and a base is a very
important double displacement reaction. In a neutralization reaction,
+ −
water results when an H ion from the acid bonds with an OH ion
from the base.
H 2 SO 4(aq) +2NaOH (aq) → Na 2 SO 4(aq) +2H 2 O ((cid:2))
Most metal oxides are bases. Therefore, a metal oxide will react with an
acid in a neutralization reaction to form a salt and water.
2HNO 3(aq) +MgO (s) → Mg(NO 3 ) 2(aq) +H 2 O ((cid:2))
Non-metal oxides are acidic. Therefore, a non-metal oxide will react
with a base. This type of reaction is used in the space shuttle. Cabin air
is circulated through canisters of lithium hydroxide (a base) to remove
the carbon dioxide before it can reach dangerous levels.
2LiOH (s) +CO 2(g) → Li 2 CO 3(aq) +H 2 O ((cid:2))
Representing Aqueous Ionic Reactions with Net Ionic Equations
Mixing a solution that contains silver ions with a solution that contains
chloride ions produces a white precipitate of silver chloride. There must
have been other ions present in each solution, as well. You know this
because it is impossible to have a solution of just a cation or just an anion.
Perhaps the solution that contained silver ions was prepared using silver
nitrate or silver acetate. Similarly, the solution that contained chloride
ions might have been prepared by dissolving NaCl in water, or perhaps
+
NH Cl or another soluble chloride. Any solution that contains Ag
4 (aq)
−
will react with any other solution that contains Cl to form a
(aq)
precipitate of AgCl . The other ions in the solutions are not important
(s)
to the net result. These ions are like passive onlookers. They are called
spectator ions.
The reaction between silver nitrate and sodium chloride can be
represented by the following chemical equation:
AgNO +NaCl → NaNO +AgCl
3(aq) (aq) 3(aq) (s)
This equation does not show the change that occurs, however. It shows
the reactants and products as intact compounds. In reality, soluble ionic
compounds dissociate into their respective ions in solution. So chemists
often use a total ionic equation to show the dissociated ions of the soluble
ionic compounds.
Ag + +NO − +Na + +Cl − → Na + +NO − +AgCl
(aq) 3 (aq) (aq) (aq) (aq) 3 (aq) (s)
Notice that the precipitate, AgCl, is still written as an ionic formula. This
makes sense because precipitates are insoluble, so they do not dissociate
into ions. Also notice that the spectator ions appear on both sides of the
equation. Here is the total ionic equation again, with slashes through the
spectator ions.
Ag + +NO − +Na + +Cl − → Na + +NO − +AgCl
(aq) 3 (aq) (aq) (aq) (aq) 3 (aq) (s)
If you eliminate the spectator ions, the equation becomes
Ag + +Cl − → AgCl
(aq) (aq) (s)
Chapter 9 Aqueous Solutions • MHR 341
An ionic equation that is written this way, without the spectator ions, is
called a net ionic equation. Before you try writing your own net ionic
equations, examine the guidelines in Table 9.2 below.
Table 9.2 Guidelines for Writing a Net Ionic Equation
1. Include only ions and compounds that have reacted. Do not include
spectator ions.
2. Write the soluble ionic compounds as ions. For example, write
+ −
NH and Cl , instead of NH Cl .
4 (aq) (aq) 4 (aq)
3. Write insoluble ionic compounds as formulas, not ions. For example,
zinc sulfide is insoluble, so you write it as ZnS , not
Zn2+
and
S2−
.
(s)
4. Since covalent compounds do not produce ions in aqueous solution,
write their molecular formulas. Water is a common example,
because it dissociates only very slightly into ions. When a reaction
involves a gas, always include the gas in the net ionic equation.
5. Write strong acids (discussed in the next chapter) in their ionic
form. There are six strong acids:
• hydrochloric acid (write as H + and Cl − , not HCl )
(aq) (aq) (aq)
• hydrobromic acid (write as H + and Br − )
(aq) (aq)
• hydroiodic acid (write as H + and l − )
(aq) (aq)
• sulfuric acid (write as H + and SO )
(aq) 4(aq)
• nitric acid (write as H + and NO − )
(aq) 3 (aq)
• perchloric acid (write as H + and CIO − )
(aq) 4 (aq)
All other acids are weak and form few ions. Therefore, write them
in their molecular form.
6. Finally, check that the net ionic equation is balanced for charges as
well as for atoms.
Sample Problem
Writing Net Ionic Equations
Problem
A chemical reaction occurs when the following aqueous solutions
are mixed: sodium sulfide and iron(II) sulfate. Identify the spectator
ions. Then write the balanced net ionic equation.
What Is Required?
You need to identify the spectator ions and write a balanced net
ionic equation for the reaction between sodium sulfide and iron(II)
sulfate.
What Is Given?
You know the chemical names of the compounds.
Continued ...
342 MHR • Unit 3 Solutions and Solubility
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 342
Plan Your Strategy
Step 1 Start by writing the chemical formulas of the given
compounds.
Step 2 Then write the complete chemical equation for the reaction,
using your experience in predicting the formation of a
precipitate.
Step 3 Once you have the chemical equation, you can replace the
chemical formulas of the soluble ionic compounds with their
dissociated ions.
Step 4 This will give you the total ionic equation. Next you can
identify the spectator ions (the ions that appear on both sides
of the equation).
Step 5 Finally, by rewriting the total ionic equation without the
spectator ions, you will have the net ionic equation.
Act on Your Strategy
Steps 1 and 2 The chemical equation for the reaction is
Na S +FeSO → Na SO +FeS
2 (aq) 4(aq) 2 4(aq) (s)
Step 3 The total ionic equation is
2Na + +S2− +Fe2+ +SO 2− → 2Na + +SO 2− +FeS
(aq) (aq) (aq) 4 (aq) (aq) 4 (aq) (s)
Step 4 Therefore, the spectator ions are Na
+
and SO
2−
.
(aq) 4 (aq)
Step 5 The net ionic equation is
Fe2+ +S2− → FeS
(aq) (aq) (s)
Check Your Solution
Take a final look at your net ionic equation to make sure that no ions
are on both sides of the equation.
Practice Problems
5. Mixing each pair of aqueous solutions results in a chemical
reaction. Identify the spectator ions. Then write the balanced
net ionic equation.
(a) sodium carbonate and hydrochloric acid
(b) sulfuric acid and sodium hydroxide
6. Identify the spectator ions for the reaction that takes place when
each pair of aqueous solutions is mixed. Then write the balanced
net ionic equation.
(a) ammonium phosphate and zinc sulfate
(b) lithium carbonate and nitric acid
(c) sulfuric acid and barium hydroxide
Chapter 9 Aqueous Solutions • MHR 343
Identifying Ions in Aqueous Solution
Suppose that you have a sample of water. You want to know what, if any,
ions are dissolved in it. Today technological devices, such as the mass
spectrometer, make this investigative work fairly simple. Before such
devices, however, chemists relied on wet chemical techniques:
experimental tests, such as submitting a sample to a series of double
displacement reactions. Chemists still use wet chemical techniques.
With each reaction, insoluble compounds precipitate out of the solution.
(See Figure 9.6.) This enables the chemist to determine, eventually, the
identity of one or several ions in the solution. This ion-identification
process is an example of qualitative analysis.
Chemists use a range of techniques for qualitative analysis. For exam-
ple, the colour of an aqueous solution can help to identify one of the ions
that it contains. Examine Table 9.3. However, the intensity of ion colour
varies with its concentration in the solution. Also keep in mind that many
ions are colourless in aqueous solution. For example, the cations of ele-
ments from Groups 1 (IA) and 2 (IIA), as well as aluminum, zinc, and
most anions, are colourless. So there are limits to the inferences you can
make if you rely on solution colour alone.
Another qualitative analysis technique is a flame test. A dissolved
ionic compound is placed in a flame. Table 9.4 lists the flame colours
associated with several ions. Notice that all the ions are metallic. The
flame test is only useful for identifying metallic ions in aqueous solution.
Qualitative analysis challenges a chemist’s creative imagination and
chemical understanding. Discover this for yourself in Investigation 9-B.
Ions Symbol Colour
blue
green
pale yellow
pink
yellow
orange
purple
add add
precipitating precipitating etc.
solution solution
mixture remaining remaining
of ions ions ions
precipitate precipitate
1 2
344 MHR • Unit 3 Solutions and Solubility
snoitaC
chromium (II)
copper(II)
chromium(III)
copper(I)
iron(II)
nickel(II)
iron(III)
cobalt(II)
manganese(II)
chromate
dichromate
permanganate
snoinA
Table 9.3 The Colour of Some Common Ions in Aqueous Solution Table 9.4 The Flame Colour of Selected Metallic Ions
Ion Symbol Colour
Cr2+ lithium Li+ red
Cu2+
sodium Na+ yellow
Cr3+
Cu+ potassium K+ violet
Fe2+ cesium Cs+ violet
Ni2+
calcium Ca2+ red
Fe3+
strontium Sr2+ red
Co2+
Mn2+ barium Ba2+ yellowish-green
CrO2− copper Cu2+ bluish-green
4
Cr O2− boron B2+ green
2 7
MnO
4
− lead Pb2+ bluish-white
Figure 9.6 This illustration
shows the basic idea behind a
qualitative analysis for identify-
ing ions in an aqueous solution.
At each stage, the resulting
precipitate is removed.
S K I L L F O C U S
Predicting
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
Qualitative Analysis
In this investigation, you will apply your knowl- Safety Precautions
edge of chemical reactions and the general solu-
bility guidelines to identify unknown ions.
•Be careful not to contaminate the dropper
bottles. The tip of a dropper should not
Question
make contact with either the plate or another
How can you identify ions in solution? solution. Put the cap back on the bottle
immediately after use.
Predictions •Hydrochloric acid and sulfuric acid are
corrosive. Wash any spills on your skin with
Read the entire Procedure. Can you predict the
plenty of cool water. Inform your teacher
results of any steps? Write your predictions in
immediately.
your notebook. Justify each prediction.
•Part 2 of this investigation requires an open
flame. Tie back long hair, and confine any loose
Materials
clothing.
Part 1
12-well or 24-well plate, or spot plate Procedure
toothpicks
Part 1 Using Acids to Identify Cations
cotton swabs
1. Read steps 2 and 3 below. Design a suitable
unknowns: 4 dropper bottles (labelled A, B, C,
+ table for recording your observations.
and D) of solutions that include Na ,
(aq)
Ag
+
(aq) ,
Ca2+
(aq) , and
Cu2+
(aq) 2. Place one or two drops of each unknown
reactants: 2 labelled dropper bottles, containing solution into four different wells or spots.
dilute HCI and dilute H SO Add one or two drops of hydrochloric acid
(aq) 2 4(aq)
to each unknown. Record your observations.
Part 2
3. Repeat step 2. This time, test each unknown
cotton swabs
solution with one or two drops of sulfuric
Bunsen burner
acid. Record your observations.
heat-resistant pad
unknowns: 4 dropper bottles, containing the same 4. Answer Analysis questions 1 to 5.
unknowns that were used in Part 1
Part 2 Using Flame Tests to Identify Cations
reactants: 4 labelled dropper bottles, containing
Na + , Ag + , Ca2+ , and Cu2+ Note: Your teacher may demonstrate this part or
(aq) (aq) (aq) (aq)
provide you with an alternative version.
Part 3
1. Design tables to record your observations.
12-well or 24-well plate, or spot plate
2. Observe the appearance of each known solu-
toothpicks
tion. Record your observations. Repeat for
cotton swabs
each unknown solution. Some cations have
unknowns: 3 dropper bottles (labelled X, Y,
and Z), containing solutions of SO
2−
,
a characteristic colour. (Refer to Table 9.4.)
4 (aq)
CO
2−
, and I
− If you think that you can identify one of the
3 (aq) (aq)
unknowns, record your identification.
reactants: 3 labelled dropper bottles, containing
Ba2+
, Ag
+
, and HCl
(aq) (aq) (aq)
Chapter 9 Aqueous Solutions • MHR 345
3. Flame tests can identify some cations. Set up Analysis
the Bunsen burner and heat-resistant pad.
1.(a) Which of the cations you tested should
Light the burner. Adjust the air supply to pro-
form a precipitate with hydrochloric acid?
duce a hot flame with a blue cone.
Write the net ionic equation.
4. Place a few drops of solution containing (b) Did your results support your predictions?
+
Na (aq) on one end of a cotton swab. Explain.
CAUTION Carefully hold the saturated tip so 2.(a) Which cation(s) should form a precipitate
it is just in the Bunsen burner flame, near
when tested with sulfuric acid? Write the
the blue cone. You may need to hold it in
net ionic equation.
this position for as long as 30 s to allow the
(b) Did your results support your predictions?
solution to vaporize and mix with the flame.
Explain.
Record the colour of the flame.
3. Which cation(s) should form a soluble chlo-
5. Not all cations give colour to a flame. The
ride and a soluble sulfate?
sodium ion does give a distinctive colour to a
flame, however. It is often present in solutions 4. Which cation has a solution that is not
as a contaminant. For a control, repeat step 4 colourless?
with water and record your observations. You
5. Based on your analysis so far, tentatively
can use the other end of the swab for a second
identify each unknown solution.
test. Dispose of used swabs in the container
your teacher provides. 6. Use your observations of the flame tests to
confirm or refute the identifications you made
6. Repeat the flame test for each of the other
in question 5. If you are not sure, check your
known solutions. Then test each of the
observations and analysis with other students.
unknown solutions.
If necessary, repeat some of your tests.
7. Answer Analysis question 6.
7. Which anion(s) should form a precipitate with
Ba2+
? Write the net ionic equation.
Part 3 Identifying Anions
1. Place one or two drops of each unknown 8. Which precipitate should react when
solution into three different wells or spots. hydrochloric acid is added? Give reasons for
Add one or two drops of Ba2+ to each your prediction.
(aq)
unknown solution. Stir with a toothpick.
9. Tentatively identify each anion. Check your
Record your observations.
observations against the results you obtained
2. Add a drop of hydrochloric acid to any well when you added hydrochloric acid. Were
or spot where you observed a precipitate in they what you expected? If not, check your
step 1. Stir and record your observations. observations and analysis with other students.
If necessary, repeat some of your tests.
3. Repeat step 1, adding one or two drops of
+
Ag to each unknown solution. Record the
(aq)
Conclusion
colour of any precipitate that forms.
10. Identify the unknown cations and anions in
4. Answer Analysis questions 7 to 9.
this investigation. Explain why you do, or do
not, have confidence in your decisions. What
could you do to be more confident?
346 MHR • Unit 3 Solutions and Solubility
Section Wrap-up
Qualitative analysis helps you identify ions that may be present in a solu-
tion. It does not, however, tell you how much of these ions are present. In
other words, it does not provide any quantitative information about the
quantity or concentration of ions in solution. In the next section, you will
find out how to calculate this quantitative information, using techniques
you learned in Unit 2.
Section Review
1 C Briefly compare the relationships among a chemical formula, a total
ionic equation, and a net ionic equation. Use sentences or a graphic
organizer.
2 K/U Write a net ionic equation for each double displacement reaction
in aqueous solution.
(a) tin(II) chloride with potassium phosphate
(b) nickel(II) chloride with sodium carbonate
(c) chromium(III) sulfate with ammonium sulfide
3 K/U For each reaction in question 2, identify the spectator ions.
4 K/U Would you expect a qualitative analysis of a solution to give you
the amount of each ion present? Explain why or why not.
5 I A solution of limewater, Ca(OH) 2(aq) , is basic. It is used to test for
the presence of carbon dioxide. Carbon dioxide is weakly acidic and
turns limewater milky. Use a chemical equation to explain what
happens during the test. What type of reaction occurs?
6 K/U State the name and formula of the precipitate that forms when
aqueous solutions of copper(II) sulfate and sodium carbonate are
mixed. Write the net ionic equation for the reaction. Identify the
spectator ions.
7 I All the solutions in this photograph have the same concentration:
0.1 mol/L. Use Table 9.3 to infer which ion causes the colour in each
solution. How much confidence do you have in your inferences? What
could you do to increase your confidence?
Chapter 9 Aqueous Solutions • MHR 347
9.3 Stoichiometry in
Solution Chemistry
Section Preview/ Recall that stoichiometry involves calculating the amounts of reactants
Specific Expectations and products in chemical reactions. If you know the atoms or ions in a
formula or a reaction, you can use stoichiometry to determine the
In this section, you will
amounts of these atoms or ions that react. Solving stoichiometry problems
(cid:2) representdouble displace-
in solution chemistry involves the same strategies you learned in Unit 2.
ment reactions by their net
ionic equations Calculations involving solutions sometimes require a few additional steps,
however. For example, if a precipitate forms, the net ionic equation may
(cid:2) writebalanced chemical
equations for double be easier to use than the chemical equation. Also, some problems may
displacement reactions require you to calculate the amount of a reactant, given the volume and
concentration of the solution.
(cid:2) solvestoichiometry prob-
lems that involve solutions Take your time working through the next three Sample Problems.
Make sure that you understand how to arrive at the solutions. Then try
(cid:2) describeand work with
the Practice Problems on page 352.
solutions that have
known concentrations
Sample Problem
The Concentration of Ions
Problem
Calculate the concentration (in mol/L) of chloride ions in
each solution.
(a) 19.8 g of potassium chloride dissolved in 100 mL of solution
(b) 26.5 g of calcium chloride dissolved in 150 mL of solution
(c) a mixture of the two solutions in parts (a) and (b), assuming that
the volumes are additive
What Is Required?
(a) and (b) You need to find the concentration (in mol/L) of chloride
ions in two different solutions.
(c) You need to find the concentration of chloride ions when the two
solutions are mixed.
What Is Given?
You know that 19.8 g of potassium chloride is dissolved in 100 mL
of solution. You also know that 26.5 g of calcium chloride is
dissolved in 150 mL of solution.
Plan Your Strategy
(a) and (b) For each solution, determine the molar mass. Find the
amount (in mol) using the mass and the molar mass. Write
equations for the dissociation of the substance. (That is, write
the total ionic equation.)
Continued ...
348 MHR • Unit 3 Solutions and Solubility
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 348
Use the coefficients in the dissociation equation to determine
the amount (in mol) of chloride ions present. Calculate the
concentration (in mol/L) of chloride ions from the amount and
volume of the solution.
(c) Add the amounts of chloride ions in the two solutions to find
the total. Add the volumes of the solutions to find the total
volume. Calculate the concentration of chloride ions (in mol/L)
using the total amount (in mol) divided by the total volume (in L).
Act on Your Strategy
(a) and (b)
Solution KCI CaCl
2
Molar mass 39.10+35.45 = 74.55g 40.08+(2×35.45) = 110.98g
Amount (mol) 19.8g× 1mol = 0.266mol 26.5g× 1mol = 0.239mol
74.55g 110.98g
Dissociation KCl → K + +Cl− CaCl → Ca2+ +2Cl−
equation s (aq) (aq) 2(s) (aq) (aq)
Amount of Cl– 0.266molKCl×
1molCl−
= 0.266mol 0.239molCaCl ×
2molCl−
= 0.478mol
2
1mol KCl 1 mol CaCl
2
Concentration 0.266mol = 2.66mol/L 0.478mol = 3.19mol/L
of Cl– 0.100L 0.150L
The concentration of chloride ions when 19.8 g of potassium
chloride is dissolved in 100 mL of solution is 2.66 mol/L. The
concentration of chloride ions when 26.5 g of calcium chloride
is dissolved in 150 mL of solution is 3.19 mol/L.
(c) Total amount of Cl − = 0.266+0.478mol
(aq)
= 0.744mol
Totalvolumeofsolution = 0.100+0.150L
= 0.250L
Total concentration of Cl − = 0.744mol
(aq) 0.250L
= 2.98mol/L
The concentration of chloride ions when the solutions are mixed
is 2.98 mol/L.
Check Your Solution
The units for amount and concentration are correct. The answers
appear to be reasonable. When the solutions are mixed, the
concentration of the chloride ions is not a simple average of the
concentrations of the two solutions. Why? The volumes of the two
solutions were different.
Chapter 9 Aqueous Solutions • MHR 349
Sample Problem
The Mass Percent of Ions
Problem
The leaves of a rhubarb plant contain a relatively high concentration
of oxalate ions, C O
2−
. Oxalate ions are poisonous, causing respira-
2 4
tory failure. To determine the percent of oxalate ions, a student
measured the mass of some leaves. Then the student ground up the
leaves and added excess calcium chloride solution to precipitate
calcium oxalate. The student tested 238.6 g of leaves. The dried
mass of calcium oxalate was 0.556 g. What was the mass percent
of oxalate ions in the leaves?
Although rhubarb stalks are safe to eat, the leaves are poisonous.
What Is Required?
You need to find the mass percent of oxalate ions in the leaves.
What Is Given?
You know the mass of the leaves is 238.6 g. You also know the mass
of dried calcium oxalate is 0.556 g.
Plan Your Strategy
Determine the molar mass of calcium oxalate. Use the mass of
calcium oxalate and its molar mass to find the amount (in mol) of
calcium oxalate. Write the net ionic equation for the formation of
calcium oxalate. From the coefficients in the net ionic equation, find
the amount of oxalate ions (in mol). Calculate the mass of oxalate
ions from the amount of oxalate ions (in mol) and the molar mass.
Calculate the mass percent of oxalate ions in rhubarb leaves from
the mass of the leaves and the mass of the oxalate ions present.
Continued ...
350 MHR • Unit 3 Solutions and Solubility
Continued ...
PROBLEM TIP
FROM PAGE 350
Review the method for solving
Act on Your Strategy stoichiometry problems
you learned in Chapter 7,
Molar mass of CaC O = 128.1g
2 4 Section 7.1.
Amount of CaC O = 0.556g× 1mol
2 4 128.1g
= 0.00434mol
The net ionic equation is
Ca2+ +C O 2− → CaC O
(aq) 2 4 (aq) 2 4(s)
The mole ratio of CrO
2−
to CaC O is 1:1. Therefore, the leaves must
4 2 4
have contained 0.004 34 mol of C O
2−
.
2 4
Molar mass of C O 2− = 88.02g
2 4
Mass of C O 2− = 0.00434mol× 88.02g
2 4 1mol
= 0.382g
Mass percent of C O 2− intheleaves = 0.382g ×100%
2 4 238.6g
= 0.160%
The mass percent of oxalate ions in the leaves is 0.160%.
Check Your Solution
Since the units divide out properly, you can be fairly confident that
the answer is correct. The final value appears to be reasonable.
Sample Problem
Finding the Minimum Volume to Precipitate
Problem
Aqueous solutions that contain silver ions are usually treated with
chloride ions to recover silver chloride. What is the minimum
volume of 0.25 mol/L magnesium chloride, MgCl , needed to
2(aq)
precipitate all the silver ions in 60 mL of 0.30 mol/L silver nitrate,
AgNO ? Assume that silver chloride is completely insoluble
3(aq)
in water.
What Is Required?
You need to find the minimum volume of magnesium chloride that
will precipitate all the silver ions.
What Is Given?
You know the volumes and concentrations of the silver nitrate
(volume = 60mL; concentration = 0.30mol/L). The concentration
of the magnesium chloride solution is 0.25 mol/L.
Plan Your Strategy
Find the amount (in mol) of silver nitrate from the volume
and concentration of solution. Write a balanced chemical
Continued ...
Chapter 9 Aqueous Solutions • MHR 351
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 351
equation for the reaction. Use mole ratios from the coefficients in the
equation to determine the amount (in mol) of magnesium chloride
that is needed. Use the amount (in mol) of magnesium chloride and
the concentration of solution to find the volume that is needed.
Act on Your Strategy
Amount AgNO = 0.060L×0.30mol/L
3
= 0.018mol
MgCl +2AgNO → 2AgCl +Mg(NO )
2(aq) 3(aq) (s) 3 2(aq)
The mole ratio of MgCl to AgNO is 1:2.
2 3
1molMgCl
n mol MgCl = 0.018molAgNO × 2
2 3 2molAgNO
3
= 0.0090mol
Volume of 0.25mol/LMgCl needed = 0.0090mol
2 0.25mol/L
= 0.036L
The minimum volume of 0.25 mol/L magnesium chloride that
is needed is 36 mL.
Check Your Solution
The answer is in millilitres, an appropriate unit of volume.
The amount appears to be reasonable.
Practice Problems
7. Food manufacturers sometimes add calcium acetate to puddings
and sweet sauces as a thickening agent. What volume of
0.500 mol/L calcium acetate, Ca(CH COO) , contains 0.300 mol
3 2(aq)
of acetate ions?
8. Ammonium phosphate can be used as a fertilizer. 6.0 g of
ammonium phosphate is dissolved in sufficient water to produce
300 mL of solution. What are the concentrations (in mol/L) of the
ammonium ions and phosphate ions present?
9. An aqueous solution of a certain salt contains chloride ions. A
sample of this solution was made by dissolving 17.59 g of the salt
in a 1 L volumetric flask. Then 25.00 mL of the solution was treat-
ed with excess silver nitrate. The precipitate, AgCl , was filtered
(s)
and dried. If the mass of the dry precipitate was 47.35 g, what
was the mass percent of chloride ions in the solution?
10. The active ingredient in some rat poisons is thallium(I) sulfate,
Tl SO . A chemist takes a 500 mg sample of thallium(I) sulfate
2 4
and adds potassium iodide, to precipitate yellow thallium(I)
iodide. When the precipitate is dried, its mass is 200 mg. What is
the mass percent of Tl SO in the rat poison?
2 4
352 MHR • Unit 3 Solutions and Solubility
Limiting Reactant Problems in Aqueous Solutions
In Chapter 7, you learned how to solve limiting reactant problems. You
can always recognize a limiting reactant problem because you are always
given the amounts of both reactants. A key step in a limiting reactant
problem is determining which one of the two reactants is limiting. In
aqueous solutions, this usually means finding the amount of a reactant,
given the volume and concentration of the solution.
Sample Problem
Finding the Mass of a Precipitated Compound
Problem
Mercury salts have a number of important uses in industry and in
chemical analysis. Because mercury compounds are poisonous,
however, the mercury ions must be removed from the waste water.
Suppose that 25.00 mL of 0.085 mol/L aqueous sodium sulfide is
added to 56.5 mL of 0.10 mol/L mercury(II) nitrate. What mass of
mercury(II) sulfide, HgS , precipitates?
(s)
What Is Required?
You need to find the mass of mercury(II) sulfide that precipitates.
What Is Given?
You know the volumes and concentrations of the sodium sulfide
and mercury(II) nitrate solutions.
Plan Your Strategy PROBLEM TIP
Write a balanced chemical equation for the reaction. Find the Chemists solve limiting reac-
amount (in mol) of each reactant, using its volume and concentra- tant problems in different
tion. Identify the limiting reactant. Determine the amount (in mol) ways. The method used here
of mercury(II) sulfide that forms. Calculate the mass of mercury(II) is different from the one you
used in Chapter 7, Section 7.2
sulfide that precipitates.
Act on Your Strategy
The chemical equation is
Hg(NO ) +Na S → 2NaNO +HgS
3 2(aq) 2 (aq) 3(aq) (s)
Calculate the amount (in mol) of each reactant.
Amount of Hg(NO ) = 0.0565L×0.10mol/L
3 2
= 0.00565mol
Amount of Na S = 0.0250L×0.085mol/L
2
= 0.00212mol
The reactants are in a 1:1 ratio. Because Na S is present
2
in the smallest amount, it is the limiting reactant.
The equation indicates that each mol of Na S reacts to produce the
2
same amount of HgS precipitate. This amount is 0.002 12 mol.
(s)
Continued ...
Chapter 9 Aqueous Solutions • MHR 353
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 353
Molar mass of HgS = 200.6+32.1
= 232.7
Mass of HgS = Amount×Molarmass
(s)
232.7g
= 0.00212mol×
1mol
= 0.493g
The mass of mercury(II) sulfide that precipitates is 0.49 g
Check Your Solution
The answer has appropriate units of mass. This answer appears to be
reasonable, given the values in the problem.
Sample Problem
Finding the Mass of Another
Precipitated Compound
Problem
Silver chromate, Ag CrO , is insoluble. It forms a brick-red precipi-
2 4
tate. Calculate the mass of silver chromate that forms when 50.0 mL
of 0.100 mol/L silver nitrate reacts with 25.0 mL of 0.150 mol/L
sodium chromate.
What Is Required?
You need to find the mass of silver chromate that precipitates.
What Is Given?
You know the volumes and concentrations of the silver nitrate and
sodium chromate solutions.
Plan Your Strategy
Write a balanced chemical equation for the reaction. Find the
amount (in mol) of each reactant, using its volume and concentra-
tion. Identify the limiting reactant. Determine the amount (in mol)
of silver chromate that forms. Calculate the mass of silver chromate
that precipitates.
Act on Your Strategy
The chemical equation is
2AgNO +Na CrO → Ag CrO +2NaNO
3(aq) 2 4(aq) 2 4(s) 3(aq)
Calculate the amount (in mol) of each reactant.
Amount of AgNO = 0.0500L×0.100mol/L
3
= 5.00×10 −3mol
Amount of Na CrO = 0.0250L×0.150mol/L
2 4
= 3.75×10 −3mol
Continued ...
354 MHR • Unit 3 Solutions and Solubility
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 354
To identify the limiting reactant, divide by the coefficient in
the equation and find the smallest result.
AgNO :5.00× 10
−3mol
= 2.50×10 −3mol
3 2
Na CrO :3.75× 10
−3mol
= 3.75×10 −3mol
2 4 1
Since the smallest result is given for AgNO , this reactant is the
3
limiting reactant.
Using the coefficients in the balanced equation, 2 mol of AgNO
3
react for each mole of Ag CrO formed.
2 4
Amount of Ag CrO = 5.00×10 −3molAgNO × 1molAg 2 CrO 4
2 4 3 2molAgNO
3
= 2.50×10 −3molAg CrO
2 4
The molar mass of Ag CrO is 331.7 g/mol.
2 4
Massofprecipitate = 2.50×10 −3mol× 331.7g
1mol
= 0.829g
The mass of silver chromate that precipitates is 0.829 g.
Check Your Solution
The answer has appropriate units of mass. The answer appears to be
reasonable, given the values in the problem.
Practice Problems
11. 8.76 g of sodium sulfide is added to 350 mL of 0.250 mol/L
lead(II) nitrate solution. Calculate the maximum mass of
precipitate that can form.
12. 25.0 mL of 0.400 mol/L Pb(NO ) is mixed with 300 mL of
3 2(aq)
0.220 mol/L KI . What is the maximum mass of precipitate
(aq)
that can form?
13. A student mixes 15.0 mL of 0.250 mol/L aqueous sodium hydrox-
ide with 20.0 mL of 0.400 mol/L aqueous aluminum nitrate.
(a) Write the chemical equation for the reaction.
(b) Calculate the maximum mass of precipitate that forms.
Section Wrap-up
In the last two sections, you have used qualitative and quantitative
techniques to investigate ions in aqueous solution. Every drop of water
that comes into your home contains a variety of such ions. It also contains
other substances, in various concentrations. You have investigated water
quality in previous grades. In the next section, you will consider the
chemistry of water quality.
Chapter 9 Aqueous Solutions • MHR 355
Section Review
1 I Equal volumes of 0.120 mol/L potassium nitrate and 0.160 mol/L
iron(III) nitrate are mixed together. What is the concentration of nitrate
ions in the mixture?
2 I Suppose that you want to remove the barium ions from 120 mL
of 0.0500 mol/L aqueous barium nitrate solution. What is the minimum
mass of sodium carbonate that you should add?
3 I An excess of aluminum foil is added to a certain volume of 0.675
mol/L aqueous copper(II) sulfate solution. The mass of solid copper
that precipitates is measured and found to be 4.88 g. What was the
volume of the copper(II) sulfate solution?
4 I To generate hydrogen gas, a student adds 5.77 g of mossy zinc to
80.1 mL of 4.00 mol/L hydrochloric acid in an Erlenmeyer flask. When
the reaction is over, what is the concentration of aqueous zinc chloride
in the flask?
5 I Copper can be recovered from scrap metal by adding sulfuric acid.
Soluble copper sulfate is formed. The copper sulfate then reacts with
metallic iron in a single displacement reaction. To simulate this reac-
tion, a student places 1.942 g of iron wool in a beaker that contains
136.3 mL of 0.0750 mol/L aqueous copper(II) sulfate. What mass of
copper is formed?
6 I Your stomach secretes hydrochloric acid to help you digest the
food you have eaten. If too much HCl is secreted, however, you may
need to take an antacid to neutralize the excess. One antacid product
contains the compound magnesium hydroxide, Mg(OH) .
2
(a) Predict the reaction that takes place when magnesium hydroxide
reacts with hydrochloric acid. (Hint: This is a double-displacement
reaction.)
(b) Imagine that you are a chemical analyst testing the effectiveness of
antacids. If 0.10mol/LHCl serves as your model for stomach
(aq)
acid, how many litres will react with an antacid that contains 0.10 g
of magnesium hydroxide?
7 I Even though lead is toxic, many lead compounds are still used as
paint pigments (colourings). What volume of 1.50 mol/L lead(II) acetate
contains
0.400molPb2+
ions.
356 MHR • Unit 3 Solutions and Solubility
Aqueous Solutions 9.4
and Water Quality
Water, as you know, is the most abundant substance on Earth’s surface. Section Preview/
Unfortunately there is more than enough water in some places, but not Specific Expectations
enough in others. As well, because water is used and re-used, and because
In this section, you will
it is such a powerful solvent, it is easily polluted.
(cid:2) explainthe origins of
Canada, with less than 1% of the world’s population, has 22% of its
pollutants in natural waters
fresh water. So, in most regions of our country, the quality of water is
(cid:2) identifythe allowed
usually of greater concern than the quantity available. In this section, you
concentrations of pollutants
will examine factors that affect water quality. You will also study some of in drinking water
the reactions that make polluted water safe and fit to drink.
(cid:2) explainthe origins and
consequences of water
Acceptable Concentrations of Substances in Drinking Water hardness, and outlinemeth-
ods for softening hard water
The federal government assesses the health risks of specific substances
in drinking water. Guidelines for acceptable concentrations of each sub- (cid:2) describethe technology
involved in purifying drinking
stance are then established in partnership with provincial and territorial
water and treating waste
governments. See Table 9.5. These governments require water suppliers
water
to meet the guidelines. Corrective action may be taken when guidelines
(cid:2) communicateyour under-
are violated.
standing of the following
Table 9.5 Acceptable Concentrations of Selected Ions and Compounds in Drinking Water terms: water treatment,
hard water, soft water, ion
Interim Maximum
exchange, waste-water
Maximum Acceptable Acceptable Aesthetic
treatment
Concentration (MAC) Concentration Objectives (AO)
Ion or compound (mg/L) (mg/L) (mg/L)
aldrin and dieldrin 0.0007
(organic insecticides*)
aluminum <0.1 or <0.2**
arsenic 0.025
benzene (organic 0.005
You are probably familiar with
component of gasoline)
the water cycle: the natural
cadmium (component 0.005
process that ensures a contin-
of batteries)
ual supply of Earth’s water.
chloride
≤250
Sketch, from memory, a
fluoride 1.5 schematic drawing of the
iron
≤0.3 water cycle. Add labels to
indicate the states and energy
lead 0.010
changes involved. Then infer
malathion (organic 0.19
the main solutes and suspend-
insecticide)
ed materials in water at each
mercury 0.001 of the following locations:
selenium 0.01 • the atmosphere
sulfide (as H S) ≤0.05 • Earth’s surface (at an
2
urban and a rural location)
toluene (organic solvent) ≤0.024
• below Earth’s surface
uranium 0.1 (that is, in ground water)
• a fresh-water lake
*As you will learn in Unit 5, the term “organic” refers to most compounds
• an ocean
structured around the element carbon. Toluene belongs to a large class of
petroleum-related compounds called hydrocarbons. For each location, suggest
** Health-based guidelines have not yet been established. The concentrations sources of the solutes and
that are listed depend on the method of treatment. They are noted as a materials you inferred.
precautionary measure.
Chapter 9 Aqueous Solutions • MHR 357
Sources That Compromise Water Quality
CHEM
FACT
Pure water does not exist in nature. All water naturally contains dissolved
Drinking water guidelines substances or ions. For example, rainwater is naturally acidic. This is
exist for microscopic organ- because water droplets dissolve atmospheric gases, such as carbon diox-
isms, such as bacteria and ide, to form carbonic acid, H CO . As water filters through soil and rock,
2 3
protozoans, as well as for it tends to dissolve (leach) certain ions and compounds, such as Ca2+ ,
(aq)
chemicals. These guidelines Mg2+
,
Fe2+
,
Fe3+
, and SO
2−
. In general, these substances pose
(aq) (aq) (aq) 4 (aq)
were compromised in the town
little or no threat to plants, animals, or you. In contrast, many of the
of Walkerton, Ontario, in 2000.
substances listed in Table 9.5 may pose a threat. They result mainly from
Seven people died and about
2000 people became ill as a human activities, such as manufacturing, food and materials processing,
result of exposure to E. coli farming, and garbage disposal. The sources of these substances can be
bacteria that were present in classified in the following three broad categories.
the town’s water supply. The • Point Sources: A manufacturing or processing plant that discharges
maximum acceptable concen-
untreated or insufficiently treated waste water into a river or lake is a
tration for E. colibacteria is
point source of pollution. Point sources include wrecked tankers that
zero organisms detectable in
100 mL of drinking water. To leak oil and factories that discharge metallic ions, organic compounds,
achieve this target, chlorine is acids, and bases. Water itself can be a point source of thermal pollution,
commonly used to kill E. coli when thermal power plants discharge warm water into a lake from their
and other organisms in drink- cooling towers. Point sources can spread pollution over huge areas.
ing water. Despite receiving
• Diffuse Sources: Pollution that comes from a wide range of sources,
two warnings from the Ministry
not from a single source, is said to come from a diffuse source. (See
of the Environment, the town’s
water manager chose not to Figure 9.7.) A heavy downpour can cause run-off from farm fields to
increase the concentration of enter rivers and lakes. This run-off often carries undesirable pollutants,
chlorine in the water supply. including fecal matter, pesticides, and fertilizer compounds, such as
As a result of this incident, the nitrates and phosphates.
Ontario government drafted
• Indirect Sources: Air, water, and soil can become polluted from a
legislation to enforce strict
adherence to water quality variety of indirect sources. Motor vehicles and factory smokestacks
quidelines. release gases that can indirectly cause many different types of pollution.
The acidic gases that are produced (sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxides)
dissolve and contribute to the formation of acid rain. The concentra-
tions of ions in ground water are affected by how acidic the water is.
For example, aluminum compounds are commonly found in soil. Acidic
water increases the leaching of aluminum ions into rivers and lakes.
Figure 9.7 Landfill leachate
is rainwater that has percolated
through landfill wastes. It dis-
solves numerous compounds,
many of them toxic. Modern
landfills have containment and
treatment procedures to prevent
this diffuse source of pollution
from contaminating ground water.
358 MHR • Unit 3 Solutions and Solubility
Treating Water for Your Home
If you live on a farm or in a remote area, you probably obtain your water
directly from a well on your property. If you live in an urban community,
you probably obtain your water through a municipal or regional water
authority. Before the water is made available to you, it is processed at a
water treatment plant to remove pollutants. Lake, river, or reservoir water
enters the treatment plant, where a number of physical and chemical
processes take place. Figure 9.8 summarizes these processes.
storage
tank
6
to homes
2 and businesses
3
5
1
4
1 A coarse screen made of metal bars filters large particles and trash such as bottles and cans.
2 Chlorine is added to kill bacteria and viruses. It also helps to remove dissolved hydrogen sulfide:
HS +4Cl +4HO → 8Cl− +SO2− +10H+
2 (aq) 2(aq) 2 (l) (aq) 4 (aq) (aq)
3 A process called flocculationremoves suspended particles such as clay and microorganisms. Lime (CaO)
and aluminum sulfate (Al(SO)) are added. They react together to form aluminum hydroxide:
2 43
3CaO +3HO +Al(SO) → 2Al(OH) +3Ca2+ +3SO2−
(s) 2 (l) 2 43(s) 3(s) (aq) 4 (aq)
Aluminum hydroxide is a sticky gel that traps the finely suspended particles. Lime is a basic oxide, so it
decreases the acidity of the water, and it precipitates some calcium carbonate. The aluminum hydroxide
with its trapped particles settles to the bottom of the tank.
4 The water is passed through a bed of graded gravel and sand in a filtering tank.
5 Water is often saturated with oxygen by spraying it into the air, which helps to remove volatile organic
compounds and improves the taste and odour.
6 The water receives a second treatment with chlorine to kill bacteria. Ammonia is added to make the
chlorine last longer in the piping. Some municipalities add compounds such as sodium fluoride.
Figure 9.8 The following processes take place at a water treatment plant. These
processes must ensure that the water meets all the allowable concentrations.
Chapter 9 Aqueous Solutions • MHR 359
Hard Water and Soft Water
CHEM
FACT
The water that flows through your faucet has been treated to remove,
Why is hard water so hard to or limit, a large number of pollutants. It is far from pure, however. For
lather? Ordinary soap is often example, it still contains dissolved ions, such as
Ca2+
,
Mg2+
,
Fe2+
,
(aq) (aq) (aq)
sodium stearate, NaC 17 H 35 O 2 . Fe3+ (aq) , and SO 4 2− (aq) . These ions, especially calcium and magnesium,
Sodium stearate consists of make it difficult to form lather with soap. Water with high concentrations
the sodium salt of a compound
of these ions is called hard water, partly because it is “hard” to lather.
that contains many carbon
Water with relatively low concentrations of these ions lathers well. It is
atoms. The calcium ions in
called soft water.
hard water displace the
sodium ions, and the new Ground water is usually harder than surface water in the same region.
salts are insoluble: The extent of the hardness depends on the types of rocks through which
Ca2+ +2NaC H O → the water flows. It also depends on the length of time that the water is
(aq) 17 35 2(aq)
Ca(C H O) +2Na+ in contact with the rocks. The Rocky Mountains, the Canadian Shield,
17 35 22(s) (aq)
and most of the Maritimes have very insoluble bedrock. Thus, the water
As a result, the effectiveness
in these regions is usually soft. The sedimentary rocks of the Niagara
of the soap is reduced. The
insoluble salts form a scum Peninsula and the Prairies are more soluble, resulting in water that ranges
on clothing and a grey slimy from moderately hard to very hard.
deposit in sinks and bathtubs: The most common type of rock to cause hard water is limestone
“bathtub ring.” (calcium carbonate). Limestone is usually considered insoluble. The small
amount that does dissolve forms low concentrations of important ions.
CaCO 3(s) +H 2 O ((cid:2)) → Ca2+ (aq) +HCO − 3(aq) +OH − (aq)
When the water contains dissolved acids (often H CO from rainwater),
2 3
+
the H ion increases the concentrations of calcium and hydrogen
(aq)
carbonate ions.
CaCO +H + → Ca2+ +HCO3−
3(s) (aq) (aq) (aq)
Hydrogen carbonate ions can be economically costly. Solutions that
contain these ions decompose when heated to form carbonates.
2HCO 3 − (aq) → H 2 O ((cid:2)) +CO 2(g) +CO 3 2− (aq)
The carbonate ions recombine with calcium ions to form calcium carbon-
ate deposits. These deposits form a coating on heating elements in kettles
and boilers, and build up inside hot water pipes. The coating is com-
monly called boiler scale. (See Figure 9.9.) It not only reduces the flow
of water in pipes, but it also increases the cost of heating the water.
A simple way to remove boiler scale from the inside of a kettle or
a coffee maker is to add vinegar. Acetic acid in vinegar reacts with
calcium (and magnesium) carbonates to form soluble salts. (Remember
that all acetates are soluble.)
CaCO 3(s) +2CH 3 COOH (aq) → Ca2+ (aq) +2CH 3 COO − (aq) +H 2 O ((cid:2)) +CO 2(g)
Figure 9.9 This photomicro-
graph shows the crystalline
structure of precipitated
boiler scale.
360 MHR • Unit 3 Solutions and Solubility
Treating Water at Home
Biology
LINK
The ions that cause hard water are not a health hazard but they can be
a nuisance. They are not always removed at municipal treatment plants. A vivid red dye is produced
If you wish, you can remove some of these ions (mainly Ca2+ , Mg2+ , from a small insect, called the
(aq) (aq)
and Fe2+ ) yourself. For relatively small volumes of water (such as cochineal, that lives in the
(aq)
Peruvian Andes. Two chemists
enough to fill a bathtub or a washing machine), you can add sodium
from Simon Fraser University
carbonate decahydrate, Na CO ·10H O. This compound is commonly
2 3 2 in British Columbia, Dr. Cam
called washing soda. It is an inexpensive way to add carbonate ion to the
Oehlschlager and Dr. Eva
water. The carbonate ions precipitate the unwanted ions.
Czyzewska, have developed an
Ca2+ +CO 2− → CaCO improved process for extract-
(aq) 3 (aq) 3(s)
ing the natural red colouring
The sodium ions in the washing soda behave as spectator ions, leaving
agent from the insects. The
the water soft.
ions that cause hard water
For the large volume of water needed on a daily basis, people often change the colour of the dye,
install an ion exchange water softener. This apparatus exchanges one however. So the first step in
kind of ion for another. (See Figure 9.10.) The hard water passes through a the process uses demineral-
column that is packed with beads. The beads are made from an insoluble ized hot water. After precipitat-
ing the dye, it is dried and used
plastic material and are coated with sodium salts, often NaCl. (The salt-
for a variety of products. Some
coated beads are referred to as an ion exchange resin.) As the hard water
of your classmates may be
passes through the column, the ions in the water displace the sodium
wearing examples of these
ions on the resin. After most of the sodium ions have been exchanged for
products right now. Use the
calcium ions (and other hardness-causing ions), the resin is regenerated. library or the Internet to find
This is done by passing a very concentrated solution of sodium chloride out what they are.
(brine) through the column. The calcium ions are flushed out of the
system, along with excess sodium chloride solution.
Electronic Learning Partner
outlet
mineral tank inlet
Your Chemistry 11 Electronic
Learning Partner has a movie
brine tank detailing several methods for
purifying water.
brine well
timer
hard drain
water
in
core
pipe
salt
resin
beads
float Figure 9.10 An ion exchange
water softener adds significant
screen
amounts of sodium to the water.
Thus, it may not be the best
brine
choice for drinking water. This
is especially true for people on
sodium-restricted diets.
Chapter 9 Aqueous Solutions • MHR 361
Waste-Water Treatment
The treatment of waste water (sewage) is often divided into three types:
primary, secondary, and tertiary treatment. (See Figure 9.11.)
•Primary treatment mainly involves removing solids from waste water
physically, using filters and settling tanks.
• Secondary treatment involves using bacteria to chemically decompose
dissolved and suspended organic compounds.
• Tertiary treatment involves chemical treatments to remove the majority
of remaining ions and disease-causing micro-organisms.
Secondary
Treatment
5 6
Primary Tertiary
trickling
Treatment Treatment
incoming filter tank
secondary
waste
setting tank
water
1 2 3 discharge
activated
to waterways
sludge tank
methane
gas
sludge-
digesting
solids sent to landfill
tank
or farms for fertilizer
4
Primary Treatment
1 Screens remove larger solids.
2 As waste water slowly passes through a grit tank, smaller particles (such as gravel, sand, and food wastes)
settle out.
3 In a sedimentation tank, finer-sized particles settle out slowly to form sludge.
4 Sludge, oils, and grease from the sedimentation tank move to a sludge-digesting tank. There they are
chemically decomposed (“digested”) by anaerobic bacteria.
Secondary Treatment
5 Bacterial decomposition of dissolved organic matter takes place in trickling filter tanks and activated
sludge tanks.
Tertiary Treatment
6 The resulting waste water may be returned to waterways or used by industries or for irrigation. Processes
such as precipitation and filtration remove most remaining pollutants. Treatment with chlorine or ozone
kills most of the disease-causing micro-organisms. The resulting water is safe for most purposes, but not
for drinking.
Figure 9.11 The main steps involved in the treatment of waste water: Municipalities
may use one, two, or all three treatment methods, depending on their needs and finances.
362 MHR • Unit 3 Solutions and Solubility
ThoughtLab Testing Hard Water and Soft Water
Water is hard if it contains high concentrations of 2. Into each test tube, the student put two
calcium and magnesium ions, Ca2+and Mg2+. If drops of 0.1 mol/L sodium oxalate solution.
these ions are present in lower concentrations, Then the student mixed the contents.
the water is considered to be soft. Distilled water
has few ions of any kind, and no Ca2+or Mg2+. Analysis
Sodium oxalate, Na 2 C 2 O 4 , is a compound that 1. Infer what the student observed in each test
causes Ca2+to precipitate as calcium oxalate, tube. Write a net ionic equation if you predict
CaC 2 O 4 , and Mg2+ to precipitate as magnesium that a precipitate formed. Write “NR” if you
oxalate, MgC 2 O 4 . think that no reaction occurred.
2. Imagine that you have the three water sam-
Procedure
ples the student used, but no sodium oxalate
1. A student added 1 mL of hard water to one solution. How else could you test the validity
test tube, 1 mL of soft water to another, and of your predictions?
1 mL of distilled water to a third. The hard
3. With your teacher’s permission, test your
water sample contained Ca2+and Mg2+. The
predictions. CAUTION Sodium oxalate is
soft water contained lower concentrations of
poisonous. Wear an apron and safety goggles.
these ions.
Handle all the solutions carefully.
Canadians in Chemistry
Dr. Jiangning Wu: Enzymes are naturally occurring substances
Cleaning the World’s Water that speed up chemical reactions without being
used up or changed by the reactions. They are
basic to living organisms. Thus it is no surprise
that they are well-suited to removing organic
pollutants from waste water. For instance, an
enzyme that is found in horseradish helps to
accelerate the oxidation of soluble organic pollu-
tants known as phenols. The resulting com-
pounds are less soluble and more easily removed
from the waste water.
In 1993, Dr. Wu found that, with a single
Around the world, researchers are working to additive, the same enzyme was able to remove
reduce the pollutants in our lakes, rivers, and phenols from waste water. Her strategy worked
ground water. Both industry and agriculture too even for the low concentrations of phenols
often produce waste water that contains every- typical of industrial waste water. Moreover,
thing from animal droppings and excess fertilizer significantly lower concentrations of the enzyme
to artificial colours and other chemicals. Yet, were needed! Dr. Wu’s discovery brought
without industry and agriculture, we would not researchers one step closer to a commercial
have many of the modern comforts we expect process, which would mean cleaner waters and
and enjoy. less stress on the environment.
Jiangning Wu was born and raised in Dr. Wu is a professor in the School of
Nanjing, China. She came to Canada to complete Chemical Engineering at Ryerson Polytechnical
her studies in chemical engineering at the University in Toronto. She is currently investigat-
University of Windsor. After earning her doctorate ing the use of ozone for waste-water treatment
in 1992, she turned her attention to the use of and food preservation.
enzymes for purifying waste water.
Chapter 9 Aqueous Solutions • MHR 363
Section Wrap-up
In this section, you applied your understanding of aqueous solutions to
explore the chemistry of water quality. Some of the chemicals you
considered belong to a group of compounds that are called acids and
bases. In the next chapter, you will investigate the properties and chemi-
cal behaviour of these important compounds.
Section Review
CHEM 1 K/U In what ways can water in the environment become polluted?
FACT Give at least two examples for each.
Chlorine was first used to 2 K/U Which chemical in Table 9.5 has the lowest acceptable
disinfect water in Britain in concentration? Which chemical has the highest acceptable concentra-
1904, after a typhoid epidemic.
tion? Rearrange the chemicals in the table so they are organized by
(Typhoid is a water-borne, con-
concentration, from lowest to highest, rather than alphabetically by
tagious illness that is caused
name.
by a species of Salmonella
bacteria.) Strict limits are 3 MC What is the source of the water you use at home? Based on your
necessary because chlorine is
experience with this water, which ions do you think it contains?
ineffective when its concentra-
Explain your answer.
tion is less than 0.1 mg/L. It
gives water an unpleasant 4 C Use a graphic organizer to outline the main steps involved in
taste at concentrations above
treating drinking water and waste water.
1.0 mg/L. Chlorine has a disad-
vantage, however. It can react 5 MC An alternative to ion exchange water softening is a process called
with other chemicals in the reverse osmosis. Use your knowledge of osmosis to infer, in general
water to form poisonous com- terms, how this method might work. Consult print or electronic
pounds, such as chloroform,
resources to modify or expand on your ideas. Then use suitable
CHCl . These chemicals may
3 software to communicate your findings as a graphic organizer or a
remain in solution even after
virtual slide presentation.
the entire treatment process.
6 MC One component of the waste water that enters a waste water plant
for treatment is urea, (NH ) CO.
2 2
(a) Use reference materials to find out how urea is chemically changed
to nitrate ions. (There are several steps.)
(b) Write chemical equations to represent the steps involved in this
process.
(c) What happens to aqueous nitrates when they are discharged to
waterways in the environment?
364 MHR • Unit 3 Solutions and Solubility
Review
Reflecting on Chapter 9 4. Each of the following combinations of reagents
results in a double displacement reaction.
Summarize this chapter in the format of your
In your notebook, complete the chemical
choice. Here are a few ideas to use as guidelines:
equation. Then identify the spectator ions,
•Predict combinations of aqueous solutions that
and write the net ionic equation.
result in the formation of precipitates.
(a) copper(II) chloride +ammonium
•Describe your experiences with a qualitative (aq)
phosphate →
analysis of ions in solution. (aq)
(b) aluminumnitrate +barium
•Represent a double-displacement reaction using (aq)
hydroxide →
its net ionic equation. (aq)
(c) sodiumhydroxide +magnesium
•Write balanced chemical equations and net ionic (aq)
chloride →
equations for double-displacement reactions. (aq)
•Apply your understanding of stoichiometry to 5. Use the general solubility guidelines to name
solve quantitative problems involving solutions. three reagents that will combine with each ion
•Identify the origins of pollutants in drinking below to form a precipitate. Assume that the
water, and the allowed concentrations of some reactions take place in aqueous solution. For
of these pollutants. each reaction, write the net ionic equation.
•Examine the causes and effects of water hard- (a) bromide ion
ness. Considered several methods for softening (b) carbonate ion
hard water. (c) lead(II) ion
•Compare the chemistry and the technology of (d) iron(III) ion
water treatment and waste-water treatment. 6. The transition metals form insoluble sulfides,
often with a characteristic colour. Write the net
Reviewing Key Terms
ionic equation for the precipitation of each ion
For each of the following terms, write a sentence by the addition of an aqueous solution of
that shows your understanding of its meaning. sodium sulfide.
general solubility guidelines (a)
Cr3+
(aq) (Note: Cr 2 S 3(s) is brown-black.)
hard water ion exchange (b)
Ni2+
(Note: NiS is black.)
(aq) (s)
net ionic equation precipitate
(c)
Mn4+
(Note: MnS is green or red,
(aq) 2(s)
qualitative analysis soft water
depending on the arrangement
spectator ions total ionic equation
of ions in the solid.)
waste-water treatment water treatment
7. Identify three cations and three anions that
are commonly found in ground water. Suggest
Knowledge/Understanding
at least one likely source for each.
1. In your own words, define the terms “spectator
8. Briefly describe two steps in the primary
ion” and “net ionic equation.”
treatment of waste water, one involving a
2. Identify the spectator ions in the following
physical change and the other involving a
skeleton equation. Then write the balanced
chemical change.
ionic equation for the reaction.
Al(NO ) +NH OH → 9.(a) Many liquid antacids contain magnesium
3 3(aq) 4 (aq)
hydroxide, Mg(OH) . Why must the bottle
Al(OH) +NH NO 2
3(s) 4 3(aq) be shaken before a dose is poured?
3. Hydrogen sulfide gas can be prepared by the (b) Stomach acid contains hydrochloric acid.
reaction of sulfuric acid with sodium sulfide. Excess acid that backs up into the esophagus
H 2 SO 4(aq) +Na 2 S (aq) → H 2 S (g) +Na 2 SO 4(aq) is the cause of “heartburn.” Write the
Write the net ionic equation for this reaction. chemical equation and the net ionic
equation for the reaction that takes place
when someone with heartburn swallows
a dose of liquid antacid.
Chapter 9 Aqueous Solutions • MHR 365
10. Aqueous solutions of iron(III) chloride 17. Equal masses of each of the following salts
and ammonium sulfide react in a double are dissolved in equal volumes of water:
displacement reaction. sodium chloride, calcium chloride, and iron(III)
(a) Write the name and formula of the substance chloride. Which salt produces the largest
that precipitates. concentration of chloride ions?
(b) Write the chemical equation for the reaction. 18. Imagine that you are the chemist at a cement
(c) Write the net ionic equation. factory. You are responsible for analyzing the
factory’s waste water. If a 50.0 mL sample of
Inquiry
waste water contains 0.090 g of
Ca2+
and
(aq)
11. A reference book states that the solubility of 0.029 g of Mg2+ , calculate
(aq)
silver sulfate is 0.57 g in 100 mL of cold water. (a) the concentration of each ion in mol/L
You decide to check this by measuring the (b) the concentration of each ion in ppm
mass of a silver salt precipitated from a known
19. The concentration of calcium ions,
Ca2+
, in
volume of saturated silver sulfate solution. blood plasma is about 2.5×10 −3 mol/L.
Solubility data show that silver chloride is
Calcium ions are important in muscle contrac-
much less soluble than silver nitrate. Explain
tion and in regulating heartbeat. If the concen-
why you should not use barium chloride to
tration of calcium ions falls too low, death is
precipitate the silver ions. Suggest a different
inevitable. In a television drama, a patient is
reagent, and write the net ionic equation for the
brought to hospital after being accidentally
reaction.
splashed with hydrofluoric acid. The acid
12. The presence of copper(II) ions in solution readily penetrates the skin, and the fluoride
can be tested by adding an aqueous solution ions combine with the calcium ions in the
of sodium sulfide. The appearance of a black blood. If the patient’s volume of blood plasma
precipitate indicates that the test is positive. is 2.8 L, what amount (in mol) of fluoride
A solution of copper(II) bromide is tested this ions would completely combine with all the
way. What precipitate is formed? Write the net calcium ions in the patient’s blood?
ionic equation for the reaction.
20. A double displacement reaction occurs in
13. An old home-gardening “recipe” for fertilizer aqueous solution when magnesium phosphate
suggests adding 15 g of Epsom salts (magne- reacts with lead(II) nitrate. If 20.0 mL of
sium sulfate heptahydrate, MgSO 4 ·7H 2 O) to 4 L 0.750 mol/L magnesium phosphate reacts,
of water. What will be the concentration of what is the maximum mass of precipitate that
magnesium ions? can be formed?
14. Calculate the concentration (in mol/L) of each
Communication
aqueous solution.
(a) 7.37 g of table sugar, C H O , dissolved in 21. Phosphate ions act as a fertilizer. They promote
12 22 11
125 mL of solution the growth of algae in rivers and lakes. They
(b) 15.5 g of ammonium phosphate, (NH ) PO , can enter rivers and lakes from fields that are
4 3 4
dissolved in 180 mL of solution improperly fertilized or from untreated waste
(c) 76.7 g of glycerol, C H O , dissolved in water that contains phosphate detergents.
3 8 3
1.20 L of solution How can the water be treated to remove the
15. 50.0 mL of 0.200 mol/L Ca(NO ) is mixed phosphate ions?
3 2(aq)
with 200 mL of 0.180 mol/L K SO . What is 22. A chemist analyzes the sulfate salt of an
2 4(aq)
the concentration of sulfate ions in the final unknown alkaline earth metal. The chemist
solution? adds 1.273 g of the salt to excess barium
16. Suppose that 1.00 L of 0.200 mol/L KNO is chloride solution. After filtering and drying, the
3(aq)
mixed with 2.00 L of 0.100 mol/L Ca(NO ) . mass of precipitate is found to be 2.468 g.
3 2(aq)
Determine the concentrations of the major ions (a) Use the formula MSO 4 to represent the
unknown salt. Write the molecular and net
in the solution.
ionic equations for the reaction.
366 MHR • Unit 3 Solutions and Solubility
(b) Calculate the amount (in mol) of MSO Answers to Practice Problems and
4
used in the reaction. Short Answers to Section Review Questions:
Practice Problems: 1.(a)insoluble (b)insoluble
(c) Determine the molar mass of the
(c)soluble 2.(a)soluble (b)soluble (c)insoluble
unknown salt.
3.(a)insoluble (b)soluble (c)insoluble
(d) What is the likely identity of the unknown 4.(a)Na
2
S
(aq)
+FeSO
4(aq)
→ Na
2
SO
4(aq)
+FeS
(s)
metal cation? What test might the chemist (b)NaOH
(aq)
+Ba(NO
3
)
2(aq)
→ NR
perform to help confirm this conclusion? (c)2Cs
3
PO
4(aq)
+3CaBr
2(aq)
→ 6CsBr
(aq)
+Ca
3
(PO
4
)
2(s)
23. The same volume of solution is made using the (d)Na 2 CO 3(aq) +H 2 SO 4(aq) → NR
same masses of two salts: rubidium carbonate
(e)NaNO
3(aq)
+CuSO
4(aq)
→ NR
and calcium carbonate. Which salt gives the
(f)NH
4
I
(aq)
+AgNO
3(aq)
→ AgI
(s)
+NH
4
NO
3(aq)
(g)K
2
CO
3(aq)
+Fe(NO
3
)
2(aq)
→ FeCO
3(s)
+2KNO
3(aq)
larger concentration of aqueous carbonate ions? (h)Al(NO
3
)
3(aq)
+Na
3
PO
4(aq)
→AlPO
4(s)
+3NaNO
3(aq)
24. A prospector asks you to analyze a bag of silver (i)KCl (aq) +Fe(NO 3 ) 2(aq) → NR
ore. You measure the mass of the ore and add (j)(NH 4 ) 2 SO 4(aq) +BaCl 2(aq) → BaSO 4(s) +2NH 4 Cl (aq)
excess nitric acid to it. Then you add excess
(k)Na
2
S
(aq)
+NiSO
4(aq)
→ NiS
(s)
+Na
2
SO
4(aq)
sodium chloride solution. You filter and dry
(l)Pb(NO
3
)
2
+2KBr
(aq)
→ PbBr
2(s)
+2KNO
3(aq)
5.(a)spectator ions: Na+
(aq)
and Cl−
(aq)
; net ionic equation:
the precipitate. The mass of the ore is 856.1 g, CO
3
2−
(aq)
+2H+
(aq)
→ CO
2(g)
+H
2
O
(l)
(b)spectator ions:
and 1.092 g of silver chloride is collected. Na+ and SO 2− ; net ionic equation:
(aq) 4 (aq)
(a) Why did you first treat the ore with excess H+
(aq)
+OH−
(aq)
→ H
2
O
(l)
6.(a)spectator ions: NH
4
+
(aq)
nitric acid? and SO 2− ; net ionic equation:
4 (aq)
(b) Calculate the mass percent of silver in the Zn2+ (aq) +PO 4 3− (aq) → Zn 3 (PO 4 ) 2(s) (b)spectator ions:
ore. The ore that is extracted at a silver mine Li+ (aq) and NO3− (aq) ; net ionic equation:
typically contains about 0.085% silver by
CO
3
2−
(aq)
+2H+
(aq)
→ CO
2(g)
+H
2
O
(l)
(c)spectator ions:
none; net ionic equation:
mass. Should the prospector keep looking
2H+ +SO2− +Ba2− +2OH− → BaSO +H O
or begin celebrating? 7.30 (a 0 q ) mL 8. 4 c ( o aq n ) centrat ( i a o q) n of NH 4 (a + q (a ) q) is 0.40 4 m (s) ol/L; 2 (l)
concentration of PO
4
3−
(aq)
is 0.13 mol/L 9.66.57%
Making Connections
10.30.47% 11.20.9 g of PbS 12.4.61 g PbI
2
25. Think about your activities yesterday. Which 13.(a)3NaOH (aq) +Al(NO 3 ) 3(aq) → Al(OH) 3(s) +3NaNO 3(aq)
activity required the most use of water?
(b)0.0975 g
Section Review: 9.1: 2.NaF less soluble, because F−is
Estimate the volume of water you used. Would
smaller than I−. 3.(a)insoluble (b)soluble (c)soluble.
it make sense to have two supplies of water to 4.all insoluble. 5.Any reagent containing Cl−, Br−, or I−
your home, one for drinking and a second of
will precipitate silver ion but leave calcium ion in
lower purity for every other activity that uses solution. 6.1 = Ag+, 2 = SO
4
2+, 3 = Ba2+, 4 = Cl−.
water? Give reasons for your answer. 9.2: 2.(a)3Sn2+
(aq)
+2PO
4
3−
(aq)
→ Sn
3
(PO
4
)
2(s)
26. List three different household wastes that are
(b)Ni2+
(aq)
+CO
3
2−(aq) → NiCO
3(s)
commonly discarded and have the potential
(c)2Cr3+
(aq)
+3S2−
(aq)
→ Cr
2
S
3(s)
3.(a)Cl−
(aq)
and K+
(aq)
(b)Cl−
(aq)
and Na+
(aq)
(c)NH
4
+
(aq)
and SO
4
2−
(aq)
.
to contaminate ground water if rain leaches
6.copper(II) carbonate, CuCO
3
;
through your local landfill site. What chemi- Cu2+ +CO 2− → CuCO ; spectator ions:
(aq) 3 (aq) 3(s)
cal(s) does each contain? For each waste, SO
4
2−
(aq)
and Na+
(aq)
. 9.3: 1.0.300 mol/L nitrate ion.
identify an alternative to dumping it in a 2.0.636 g Na
2
CO
3(s)
. 3.114 mL. 4.1.09 mol/L ZnCl
2
.
landfill site. 5.0.650 g Cu 6.3.4×10−2L 7.0.267 L
27. Water is essential for crops. Improper irrigation
over a number of years, however, can result in
farmed land becoming laden with toxic chemi-
cal compounds. Research how this happens.
Find out whether this is a concern to farmers
near where you live.
Chapter 9 Aqueous Solutions • MHR 367
368
Acids and Bases
W
hat do cheese, stomach juices, baking soda, oven cleaner, and under- Chapter Preview
arm odour have in common? They are all acidic or basic. Do you know
10.1 Acid-Base Theories
which are acidic and which are basic?
10.2 Strong and Weak Acids
Acids and bases are very important chemicals. They have been used
and Bases
for thousands of years. Vinegar is an acidic solution that is common in
many food and cleaning products. It was discovered long ago—before 10.3 Acid-Base Reactions
people invented the skill of writing to record its use. Today, acids are also
used to manufacture fertilizers, explosives, plastics, motor vehicles, and
computer circuit boards.
Like acids, bases have numerous uses in the home and in chemical
industries. Nearly 5000 years ago, in the Middle East, the Babylonians
made soap using the bases in wood ash. Today, one of Canada’s most
important industries, the pulp and paper industry, uses huge quantities
of a base called sodium hydroxide. Sodium hydroxide is also used to
manufacture soaps, detergents, dyes, and many other compounds.
In this chapter, you will learn about the properties of acids and bases.
You will learn how these properties change when acids and bases react
together. As well, you will have a chance to estimate and measure the
Concepts and Skills
acidity of aqueous solutions.
You Will Need
Before you begin this chapter,
review the following concepts
and skills:
(cid:2) describingand calculat-
ingthe concentration of
solutions (Chapter 8,
section 8.2)
(cid:2) performingstoichiometry
calculations (Chapter 7,
section 7.2)
(cid:2) namingand identifying
polyatomic ions and their
formulas (Chapter 3,
section 3.4)
Books that have been published since the mid-nineteenth
century suffer from yellowing, brittle pages as they age.
How might acids cause this problem? Can you think of
any solutions to this problem?
Chapter 10 Acids and Bases • MHR 369
10.1 Acid-Base Theories
Section Preview/ As you can see in Table 10.1, acids and bases are common products in the
Specific Expectations home. It is easy to identify some products as acids. Often the word “acid”
appears in the list of ingredients. Identifying bases is more difficult. Acids
In this section, you will
and bases have different properties, however, that enable you to distin-
(cid:2) describeand comparethe
guish between them.
Arrhenius and Brønsted-
Lowry theories of acids and
Table 10.1 Common Acids and Bases in the Home
bases
Acids
(cid:2) identifyconjugate acid-base
pairs Product Acid(s) contained in the product
(cid:2) communicateyour citrus fruits (such as lemons, citric acid and ascorbic acid
understanding of the limes, oranges and tomatoes)
following terms: Arrhenius
dairy products (such as cheese, lactic acid
theory of acids and bases,
milk, and yogurt)
hydronium ion, Brønsted-
vinegar acetic acid
Lowry theory of acids and
bases, conjugate acid-base soft drinks carbonic acid; may also contain
pair, conjugate base, phosphoric acid and citric acid
conjugate acid
underarm odour 3-methyl-2-hexenoic acid
Bases
Product Base contained in the product
oven cleaner sodium hydroxide
baking soda sodium hydrogen carbonate
washing soda sodium carbonate
glass cleaner (some brands) ammonia
Properties of Acids and Bases
Language
LINK One way to distinguish acids from bases is to describe their observable
properties. For example, acids taste sour, and they change colour when
The word “acid” comes from
mixed with coloured dyes called indicators. Bases taste bitter and feel
the Latin acidus, meaning
slippery. They also change colour when mixed with indicators.
“sour tasting.” As you will
learn in this chapter, bases
are the “base” (the foundation) CAUTION You should never taste or touch acids, bases, or any other
from which many other com- chemicals. Early chemists used their senses of taste and touch to
pounds form. A base that is observe the properties of many chemicals. This dangerous practice
soluble in water is called an
often led to serious injury, and sometimes death.
alkali. The word “alkali” comes
from an Arabic word meaning
“ashes of a plant.” In the Another property that can be used to distinguish acids from bases is
ancient Middle East, people their conductivity in solution. As you can see in Figure 10.1, aqueous
rinsed plant ashes with hot solutions of acids and bases conduct electricity. This is evidence that ions
water to obtain a basic are present in acidic and basic solutions. Some of these solutions, such as
solution. The basic solution
hydrochloric acid and sodium hydroxide (a base), cause the bulb to
was then reacted with animal
glow brightly. Most acidic and basic solutions, however, cause the bulb
fats to make soap.
to glow dimly.
370 MHR • Unit 3 Solutions and Solubility
An oxide is a compound of oxy-
gen with a metal or non-metal.
Most metal oxides react with
water to form basic solutions.
For example, calcium oxide is a
metal oxide that is important in
the construction industry as an
ingredient of cement. Calcium
oxide reacts with water to form
a basic solution of calcium
hydroxide.
CaO (s) +H 2 O ((cid:2)) → Ca(OH) 2(aq)
pure water hydrochloric acid, HCl (aq) (1 mol/L) Many municipal water treat-
ment plants use calcium
hydroxide to soften very hard
water before releasing it for
public use. Most non-metal
oxides react with water to form
acidic solutions. For example,
sulfur dioxide gas dissolves in
water to form sulfurous acid.
SO 2(g) +H 2 O ((cid:2)) → H 2 SO 3(aq)
The metallic character of the
elements in the periodic table,
and the acid-base properties
of their oxides, show a distinct
trend across periods and down
groups. Infer what this trend is.
acetic acid, CHCOOH (1 mol/L) sodium hydroxide, NaOH (1 mol/L)
3 (aq) (aq)
In other words, state what you
think happens to the acid-base
properties of oxides as you go
across a period and down a
group. Make a quick sketch of
the periodic table to illustrate
this trend. How would you
describe the acid-base proper-
ties of the metalloids? (Use
your knowledge of the physical
Figure 10.1 Aqueous solutions of properties of the metalloids to
acids and bases can be tested using help you make your inference.)
a conductivity tester. The brightness
of the bulb is a clue to the concentration
of ions in the solution. Which of these
solutions have higher concentrations of
ammonia, NH (1 mol/L)
3(aq) ions? Which have lower concentrations?
Table 10.2 on the next page summarizes the observable properties of acids
and bases. These observable properties include their physical characteris-
tics and their chemical behaviour. The Express Lab on page xxx provides
you with an opportunity to compare some of these properties. What are
acids and bases, however? How does chemical composition determine
whether a substance is acidic or basic? You will consider one possible
answer to this question starting on page 373.
Chapter 10 Acids and Bases • MHR 371
Table 10.2 Some Observable Properties of Acids and Bases
Property
Electrical conductivity
Taste in solution Feel of solution
taste sour conduct electricity have no
ACIDS
characteristic feel
taste bitter conduct electricity feel slippery
BASES
Property
Reaction with Reaction with Reaction with
litmus paper active metals carbonate compounds
Acids turns blue produce produce carbon
ACIDS litmus red hydrogen gas dioxide gas
Bases turn red do not react do not react
BASES
litmus blue
372 MHR • Unit 3 Solutions and Solubility
ExpressLab Clean a Penny
Many cleaning products contain an acid or a mix about 20 mL to 30 mL spoonfuls of baking
base. For example, some window cleaners soda with 150 mL of water. In the third beaker,
contain vinegar (acetic acid). Other window put only 150 mL of water.
cleaners contain ammonia (a base). Oven clean-
3. Place a tarnished penny in each beaker.
ers, however, contain only bases. This activity
Observe what happens for about 15 min.
will help you infer why.
Analysis
Safety Precautions
1. Which solution was the best cleaner? How
did your observations compare with your
prediction?
Materials
2. What results would you expect if you tried
water
cleaning a penny in a solution of lemon juice?
vinegar
What if you used a dilute solution of
100 mL graduated cylinder
ammonia? Note:If you want to test your
spoon or scoopula
predictions, ask your teacher for the concen-
baking soda
trations of the solutions you should use.
3 small beakers (about 200 mL)
3 tarnished pennies 3. The base that is often used in oven cleaners is
sodium hydroxide. This base is very corrosive,
Procedure and it can burn skin easily. A corrosive acid,
such as hydrochloric acid, could also remove
1. Predict which solution(s) will clean the penny
baked-on grease and grime from ovens. Why
best. Give reasons for your prediction.
are bases a better choice for oven cleaners?
2. In one beaker, mix 50 mL of vinegar with
about 150 mL of water. In a second beaker,
The Arrhenius Theory of Acids and Bases
In Figure 10.1, you saw evidence that ions are present in solutions of
acids and bases. When hydrogen chloride dissolves in water, for example,
it dissociates (breaks apart) into hydrogen ions and chloride ions.
HCl → H + +Cl −
(aq) (aq) (aq)
When sodium hydroxide dissolves in water, it dissociates to form sodium
ions and hydroxide ions.
NaOH → Na + +OH −
(aq) (aq) (aq)
The dissociations of other acids and bases in water reveal a pattern. This
pattern was first noticed in the late nineteenth century by a Swedish
chemist named Svanté Arrhenius. (See Figure 10.2.)
HBr → H + +Br −
(aq) (aq) (aq)
acids dissociating in water,
H 2 SO 4(aq) → H + (aq) +HSO − 4(aq) and their resulting ions (1 F 8 ig 5 u 9– re 1 9 1 2 0 7 . ) 2 . Svanté Arrhenius
HClO → H + +ClO −
4(aq) (aq) 4(aq)
LiOH → Li + + OH −
(aq) (aq) (aq)
bases dissociating in water,
KOH (aq) → K + (aq) + OH − (aq) and their resulting ions
Ba(OH) → Ba + + 2OH −
2(aq) (aq) (aq)
Chapter 10 Acids and Bases • MHR 373
Web In 1887, Arrhenius published a theory to explain the nature of acids
LINK
and bases. It is called the Arrhenius theory of acids and bases.
www.school.mcgrawhill.ca/
resources/ The Arrhenius Theory of Acids and Bases
Scientists did not embrace the • An acid is a substance that dissociates in water to produce one or
Arrhenius theory when they more hydrogen ions, H + .
first heard about it during the • A base is a substance that dissociates in water to form one or more
1880s. Why were they unim- −
hydroxide ions, OH .
pressed with this theory? What
was necessary to convince
+
them? Arrhenius is featured on According to the Arrhenius theory, acids increase the concentration of H
several web sites on the in aqueous solutions. Thus, an Arrhenius acid must contain hydrogen as
Internet. To link with these web the source of H + . You can see this in the dissociation reactions for acids
sites, go to the web site above. on the previous page.
Go to Science Resources,then −
Bases, on the other hand, increase the concentration of OH in aque-
to Chemistry 11to find out
ous solutions. An Arrhenius base must contain the hydroxyl group, —OH,
where to go next.
−
as the source of OH . You can see this in the dissociation reactions for
bases on the previous page.
Limitations of the Arrhenius Theory
The Arrhenius theory is useful if you are interested in the ions that result
when an acid or a base dissociates in water. It also helps explain what
happens when an acid and a base undergo a neutralization reaction. In
such a reaction, an acid combines with a base to form an ionic compound
and water. Examine the following reactions:
HCl (aq) +NaOH (aq) → NaCl (aq) +H 2 O ((cid:2))
The net ionic equation for this reaction shows the principal ions in the
Arrhenius theory.
H + (aq) +OH − (aq) → H 2 O ((cid:2))
Since acids and bases produce hydrogen ions and hydroxide ions, water
is an inevitable result of acid-base reactions.
Problems arise with the Arrhenius theory, however. One problem
+
involves the ion that is responsible for acidity: H . Look again at the equa-
tion for the dissociation of hydrochloric acid.
HCl → H + +Cl −
(aq) (aq) (aq)
This dissociation occurs in aqueous solution, but chemists often leave out
H O as a component of the reaction. They simply assume that it is there.
2
What happens if you put H O into the equation?
2
HCl (aq) +H 2 O ((cid:2)) → H + (aq) +Cl − (aq) +H 2 O ((cid:2))
Notice that the water is unchanged when the reaction is represented
this way. However, you learned earlier that water is a polar molecule.
The O atom has a partial negative charge, and the H atoms have partial
+
positive charges. Thus, H O must interact in some way with the ions H
2
−
and Cl . In fact, chemists made a discovery in the early twentieth century.
They realized that protons do not exist in isolation in aqueous solution.
(The hydrogen ion is simply a proton. It is a positively charged nuclear
particle.) Instead, protons are always hydrated: they are attached to
+
water molecules. A hydrated proton is called a hydronium ion, H O .
3 (aq)
(See Figure 10.3.)
374 MHR • Unit 3 Solutions and Solubility
+
Figure 10.3 For convenience,
hydrogen bond chemists often use H+ as
(aq)
a shorthand notation for the
hydronium ion, HO+ .
3 (aq)
Hydronium ions do not exist
independently. Instead, they form
hydrogen bonds with other water
molecules. Thus, a more correct
+
formula is H (HO) , where nis
2 n
H O+ usually 4 or 5.
3
There is another problem with the Arrhenius theory. Consider the
reaction of ammonia, NH , with water.
3
NH 3(g) +H 2 O ((cid:2)) → NH + 4(aq) +OH − (aq)
Ammonia is one of several substances that produce basic solutions
in water. As you can see, ammonia does not contain hydroxide ions.
Use the idea of the hydronium
However, it does produce these ions when it reacts with water. Ammonia
ion to complete the following
also undergoes a neutralization reaction with acids. The Arrhenius theory
equation:
cannot explain the basic properties of ammonia. Nor can it explain the
fact that certain other substances, such as salts that contain carbonate HCl (aq) +H 2 O ((cid:2)) →
ions, also have basic properties.
There is yet another problem with the Arrhenius theory. It is limited
to acid-base reactions in a single solvent, water. Many acid-base reactions
take place in other solvents, however.
The Brønsted-Lowry Theory of Acids and Bases
In 1923, two chemists working independently of each other, proposed a
new theory of acids and bases. (See Figure 10.4.) Johannes Brønsted in
Copenhagen, Denmark, and Thomas Lowry in London, England, proposed
what is called the Brønsted-Lowry theory of acids and bases. This theory
overcame the problems related to the Arrhenius theory.
The Brønsted-Lowry Theory of Acids and Bases
• An acid is a substance from which a proton (H + ion) can be
removed.
• A base is a substance that can remove a proton (H + ion) from
an acid.
Figure 10.4 Johannes Brønsted
(1879–1947), left, and Thomas
Lowry (1874–1936), right. Brønsted
published many more articles
about ions in solution than
Lowry did. Thus, some chemistry
resources refer to the “Brønsted
theory of acids and bases.”
Chapter 10 Acids and Bases • MHR 375
Like an Arrhenius acid, a Brønsted-Lowry acid must contain H in its
CHEM
FACT formula. This means that all Arrhenius acids are also Brønsted-Lowry
−
acids. However, any negative ion (not just OH ) can be a Brønsted-Lowry
In many chemistry references,
base. In addition, water is not the only solvent that can be used.
Brønsted-Lowry acids are
called "proton donors." According to the Brønsted-Lowry theory, there is only one require-
Brønsted-Lowry bases are ment for an acid-base reaction. One substance must provide a proton, and
called "proton acceptors." another substance must receive the same proton. In other words, an acid-
Although these terms are base reaction involves the transfer of a proton.
common, they create a false
The idea of proton transfer has major implications for understanding
impression about the energy
the nature of acids and bases. According to the Brønsted-Lowry theory,
that is involved in acid-base
any substance can behave as an acid, but only if another substance
reactions. Breaking bonds
always requires energy. For behaves as a base at the same time. Similarly, any substance can behave as
example, removing a proton a base, but only if another substance behaves as an acid at the same time.
from a hydrochloric acid mole- For example, consider the reaction between hydrochloric acid and
cule requires 1.4×103kJ/mol. water shown in Figure 10.5. In this reaction, hydrochloric acid is an acid
This is far more energy than +
because it provides a proton (H ) to the water. The water molecule
the word "donor" implies.
receives the proton. Therefore, according to the Brønsted-Lowry theory,
water is a base in this reaction. When the water receives the proton, it
+
becomes a hydronium ion (H O ). Notice the hydronium ion on the right
3
side of the equation.
proton transfer conjugate
acid
HCl (aq) + H 2 O ((cid:2)) → H 3 O+ (aq) + Cl− (aq)
acid base conjugate
base
Figure 10.5 The reaction between hydrochloric acid and water, according to the
Brønsted-Lowry theory
Two molecules or ions that are related by the transfer of a proton are
called a conjugate acid-base pair. (Conjugate means "linked together.")
The conjugate base of an acid is the particle that remains when a proton
is removed from the acid. The conjugate acid of a base is the particle that
results when the base receives the proton from the acid. In the reaction
between hydrochloric acid and water, the hydronium ion is the conjugate
acid of the base, water. The chloride ion is the conjugate base of the acid,
hydrochloric acid.
According to the Brønsted-Lowry theory, every acid has a conjugate
base, and every base has a conjugate acid. The conjugate base and conju-
gate acid of an acid-base pair are linked by the transfer of a proton. The
conjugate base of the acid-base pair has one less hydrogen than the acid. It
also has one more negative charge than the acid. The conjugate acid of the
acid-base pair has one more hydrogen than the base. It also has one less
negative charge than the base.
These ideas about acid-base reactions and conjugate acid-base pairs
will become clearer as you study the following Sample Problems and
Practice Problems.
376 MHR • Unit 3 Solutions and Solubility
Sample Problem
Conjugate Acid-Base Pairs
Problem
Hydrogen bromide is a gas at room temperature. It is soluble in
water, forming hydrobromic acid. Identify the conjugate acid-base
pairs.
What Is Required?
You need to identify two sets of conjugate acid-base pairs.
What Is Given?
You know that hydrogen bromide forms hydrobromic acid in
aqueous solution.
Plan Your Strategy
• Write a balanced chemical equation.
• On the left side of the equation, identify the acid as the molecule
that provides the proton. Identify the base as the molecule that
accepts the proton.
• On the right side of the equation, identify the particle that has one
proton less than the acid on the left side as the conjugate base of
the acid. Identify the particle on the right side that has one proton
more than the base on the left side as the conjugate acid of
the base.
Act on Your Strategy
Hydrogen bromide provides the proton, so it is the Brønsted-Lowry
acid in the reaction. Water receives the proton, so it is the Brønsted-
−
Lowry base. The conjugate acid-base pairs are HBr/Br and
+
H O/H O .
2 3
conjugate acid-base pair
conjugate
acid base
HHBBrr ((g)) +HH 22 OO (((cid:2))) −→ HH 3 OO +++ (aq) +BBBBrr − (aq)
base conjugate
acid
conjugate acid-base pair
Check Your Solution
+
The formulas of the conjugate pairs differ by one proton, H ,
as expected.
Chapter 10 Acids and Bases • MHR 377
Sample Problem
More Conjugate Acid-Base Pairs
Problem
Ammonia is a pungent gas at room temperature. Its main use is in
the production of fertilizers and explosives. It is very soluble in
water. It forms a basic solution that is used in common products,
such as glass cleaners. Identify the conjugate acid-base pairs in the
reaction between aqueous ammonia and water.
NH 3(g) +H 2 O ((cid:2)) → NH 4 + (aq) +OH − (aq)
What Is Required?
You need to identify the conjugate acid-base pairs.
What Is Given?
The chemical equation is given.
Plan Your Strategy
• Identify the proton-provider on the left side of the equation as the
acid. Identify the proton-remover (or proton-receiver) as the base.
• Identify the conjugate acid and base on the right side of the equa-
tion by the difference of a single proton from the acid and base on
the left side.
Act on Your Strategy
PROBLEM TIP
+ −
The conjugate acid base pairs are NH /NH and H O/OH .
In the previous Sample 4 3 2
Problem, water acted as a
conjugate acid-base pair
base. In this Sample Problem,
water acts as an acid.
conjugate
Remember:Water can act as a
acid base
proton-provider (an acid) in NNHH 3(g) +HH 22 OO ((cid:2)) −→ NNHH 4 +++ (aq) +OOOOHH − (aq)
some reactions and as a
base conjugate
proton-receiver (a base)
acid
in others.
conjugate acid-base pair
Check Your Solution
The formulas of the conjugate pairs differ by a proton, as expected.
Practice Problems
1. Hydrogen cyanide is a poisonous gas at room temperature. When
this gas dissolved in water, the following reaction occurs:
HCN (aq) +H 2 O ((cid:2)) → H 3 O + (aq) +CN − (aq)
Identify the conjugate acid-base pairs.
Continued ...
378 MHR • Unit 3 Solutions and Solubility
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 378
2. Sodium acetate is a good electrolyte. In water, the acetate ion
reacts as follows:
CH 3 COO − (aq) +H 2 O ((cid:2)) → CH 3 COOH (aq) +OH − (aq)
Identify the conjugate acid-base pairs.
−
3. Write equations to show how the hydrogen sulfide ion, HS , can
react with water. First show the ion acting as an acid. Then show
the ion acting as a base.
Section Wrap-up
The two theories that you have considered in this section attempt to
explain the chemical nature of acids and bases. Table 10.3 summarizes the
key points of these theories.
In both the Arrhenius theory and the Brønsted-Lowry theory, acids
and bases form ions in solution. Many characteristics of acid-base behav-
iour are linked to the number of ions that form from a particular acid or
base. One of these characteristics is strength.
In section 10.2, you will learn why a dilute solution of vinegar is safe
to ingest, while the same molar concentration of hydrochloric acid would
be extremely poisonous.
Table 10.3 Comparing the Arrhenius Theory and the Brønsted-Lowry Theory
Theory Arrhenius Brønstead-Lowry
Acid any substance that any substance that provides a proton
dissociates to form H+ in to another substance (or any substance
aqueous solution from which a proton may be removed)
Base any substance that any substance that receives a proton
dissociates to form OH− in from an acid (or any substance that
aqueous solution removes a proton from an acid)
Example HCl (aq) →H+ (aq) + Cl− (aq) HCl (aq) + H 2 O ((cid:2)) →H 3 O+ (aq) + Cl− (aq)
Section Review
1 I Suppose that you have four unknown solutions, labelled A, B, C,
and D. You use a conductivity apparatus to test their conductivity,
and obtain the results shown below. Use these results to answer the
questions that follow.
Solution Results of Conductivity Test
A the bulb glows dimly
B the bulb glows strongly
C the bulb does not glow
D the bulb glows strongly
(a) Which of these solutions has a high concentration of dissolved ions?
What is your evidence?
(b) Which of these solutions has a low concentration of dissolved ions?
What is your evidence?
Chapter 10 Acids and Bases • MHR 379
(c) Which of the four unknowns are probably aqueous solutions of acids
or bases?
(d) Based on these tests alone, can you distinguish the acidic solution(s)
from the basic solutions(s)? Why or why not?
(e) Suggest one way that you could distinguish the acidic solution(s)
from the basic solution(s).
2 (a) K/U Define an acid and a base according to the Arrhenius theory.
(b) Give two examples of observations that the Arrhenius theory
can explain.
(c) Give two examples of observations that the Arrhenius theory
can not explain.
3 (a) K/U Define an acid and a base according to the Brønsted-Lowry
theory.
(b) What does the Brønsted-Lowry theory have in common with the
Arrhenius theory? In what ways is it different?
(c) Which of the two acid-base theories is more comprehensive? (In
other words, which explains a broader body of observations?)
4 (a) K/U What is the conjugate acid of a base?
(b) What is the conjugate base of an acid?
(c) Use an example to illustrate your answers to parts (a) and (b) above.
5 K/U Write the formula for the conjugate acid of the following:
−
(a) the hydroxide ion, OH
(b) the carbonate ion, CO
2−
3
6 K/U Write the formula for the conjugate base of the following:
(a) nitric acid, HNO
3
−
(b) the hydrogen sulfate ion, HSO
4
7 K/U Which of the following compounds is an acid according to the
Arrhenius theory?
(a) H O
2
(b) Ca(OH)
2
(c) H PO
3 3
(d) HF
8 K/U Which of the following compounds is a base according to the
Arrhenius theory?
(a) KOH
(b) Ba(OH)
2
(c) HClO
(d) H PO
3 4
9 C Hydrofluoric acid dissociates in water to form fluoride ions.
(a) Write a balanced chemical equation for this reaction.
(b) Identify the conjugate acid-base pairs.
(c) Explain how you know whether or not you have correctly identified
the conjugate acid-base pairs.
10 I Identify the conjugate acid-base pairs in the following reactions:
(a) H PO − +CO2− → HPO 2− +HCO −
2 4 (aq) 3(aq) 4 (aq) 3 (aq)
(b) HCOOH +CN − → HCOO − +HCN
(aq) (aq) (aq) (aq)
(c) H 2 PO 4 − (aq) +OH − (aq) → HPO 4 2− (aq) +H 2 O ((cid:2))
380 MHR • Unit 3 Solutions and Solubility
Re-examine Figure 10.1 on page xxx. Look at the photographs of
hydrochloric acid and acetic acid. The conductivity tester is testing the
same concentrations of both acids. As you can see, the bulb glows brightly
in the hydrochloric acid. The bulb glows dimly in the acetic acid. How
can these different results be explained?
Strong Acids and Weak Acids
You know that ions are present in an aqueous solution of an acid. These
ions result from the dissociation of the acid. An acid that dissociates
completely into ions in water is called a strong acid. For example,
hydrochloric acid is a strong acid. All the molecules of hydrochloric acid
+ − +
in an aqueous solution dissociate into H and Cl ions. The H ions, as
you know, bond with surrounding water molecules to form hydronium
+ ions, H O . (See Figure 10.6.) The concentration of hydronium ions in a
3
dilute solution of a strong acid is equal to the concentration of the acid.
Thus, a 1.0 mol/L solution of hydrochloric acid contains 1.0 mol/L of
hydronium ions. Table 10.4 lists the strong acids.
Before After
Dissociation Dissociation
100 100 100
HCl HCl H O+ Cl −
3
HCl (g) + H 2 O (l) H 3 O+ (aq) + Cl − (aq)
Figure 10.6 When hydrogen chloride molecules enter an aqueous solution, 100% of the
hydrogen chloride molecules dissociate. As a result, the solution contains the same per-
cent of H+ions (in the form of HO+) and Cl− ions: 100%.
3
A weak acid is an acid that dissociates very slightly in a water solu-
tion. Thus, only a small percentage of the acid molecules break apart into
ions. Most of the acid molecules remain intact. For example, acetic acid is
a weak acid. On average, only about 1% (one in a hundred) of the acetic
acid molecules dissociate at any given moment in a 0.1 mol/L solution.
(The number of acid molecules that dissociate depends on the concentra-
tion and temperature of the solution.) In fact, the concentration of
hydronium ions in a solution of a weak acid is always less than the
concentration of the dissolved acid. (See Figure 10.7.)
selucelomforebmunevitaleR
Strong and Weak Acids and Bases 10.2
Section Preview/
Specific Expectations
In this section, you will
(cid:2) explain, in terms of the
degree to which they
dissociate, the difference
between strong and weak
acids and bases
(cid:2) distinguishbetween binary
acids and oxoacids
(cid:2) definepH, and experimental-
ly determine the effect on pH
of diluting an acidic solution
(cid:2) communicateyour under-
standing of the following
terms: strong acid, weak
acid, strong base, weak
base, binary acid, oxoacid,
pH
Table 10.4 Strong Acids
hydrochloric acid, HCl
hydrobromic acid, HBr
hydroiodic acid, HI
nitric acid, HNO
3
sulfuric acid, H SO
2 4
perchloric acid, HClO
4
Chapter 10 Acids and Bases • MHR 381
Before Dissociation After Dissociation
100 about
99
about about
1 1
+ −
CH 3 COOH (aq) + H 2 O (l) H 3 O (aq) + CH 3 COO (aq)
Figure 10.7 When acetic acid molecules enter an aqueous solution, only about 1% of
them dissociate. Thus, the number of acetic acid molecules in solution is far greater than
the number of hydronium ions and acetate ions.
Notice the arrow that is used in the equation in Figure 10.7. It points in
both directions, indicating that the reaction is reversible. In other words,
the products of the reaction also react to produce the original reactants. In
this reaction, molecules of acetic acid dissociate just as quickly and as
often as the dissociated ions re-associate to produce acetic acid molecules.
(Figure 10.8 will help you visualize what happens.)
Most acids are weak acids. Whenever you see a reversible chemical
equation involving an acid, you can safely assume that the acid is weak.
+ +
− −
CH 3 COOH + H 2 O CH 3 COO + H 3 O + CH 3 COO + H 2 O
Figure 10.8 When acetic acid dissolves in water, acetic acid molecules dissociate
and re-associate at the same time and at the same rate.
A few acids contain only a single hydrogen ion that can dissociate.
These acids are called monoprotic acids. (The prefix mono- means “one.”
The root -protic refers to “proton.”) Hydrochloric acid, hydrobromic acid,
and hydroiodic acid are strong monoprotic acids. Hydrofluoric acid, HF, is
weak monoprotic acid.
Many acids contain two or more hydrogen ions that can dissociate.
For example, sulfuric acid, H SO , has two hydrogen ions that can dis-
2 4(aq)
sociate. As you know from Table 10.4, sulfuric acid is a strong acid. This
is true only for its first dissociation, however.
H SO → H + +HSO −
2 4(aq) (aq) 4 (aq)
−
The resulting aqueous hydrogen sulfate ion, HSO , is a weak acid. It dis-
4
sociates to form the sulfate ion in the following reversible reaction:
HSO − H + +SO 2−
4 (aq) (aq) 4 (aq)
382 MHR • Unit 3 Solutions and Solubility
selucelomforebmunevitaleR
+ −
CH 3 COOH CH 3 COOH H 3 O CH 3 COO
Thus, acids that contain two hydrogen ions dissociate to form two anions.
These acids are sometimes called diprotic acids. (The prefix di-, as you
know, means “two.”) The acid that is formed by the first dissociation is
stronger than the acid that is formed by the second dissociation.
Acids that contain three hydrogen ions are called triprotic acids.
Phosphoric acid, H PO , is a triprotic acid. It gives rise to three anions,
3 4(aq)
as follows:
H 3 PO 4(aq) +H 2 O ((cid:2)) H + (aq) +H 2 PO 4 − (aq)
H 2 PO 4 − (aq) +H 2 O ((cid:2)) H + (aq) +HPO 4 2− (aq)
HPO 4 2− (aq) +H 2 O ((cid:2)) H + (aq) +PO 4 3− (aq)
Here again, the acid that is formed by the first dissociation is stronger
than the acid that is formed by the second dissociation. This acid is
stronger than the acid that is formed by the third dissociation. Keep in
mind, however, that all three of these acids are weak because only a small
proportion of them dissociates.
Strong Bases and Weak Bases
Like a strong acid, a strong base dissociates completely into ions in water. Table 10.5 Common Strong Bases
All oxides and hydroxides of the alkali metals—Group 1 (IA)—are strong sodium hydroxide, NaOH
bases. The oxides and hydroxides of the alkaline earth metals—Group 2
potassium hydroxide, KOH
(IIA)—below beryllium are also strong bases.
calcium hydroxide, Ca(OH)
Recall that the concentration of hydronium ions in a dilute solution of 2
a strong acid is equal to the concentration of the acid. Similarly, the con- strontium hydroxide, Sr(OH) 2
centration of hydroxide ions in a dilute solution of a strong base is equal barium hydroxide, Ba(OH)
2
to the concentration of the base. For example, a 1.0 mol/L solution of
sodium hydroxide (a strong base) contains 1.0 mol/L of hydroxide ions.
Table 10.5 lists some common strong bases. Barium hydroxide,
Ba(OH) , and strontium hydroxide, Sr(OH) , are strong bases that are
2 2
soluble in water. Magnesium oxide, MgO, and magnesium hydroxide,
Mg(OH) , are also strong bases, but they are considered to be insoluble.
2
A small amount of these compounds does dissolve in water, however.
Virtually all of this small amount dissociates completely.
Most bases are weak. A weak base dissociates very slightly in a
water solution. The most common weak base is aqueous ammonia. In a
0.1 mol/L solution, only about 1% of the ammonia molecules react with
water to form hydroxide ions. This reversible reaction is represented in
Figure 10.9.
NH 3 + H 2 O NH 4 + + OH −
Figure 10.9 Ammonia does not contain hydroxide ions, so it is not an Arrhenius base.
As you can see, however, an ammonia molecule can remove a proton from water, leaving
a hydroxide ion behind. Thus, ammonia is a Brønsted-Lowry weak base.
Chapter 10 Acids and Bases • MHR 383
Naming Acids and Their Anions
The terms “strong” and “con- There are two main kinds of acids: binary acids and oxoacids. A binary
centrated” have very different acid is composed of two elements: hydrogen and a non-metal. Two exam-
meanings when describing ples of binary acids are hydrofluoric acid and hydrochloric acid. All bina-
solutions of acids, bases, or
ry acids have the general formula HX . The H represents one or more
(aq)
salts. Similarly, the terms
hydrogen atoms. The X represents the non-metal. As you can see in Table
“weak” and “dilute” have very
10.6, the names of binary acids are made up of the following parts:
different meanings. In your
•the prefix hydro-
own words, summarize the dif-
ference between “strong” and •a root that is formed from the name of the non-metal
“concentrated.” Give examples •the suffix -ic
that illustrate this difference. •the word “acid” at the end
Then summarize the difference
between “weak” and “dilute,” Table 10.6 Examples of Naming Binary Acids
again giving examples.
Binary acid Prefix Non-metal root Suffix
hydrofluoric acid, HF hydro- -fluor- -ic
(aq)
hydrochloric acid, HCl hydro- -chlor- -ic
(aq)
hydrosulfuric acid, H S hydro- -sulfur- -ic
2
As you know, anions are formed when binary acids dissociate. The
names of these anions end in the suffix -ide. For example, hydroflouric
−
acid forms the anion fluoride, F . Hydrochloric acid forms the anion
−
chloride, Cl .
An oxoacid is an acid formed from a polyatomic ion that contains
The conjugate base of a strong oxygen, hydrogen, and another element. (Oxoacids are called oxyacids in
acid is always a weak base. some chemistry textbooks). In Chapter 3, you learned the names of com-
Conversely, the conjugate base mon polyatomic ions and their valences (oxidation numbers). The names
of a weak acid is always a
of oxoacids are similar to the names of their polyatomic oxoanions. Only
strong base. Explain this
the suffix is different. Study the three rules and examples for naming
inverse relationship.
oxoacids below. Then try the Practice Problems that follow.
1. For anions that end in -ate, the suffix of the acid is -ic. For example,
−
the acid of the chlorate anion ClO , is chloric acid, HClO .
3 3
2. For anions that end in -ite, the suffix of the acid is -ous. For example,
−
the acid of the chlorite anion, ClO , is chlorous acid, HClO .
2 2
3. The prefixes hypo- and per- remain as part of the acid name. For exam-
−
ple, the acid of the perchlorate anion, ClO , is perchloric acid, HClO .
4 4
−
The acid of the hypochlorite anion, ClO , is hypochlorous acid, HClO.
Practice Problems
4.(a) Write the chemical formula for hydrobromic acid. Then write the
name and formula for the anion that it forms.
(b) Hydrosulfuric acid, H S, forms two anions. Name them and write
2
their formulas.
5. Write the chemical formulas for the following acids. Then name and
write the formulas for the oxoanions that form from each acid. Refer
to Chapter 3, Table 3.5, Names and Valences of Some Common
Polyatomic Ions, as necessary.
(a) nitric acid (d) phosphoric acid
(b) nitrous acid (e) phosphorous acid
(c) hyponitrous acid (f) periodic acid
384 MHR • Unit 3 Solutions and Solubility
Describing Acid and Base Strength Quantitatively: pH
You are probably familiar with the term “pH” from a variety of sources.
Advertisers talk about the “pH balance” of products such as soaps, sham-
poos, and skin creams. People who own aquariums and swimming pools
must monitor the pH of the water. (See Figure 10.10.) Gardeners and farm-
ers use simple tests to determine the pH of the soil. They know that plants
and food crops grow best within a narrow range of pH. Similarly, the pH
of your blood must remain within narrow limits for you to stay healthy.
Figure 10.10 Maintaining a
safe environment for an aquarium
or a swimming pool requires
measuring the pH of the water
and knowing how to adjust it.
pH is clearly related to health, and to the proper functioning of products
and systems. (Notice that the “p” is always lower case, even at the start
of a sentence.) What exactly is pH? How is it measured? To answer these
questions, consider a familiar substance: water.
The Power of Hydrogen in Water
As you know, all aqueous solutions contain ions. Even pure water con-
tains a few ions that are produced by the dissociation of water molecules.
Remember: The double arrow in the equation shows that the reaction is
reversible. The ions recombine to form water molecules.
H 2 O ((cid:2)) +H 2 O ((cid:2)) H 3 O + (aq) +OH − (aq)
On average, at 25°C, only about two water molecules in a billion are
dissociated at any given moment. As you know, it is the ions in solution
that conduct electricity. If there are virtually no ions, no electricity is
conducted. This is why pure water is such a poor conductor. Chemists
have determined that the concentration of hydronium ions in neutral
water, at 25˚C, is only 1.0×10 −7 mol/L. The dissociation of water also
produces the same, very small number of hydroxide ions. Therefore, the
concentration of hydroxide ions is also 1.0×10 −7 mol/L.
Chemists sometimes use square brackets around a chemical formula.
This shorthand notation means “the concentration of” the chemical inside
+
the brackets. For example, [H O ] is read as “the concentration of hydro-
3
nium ions.” Thus, the concentration of hydronium ions and hydroxide
ions in neutral water can be written as
the concentration of hydronium ions
[H O+] = [OH−] = 1.0×10–7mol/L
3
the concentration of hydroxide ions
Chapter 10 Acids and Bases • MHR 385
Compared with neutral water, acidic solutions contain a higher con-
centration of hydronium ions. Basic solutions contain a lower concentra-
tion of hydronium ions. Therefore, the dissociation of water provides
another way of thinking about acids and bases. An acid is any compound
+
that increases [H O ] when it is dissolved in water. A base is any com-
3
−
pound that increases [OH ] when it is dissolved in water. (See Figure
10.11.)
acidic solution basic solution neutral solution
[H O+] >[OH − ] [H O+] <[OH − ] [H O+]=[OH − ]
3 3 3
Figure 10.11 The relationship between the concentrations of hydronium ions and
hydroxide ions in a solution determines whether the solution is acidic, basic, or neutral.
The pH Scale: Measuring by Powers of Ten
The concentration of hydronium ions ranges from about 10 mol/L for a
concentrated strong acid to about 10
−15mol/L
for a concentrated strong
base. This wide range of concentrations, and the negative powers of 10,
are not very convenient to work with. In 1909, a Danish biochemist, Søren
Sørensen, suggested a method for converting concentrations to positive
numbers. His method involved using the numerical system of logarithms.
The logarithm of a number is the power to which you must raise 10 to
equal that number. For example, the logarithm of 10 is 1, because
101 = 10. The logarithm of 100 is 2, because 102 = 100. (See Appendix E
for more information about exponents and logarithms.)
Sørensen defined pH as −log [H + ]. Since Sørensen did not know about
hydronium ions, his definition of pH is based on Arrhenius’ hydrogen
ion. Many chemistry references reinterpret the H so that it refers to the
+
Brønsted-Lowry hydronium ion, H O , instead. This textbook adopts the
3
hydronium ion usage. Thus, the definition for pH becomes
pH = −log[H O + ]. Recall, though, that chemists use [H + ] as a shorthand
3
+
notation for [H O ]. As a result, both equations give the same product.
3
As you can see in Figure 10.12, the “p” in pH stands for the word
“power.” The power referred to is exponential power: the power of 10.
+
The “H” stands for the concentration of hydrogen ions (or H O ions),
3
measured in mol/L.
" the negative " ...the concentration
logarithm of... pH of H+ ions (in mol/L) Figure 10.12 The concept
of pH makes working with
or or
−log [H+] very small values, such as
0.000 000 000 000 01, much easier.
386 MHR • Unit 3 Solutions and Solubility
The concept of pH allows hydronium (or hydrogen) ion concentra-
Science
LINK
tions to be expressed as positive numbers, rather than negative exponents.
For example, recall that [H O + ] of neutral water at 25˚C is 1.0×10 −7.
3 Using logarithms is a conven-
∴pH = −log[H O + ] ient way to count a wide range
3
= −log(1.0×10 −7) of values by powers of 10.
= −(−7.00) Chemists are not the only
= 7.00 scientists who use such loga-
rithms, however. Audiologists
[H O + ] in acidic solutions is greater than [H O + ] in neutral water. For (scientists who study human
3 3
example, if [H O + ] in an acid is 1.0×10 −4mol/L, this is 1000 times greater hearing) use logarithms, too.
3
+ Research the decibel scale to
than [H O ] in neutral water. Use Table 10.7 to make sure that you under-
3
find out how it works. Present
stand why. The pH of the acid is 4.00. All acidic solutions have a pH that
your findings in the medium of
is less than 7.
your choice.
Table 10.7 Understanding pH
Range of acidity Exponential pH
and basicity [H0+] (mol/L) notation (mol/L) log (-log [H0+])
3 3
strong acid 1 1×100 0 0 Math
LINK
0.1 1×10−1 −1 1
How do you determine the
0.01 1×10−2 −2 2
number of significant digits in a
0.001 1×10−3 −3 3 pH? You count only the digits to
0.000 1 1×10−4 −4 4 the right of the decimal point.
For example, suppose that the
0.000 01 1×10−5 −5 5
concentration of hydronium
0.000 001 1×10−6 −6 6 ions in a sample of orange
neutral 0.000 000 1 1×10−7 −7 7 juice is 2.5×10−4mol/L. This
[H+]= [OH−] number has two significant
= 1.0 ×10−7 digits: the 2 and the 5. The
power of 10 only tells us where
0.000 000 01 1×10−8 −8 8 to place the decimal: 0.000 25.
0.000 000 001 1×10−9 −9 9 The pH of the sample is
−log (2.5×10−4) = 3.602059.
0.000 000 000 1 1×10−10 −10 10
The digit to the left of the deci-
0.000 000 000 01 1×10−11 −11 11 mal (the 3) is derived from the
0.000 000 000 001 1×10−12 −12 12 power of 10. Therefore, it is not
considered to be a significant
0.000 000 000 000 1 1×10−13 −13 13 digit. Only the two digits to the
strong base 0.000 000 000 000 01 1×10−14 −14 14 right of the decimal are
significant. Thus, the pH value
is rounded off to 3.60.
+ +
[H O ] in basic solutions is less than [H O ] in pure water. For exam-
3 3
ple, if [H O + ] in a base is 1.0×10 −11mol/L, this is 10 000 times less than Identify the significant digits in
3 each pH value below.
+
[H O ] in neutral water. The pH of the base is 11.00. All basic solutions
3
1. The pH of drain cleaner is
have a pH that is greater than 7.
13.1.
+
The relationship among pH, [H O ], and the strength of acids and
3
2. The pH of milk is 6.4.
bases is summarized in the Concept Connection on the next page. Use the
following Sample Problem and Practice Problems to assess your under- 3. The pH of vinegar is 2.85.
standing of this relationship. Then, in Investigation 10-A, you will look 4. The pH of lemon juice is
for a pattern involving the pH of a strong acid, a weak acid, and dilutions 2.310.
of both.
Chapter 10 Acids and Bases • MHR 387
Concept Organizer pH, [H O+], and the Strength of Acids and Bases
3
Concentration of hydronium
Type of solution [H0+] (mol/L) and hydroxide ions pH at 25˚C
3
acidic solution greater than 1×10−7 [H O+]>[OH−] < 7.00
3
neutral solution 1×10−7 [H O+]=[OH−] 7.00
3
basic solution less than 1×10−7 [H O+]<[OH−] > 7.00
3
pH
14 1mol/L NaOH (14.0)
13 lye (sodium hydroxide)
(13.0)
12
household ammonia
(11.9)
C
IS 11
A milk of magnesia
B
(antacid) (10.5)
E R 10 detergent solution
O
(approximately 10)
M
9
8 ocean water (7.0-8.3)
blood (7.4)
7 NEUTRAL
milk (6.4)
6 urine (4.8-7.5)
rain water (5.6)
C 5
ID
IC
A tomatoes (4.2)
E 4
R
O
M vinegar (2.4-3.4)
3
The pH values of many common solutions fall within a range from 0 to 14, as
lemon juice (2.2-2.4)
2 shown on this pH scale. The table above the pH scale relates the positive pH
values to their hydronium ion concentrations and their logarithms.
stomach acid
1
(mainly HCl) (1.0-3.0)
0 1 mol/L HCl (0.0)
388 MHR • Unit 3 Solutions and Solubility
Sample Problem
Calculating the pH of a Solution
Problem
Calculate the pH of a solution with [H O + ] = 3.8×10 −3mol/L.
3
What Is Required?
+
You need to calculate the pH, given [H O ].
3
What Is Given?
You know that [H O + ] is 3.8×10 −3mol/L.
3
Plan Your Strategy
Use the equation pH = −log[H O + ] to solve for the unknown.
3
Act on Your Strategy PROBLEM TIP
pH = −log(3.8×10 −3) Appendix E, “Math and
= 2.42 Chemistry”, explains how you
can do these calculations with
a calculator.
Check Your Solution
[H O + ] is greater than 1.0×10 −7mol/L. Therefore, the pH should be
3
less than 7.00. The solution is acidic, as you would expect.
Practice Problems
6. Calculate the pH of each solution, given the hydronium ion
concentration.
(a) [H O + ] = 0.0027mol/L
3
(b) [H O + ] = 7.28×10 −8mol/L
3
(c) [H O + ] = 9.7×10 −5mol/L
3
(d) [H O + ] = 8.27×10 −12
3
7. [H O + ] in a cola drink is about 5.0×10 −3mol/L. Calculate the pH
3
of the drink. State whether the drink is acidic or basic.
8. A glass of orange juice has [H O + ] of 2.9×10 −4 mol/L. Calculate
3
the pH of the juice. State whether the result is acidic or basic.
+
9.(a) [H O ] in a dilute solution of nitric acid, HNO , is
3 3
6.3×10 −3 mol/L. Calculate the pH of the solution.
(b) [H O + ] of a solution of sodium hydroxide is 6.59×1010mol/L.
3
Calculate the pH of the solution.
Chapter 10 Acids and Bases • MHR 389
S K I L L F O C U S
Predicting
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
The Effect of Dilution
on the pH of an Acid
In this investigation, you will compare the effects Safety Precautions
of diluting a strong acid and a weak acid.
In Part 1, you will measure the pH of a strong
acid. Then you will perform a series of ten-fold Hydrochloric acid is corrosive. Wash any spills
dilutions. That is, each solution will be one-tenth on skin or clothing with plenty of cool water.
as dilute as the previous solution. You will meas- Inform your teacher immediately.
ure and compare the pH after each dilution.
In Part 2, you will measure the pH of a weak Materials
acid with the same initial concentration as the
100 mL graduated cylinder
strong acid. Then you will perform a series of
100 mL beaker
ten-fold dilutions with the weak acid. Again,
2 beakers (250 mL)
you will measure and compare the pH after
universal indicator paper and glass rod
each dilution.
pH meter
0.10 mol/L hydrochloric acid (for Part 1)
Problem 0.10 mol/L acetic acid (for Part 2)
How does the pH of dilutions of a strong acid distilled water
compare with the pH of dilutions of a weak acid?
Procedure
Prediction Part 1 The pH of Solutions of a Strong Acid
Predict each pH, and explain your reasoning. 1. Copy the table below into your notebook.
(a) the pH of 0.10 mol/L hydrochloric acid Record the pH you predicted for eachdilution.
(b) the pH of the hydrochloric acid after one 2. Pour about 40 mL of 0.10 mol/L hydrochloric
ten-fold dilution acid into a clean, dry 100 mL beaker. Use the
end of a glass rod to transfer a drop of solu-
(c) the pH of the hydrochloric acid after each of
tion to a piece of universal pH paper into the
six more ten-fold dilutions
acid. Compare the colour against the colour
(d) the pH of 0.10 mol/L acetic acid, compared
chart to determine the pH. Record the pH.
with the pH of 0.10 mol/L hydrochloric acid
Then measure and record the pH of the acid
(e) the pH of the acetic acid after one ten-fold using a pH meter. Rinse the electrode with
dilution distilled water afterward.
Data Table for Part 1
[HCl ] mol/L Predicted pH pH measured with universal indicator pH measured with pH meter
(aq)
1×10−1
1×10−2
1×10−3
1×10−4
1×10−5
1×10−6
1×10−7
1×10−8
390 MHR • Unit 3 Solutions and Solubility
3. What was the pH of the solution that had a
concentration of 1.0×10 −8mol/L? Explain the
pH you obtained.
4. Compare the pH of 0.10 mol/L acetic acid
with the pH of 0.10 mol/L hydrochloric acid.
Why do you think the pH values are different,
even though the concentrations of the acids
were the same?
5. What effect does a ten-fold dilution of a strong
acid (hydrochloric acid) have on the pH of the
3. Measure 90 mL of distilled water in a 100 mL
acid? What effect does the same dilution of a
graduated cylinder. Add 10 mL of the acid
weak acid (acetic acid) have on its pH?
from step 2. The resulting 100 mL of solution
Compare the effects for a strong acid and a
is one-tenth as concentrated as the acid from
weak acid. Account for any differences.
step 2. Pour the dilute solution into a clean,
dry 250 mL beaker. Use universal pH paper
and a pH meter to measure the pH. Record Conclusion
your results. 6. Use evidence from your investigation to
support the conclusion that a weak acid
4. Repeat step 3. Pour the new dilute solution
ionizes less than a strong acid of identical
into a second clean, dry beaker. Dispose of the
concentration.
more concentrated acid solution as directed
by your teacher. Rinse and dry the beaker so 7. Why is the method for calculating the pH of a
you can use it for the next dilution. strong acid (if it is not too dilute) not appro-
priate for a weak acid?
5. Make further dilutions and pH measurements
until the hydrochloric acid solution is
1.0×10 −8mol/L Applications
8. Nicotinic acid is a B vitamin. The pH of a
Part 2 The pH of Solutions of a Weak Acid
0.050 mol/L solution of this acid is measured
1. Design a table to record your predictions and to be 3.08. Is it a strong acid or a weak acid?
measurements for 0.10 mol/L and 0.010 mol/L Explain. What would be the pH of a solution
concentrations of acetic acid. of nitric acid having the same concentration?
2. Use the same procedure that you used in Part 9. Would you expect to be able to predict the
1 to measure and record the pH of a 0.10 pH of a weak base, given its concentration?
mol/L sample of acetic acid. Then dilute the Explain. Design an experiment you could
solution to 0.010 mol/L. Measure the pH perform to check your answer.
again.
Analysis
1. Which do you think gave the more accurate
pH: the universal indicator paper or the pH
meter? Explain.
2. For the strong acid, compare the pH values
you predicted with the measurements you
made. How can you explain any differences
for the first few dilutions?
Chapter 10 Acids and Bases • MHR 391
Chemistry Bulletin
The Chemistry of Oven Cleaning Cleaners that contain sodium hydroxide and
potassium hydroxide are very effective. They
are also caustic and potentially very dangerous.
For example, sodium hydroxide, in the concen-
trations that are used in oven cleaners, can
irritate the skin and cause blindness if it gets
in the eyes. As well, it is damaging to paints
and fabrics.
There are alternatives to sodium hydroxide
and other strong base cleaners. One alternative
involves using ammonia, NH , which is a weak
3
base. If a bowl of dilute ammonia solution is
placed in an oven and left for several hours,
most of the grease and grime can be wiped off.
Ammonia does not completely ionize in
water. Only a small portion dissociates.
Although an ammonia solution is less caustic
than sodium hydroxide, it can be toxic if inhaled
Oven cleaning is not a job that most people
directly. As well, ammonia vapours can cause
enjoy. Removing baked-on grease from inside
eye, lung, and skin irritations. At higher concen-
an oven requires serious scrubbing. Any chemi-
trations, ammonia can be extremely toxic.
cal oven cleaners that help to make the job
Baking soda is a non-toxic alternative, but it
easier are usually welcome. Like all chemicals,
is much less effective. Therefore, it requires
however, the most effective oven cleaners
even more scrubbing. An abrasive paste can be
require attention to safety.
made by mixing baking soda and water. The
Cleaners that contain strong bases are the
basic properties of baking soda also have a
most effective for dissolving grease and grime.
small effect on grease and grime if it is applied
Bases are effective because they produce soaps
to the oven and left for several hours.
when they react with the fatty acids in grease.
When a strong base (such as sodium hydroxide, Making Connections
NaOH, or potassium hydroxide, KOH) is used on
1. Survey the cleaners in your home or school.
a dirty oven, the fat molecules that make up the
Which cleaners contain bases and which con-
grease are split into smaller molecules. Anions
tain acids? What cleaning jobs can an acid
from the base then bond with some of these
cleaner perform well? How do most acid
molecules to form soap.
cleaners work?
One end of a soap molecule is non-polar
2. Some companies claim to make environmen-
(uncharged), so it is soluble in dirt and grease,
tally sensitive cleaners. Investigate these
which are also non-polar. The other end of a
cleaners. What chemicals do they contain?
soap molecule is polar (charged), so it is soluble
See if you can infer how they work. You
in water. Because of its two different properties,
might like to design a controlled experiment
soap acts like a “bridge” between the grease
to test the effectiveness of several oven
and the water. Soap enables grease to dissolve
cleaners. CAUTION Obtain permission from
in water and be washed away, thus allowing
your teacher before performing such an
the cleaner to remove the grease from the
experiment.
oven surface.
392 MHR • Unit 3 Solutions and Solubility
Section Wrap-up
In this section, you considered the relationship among the strength of
acids and bases, the concentration of hydronium and hydroxide ions, and
pH. Much of the time, you examined acids and bases acting independent-
ly of each other. However, acids and bases often interact. In fact, acid-base
reactions have many important applications in the home, as well as in the
laboratory. In section 10.3, you will investigate acid-base reactions.
Section Review
1 K/U Distinguish, in terms of degree of dissociation, between a strong Unit Issue Prep
acid and a weak acid, and a strong base and a weak base. As you investigate the contam-
2 K/U Give one example of the following: ination of Prince Edward
Island’s soils with sodium
(a) a weak acid
arsenite from pesticides, inves-
(b) a strong acid tigate the link between the pH
and solubility. For example,
(c) a strong base
water polluted with sodium
(d) a weak base arsenite may be treated with
lime (calcium oxide), CaO.
3 K/U Formic acid, HCOOH, is responsible for the painful bites of fire
What is the purpose of this
ants. Is formic acid strong or weak? Explain.
treatment?
4 K/U KMnO 4 is an intense purple-coloured solid that can be made into
a solution to kill bacteria. What is the name of this compound?
Give the name and the formula of the acid that forms when KMnO
4
combines with water.
5 K/U State the name or the formula for the acid that forms from each of
the following anions:
(a) hydrogen sulfate
−
(b) F
−
(c) HS
(d) bromite
6 K/U Explain the meaning of pH, both in terms of hydrogen ions and
hydronium ions.
7 K/U Arrange the following foods in order of increasing acidity: beets,
pH = 5.0; camembert cheese, pH = 7.4; egg white, pH = 8.0; sauerkraut,
pH = 3.5; yogurt, pH = 4.5.
8 I Calculate the pH of each body fluid, given the concentration of
hydronium ions.
(a) tears, [H O + ] = 4.0×10 −8mol/L
3
(b) stomach acid, [H O + ] = 4.0×10 −2mol/L
3
9 I Calculate the pH of the solution that is formed by diluting 50 mL
of 0.025 mol/L hydrochloric acid to a final volume of 1.0 L
10 C What is [H 3 O + ] in a solution with pH = 0? Why do chemists not
+
usually use pH to describe [H O ] when the pH value would be a
3
negative number?
Chapter 10 Acids and Bases • MHR 393
10.3 Acid-Base Reactions
Section Preview/ Is there a box of baking soda in your refrigerator at home? Baking soda is
Specific Expectations sodium hydrogen carbonate. (It is also commonly called sodium bicarbon-
ate.) Baking soda removes the odours caused by spoiling foods. The
In this section, you will
smelly breakdown products of many foods are acids. Baking soda, a base,
(cid:2) performcalculations involv-
eliminates the odours by neutralizing the characteristic properties of
ing neutralization reactions
the acids.
(cid:2) determinethe concentration
Adding a base to an acid neutralizes the acid’s acidic properties. This
of an acid in solution by con-
ducting a titration type of reaction is called a neutralization reaction.
There are many different acids and bases. Being able to predict the
(cid:2) communicateyour under-
results of reactions between them is important. Bakers, for example,
standing of the following
terms: neutralization depend on neutralization reactions to create light, fluffy baked goods.
reaction, salt, acid-base Gardeners and farmers depend on these reactions to modify the character-
indicator, titration, istics of the soil. Industrial chemists rely on these reactions to produce the
equivalence point, end-point raw materials that are used to make a wide variety of chemicals and
chemical products. (See Figure 10.13.)
fuels
hydrogen
margarine
hydrochloric acid: used to make medicines, cosmetics
solvents
electricity
pvc (plastics)
salt (sodium chloride) chlorine
water purification
and water
other industrial chemicals
bleach: used to make paper, textiles, cleaning products
paper
synthetic fibres
sodium hydroxide
soaps and detergents
other industrial chemicals
Figure 10.13 You know sodium
chloride as common table salt. As
Neutralization Reactions
you can see here, however,
sodium chloride is anything but The reaction between an acid and a base produces an ionic compound
common. Sodium chloride is a
(a salt) and water.
product of an acid-base reaction acid+base → asalt+water
between hydrochloric acid and
sodium hydroxide. A salt is an ionic compound that is composed of the anion from an acid
and a cation from a base. For example, sodium nitrate is a salt that is
found in many kitchens. It is often added to processed meat to preserve
the colour and to slow the rate of spoiling by inhibiting bacterial growth.
Sodium nitrate can be prepared in a laboratory by reacting nitric acid with
sodium hydroxide, as shown on the next page.
394 MHR • Unit 3 Solutions and Solubility
cation from base CHEM
FACT
HNO 3(aq) +NaOH (aq) → NaNO 3(aq) +H 2 O ((cid:2)) If a small quantity of an acid or
a base is spilled in a laborato-
ry, you can use a neutralization
reaction to minimize the
anion from acid
hazard. To neutralize a basic
The balanced chemical equation for this reaction shows that 1 mol of solution spill, you can add solid
nitric acid reacts with 1 mol of sodium hydroxide. If equal molar sodium hydrogen sulfate or
quantities of nitric acid and sodium hydroxide are used, the result is a citric acid. For an acidic solu-
tion spill, you can use sodium
neutral (pH 7) aqueous solution of sodium nitrate. In fact, when any
hydrogen carbonate (baking
strong acid reacts with any strong base in the mole ratio from the bal-
soda). Note that you cannot
anced chemical equation, a neutral aqueous solution of a salt is formed.
use a strong acid or base to
Reactions between acids and bases of different strengths usually do not
clean up a spill. This would
result in neutral solutions. result in another hazardous
For most neutralization reactions, there are no visible signs that a spill. As well, the neutralization
reaction is occurring. How can you determine that a neutralization reaction would generate a lot
reaction is taking place? One way is to use an acid-base indicator. This of heat, and thus produce a
very hot solution.
is a substance that changes colour in acidic and basic solutions. Most
acid-base indicators are weak, monoprotic acids. The undissociated weak
acid is one colour. Its conjugate base is a different colour.
colour 1
H (indicator) H
++
(indicator)
−
(aq) (aq)
colour 2
In an acidic solution, the indicator does not dissociate very much. It
appears as colour 1. In a basic solution, the indicator dissociates much
Show that the net ionic equa-
more. It appears as colour 2. Often a single drop of indicator causes a dra-
tion for the reaction between
matic change in colour. For example, phenolphthalein is an indicator that
HNO (a strong acid) and
3
chemists often use for reactions between a strong acid and a strong base. It NaOH (a strong base) results in
is colourless between pH 0 and pH 8. It turns pink between pH 8 and the formation of water.
pH 10. (See Figure 10.14.)
Figure 10.14 A good indicator, such as the phenolphthalein shown here, must give a
vivid colour change.
Chapter 10 Acids and Bases • MHR 395
Calculations Involving Neutralization Reactions
CHEM
FACT
Suppose that a solution of an acid reacts with a solution of a base. You
An old remedy to relieve the can determine the concentration of one solution if you know the concen-
prickly sting of a nettle plant is tration of the other. (This assumes that the volumes of both are accurately
to rub the area with the leaf of
measured.) Use the concentration and volume of one solution to deter-
a dock plant. The sting con-
mine the amount (in moles) of reactant that it contains. The balanced
tains an acid. This acid is neu-
chemical equation for the reaction describes the mole ratio in which the
tralized by a base that is pres-
ent in the dock leaf. Bees and compounds combine. In the following Sample Problems and Practice
ants also have an acidic sting. Problems, you will see how to do these calculations.
You can wash the sting with
soap, because soap is basic.
You can also apply baking soda Sample Problem
(a base) to the skin for more
effective relief. If you are stung Finding Concentration
by a wasp, however, you
should apply vinegar. The sting Problem
of a wasp contains a base.
13.84 mL of hydrochloric acid, HCl , just neutralizes 25.00 mL of a
(aq)
0.1000 mol/L solution of sodium hydroxide, NaOH . What is the
(aq)
concentration of the hydrochloric acid?
What Is Required?
You need to find the concentration of the hydrochloric acid.
What Is Given?
Volume of hydrochloric acid, HCl = 13.84mL
Volume of sodium hydroxide, NaOH = 25.00mL
Concentration of sodium hydroxide, NaOH = 0.1000mol/L
Plan Your Strategy
Step 1 Write the balanced chemical equation for the reaction.
PROBLEM TIPS
Step 2 Calculate the amount (in mol) of sodium hydroxide added,
1. Make sure that the based on the volume and concentration of the sodium
values you use in your hydroxide solution.
calculations refer to the
Step 3 Determine the amount (in mol) of hydrochloric acid needed to
same reactant. For exam-
neutralize the sodium hydroxide.
ple, you can use the con-
Step 4 Find [HCl ], based on the amount and volume of hydrochlo-
centration and volume of (aq)
ric acid solution needed.
sodium hydroxide to find
the amount of sodium
hydroxide in this problem. Act on Your Strategy
You cannot use the con-
Step 1 The balanced chemical equation is
centration of sodium
hydroxide and the volume HCl (aq) +NaOH (aq) → NaCl (aq) +H 2 O ((cid:2))
of hydrochloric acid. Step 2 Amount(inmol) = Concentration(inmol/L)
2. In the solution, the vol-
×Volume(inL)
umes are converted to AmountNaOH(inmol)added = 0.1000mol/L×0.02500L
litres. If all the volumes = 2.500×10 −3mol
are expressed in the
same unit, the conversion
step is not necessary.
3. Do not drop significant
digits, even zeros, during
your calculations.
Continued ...
396 MHR • Unit 3 Solutions and Solubility
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 396
Step 3 HCl reacts with NaOH in a 1:1 ratio, so there must be
2.500×10 −3mol HCl.
Step 4 Concentration(inmol/L) = Amount(inmol)
Volume(inL)
[HCl ] =
2.500×103mol
(aq) 0.01384L
= 0.1806mol/L
Therefore, the concentration of hydrochloric acid is 0.1806 mol/L.
Check Your Solution
[HCl ] is greater than [NaOH ]. This is reasonable because a
(aq) (aq)
smaller volume of hydrochloric acid was required. As well, the
balanced equation shows a 1:1 mole ratio between these reactants.
Sample Problem
Finding Volume
Problem
What volume of 0.250 mol/L sulfuric acid, H SO , is needed to
2 4(aq)
react completely with 37.2 mL of 0.650 mol/L potassium hydroxide,
KOH ?
(aq)
What Is Required?
You need to find the volume of sulfuric acid.
What Is Given?
Concentration of sulfuric acid, H SO = 0.250 mol/L
2 4
Concentration of potassium hydroxide, KOH = 0.650 mol/L
Volume of potassium hydroxide, KOH = 37.2 mL.
Plan Your Strategy
Step 1 Write the balanced chemical equation for the reaction.
Step 2 Calculate the amount (in mol) of potassium hydroxide, based
on the volume and concentration of the potassium hydroxide
solution.
Step 3 Determine the amount (in mol) of sulfuric acid that is needed
to neutralize the potassium hydroxide.
Step 4 Find the volume of the sulfuric acid, based on the amount and
concentration of sulfuric acid needed.
Act on Your Strategy
Step 1 The balanced chemical equation is
H 2 SO 4(aq) +2KOH → K 2 SO 4(aq) +2H 2 O ((cid:2))
Step 2 Amount(inmol)ofKOH = 0.650mol/L×0.0372L
= 0.02418mol
Continued ...
Chapter 10 Acids and Bases • MHR 397
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 397
Step 3 H SO reacts with KOH in a 1:2 mole ratio. The amount of
2 4
H SO needed is
2 4
1molH 2 SO 4 = 0.01209molH 2 SO 4
2molKOH 0.2418molKOH
0.02418molKOH×1molH 2 SO 4 = 0.01209molH SO
2molKOH 2 4
Step 4 Amount(inmol)H SO
2 4
= 0.01209mol
= 0.250mol/L×VolumeH SO (inL)
2 4(aq)
VolumeH SO = 0.01209mol
2 4(aq) 0.250mol/L
= 0.04836L
Therefore, the volume of sulfuric acid that is needed is 48.4 mL.
Check Your Solution
The balanced chemical equation shows that half the amount of sulfu-
ric acid will neutralize a given amount of potassium hydroxide. The
concentration of sulfuric acid, however, is less than half the concen-
tration of potassium hydroxide. Therefore, the volume of sulfuric
acid should be greater than the volume of potassium hydroxide.
Practice Problems
10. 17.85 mL of nitric acid neutralizes 25.00 mL of 0.150 mol/L
NaOH . What is the concentration of the nitric acid?
(aq)
11. What volume of 1.015 mol/L magnesium hydroxide is needed to
neutralize 40.0 mL of 1.60 mol/L hydrochloric acid?
12. What volume of 0.150 mol/L hydrochloric acid is needed to
neutralize each solution below?
(a) 25.0 mL of 0.135 mol/L sodium hydroxide
(b) 20.0 mL of 0.185 mol/L ammonia solution
(c) 80 mL of 0.0045 mol/L calcium hydroxide
13. What concentration of sodium hydroxide solution is needed for
each neutralization reaction?
(a) 37.82 mL of sodium hydroxide neutralizes 15.00 mL of
0.250 mol/L hydrofluoric acid.
(b) 21.56 mL of sodium hydroxide neutralizes 20.00 mL of
0.145 mol/L sulfuric acid.
(c) 14.27 mL of sodium hydroxide neutralizes 25.00 mL of
0.105 mol/L phosphoric acid.
398 MHR • Unit 3 Solutions and Solubility
Acid-Base Titration
Web
LINK
In the previous Sample Problems and Practice Problems, you were given
the concentrations and volumes you needed to solve the problems. What www.school.mcgrawhill.ca/
if you did not have some of this information? Chemists often need to resources
know the concentration of an acidic or basic solution. To acquire this Sometimes a moving picture is
information, they use an experimental procedure called a titration. In a worth a thousand words. To
titration, the concentration of one solution is determined by quantitative- enhance your understanding,
your teacher will demonstrate
ly observing its reaction with a solution of known concentration. The
the titration procedure
solution of known concentration is called a standard solution. The aim of
described in this textbook. In
a titration is to find the point at which the number of moles of the stan-
addition, some web sites pro-
dard solution is stoichiometrically equal to the original number of moles
vide downloadable or real-time
of the unknown solution. This point is referred to as the equivalence titration movies to help stu-
point. At the equivalence point, all the moles of hydrogen ions that were dents visualize the procedure
present in the original volume of one solution have reacted with an equal and its techniques. Go to the
number of moles of hydroxide ions from the other solution. web site above, then to
Science Resources and to
Precise volume measurements are needed when you perform a
Chemistry 11 to see where to
titration. Chemists use special glass apparatus to collect these measure-
go next. Compare the different
ments. (See Figure 10.15.) As well, an acid-base indicator is needed to
demonstrations you can find
monitor changes in pH during the titration. and observe, including your
teacher’s. Prepare your own
set of "Titration Tips" to help
you recall important details.
Figure 10.15 A transfer pipette (bottom) measures a fixed volume of liquid,
such as 10.00 mL, 25.00 mL, or 50.0 mL. A burette (top) measures a variable
volume of liquid.
In a titration, a pipette is used to measure a precise volume of standard
solution into a flask. The flask sits under a burette that contains the
solution of unknown concentration. After adding a few drops of indicator,
you take an initial burette reading. Then you start adding the known solu-
tion, slowly, to the flask. The end-point of the titration occurs when the
indicator changes colour. The indicator is chosen so that it matches its
equivalance point.
PROBEWARE
Titration Step by Step If you have access to probe-
ware, try the Chemistry 11 lab,
The following pages outline the steps that you need to follow to prepare
Titrating an Unknown, or a
for a titration. Review these steps carefully. Then observe as your teacher
similar lab from a probeware
demonstrates them for you. At the end of this section, in Investigation
company
10-B, you will perform your own titration of a common substance: vinegar.
Chapter 10 Acids and Bases • MHR 399
Rinsing the Pipette
TITRATION TIP
A pipette is used to measure and transfer a precise
Never use your mouth in place volume of liquid. You rinse a pipette with the solu-
of a suction bulb to draw a tion whose volume you are measuring. This
liquid into a pipette. The ensures that any drops that remain inside the
liquid could be corrosive or pipette will form part of the measured volume.
poisonous. As well, you will 1.Pour a sample of standard solution into a clean,
contaminate the glass stem. dry beaker.
2.Place the pipette tip in a beaker of distilled
water. Squeeze the suction bulb. Maintain your
grip while placing it over the stem of the
pipette. (If your suction bulbs have valves, your
teacher will show you how to use them.)
3.Relax your grip on the bulb to draw up a small
volume of distilled water.
4.Remove the bulb and discard the water by
letting it drain out.
5.Rinse the pipette by drawing several millilitres
of solution from the beaker into it. Rotate and
rock the pipette to coat the inner surface with
solution. Discard the rinse. Rinse the pipette
twice in this way. It is now ready to fill with
standard solution.
Filling the Pipette
6.Place the tip of the pipette below the surface of
TITRATION TIP
the solution.
Practice removing the bulb and 7.Hold the suction bulb loosely on the end of the
replacing it with your index glass stem. Use the suction bulb to draw liquid
finger. You need to be able to up just past the etched volume mark. (See
perform this action quickly and Figure 10.16.)
smoothly. 8.As quickly and smoothly as you can, slide the
bulb off and place your index finger over the Figure 10.16 Draw a bit
end of the glass stem. more liquid than you need
9.Gently roll your finger slightly away from end of into the pipette. It is easier
the stem to let solution drain slowly out. to reduce this volume than
10. When the bottom of the meniscus aligns with it is to add more solution
the etched mark, as in Figure 10.17, press your to the pipettes.
finger back over the end of the stem. This will
prevent more solution from draining out.
11. Touch the tip of the pipette to the side of the
beaker to remove any clinging drop. See Figure
10.18. The measured volume inside the pipette
is now ready to transfer to an Erlenmeyer flask
or a volumetric flask.
Transferring the Solution
12. Place the tip of the pipette against the inside
glass wall of the flask. Let the solution drain
slowly, by removing your finger from the stem.
Figure 10.17 The bottom
13. After the solution drains, wait several seconds,
of the meniscus must align
then touch the tip to the inside wall of the flask
exactly with the etched
to remove any drop on the end. Note: You may
mark.
notice a small amount of liquid remaining in the
tip. The pipette was calibrated to retain this
Figure 10.18 You can prevent a
amount. Do not try to remove it.
“stubborn” drop from clinging to
the pipette tip by touching the tip
to the inside of the glass surface.
400 MHR • Unit 3 Solutions and Solubility
Adding the Indicator
TITRATION TIP
14. Add two or three drops of indicator to the flask
and its contents. Do not add too much indicator. If you are right-handed, the tap
Using more does not make the colour change should be on your right as you
easier to see. Also, indicators are usually weak face the burette. Use your left
acids. Too much can change the amount of hand to operate the tap. Use
base needed for neutralization. You are now your right hand to swirl the liq-
ready to prepare the apparatus for the titration.
uid in the Erlenmeyer flask. If
you are left-handed, reverse
Rinsing the Burette
this arrangement.
A burette is used to accurately measure the vol-
ume of liquid added during a titration experiment.
It is a graduated glass tube with a tap at one end.
15. To rinse the burette, close the tap and add
about 10 mL of distilled water from a wash
bottle.
16. Tip the burette to one side and roll it gently
back and forth so that the water comes in
contact with all inner surfaces.
17. Hold the burette over a sink. Open the tap, and
let the water drain out. While you do this, check
that the tap does not leak. Make sure that it
turns smoothly and easily.
18. Rinse the burette with 5 mL to 10 mL of the
solution that will be measured. Remember to
open the tap to rinse the lower portion of the
burette. Rinse the burette twice, discarding the
liquid each time.
Filling the Burette
19. Assemble a retort stand and burette clamp to
hold the burette. Place a funnel in the top of the
burette.
TITRATION TIP
20. With the tap closed, add solution until the liquid
is above the zero mark. Remove the funnel. Near the end-point, when you
Carefully open the tap. Drain the liquid into a see the indicator change
beaker until the bottom of the meniscus is at or colour as liquid enters the flask
below the zero mark. from the burette, slow the
21. Touch the tip of the burette against the beaker addition of liquid. The end-
to remove any clinging drop. Check that the point can occur very quickly.
portion of the burette that is below the tap is
filled with liquid and contains no air bubbles.
22. Record the initial burette reading in your
notebook.
23. Replace the beaker with the Erlenmeyer flask
that you prepared earlier. Place a sheet of white
paper under the Erlenmeyer to help you see the
indicator colour change that will occur near the
end-point.
Reading the Burette
TITRATION TIP
24. A meniscus reader is a small white card with a
thick black line on it. Hold the card behind the Observe the level of solution in
burette, with the black line just under the the burette so that your eye is
meniscus, as in Figure 10.20. Record the level with the bottom of the
volume added from the burette to the nearest meniscus.
Figure 10.20 A meniscus
0.05 mL.
reader helps you read the
volume of liquid in the
burette more easily
Chapter 10 Acids and Bases • MHR 401
S K I L L F O C U S
Predicting
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
The Concentration
of Acetic Acid in Vinegar
Vinegar is a dilute solution of acetic acid, Safety Precautions
CH COOH. Only the hydrogen atom that is
3
attached to an oxygen atom is acidic. Thus,
acetic acid is monoprotic. As a consumer, you Both vinegar and sodium hydroxide solutions are
can buy vinegar with different concentrations. corrosive. Wash any spills on skin or clothing
For example, the concentration of table vinegar is with plenty of water. Inform your teacher imme-
different from the concentration of the vinegar diately.
that is used for pickling foods. To maintain con-
sistency and quality, manufacturers of vinegar Procedure
need to determine the percent concentration of
1. Record the following information in your
acetic acid in the vinegar. In this investigation,
notebook. Your teacher will tell you the con-
you will determine the concentration of acetic
centration of the sodium hydroxide solution.
acid in a sample of vinegar. • concentration of NaOH (in mol/L)
(aq)
• type of vinegar solution
Prediction • volume of pipette (in mL)
Which do you predict has the greater concentra-
2. Copy the table below into your notebook, to
tion of acetic acid: table vinegar or pickling
record your observations.
vinegar? Give reasons for your prediction.
Burette Readings for the Titration of Acetic Acid
Materials Reading (mL) Trial 1 Trial 2 Trial 3
final reading
pipette
suction bulb initial reading
retort stand volume added
burette
burette clamp 3. Label a clean, dry beaker for each liquid:
3 beakers (250 mL) NaOH , vinegar, and distilled water. Obtain
(aq)
3 Erlenmeyer flasks (250 mL) each liquid. Record the type of vinegar you
labels will be testing.
meniscus reader
4. Obtain a pipette and a suction bulb. Record
sheet of white paper
the volume of the pipette for trial 1. Rinse it
funnel
with distilled water, and then with vinegar.
table vinegar
pickling vinegar 5. Pipette some vinegar into the first Erlenmeyer
sodium hydroxide solution flask. Record this amount. Add approximately
distilled water 50 mL of water. Also add two or three drops
dropper bottle containing phenolphthalein of phenolphthalein indicator.
6. Set up a retort stand, burette clamp, burette,
and funnel. Rinse the burette first with
distilled water. Then rinse it with sodium
hydroxide solution. Make sure that there are
no air bubbles in the burette. Also make sure
402 MHR • Unit 3 Solutions and Solubility
that the liquid fills the tube below the glass Conclusions
tap. Remove the funnel before beginning the
6. Compare your results with the results of other
titration.
students who used the same type of vinegar.
7. Place a sheet of white paper under the Then compare the concentration of acetic acid
Erlenmeyer flask. Titrate sodium hydroxide in table vinegar with the concentration in
into the Erlenmeyer flask while swirling the pickling vinegar. How did your results
contents. The end-point of the titration is compare with your prediction?
reached when a permanent pale pink colour
7. List several possible sources of error in this
appears. If you are not sure whether you have
investigation.
reached the end-point, take the burette read-
ing. Add one drop of sodium hydroxide, or
Application
part of a drop. Observe the colour of the solu-
tion. If you go past the end-point, the solution 8. Most shampoos are basic. Why do some peo-
will become quite pink. ple rinse their hair with vinegar after washing
it?
8. Repeat the titration twice more. Record your
results for each of these trials.
9. When you have finished all three trials,
dispose of the chemicals as directed by your
teacher. Rinse the pipette and burette with
distilled water. Leave the burette tap open.
Analysis
1. Average the two closest burette readings.
Average all three readings if they agree within
about ±0.2mL.
2. Write the chemical equation for the reaction
of acetic acid with sodium hydroxide.
3. Calculate the concentration of acetic acid in
your vinegar sample. Use the average volume
and concentration of sodium hydroxide, and
the volume of vinegar.
4. Find the molar mass of acetic acid. Then
calculate the mass of acid in the volume of
vinegar you used.
5. The density of vinegar is 1.01 g/mL. (The den-
sity of the more concentrated vinegar solution
is greater than the density of the less concen-
trated solution. You can ignore the difference,
however.) Calculate the mass of the vinegar
sample. Find the percent by mass of acetic
acid in the sample.
Chapter 10 Acids and Bases • MHR 403
Section Wrap-up
In this section, as in much of Unit 3, you combined liquid solutes and
liquid solvents. You have learned how to describe the concentration of
ions that determine the acidic or basic nature of a solution. As well, you
performed calculations to determine the concentration of acids and many
other substances in solution. In the upcoming unit, you will apply your
understanding of stoichiometry and solutions by examining the nature
and interactions of substances in the gaseous state.
Section Review
1 K/U Write a generalized word equation to describe what happens
during a neutralization reaction.
2 K/U Write a chemical equation for each neutralization reaction.
(a) KOH with HNO
3
(b) HBr with Ca(OH)
2
(c) H PO with NaOH
3 4
(d) Mg(OH) (the active ingredient in milk of magnesia, an antacid) with
2
HCl (the acid in your stomach)
3 K/U Distinguish between the equivalence point and the end-point in a
titration. Why might they be different? How would this affect the result
of a titration?
4 I A 25.0 mL sample of sulfuric acid is completely neutralized by
adding 32.8 mL of 0.116 mol/L ammonia solution. Ammonium sulfate,
(NH ) SO , and water are formed. What is the concentration of the
4 2 4
sulfuric acid?
5 I The following data were collected during a titration. Calculate the
concentration of the sodium hydroxide solution.
Titration Data
Volume of HCl 10.00 mL
(aq)
Final volume of NaOH 23.08 mL
(aq)
Initial volume of NaOH 1.06 mL
(aq)
Concentration of HCl 0.235 mol/L
(aq)
6 I You should always put the two solutions for a titration experiment
in clean, dry beakers. You do not need to dry the Erlenmeyer flask to
which you add the solutions, however, if it has been thoroughly rinsed
with distilled water. Explain the difference in these procedures.
7 C Suppose that a laboratory technician accidentally spills a dilute
solution of a strong acid on her hands, the sleeve of her lab coat, and
the laboratory bench. Explain how she would deal with this spill.
404 MHR • Unit 3 Solutions and Solubility
Review
Reflecting on Chapter 10 4. Sodium hydrogen carbonate, NaHCO
3
(commonly called sodium bicarbonate, or
Summarize this chapter in the format of your
bicarbonate of soda), is commonly used in
choice. Here are a few ideas to use as guidelines:
• Compare the properties of acids and bases. baked goods. It dissolves in water to form an
• Distinguish the two theories for explaining the alkaline solution.
(a) Is the pH of NaHCO greater or less
behaviour and composition of acids and bases. 3(aq)
• Identify conjugate acid-base pairs for selected than 7.00?
(b) Write the name and formula of an acid and a
acid-base reactions.
• Describe strong and weak acids and bases on the base that react together to form this com-
pound. Identify each as strong or weak.
basis of their dissociation.
• Explain the significance of the concentration 5. Aluminum sulfate, Al 2 (SO 4 ) 3 , is used to
of hydronium ion in describing pH. help clarify water. In aqueous solution, it is
• Dilute an acid and describe the effect on its pH. slightly acidic.
• Describe and conduct a titration procedure. (a) Is the pH of Al 2 (SO 4 ) 3(aq) greater or less
than 7.00?
Reviewing Key Terms (b) Write the name and formula of an acid and
For each of the following terms, write a sentence a base that react together to form aluminum
that shows your understanding of its meaning. sulfate. Identify each as either strong
or weak.
Arrhenius theory weak base
hydronium ion binary acid 6. Sodium hydrogen carbonate can be used to
Brønsted-Lowry theory oxoacid neutralize an acid. The hydrogen carbonate ion
conjugate acid-base pair pH is the conjugate base of which acid?
conjugate base neutralization reaction 7. Write the net ionic equation for the reaction
conjugate acid salt of aqueous sodium hydroxide with aqueous
strong acid acid-base indicator nitric acid.
weak acid titration
8. In different reactions in aqueous solution, the
strong base equivalence point
hydrogen carbonate ion can act as an acid or a
end-point
base. Write the chemical formula of the conju-
gate acid and the conjugate base of the hydro-
Knowledge/Understanding −
gen carbonate ion, HCO . Then complete
3 (aq)
1. Use the Arrhenius theory and then the the following equations. State whether the ion
Brønsted-Lowry theory to describe the follow- is a Brønsted-Lowry acid or a base.
ing concepts. If one of the theories does not (a) HCO − +H O + →
3 (aq) 3 (aq)
apply, state that this is the case. (b) HCO − +OH − →
3 (aq) (aq)
(a) composition of an acid and a base
(b) conductivity of an acidic or basic solution 9. Which of the following are conjugate acid-base
(c) interaction between an acid and water pairs? For those pairs that are not conjugates,
(d) interaction between a base and water write the correct conjugate acid or base for each
(e) conjugate acid-base pairs compound or ion.
(f) strong and weak acids and bases (a) HNO 3 /OH
−
(c) HSO 4
−
/SO 4
2−
(g) the pH of a solution (b) NH 4
+
/NH 3 (d) H 3 PO 4 /PO 4
3−
2. How does diluting an acidic or basic solution 10. In the laboratory, you have samples of three dif-
affect the pH of the solution? ferent acids of equal concentration: a 1.0 mol/L
3. Codeine is a compound that is extracted from solution of acetic acid, a 1.0 mol/L solution of
opium. It is used for pain relief. The pH of a hydrochloric acid, and a 1.0 mol/L solution of
0.020 mol/L solution of codeine is 10.26. Is sulfuric acid.
codeine an acid or a base? Is it strong or weak? (a) How would the pH of each acid solution
Explain how you decided. compare? Explain.
Chapter 10 Acids and Bases • MHR 405
(b) If samples of each acid were used in separate 17. How is a 1.0 mol/L solution of hydrochloric
titration experiments with 0.50 mol/L sodi- acid different from a 1.0 mol/L solution of
um hydroxide solution, how would the acetic acid? Suppose that you added a strip of
volume of acid required for neutralization magnesium metal to each acid. Would you
compare? State your reasoning. observe any differences in the reactions?
Explain your answer so that grade 9 students
11. Write balanced chemical equations for the
could understand it.
following reactions:
(a) calcium oxide with hydrochloric acid
Communication
(b) magnesium with sulfuric acid
18. Commercial processors of potatoes remove the
(c) sodium carbonate with nitric acid
skin by using a 10-20% by mass solution of
12. Domestic bleach is typically a 5% solution of sodium hydroxide. The potatoes are soaked in
sodium hypochlorite, NaOCl (aq) . It is made by the solution for a few minutes at 60-70˚C, after
bubbling chlorine gas through a solution of which the peel can be sprayed off using fresh
sodium hydroxide. water. You work in the laboratory at a large
(a) Write a balanced chemical equation showing food processor and must analyse a batch of
the reaction that takes place.
sodium hydroxide solution. You pipette 25.00
(b) In aqueous solution, the hypochlorite ion mL of NaOH , and find it has a mass of 25.75
(aq)
+
combines with H (aq) present in water to g. Then you titrate the basic solution against
form hypochlorous acid. Write the equation 1.986 mol/L HCI, and find it requires 30.21 mL
for this reaction. Is the hypochlorite ion of acid to reach an end point.
acting as an acid or a base? (a) Inform your supervisor what the molar con-
13. In this chapter, you are told that [H O + ] in pure centration of the sodium hydroxide is.
3
water is 1.0×10 −7 mol/L at 25˚C. Thus, two out (b) The mass percent of NaOH present must be a
minimum of 10% for the solution to be used.
of every one billion water molecules have dis-
Advise your supervisor whether or not the
sociated. Check these data by answering the
solution can be used to process more pota-
following questions.
toes, and explain your reasoning.
(a) What is the mass (in g) of 1.0 L of water?
(b) Calculate the amount (in mol) of water in 19. Ammonia is an important base, used to make
1.0 L. This is the concentration of water fertilizers, nylon, and nitric acid. The manufac-
in mol/L. ture of ammonia depends on a process discov-
(c) Divide the concentration of hydronium ions ered by Fritz Haber (1868-1934). After gather-
by the concentration of water. Your answer ing information from print or electronic
should be about 2 ppb. resources, write an obituary for Haber. Describe
his accomplishments and the effect on society
Inquiry
of plentiful supplies of ammonia.
14. 80.0 mL of 4.00 mol/L, H SO are diluted to
2 4
400.0 mL by adding water. What is the molar Making Connections
concentrationofthe sulfuric acid after dilution? 20. Limestone, chalk, and marble are all forms of
15. In a titration experiment, 25.0 mL of an aque- calcium carbonate. Limestone rock can be used
ous solution of sodium hydroxide was required to build roads, but it is a very important basic
to neutralize 50.0 mL of 0.010 mol/L compound used in large quantities by chemical
hydrochloric acid. What is the molar concen- industries. For example, limestone is used
tration of the sodium hydroxide solution? directly to make concrete and cement. It is also
16. A burette delivers 20 drops of solution per used in the manufacture of glass and in agricul-
1.0 mL. What amount (mol) of H + is present ture. Limestone is often processed to make
(aq)
quicklime, CaO, and hydrated lime (calcium
in one drop of a 0.20 mol/L HCl solution?
hydroxide), Ca(OH) .
2
406 MHR • Unit 3 Solutions and Solubility
(a) Research the uses of quicklime and hydrated 8.a and b 9.(a)HF(aq) +H2O(l) →H3O+ (aq) +F− (aq) (b)HF/F−;
lime. Investigate one of these uses further. H2O/H3O+ 10.(a)H2PO4 −/HPO4 2− and CO3 2−/HCO3 −
(b) Design a poster illustrating the use you (b)HCOOH/HCOO−and CN−/HCN (c)H2PO4 −/HPO4 2− and
decided to research. Your poster should be
OH−/H2O 10.2: 3.weak 4.potassium permanganate; permangan-
both informative and visually interesting.
ic acid, HMnO4 5.(a)sulfuric acid, H2SO4 (b)hydrofluoric acid,
HF (c)hydrosulfuric acid, H2S(d)bromous acid, HBr2 7.egg
Include a bibliography showing the
white, camembert cheese, beets, yogurt, sauerkraut
resources you found useful. 8.(a)7.4 (b)1.4 9. 2.90 10.1.0 mol/L; concentrations greater than
this give negative pH values, but this gives no advantage over
21. On several occasions during the past few years,
the actual concentration of H3O+ 10.3: 1.acid + base = salt +
you have studied the environmental issue of
water 4.0.304 mol/L 5.0.107 mol/L
acid rain. Now that you have further developed
your understanding of acids and bases in this
chapter, reflect on your earlier understandings.
(a) List two facts about acid rain that you now
understand in a more comprehensive way.
Explain what is different between your pre-
vious and your current understanding in
each case.
(b) Identify three questions that your teacher
could assign as a research project on acid
rain. The emphasis of the research must be
on how an understanding of chemistry can
contribute clarifying the questions and
possible solutions involved in this issue.
Develop a rubric that would be used to
assess any student who is assigned this
research project.
22. Research the use of hypochlorous acid in the
management of swimming pools and write a
report on your findings. Include a discussion
on the importance of controlling pool water.
Answers to Practice Problems and
Short Answers to Section Review Questions
Practice Problems: 1.HCN/CN− and H2O/H3O+ 2.H2O/OH−and
CH3COO−/CH3COOH 3.as an acid:
HS−
(aq)
+H2O((cid:2)) ↔S2−
(aq)
+H3O+
(aq)
; as a base:
HS−
(aq)
+H2O((cid:2)) ↔H2S(aq) +OH−
(aq)
4.(a)HBr; bromate; Br−
(b)hydrogen sulfide, HS−; sulfide, S2 − 5.(a)nitric acid, HNO3 ;
nitrate, NO3 − (b)nitrous acid, HNO2 ; nitrite, NO2 − (c)hyponi-
trous acid, HNO; hyponitrite, NO−(d)phosphoric acid, H3PO4 ;
dihydrogen phosphate, H2PO4 −, hydrogen phosphate, HPO4 2−,
phosphate, PO4 3−(e)phosphorous acid, H3PO3 ; dihydrogen
phosphite, H2PO3 −, hydrogen phosphite, HPO3 2−, phosphite,
PO3 3−(f)periodic acid, HlO4 ; periodate, IO4 − 6.(a)2.57 (b)7.138
(c)4.01 (d)11.082 7.pH = 2.30; acidic 8.3.54; acidic 9.(a)2.20
(b)9.181; basic 10.0.210 mol/L 11.31.5 mL 12.(a)22.5 mL
(b)24.7 mL (c)4.8 mL 13.(a)0.0992 mol/L (b)0.269 mol/L
(c)0.552 mol/L
Section Review: 10.1: 1.(a)B and D (b)A (C, although unintended,
would also be correct) (c)A, B, D (d)no (e)litmus test, for
example 5.(a)H2O(b)HCO3 − 6.(a)NO3 − (b)SO4 2− 7.c and d
Chapter 10 Acids and Bases • MHR 407
An Issue to Analyze
UNIT 3
Island at Risk:
A Simulation
Background
Would you rather have fish—or chips? People on
Prince Edward Island are discovering that their sources
of both of these food items are increasingly at risk.
The fertile red soil of Prince Edward Island is
famous for potato growing. Agricultural corporations
have been increasing their potato plantings on this
island province. In the process, they have been elimi- Suggestions for dealing with this problem have
nating other crops, which has led to a monoculture. included:
(“Monoculture” refers to the growing of a single crop • creating a mandatory untilled area spanning
in an area.) Potato pests are posing a huge threat to 20 m next to waterways;
this profitable cash crop, however. Part of the problem • growing genetically engineered potatoes that are
results from the fact that the potato fields are very more blight-resistant. These genetically modified
close together. To combat the pests—potato bugs, in potatoes would contain genes from bacteria that
particular—farmers are applying more and more pesti- have insecticidal properties;
cides, fertilizers, and herbicides to the potato fields. • employing alternative fertilization and pesticide
methods to reduce the amount of chemicals used
on the potato crop; and
• rotating crops (that is, alternating types of crops
from year to year) so that the spread of potato
bugs and the overuse of soil would be less of
a problem.
Plan and Present
1 Look up the properties of sodium arsenate in either
the CRC Handbook or the Merck Manual. As well,
search the Internet for an MSDS sheet about
sodium arsenate.
2 Using your knowledge of solutions and dissolving,
explain how the chemicals from the potato fields
What are the environmental effects of this heavy
end up in the water with the fish. Make a diagram,
use of pesticides (insecticides and herbicides)? After
a poster, or a PowerPointTMpresentation that clearly
heavy rains on the island, large numbers of dead fish
illustrates the processes involved in this type of
have been found in the ocean, and washed up on the
aquatic pollution.
shore near the potato farms. The suspected cause is
the leaching of sodium arsenite and other pesticides 3 Provide a minimum of two advantages and two
used in the potato fields. Sodium arsenate is a chemi- disadvantages of each of the four possible solutions
cal used to kill both weeds and insects. If the poison- to the problem.
ing of the ocean waters continues, Prince Edward 4 The provincial government in Charlottetown has
Island’s unique seafood industry will come to an end. decided that action must be taken, in some form or
another. The following people and organizations
have been invited to participate on a board to
develop an action plan:
408 MHR • Unit 3 Solutions and Solubility
Assessment
After you analyze this issue,
(cid:2) Assess the quality and practicality of
your solution.
(cid:2) Assess your solution based on how clearly
•the P. E. I. Potato Board
the chemistry concepts are expressed
•the scientists who helped develop the genetically
and communicated.
engineered, blight-resistant potato variety
•the corporations who want to buy the potatoes
and process them
2 From what you learned in Unit 3 about solutions
•people who fish for their living
and water treatment, do you think there could be
•potato farmers
other chemical-based solutions to this problem in
(a) Your class will be divided into groups, and each
the future? Give a chemical explanation of how the
group will research the point of view of one of
leachates might be contained, if such processing
these interest groups. Consider questions such
were possible.
as these:
3 Try to suggest some safe, alternative methods of
• To what extent do landowners have the right
reducing weeds, insects, and harmful microorgan-
to determine how they use their land?
isms. For example, could boiling water be used as
• What recourse should the fishers on P.E.I.
an effective herbicide? Would this method of
have available to them to respond to the
reducing weeds cause more problems than it
threat posed to their livelihood?
would solve? Why or why not?
• What possible consumers’ rights need to be
assessed in analyzing this issue?
(b) Before developing an action plan, each group
should decide on and state clearly their motive
and their mandate. In other words, what is the
reason for their existence as a group and to
whom is the group accountable? For example:
• Are the scientists working for biotechnology
companies or are they doing pure research?
• What is each group’s present policy regarding
issues such as environmental protection
and sustainability?
• What points might be included in each
group’s short-term and long-term action plan?
(c) Make a one-page summary of your points to
hand out to other members at the meeting. A
large diagram, poster, overhead transparency,
or PowerPoint™slide will help your group
illustrate how your action plan:
• will affect the environment
• acknowledges the scientific realities of the
leaching situation
• satisfies the needs of other interestgroups
(d) Hold a meeting of the action plan board, to
present all points of view, and to try to reach
a consensus on an action plan.
Evaluate the Results Web
LINK
1 (a) Take notes on every point of view presented
during the meeting. www.school.mcgrawhill.ca/resources/
(b) Decide what you think the best solution is, for Go to McGraw-Hill Ryerson’s Chemistry 11 web site at
everyone involved. Why do you consider it to be
the above address, and then follow the links to access
the best solution?
further information.
Unit 3 An Issue to Analyze • MHR 409
Review
Knowledge/Understanding (h) The conjugate base When solute is added to
−
of HSO an aqueous solution, the
3
True/False solute dissolves
In your notebook, indicate whether each statement (i) A solution more A substance that
is true or false. Correct each false statement. acidic than one produces H+ when
with pH = 9 dissolved in water
1. The solubility of a gas increases with increased
temperature. (j) A solution more A solution that contains
basic than one a relatively small
2. Molar concentration refers to the amount, in
with pH = 9 amount of solute
moles, of solute dissolved in one kilogram of
solvent.
Multiple Choice
3. The maximum amount of a solute that will
In your notebook, write the letter of the best
dissolve in a solvent at a certain temperature
answer for each of the following questions.
is called its solubility.
11. Which of the following would best indicate
4. The term insoluble has a precise meaning.
that a sample of water is pure?
5. The component of a solution present in the (a) Measure its boiling point.
smaller amount is called the solvent.
(b) Measure its pH.
6. The molar concentration of a solution contain- (c) Add it to a sample of pure water and see if it
ing 4 mol of solute dissolved in 2 L of solvent is miscible (dissolves infinitely).
is 2 mol/L. (d) Pass an electric current through it to see
7. The rate at which a solid solute dissolves in if it decomposes into hydrogen gas and
water can usually be increased by increasing oxygen gas.
the temperature of the solution. (e) See if sodium chloride dissolves in it.
8. Each ten-fold increase in the concentration of 12. If 1.00 g of solid sodium chloride is dissolved
hydronium ions in a solution increases the pH in enough water to make 350 mL of solution,
of the solution by one unit. what is the molar concentration of the solu-
tion?
9. Hydrobromic acid is a strong acid.
(a) 5.98 mol/L
Matching (b) 1.67 × 10 −1 mol/L
(c) 4.89 × 10 −2 mol/L
10. Match each description in column B with the (d) 5.98 × 10 −3 mol/L
correct term in column A. (e) 4.88 × 10 −5 mol/L
Column A Column B 13. What volume of 5.00 × 10 −2 mol/L Ca(NO )
3 2
(a) Unsaturated solution A solution with pH = 10 solution will contain 2.50 × 10 −2 mol of nitrate
(b) Saturated solution NH 3 ions?
(c) Dilute solution SO 2− (a) 200 mL
3
(b) 250 mL
(d) Concentrated H SO
2 3
(c) 500 mL
solution
(d) 750 mL
(e) Arrhenius acid A solution that contains
(e) 1.00 L
a relatively large amount
14. If 40.0 mL of 6.00 mol/L sulfuric acid is diluted
of solute
to 120 mL by the addition of water, what is the
(f) Brønsted–Lowry A solution with pH = 8
molar concentration of the sulfuric acid after
base
dilution?
(g) An example of a When solute is added to (a) 5.00 × 10 −2 mol/L
weak acid an aqueous solution, the (b) 7.50 × 10 −2 mol/L
solute does not dissolve
(c) 1.00 mol/L
410 MHR • Unit 3 Solutions and Solubility
(d) 2.0 mol/L 23. High levels of phosphorus are not toxic, but
(e) 4.0 mol/L can cause digestive problems. The allowable
15. When solutions of sodium chloride, NaCl, and drinking water concentration is 0.05 ppm.
silver nitrate, AgNO , are mixed, what is the What is the maximum mass of phosphorus
3
that could be present in a 250 mL glass of tap
net ionic equation for the reaction that results?
(a) Na + + NO − → NaNO water?
(aq) 3(aq) 3(aq)
(b) Ag + + Cl − → AgCl 24. Is a 1% solution of table salt, NaCl , more
(aq) (aq) (s) (aq)
(c) Na + + NO − + Ag + + Cl − → concentrated, less concentrated, or at the same
(aq) 3 (aq) (aq) (aq)
AgCl + NaNO concentration as a 1% solution of sugar,
(s) 3(aq)
(d) Na + (aq) + NO 3 − (aq) + Ag + (aq) + Cl − (aq) → C 12 H 22 O 11(aq) ? Explain.
AgCl + Na + + NO −
(s) (aq) 3 (aq) 25. Bones and teeth consist mostly of a compound
(e) Na + + NO − + Ag + + Cl − →
(aq) 3 (aq) (aq) (aq) called hydroxyapatite, Ca (PO ) (OH) . This
NaNO 3(aq) + Ag + (aq) + Na + (aq) compound contains PO 3− 10 and 4 O 6 H − ion 2 s.
4
16. The acidity in a sample of soil could be (a) Do you expect hydroxyapatite will be an
neutralized by adding: acid or a base?
(a) sodium chloride (b) Foods that contain sucrose form lactic acid
(b) ammonium nitrate in the mouth and the pH drops. As a result,
(c) potassium sulfate eating candy promotes a reaction between
+
(d) calcium oxide hydroxyapatite and H (aq) . Balance the
(e) magnesium phosphate skeleton reaction:
Ca (PO ) (OH) + H + →
10 4 6 2 (aq)
Short Answers CaHPO 4(s) + H 2 O ((cid:2)) + Ca2+ (aq)
(c) At lower pH values, the CaHPO also
In your notebook, write a sentence or a short para- 4(s)
+
reacts with H :
graph to answer each of the following questions: (aq)
CaHPO + H + → Ca2+ + H PO −
17. Is a saturated solution always a concentrated 4(s) (aq) (aq) 2 4 (aq)
Dentists and toothpaste manufacturers warn
solution? Give an example to explain your
that eating candy promotes tooth decay.
answer.
What chemical evidence have you seen to
18. How can a homogeneous mixture be distin- support this advice?
guished from a heterogeneous mixture? Give
26.(a) Why does water from different regions vary
one example of each.
in its hardness?
19. List three different ways in which the concen- (b) Why is filtration not an effective method to
tration of a solution could be described. remove the hardness from water?
20. What would you observe if a saturated solution (c) Why should hard water be treated before it is
of sodium carbonate (commonly called washing heated in a hot water boiler?
soda) at room temperature was cooled to 5˚C? 27. Vinegar is added to a kettle with a build-up of
21. Explain why calcium hydroxide (solubility scale due to hard water. What would you
0.165 g per 100 g water at 20˚C) is much more expect to observe? Explain.
soluble than magnesium hydroxide (solubility 28. Chloroform and diethyl ether were among the
0.0009 g per 100 g water at 20˚C). first substances used as anaesthetics. Both are
22. Iron concentrations of 0.2 to 0.3 parts per non-polar substances.
million in water can cause fabric staining (a) Would you expect either or both of these
when washing clothes. A typical wash uses substances to be soluble in water? Explain.
12 L of water. What is the maximum mass of (b) Write a sentence or two to describe how you
iron that can be present so that the clothes will think these substances are able to get from
not be stained? the lungs to the brain.
Unit 3 Review • MHR 411
Inquiry (ii) Bromophenol blue
(iii) Phenolphthalein
29. A Chemist has a large beaker containing
ice-cold water, and another containing boiling (b) An aqueous solution of sodium acetate
water. The laboratory is well-equipped with used in photographic development makes
other apparatus. phenol red indicator red, and phenolph-
(a) Explain how the chemist could maximize thalein pink. What is the pH of this sodium
the solubility of the following solutes in acetate solution?
water (following appropriate safety
Communicating
precautions):
(i) magnesium chloride, MgCl 2 , used to fire- 32. Lead is highly toxic when absorbed into the
proof wood body, especially for young children. A level of
(ii) benzene, a non-polar liquid used by the 10 micrograms of lead per decilitre of blood is
industry and found in gasoline cause for concern. Do research, then write a
(iii) carbon monoxide, CO, a poisonous gas report describing the health effects of lead.
formed by incomplete combustion of Include information on the sources of this
hydrocarbons heavy metal and on how lead might be
(b) Explain how you could minimize the absorbed by a child.
solubility of the same solutes in water.
33. Sulfuric acid is the chemical produced in the
30. Design an experiment to collect data on the largest quantity in the world. Research some of
pH of a stream, over a period of one year. the uses of sulfuric acid. Design a poster for
Why might the pH vary at different times of students in a younger grade, illustrating one
the year? way in which this acid is used. Your poster
31. The table below shows the colours of various should be informative and visually interesting.
indicators at different pH values. 34. In the past, scurvy was a disease that killed
(a) If a vinegar solution is at pH 5, what colour many sailors. James Lind discovered that eating
would you expect the following indicators to citrus fruits prevents scurvy. Citrus fruits
show if placed into separate samples of the contain ascorbic acid (vitamin C). Research the
vinegar? life of James Lind, and write a brief biography.
(i) Thymol blue
pH
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14
Crystal violet
Thymol blue
2,4-Dinitrophenol
Bromphenol blue
Bromcresol green
Methyl red
Alizarin
Bromthymol blue
Phenol red
Phenolphthalein
Alizarin yellow R
412 MHR • Unit 3 Solutions and Solubility
Making Connections
35. The disposal of nuclear waste presents many
difficulties. Some proposals suggest burying the
waste in glass or ceramic containers deep in
the earth.
(a) Why would these containers be superior to
containers made of metal or concrete?
(b) What are some of the concerns related to
burying radioactive waste?
(c) Make a suggestion on a different way to dis-
pose of radioactive waste. Include a list of
the pros and cons of your suggestion.
36. The following is a short list of some weak bases
and their uses. Which ones are
Brønsted–Lowry bases, but not Arrhenius
bases?
(a) ammonia, NH , used in the manufacture of
3
fertilizers, plastics, and explosives
(b) zinc oxide, ZnO, a white pigment used in
paints and cosmetics
(c) copper(II) hydroxide, Cu(OH) , used to kill
2
fungi and bacteria
(d) hydrazine, N H , a colourless liquid that can
2 4
be used as a rocket fuel
37. In 1963, a treaty was signed by the US, UK, and
USSR to ban the atmospheric testing of atomic
weapons. Previous testing of atomic weapons
had added radioactive isotopes of strontium
(Sr-90) and cesium (Cs-137) to the atmosphere.
Eventually, these pollutants fell to the ground
and may have entered the food chain.
(a) Which would you expect to form more
soluble compounds, strontium or cesium?
Explain your answer.
(b) State two important factors that might
help you to determine the health risks of
COURSE
these isotopes.
CHALLENGE
Think about these questions as you plan for your
Chemistry Course Challenge.
• How might you use your knowledge of solutions to
analyze the purity of a sample of water?
• How could you precipitate out contaminants to purify
a sample of water?
• What dissolved substances might end up in water as
it passes through rock? How might you identify these
substances? How could you extract them from the
contaminated water?
Unit 3 Review • MHR 413
Gases and
Atmospheric Chemistry
D
UNIT 4 CONTENTS
id you realize that air turbulence
CHAPTER 11
is caused by the behaviour of gases?
The Behaviour of Gases
Turbulence can be caused by
CHAPTER 12 changes in air pressure in the
Exploring Gas Laws atmosphere. Airplanes are designed,
however, to adjust to the behaviour
UNIT 4 ISSUE
of atmospheric gases. The combus-
The Cost of Getting Around
tion in the engines, the shape of the
airplane, and the air mixture that
passengers breathe are all designed
UNIT 4 OVERALL EXPECTATIONS to take gas behaviour into account.
Gas behaviour and gas reactions
What laws govern the
are part of everyday life. For exam-
behaviour of gases?
ple, photosynthesis is a reaction
What are the relationships
that uses carbon dioxide gas, along
between the temperature,
pressure, volume, and number with other reactants, to produce
of moles of a gas? oxygen gas. High in the atmosphere,
ozone gas interacts with dangerous
What modern technologies
depend on gas chemistry? ultra-violet light to protect us from
the Sun’s harsh rays.
What environmental phenom-
Scientists study gases to under-
ena and issues are related to
gases? stand how they react. This under-
standing can help prevent further
damage to the environment. It also
leads to advances in gas-related
Unit Issue Prep
technology. Carbonated soft drinks,
You probably ride in a car or a bus air bags, medical anaesthetics, scuba
several times a week, if not every
equipment, and rocket engines are
day. What gases do these vehicles
all based on gas chemistry.
produce? How can we prevent
In this unit, you will learn
environmental harm from vehicle
about the relationships between the
emissions? Think through this issue
as you study the material in Unit 4. pressure, temperature, volume, and
You will have a chance to debate number of moles of a gas. You will
your point of view with your see how all these relationships are
classmates at the end of the unit. combined in the ideal gas law: an
equation that predicts the behaviour
of a gas in almost any situation.
416
416
The Behaviour of Gases
H
ow many gases are shown in the main photograph on the opposite Chapter Preview
page? The only gas you can actually see is the water vapour in the clouds.
11.1 States of Matter and the
In fact, however, many gases are present. Our atmosphere is made up of a
Kinetic Molecular
mixture of different gases. The most important of these gases is oxygen,
Theory
which we need to breathe. But did you know that most of the air you
11.2 Gas Pressure and
breathe is composed of nitrogen gas? This fact is well known to deep-sea
Volume
divers, who encounter problems with nitrogen gas when diving far below
11.3 Gases and Temperature
the surface of the ocean.
Changes
Gases are important in many different areas, from medical technology
11.4 Combined Gas Law
to the food industry. In this chapter, you will learn how particles behave
Calculations
in the gaseous, liquid, and solid states. You will also learn about laws
11.5 Gas Applications
that predict the behaviour of gases under different conditions of pressure,
temperature, and volume. As well, you will discover some of the impor-
tant ways in which gases are used in everyday life.
A knowledge of gases is
a necessary part of many
different fields of study. Concepts and Skills
How are gases being You Will Need
used in this photograph?
Before you begin this chapter,
review the following concepts
and skills:
(cid:2) significant digits
(Chapter 1, Section 1.2)
(cid:2) unit analysis problem
solving (Appendix D)
(cid:2) the behaviour of atoms
and molecules (Chapter 3,
Sections 3.1, 3.2, and 3.3)
Figure 11.1
Chapter 11 The Behaviour of Gases • MHR 417
11.1 States of Matter and
the Kinetic Molecular Theory
Section Preview/ Most of the universe is composed of plasma, a state of matter that exists at
Specific Expectations incredibly high temperatures (>5000˚C). Under normal conditions, matter
on Earth can only exist in the other three physical states, namely, the
In this section, you will
solid, liquid, or gaseous states. As you learned in an earlier course, the
(cid:2) explainstates of matter in
particle theory describes matter in all states as being composed of tiny
terms of intermolecular
forces and the motion of invisible particles, which can be atoms, ions, or molecules. In this section,
particles you will learn how these particles behave in each state. You will also
(cid:2) performan ExpressLab to learn about the forces that cause their behaviour.
determine if gases occupy
space Solids and Liquids
(cid:2) describea gas using the In previous courses, you learned about the properties of the different
kinetic molecular theory
states of matter. You may recall that both solids and liquids are
(cid:2) communicateyour incompressible. That is, the particles cannot squeeze closer together,
understanding of the follow-
or compress. The incompressible nature of solids and liquids is not
ing terms and concepts:
due to the fact that particles are touching. On the contrary, the particle
condensation,kinetic
theory states that there is empty space between all particles of matter.
molecular theory of gases,
ideal gas The incompressibility of solids and liquids arises instead from the fact
that these particles cannot move independently of each other. That is,
the movement of one particle affects the movement of other particles,
or is restricted by them.
This is especially true for solids. The particles of a solid are held
together in a framework, called a crystal lattice. In a crystal lattice, the
positions of solid particles are relatively fixed. This explains why solids
have definite shapes: the particles are unable to slip past each other and
thus change the shape of the solid.
Like solids, liquid particles cannot move independently of one
another. They can slip past each other enough, however, to flow and
change shape.
Another property of states of matter is their motion. According to the
particle theory, all particles that make up matter are in constant motion.
In solids, the range of motion of the particles is the most restricted. Each
particle of a solid is only able to vibrate around a fixed point in the lattice
(see Figure 11.2). This is called vibrational motion. Since solid particles
are fixed in space, the degree of disorder is very low.
Particles in the liquid state can move more freely than particles in the
solid state, although not entirely independently. Liquid particles move
with rotational motion as well as vibrational motion. This means that the
particles can rotate and change position. It explains why liquids are able
to flow and change shape, but keep the same volume. Since liquid parti-
cles move around more than solid particles, the liquid state has a higher
degree of disorder, as shown in Figure 11.3.
To summarise the discussion, particles in solids and liquids are
Figure 11.2 The arrangement of
incompressible and thus have definite volumes. The particles in each state
particles in a solid. Particles
vibrate in a fixed position relative cannot move independently of each other. Therefore they are relatively
to one another. They are unable to restricted in their motion. How are the properties of gases different from
move past each other. those of solids and liquids?
418 MHR • Unit 4 Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
The Gas State
Unlike solids and liquids, particles in the gaseous state are able to move
independently of one another. Gas particles are able to move from one
point in space to another. This is called translational motion. Thus, gas
particles move with all three types of motion: vibrational, rotational,
and translational. Gas particles move through space in random fashion.
However, they do travel in straight lines until their course is altered by
collisions with other particles. Because gas particles move freely, there is
a high degree of disorder in a gaseous state.
Gas particles move much faster than liquid particles. Liquids
always flow to the lowest point because they are still greatly influenced by
gravity. Because gas particles move so quickly, gravity does not affect
them as much. Gases flow in all directions, including upward against
gravity, until all of the available empty space is occupied. This is why
gases expand to fill a container. (See Figure 11.4.)
Gases can be compressed, unlike both solids and liquids. What is
different about their particle arrangement that allows for this? The space
between gas particles is much larger than the space between liquid or
solid particles. Even if gas particles are moved closer together through
compression, the distance between each particle is still very large. The
particles remain in the gaseous state. When gas molecules are compressed
further, eventually the forces between molecules become strong enough to
Figure 11.3 Particles in liquids
hold the gas molecules together. At this point, the gas changes to the liq-
are not held in a fixed position
uid state. This is known as condensation.
relative to other particles. They
can slide over and past one
Forces Between Particles another.
You have examined some properties of solids, liquids, and gases. You
have seen how the motion of the particles affects these properties. Now
you will examine how the particles affect each other.
The particle theory states that there are attractive forces between
particles. The weaker the attractive force is between particles, the freer the
particles are to move. Therefore, attractive forces between particles are at
their strongest in the solid state. Attractive forces are at their weakest in
the gaseous state.
The strength of attractive forces between particles in any physical
state depends on two major factors: type of force and temperature. The
effect of temperature, or kinetic energy, on the state of a substance will be
covered in greater detail later on in this section.
Attractions Between Charged Particles
What types of attractive forces exist between particles? In Chapter 3, you
learned that oppositely charged particles attract each other due to electro-
static attraction. Ionic bonding is one example of electrostatic attraction.
A positive ion (an atom or molecule that has lost electrons) is attracted to
a negative ion (an atom or molecule that has gained electrons). Ions form
very strong ionic bonds. Since these attractive forces are so strong, ionic
compounds usually exist in nature as solids. For example, table salt
(sodium chloride, NaCl) is a solid crystalline substance. It has a high
melting point and a high boiling point.
Figure 11.4 Gas particles move
freely in all directions, bouncing
off each other as well as off the
walls of their container.
Chapter 11 The Behaviour of Gases • MHR 419
Attractions Between Polar Molecules
Not all particles are charged, but attractions can still form between them.
What is a dipole? Go back to
You learned about intermolecular forces in Chapter 3. Intermolecular
Chapter 3 or Chapter 8 to
forces are forces that exist between neutral molecules, or between
refresh your memory.
molecules and ions.
You know that some molecules are polar due to their asymmetrical
shapes. Sulfur dioxide (SO ) is one example of a polar molecule. These
2
molecules have a permanent dipole effect. This means that one end of
the molecule is more positive, and the other end is more negative.
Polar molecules attract ions and other polar molecules.
The partially positive end of one molecule is attracted to
the partially negative end of another molecule. This pattern
continues throughout the substance. These dipole–dipole
forces of attraction are not as strong as ionic bonds. Thus sub-
stances made up of polar molecules can exist as liquids and
gases. For example, ethanol (CH CH OH) is polar, and exists as
3 2
a liquid. You know this liquid as rubbing alcohol. Hydrogen
chloride (HCl) is also polar. It is a gas under normal conditions
as shown in Figure 11.5.
Attractions Between Non-Polar Molecules
What about substances made of non-polar molecules? You
Figure 11.5 Dipole–dipole learned in Chapter 3 that weak dispersion forces form between
interactions between polar HCl non-polar molecules. As temporary dipoles form, they cause molecules to
molecules move closer together. However, these attractions are temporary and weak.
Thus, most small non-polar molecules do not hold together long enough
to maintain their solid or liquid forms. As a result, most small non-polar
molecules exist as gases at room temperature. For example, carbon diox-
ide (CO ) is a gas at normal temperatures.
2
The Relationship Between Size and State
Dispersion forces are also the primary forces of attraction between large
non-polar molecules. However, as these molecules increase in size, their
Hydrogen bonding is a very
melting and boiling points rise. For example, methane (CH ) is a small
strong type of dipole-dipole 4
non-polar molecule. It has a very low boiling point and exists as a gas at
interaction. Go back to Chapter
room temperature. Pentane (C H ) is a larger non-polar molecule.
8 to review how this type of 5 12
It has a higher boiling point, so it exists as a liquid at room temperature.
intermolecular force works.
Pentane has more sites along its length than methane does where tempo-
rary dipoles can form. The dispersion forces add up, so that it takes
more energy overall to separate the molecules. This leads to a higher
boiling point.
To summarize, the state of a substance depends on the forces between
Electronic Learning Partner the particles of that substance. If the forces are very strong, that substance
is likely to exist as a solid. If the forces are weaker, that substance will
If you are having difficulty exist as a liquid, or as a gas. The state of a non-polar substance also
visualizing molecules in the
depends on the size of the molecule. Smaller non-polar molecules are
different states of matter, go to
more likely to be gases. Larger non-polar molecules will probably exist as
the Chemistry 11 Electronic
liquids or even solids. Table 11.1 shows the forces discussed in this sec-
Learning Partner.
tion ranked in order of strength.
420 MHR • Unit 4 Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
Table 11.1 Attractive Forces
strong forces weak forces
Force Ionic Polar (dipole–dipole) Dispersion
between ions between molecules between molecules
Type of force
(intramolecular) (intermolecular) (intermolecular)
usually solid liquid or gas liquid or gas
State
(can also be solid)
Example NaCl (s) CH 3 CH 2 OH ( (cid:2) ) , HCl (g) C 5 H 12( (cid:2) ) , CH 4(g), CO 2(g)
The Effect of Kinetic Energy on the State of a Substance
There is one more factor that affects the state of a substance: temperature, What kind of molecular forces
which is related to kinetic energy. A hotter substance with high kinetic would you expect for KI, SCl ,
6
energy is more likely to overcome attractive forces between molecules, and SiO? Use diagrams to
2
and exist as a gas. A cooler substance with low kinetic energy is more explain your answer. Compare
their melting and boiling points.
likely to be a solid or a liquid. This explains why heating a substance
causes a change in state. When a solid is heated, it gains kinetic energy.
Eventually it will melt, and become a liquid. When you add kinetic
energy by heating a liquid, it will boil and become a gas. Earlier in this
section, you learned that gases move much more quickly than liquids or
solids. This is because gases have high kinetic energy.
Kinetic Molecular Theory of Gases
The particle theory of matter does not discuss the kinetic energy of parti-
cles. Kinetic energy is important, however, when describing the unique
properties of gases.
The kinetic molecular theory of gases makes the following
assumptions:
• The volume of an individual gas molecule is negligible compared
to the volume of the container holding the gas. This means that
individual gas molecules, with virtually no volume of their own,
are extremely far apart and most of the container is “empty” space.
• There are neither attractive nor repulsive forces between gas
molecules,
• Gas molecules have high translational energy. They move randomly
in all directions, in straight lines. (See Figure 11.6, on page 423.)
• When gas molecules collide with each other or with a container
wall, the collisions are perfectly elastic. This means that when gas
molecules collide, somewhat like billiard balls, there is no loss of
kinetic energy.
• The average kinetic energy of gas molecules is directly related to
the temperature. The greater the temperature, the greater the
average motion of the molecules and the greater their average
kinetic energy.
The kinetic molecular theory describes a hypothetical gas called an
ideal gas. In an ideal gas, the gas particles take up hardly any space. Also,
the particles of an ideal gas do not attract each other.
Chapter 11 The Behaviour of Gases • MHR 421
ExpressLab Do Gases Take Up Space?
Not everything can be seen with the unaided
eye. Looking at a solid or a liquid, it is easy to
see that they have mass and volume. Most gases
are colourless. How can we “see” the volume of
a gas?
Materials
1 L or 2 L clean plastic soft drink or juice bottle
round balloon
pointed scissors
Safety Precautions
Be careful with the sharp point of the scissors
when piercing the plastic bottle.
Procedure
1. Insert the balloon into the bottle, holding the
open end. Stretch the open end of the balloon
over the lip of the bottle.
2. Step 3 will ask you to inflate the balloon as
large as you can. Before you do Step 3, predict
Analysis
how much you will be able to inflate the bal-
loon. Record your prediction in your notebook. 1. Was your prediction in Step 2 verified in Step
3? If you had problems inflating the balloon in
3. Inflate the balloon inside the bottle. How large
Step 3, explain why.
did it get? Record your observations in your
notebook. 2. Was there a difference in how much you were
able to inflate the balloon after you punctured
4. Using the sharp end of a pair of scissors,
a hole in the bottle? If there was, explain why.
puncture a hole in the middle of the bottom of
the plastic bottle. Inflate the balloon again. 3. From your observations in this activity, do
Record your observations in your notebook. gases take up space? Explain your answer.
Why Use the Kinetic Molecular Theory?
How and why did scientists formulate the kinetic molecular theory?
Experiments into gas behaviour demonstrate that, under normal tempera-
tures and pressures, nearly all gases behave in similar and predictable
ways. The properties and behaviours of real gases can be generalized into
a theory of an ideal gas. This generalization makes it possible for us to
calculate mathematically, with a high degree of accuracy, how real gases
will behave under varying conditions.
Of course, no gas is really “ideal.” The ideal gas theory ignores certain
facts about real gases. For example, an ideal gas particle does not take up
any space. In fact, you know that all particles of matter must take up
space. Gas particles are small and far apart, however. Thus the space
occupied by the particles is insignificant compared to the total volume
of the container. You will learn more about the behaviour of real gases
in Chapter 12.
422 MHR • Unit 4 Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
Figure 11.6 This diagram
shows the possible path of one
gas molecule inside a volleyball.
In a sample of gas, there are
countless molecules moving in
straight lines. They rebound off
each other and the inner wall
of the volleyball.
Section Wrap-up
The molecular-level interpretation of gas behaviour given by the kinetic CHEM
molecular theory helps to explain the macroscopic, or “larger picture,” FACT
properties of gases in the real world. One of the most important properties
Oxygen molecules in the
of gases is their compressibility—how they react to the application of an
atmosphere, at room tempera-
external force. In the next section, you will observe how gases behave
ture, travel at an average
under pressure. Later in this chapter, you will learn about some interest- speed of 443 m/s. This is
ing applications of pressurized gases. approximately 1600 km/h!
Section Review
1 K/U Using the kinetic molecular theory of matter, explain each of the
following observations.
(a) Gases are more compressible than liquids.
(b) The density of gases is less than that of solids.
2 K/U In your own words, describe the characteristics of an ideal gas.
3 MC Using your knowledge of intermolecular forces, predict the state
of each substance at room temperature. Explain your answer.
(a) hexane (C H )
6 14
(b) hydrogen fluoride (HF)
(c) potassium chloride (KCl)
4 I Explain each of the following observations.
(a) Metals expand when heated, yet contract in cold weather.
(b) Gases have no fixed volume.
(c) A certain amount of moles of water occupies much more space as a
gas than as a liquid.
5 C How does the degree of disorder of a gas compare to that of a liquid
or a solid? Explain your answer.
6 K/U Describe the motion of a gas particle.
7 K/U What effect does heating have on the particles of a liquid?
8 (a) C Draw five boxes in your notebook. Inside them, illustrate the
motion of gas particles according to the kinetic molecular theory.
(b) Draw another five boxes underneath the five boxes in (a).
Illustrate how you think the molecules of a real gas might move
in comparison.
Chapter 11 The Behaviour of Gases • MHR 423
11.2 Gas Pressure and Volume
Section Preview/ The earliest use of pressure in English referred to a burden or worry
Specific Expectations troubling a person’s mind. Scientists found this a useful mental model
to picture what happens when force is applied to a specific area. They
In this section, you will
adopted the word pressure to describe any application of force over
(cid:2) performexperiments to
an area.
determine the quantitative
and graphical relationships Throughout the rest of this chapter, you will discover how gases
between pressure and behave when they are under pressure in a closed system. A closed system
volume in an ideal gas is one with a constant amount of moles of a substance. It is not open to
(cid:2) solveproblems using the atmosphere. Gases in closed systems, from CO 2 in fire extinguishers
Boyle’s law to O in oxygen tanks, perform important functions in our lives.
2
(cid:2) reviewyour understanding Understanding the behaviour of gases in closed systems is essential to
of the following terms and our safe and effective use of gases.
concepts: newton, pascal,
kilopascal, pressure, volume How is Pressure Calculated?
(cid:2) interconvertunits of
As you learned in previous studies, pressure is defined in physical terms
pressure
as the force exerted on an object per unit of surface area (P = F/A). One
(cid:2) communicateyour under- commonly used SI unit of pressure is the pascal (Pa), equal to 1 N/m2.
standing of the following
More often, pressure is reported in kilopascals (kPa), equal to 1000 Pa.
terms: closed system,
(You will learn about other units of pressure later in this section.)
pressure,pascal,kilopascals,
mm Hg, torr, atmospheres, Assume a student with a mass of 51.0 kg is sitting on a chair. The
standard atmospheric force the student applies to the chair is 500.0 N. If the surface area of
pressure, Boyle’s law the chair seat is 0.05 m2, the pressure the student exerts is
P = F = 500.0N = 10000N/m2 = 10000Pa = 10.0kPa
A 0.05m2
Figure 11.7 shows how a decrease in surface area can dramatically
increase pressure.
Figure 11.7 A woman with a mass of 50.0 kg exerts a pressure of about 21 kPa on the
floor as she walks. If another woman with an equal mass is wearing high heels, she
will exert a pressure of about 5000 kPa as her heel hits the floor. This pressure is approx-
imately 240 times greater than if she were wearing flat shoes!
424 MHR • Unit 4 Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
How does a gas exert pressure? In a sense, it
cannot exert measurable pressure in the same way pressure of atmospheric
that a solid or liquid can. The pressure of a gas ball casing pressure
is determined by the kinetic motion of its compo-
nent molecules. Suppose hundreds of billions of
gas molecules are in random motion, striking the
gas pressure
entire inner surface of their container. Each colli-
sion exerts a force on the container’s inner surface.
Picture inflating a basketball. As you add more
and more air to it, more molecules collide against
the inside wall of the basketball. Each collision
exerts a force on the basketball’s inner surface
area. The collective number of collisions as well
as the strength of the force form the net or overall
gas pressure. Since the molecules move in all
directions, the net pressure exerted will be equal
throughout. (Figure 11.8 illustrates this.) Figure 11.8 This diagram
shows gas particles exerting
Atmospheric Pressure pressure as they bounce off the
inner surface of a basketball
Despite the popular expression, you can’t carry the world on your shoul-
ders! Scientists estimate that the lithosphere, or solid Earth, has a mass of
6.0×1024 kg. The hydrosphere, or the portion of Earth covered by water,
has an estimated mass of 1.4×1021 kg.
COURSE
Figure 11.9 The column of air above one square metre (1 m2) at sea level and 0˚C CHALLENGE
exerts a pressure of 101 325 Pa (1 Pa = 1N/m2). This is equivalent to a mass of about
10000 kg over an area of 1 m2! What are the main factors
determining atmospheric
pressure on Earth? In your
You do constantly experience the pressure exerted by Earth’s
Chemistry Course Challenge,
atmosphere. Scientists estimate that the atmosphere has a mass of
you will consider the atmos-
5.1×1018 kg. Thus air molecules, which have mass, are being pulled
phere on a newly discovered
down by gravity and are exerting pressure on all objects on Earth.
planet. Why might the
Figure 11.9 shows how much pressure is exerted by the atmosphere atmospheric pressure on
over an area of 1 m2. another planet be different?
Chapter 11 The Behaviour of Gases • MHR 425
Early Studies of Atmospheric Pressure
In the early seventeenth century, the Italian scientist Galileo Galilei
Using the Internet or another (1564–1642) developed a suction pump. It used air to lift water up to the
source, find the average surface from about 10 m underground. When drawn from greater depths,
atmospheric pressure at the the column of water collapsed before it reached ground level. Galileo
top of Mount Everest. If it
concluded that the water could not be pumped higher because it had
takes four minutes to boil a
reached the “limit of vacuum.” Pumping from any depth beyond 10 m
soft-boiled egg at sea level,
required a greater pressure from the suction pump than was provided
how long would it take to boil
an egg at the top of Mount by the atmosphere. However, Galileo did not know exactly how water
Everest? was being moved up the tube.
From 1641 to 1642, Evangelista Torricelli (1608–1647) served as
Galileo’s secretary. He continued Galileo’s experiments and concluded
that the weight of air was pushing down on the rest of the water. The
weight of the air pushed water up the column. This was a logical conclu-
sion since gas molecules, like all matter on Earth, are pulled down by the
force of gravity.
Torricelli did further calculations involving the weight of the atmos-
phere pressing on the water. He then improved upon the experiment
by using mercury, which has a density 13.6 times greater than water.
He designed the apparatus which we now know as the barometer, shown
in Figure 11.10. Torricelli filled a glass tube of 1 cm diameter, closed at
one end, with mercury. He then inverted the tube in a dish of mercury.
Some of the mercury ran out of the tube. But about 760 mm of mercury
remained in the tube. This is about 13.6 times less than the height of
water that Galileo could pump. It is the air pushing on the mercury in the
dish that keeps this 760 mm of mercury in the tube.
Changes in Atmospheric Pressure
At first, Torricelli considered his experiment a failure. The height of the
vacuum
mercury column did not remain constant at 760 mm, but changed slightly
as the weather and air temperature changed. As you learned in Grade 10,
these small changes in the height of the mercury column provide us with
valuable information. We can predict the weather, in part, by looking at
glass changes in atmospheric pressure. For example, if the atmospheric pres-
760 mmHg tube sure decreases suddenly, a storm may be on the way.
Atmospheric pressure affects us in other ways, too. People who live at
air pressure high elevations, such as in the Rocky Mountains, have less mass of air
above them. At lower atmospheric pressure, the boiling point of water
decreases. Because the water boils at a lower temperature, it takes longer
to cook food in boiling water on a mountain than at sea level.
The following ExpressLab demonstrates atmospheric pressure in a
dramatic way, showing you firsthand the tremendous pressure that the air
around us can exert.
pool of mercury
Figure 11.10 Torricelli’s barometer
426 MHR • Unit 4 Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
ExpressLab Observing Atmospheric Pressure in Action
In this ExpressLab, you will see just how powerful 2. Heat the can on the hot plate until steam
atmospheric pressure can be. begins rising from the opening of the can.
3. Using the beaker tongs, quickly invert the can
Materials
into the large beaker of ice water so that the
empty, clean soft drink can opening of the can is just under the surface of
hot plate the water. Observe carefully.
beaker tongs
large beaker of ice water Analysis
10 mL graduated cylinder
1. What happened to the air and water molecules
5 mL of water
inside the can when it was heated?
2. Explain what happened to the can when it was
Safety Precautions
placed in the ice water.
Use safety goggles during this activity. Handle Extension
the heated can carefully using the beaker tongs.
3. Calculate the surface area of the outside of
the can exposed to the atmosphere. Assuming
Procedure
an atmospheric pressure of 100.0 kPa, how
1. Pour 5 mL of water into the soft drink can. much force was applied to the can by the
atmosphere?
Tools & Techniques
High Pressure Injectors enough to drive the vaccine into the tissue of a
patient’s arm without breaking the skin.
When gas molecules under high pressure are
Today jet injectors use a tank of compressed
allowed to escape and expand, they release
gas and an automatic vaccine dispenser that
kinetic energy. This energy has been harnessed to
works through a pistol-like injector. When
benefit human health by powering high-pressure
triggered, the new device releases a measured
injectors, better known as jet injectors.
dose of vaccine into a sterile chamber and a
small volume of gas through a hose. As the
compressed gas expands, it forces the vaccine
at high velocity through the injector’s nozzle.
The process is fast and simple, ideal for perform-
ing mass vaccinations. It also eliminates the
problems of disposing of used syringes. Also,
it protects medical personnel from infection
through accidental needle pricks.
In 1958, Higson led a team that inoculated
about 90 000 people in Asia and Africa against
polio, typhoid, and cholera using the Hypospray.
Jet injectors are hypodermic syringes that In 1965, the United Nation’s World Health
use high-pressure gas instead of a needle to Organization used the jet injector. The organiza-
inject vaccines under a patient’s skin. Dr. Robert tion freeze-dried vaccines for its successful
Higson (1913–1996) developed the “Hypospray” worldwide smallpox eradication program. For its
in the 1940s. This device used spring pressure key role in eliminating smallpox from the list of
against a plunger to force a vaccine through a human diseases, the jet injector earned a new
tiny nozzle at 1000 km/h. The pressure was name—the “Peace Pistol.”
Chapter 11 The Behaviour of Gases • MHR 427
Units of Pressure
Math
LINK
For many years, atmospheric pressure was measured in millimetres of
You may encounter tire pres- mercury (mm Hg). In the British Commonwealth and the United States,
sure gauges that are calibrat- inches of mercury were used. Standard atmospheric pressure, the
ed in pounds per square inch pressure of the atmosphere at sea level and 0˚C, is 760 mm Hg. More
(psi). The conversion factor
recently, in honour of the work of Torricelli, standard atmospheric
between kPa and psi is
pressure has been defined as 760 torr. 1 torr represents a column of
101.3kPa = 14.7psi. To con-
mercury 1 mm in height at 0˚C. Another common unit for measuring
vert a tire pressure of 28.0 psi:
pressure is atmospheres (atm), where 1 atm is equivalent to 760 torr.
xKPa = 101.3kPa
While mm Hg, torr, and atm are still used to measure pressure, especially
28.0psi 14.7psi
in technological and medical applications, the SI units are pascals (Pa)
x = 28.0psi
or kilopascals (kPa).
× 101.3kPa
In other words, standard atmospheric pressure at 0˚C is equivalent to:
14.7psi
= 193kPa 760mmHg = 760torr = 1atm = 101.3kPa
What would a tire pressure Using this relationship, we can convert from one unit to another. For
of 27.3 psi be in kPa? What
example, a pressure of 100.0 kPa is equivalent to
would the pressure of
198.7 kPa be in psi? 100.0kPa× 760.0torr = 750.2torr
101.3kPa
The Relationship Between Pressure and Volume
Figure 11.11 shows a meteorologist preparing to release a weather balloon
partially filled with helium gas. As the balloon rises, atmospheric pressure
decreases. The volume of the balloon increases.
Figure 11.11 Weather balloons are partially inflated with helium. They carry
specialised instruments to measure varying atmospheric conditions such as pressure,
temperature, and humidity.
Since the helium atoms inside the balloon move randomly in all
directions, they constantly bombard all the area inside the walls of the
balloon, exerting a pressure. With decreasing atmospheric pressure, there
are fewer air molecules to collide with the outside of the balloon. As the
pressure outside the balloon becomes less than that inside the balloon,
the balloon expands. Given an expandable container, such as a balloon,
the volume occupied by the gas will increase when external pressure
decreases. As external pressure increases, gas molecules are forced closer
together. The volume of gas then decreases.
428 MHR • Unit 4 Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
When we refer to the volume of a gas, we are in fact talking about the
Electronic Learning Partner
volume of the container. The definition of the volume of a gas is the space
available for gas molecules to move around in. The kinetic molecular the-
Go to the Chemistry 11
ory of gases assumes that the volume of each gas molecule is essentially
Electronic Learning Partner for
zero. Thus, the amount of space for them to move around in is the volume
a demonsration of Boyle’s law.
of the container. For all gases,V = the volume of the container holding
gas
the gas. (Do not confuse this with the molar volume of gases. You will
learn about molar volume in Chapter 12.)
Think about how the relationship between pressure and area for
solids would apply if you were testing a gas in a three-dimensional
container. You know that according to the kinetic molecular theory, gas
molecules exert pressure over the entire inside surface of their container.
If the volume of the container is halved, what would happen to the
pressure of the gas inside the container?
Robert Boyle (1627–1691) was an Irish scientist with an interest in
chemistry. He investigated the relationship between pressure and volume
of gases at constant temperatures. By making careful measurements of the
volume of a trapped gas, he was able to describe what happened when
the pressure exerted on the gas was increased. Figure 11.12 shows Boyle’s
experiment. Boyle measured the length of the column of trapped air
compared to the length of the column of mercury. Since the length of the
mercury column is directly related to its volume, Boyle was able to
deduce the relationship between pressure and volume.
h
h
gas
Hg
A B C
Figure 11.12 When liquid mercury is added to the open tube, the pressure caused
by the weight of mercury on the trapped gas increases. The volume of the trapped gas
(b and c) decreases.
Since mercury is a poisonous element, you will use a different method in
Investigation 11-A to examine the relationship between the pressure and
the volume of a gas.
Chapter 11 The Behaviour of Gases • MHR 429
S K I L L F O C U S
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
Identifying variables
The Relationship Between the
Pressure and the Volume of a Gas
Boyle measured the variance in length of a Procedure
column of trapped air. Since length is directly
1. Squeezing the bulb, draw enough coloured
proportional to volume in a column with a regu-
water into a pipette so that the water fills the
lar diameter, this gave him an indirect measure
bulb and extends about 2 to 3 cm down the
of changes in volume of the air with increased
stem. The rest of the stem should be filled
pressure. In this activity, air is trapped inside
with air.
a sealed plastic pipette. You can measure the
volume of the trapped gas in terms of the length 2. Using a flame from a Bunsen burner, carefully
of the column of air, the way that Boyle did more seal the end of the pipette completely. Allow
than three hundred years ago. You will measure the pipette to cool for at least three minutes
the applied pressure in terms of the number of before completing the rest of the procedure.
turns of a clamp rather than in kPa.
3. Copy out the data table into your notes.
Question P P × V
(no. of turns) V (mm) 1/V (mm) (turns · mm)
What is the relationship between the pressure
0
and volume of a fixed amount of gas at a
1
constant temperature?
Materials
thin stem plastic pipette with bulb 4. Break a craft stick in two. Place one half of
small C-clamp the stick on either side of the pipette bulb.
metric ruler (with mm) Tighten a small C-clamp around the bulb of
match or Bunsen burner the pipette so that the clamp just holds the
craft stick bulb snugly (see the diagram).
coloured water
5. Using a ruler, measure the length of trapped
gas (the “volume”) in millimetres. Record this
Safety Precautions
in your data table.
6. Increase the “pressure” on the bulb by turning
• Be very careful when sealing the end of the the handle of the clamp one half or one
plastic pipette with a flame. The plastic will complete turn, depending on the size of your
melt and may begin to burn. Hot, molten clamp. Record the “volume” of the trapped
plastic can burn your skin. gas in your data table.
• Do not inhale any of the fumes from the
7. Repeat step 6 until you have made at least five
plastic.
complete turns.
• Before lighting the Bunsen burner, check that
there are no flammable solvents nearby. 8. Complete the data table. Calculate an average
value for the P ×V column.
9. Plot a graph of P (y-axis) versus V (x-axis).
10. Plot a graph of P (y-axis) versus 1/V (x-axis).
430 MHR • Unit 4 Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
Analysis Conclusion
1. What relationship exists between volume and In your own words, state the relationship
pressure, based on the data collected and the between pressure and the volume of a gas.
graphs produced?
Extension
2. Express this relationship mathematically. To
help you to do this, look at the mathematical Using pressure probes and a graphing calculator
form of Boyle’s law, located after this or computer interface, investigate the relation-
investigation. ship between the pressure and the volume of a
gas. Produce a data table and graphical interpre-
3. Calculate the slope of the P vs. 1/V graph.
tation of these results.
How does this value compare with the
average P ×V value? Of what significance
are these two values?
4. What changes in temperature occurred during
the experiment? In the amount of trapped air?
Explain how this may have affected your
results.
plastic pipette
craft sticks
C-clamp
Chapter 11 The Behaviour of Gases • MHR 431
Boyle’s Law
In 1662, Robert Boyle stated that the volume of a given amount of gas, at
a constant temperature, varies inversely with the applied pressure. In
other words, as external pressure on a gas increases, the volume of the gas
decreases by the same factor. This statement is known as Boyle’s law.
Figure 11.13 illustrates Boyle’s law using a bicycle pump.
1.With the piston pulled all
1. 2. 3. the way out, the air pressure
inside a bicycle pump equals
the air pressure outside.
2.If the piston is pushed
halfway down the cylinder,
the volume of the cylinder
is decreased to one half its
original value. The pressure
doubles.
3.If the piston compresses the
air to one fourth its original
value, the pressure of the air
inside the pump will be four
times higher than its original
value.
Figure 11.13
Boyle found that this relationship
Pext held true for all gases as long as the
temperature remained unchanged.
As external pressure on a gas
Pgas Pext increases,
Pext
increases, the volume of the gas
T and n fixed
decreases. The gas molecules are
forced closer together. However, if
d1 d2 Pgas the volume of a gas decreases, then
the gas molecules have to travel a
shorter distance before they strike
Pgas = Pext Higher Pext
the container walls, as shown in
causes lower V,
Figure 11.14. Since they travel a
which causes
more collisions shorter distance, gas molecules will
until Pgas = Pext strike the container walls more
often per unit time. This increases
Figure 11.14 At a given temper- the internal pressure of the gas. (With an increased volume, there are
ature, gas molecules travel an fewer collisions per unit time and a lower gas pressure is exerted.)
average distance (d 1 )before they In other words, as the pressure of a closed system increases, its vol-
collide with the container wall.
ume decreases. If the pressure is decreased by half, the volume doubles.
When the volume is decreased,
We can write this relationship mathematically by using the proportion-
the gas molecules travel a shorter
ality symbol, α. V α 1/P means that volume is inversely proportional to
distance (d)before striking
2
the wall. the pressure.
Mathematically, the proportionality sign (α) can be removed by
introducing a proportionality constant (k).
V α 1
P
V = 1 ×k or PV = k
P
432 MHR • Unit 4 Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
In Investigation 11-A, when you plotted a graph of P versus 1/V, you
CHEM
obtained a straight line. The slope of this line gives the value of the FACT
proportionality constant, k. If the pressure is tripled, the volume will
decrease to one third of its original volume, such that P ×V = k. The Scientific discoveries often
happen simultaneously.
value of k differs depending on the gas sample and the temperature.
Edmé Mariotte, a French
Remember, this mathematical relationship only applies if the temperature
scientist, investigated the
remains constant. A graph of P versus 1/V is shown in Figure 11.15. pressure–volume relationship
For the gas sample at its initial conditions (i) of gases independently of
Boyle. He did not publish
PV = k
i i his work until 1676, fourteen
If the gas sample is then subjected to a change in pressure, years after Boyle had. In many
at its final conditions (f) European countries, the math-
P V = k ematical relationship between
f f
gas pressure and volume is
Since the slope of the line (k) is constant, and since initial
known as Mariotte’s Law.
and final conditions are both equal to k, we can write
PV = P V
i i f f
This mathematical relationship is another way of stating Boyle’s law.
Sample Problem
Boyle’s Law: Calculating Volume
Problem Final conditions
A sample of helium gas is collected at room temperature in a 4.50 L P
balloon at standard atmospheric pressure. The balloon is then
submerged in a tub of water, also at room temperature, such that Constant
the external pressure is increased to 110.2 kPa. What will the final slope
volume of the balloon become? Initial conditions
1
What Is Required? V
You need to find the volume of the balloon after the pressure on the Figure 11.15 If a sample of gas
balloon has been increased. (V f =?) at initial conditions has a change
of pressure applied to it, its
volume decreases proportionally,
What Is Given?
such that in its final state,
• You know the initial pressure and volume, and the final pressure. P ×V = k.
Initial pressure (P) = 101.3kPa
i
Initial volume (V) = 4.50L
i
Final pressure (P ) = 110.2kPa
f
• You know that the temperature does not change.
Plan Your Strategy PROBLEM TIP
In this Sample Problem, you
Algebraic method will see two different methods
• Since temperature is constant and pressure and volume have of solving the problem:the
algebraic method and the ratio
been given, you will need to use the Boyle’s law formula.
• You can substitute numbers and units for the variables in the method. Choose the method
you prefer to solve this type
formula to solve for the unknown (V ).
f of problem.
Continued ...
Chapter 11 The Behaviour of Gases • MHR 433
Continued ...
Technology
LINK FROM PAGE 433
Ratio method
In 1998, a weather balloon • The pressure on the balloon increases. When this happens, if
carrying instruments to meas-
temperature remains the same, you know according to Boyle’s
ure the ozone layer drifted
law that the volume of the balloon will decrease.
off course. It veered into
transatlantic air routes, where • To find the final volume, you can multiply the initial volume
it posed a serious danger. of the balloon by a ratio of the two pressures that is less than
By this time, the balloon had 101.3kPa
one (i.e. ).
expanded in size to about the 110.2kPa
same volume as Toronto’s Sky
Dome. Two Canadian Air Force
CF-18 jets directed over 1000 Act on Your Strategy
rounds of cannon fire at it, but
could not bring the balloon Algebraic method
down. It finally landed on an
PV = P V
island off the coast of Finland. i i f f
University of Toronto physicists (101.3kPa)(4.50L) = (110.2kPa)(V )
f
have developed a new mecha-
To isolate V, you need to divide both sides of the equation
nism to prevent such an event f
by 110.2 kPa.
from recurring. When an
experiment has been complet- (101.3kPa)(4.50L) = (110.2kPa)(V f )
ed, a parachute will return the (110.2kPa) (110.2kPa)
scientific instruments to the (101.3kPa)(4.50L) = (V )
ground. As the instruments fall, (110.2kPa) f
they will pull panels from the
V = 4.137L
side of the balloon, causing it f
to plummet rapidly.
Can you think of other ways
Ratio method
to solve the problem that faced
V = 4.50L×pressureratio
the University of Toronto scien- f
tists? Create a set of blueprints = 4.50L× 101.3kPa
for another technological 110.2kPa
solution, using CAD software = 4.137L
if you have access to it.
Since the least number of significant digits in the question is three,
the answer is:
V = 4.14L
f
Check Your Solution
• The units for the answer are in litres.
• When units cancel out, L remains.
• The volume of the balloon has decreased due to the increase
in pressure.
Practice Problems
1. A 50.0 cm3 sample of nitrogen gas is collected at 101.3 kPa. If
the volume is reduced to 5.0 cm3, and the temperature remains
constant, what will the final pressure of the nitrogen be?
Continued ...
434 MHR • Unit 4 Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 434
2. A weather balloon has a volume of 1000 L at a pressure of
740.0 torr. The balloon rises to a height of 1000 m where the
atmospheric pressure is measured as 450.0 torr. Assuming there
is no change in temperature, what is the final volume of the CHEM
weather balloon? FACT
3. A 45.0 cm3 sample of nitrogen gas is collected at 1.0 atm. The Now that you’ve finished
nitrogen is compressed to a pressure of 10.0 atm. What is the practising Boyle’s law prob-
lems, take a deep breath and
final volume of the nitrogen if the temperature remains constant?
relax. You have just illustrated
4. A 45.6 mL sample of gas at 490 torr is compressed to a certain Boyle’s law! When you inhale,
volume at 3 atm. What is the new volume, in litres? muscles in your torso expand
your rib cage. The volume of
your lungs increases. Since
Section Wrap-up the pressure inside your
lungs is decreased with the
In this section, you learned about the relationship between pressure expansion in volume, outside
and volume of a gas. This relationship is stated in Boyle’s law. With air under higher pressure
knowledge of gas properties and behaviours, we are able to devise and rushes in.
improve upon technologies used everyday. You will learn about some of
these important technologies later in this chapter. In the meantime, the
next section examines how gases respond to changes in yet another
variable: temperature.
Section Review
1 C Using the relationship 760 mm Hg = 760 torr = 1 atm = 101.3 kPa,
convert each of the following units:
(a) 2.03 atm to kPa
(b) 85.2 kPa to atm
(c) 1.50 atm to torr
(d) 600 torr to kPa
2 K/U Use the kinetic molecular theory. Explain why the air pressure
inside a capped syringe increases if the volume decreases from 15 cm3
to 10 cm3.
3 K/U Explain, using the kinetic molecular theory, why pressure is
exerted by gases in all directions.
4 I A 1.00 L helium balloon is floating in the air on a day when the
atmospheric pressure is 102.5 kPa and the temperature is 20.0˚C.
Suddenly, clouds appear and the pressure rapidly drops to 98.6 kPa at
a temperature of 20.0˚C. What is the new volume of the balloon?
5 I 0.750 L of oxygen gas is trapped at 101.3 kPa in a cylinder with a
moveable piston. The piston is moved and the gas is compressed to a
volume of 0.500 L. What is the final pressure applied to the oxygen gas
if the temperature remains unchanged?
6 MC A student produces 38.3 mL of oxygen gas in a burette. The next
day, there are 40.2 mL of gas in the burette at a pressure of 103 kPa.
What was the pressure on the previous day, in torr? What might be
happening to the weather in the student’s neighbourhood?
Chapter 11 The Behaviour of Gases • MHR 435
11.3 Gases and Temperature Changes
Section Preview/ As you learned in Section 11.1, the average kinetic energy of gas mole-
Specific Expectations cules is directly related to the temperature. The greater the temperature,
the greater the average motion of the molecules and the greater their
In this section, you will
average kinetic energy. In other words, the temperature of a substance is
(cid:2) performlaboratory experi-
defined as the measure of the average kinetic energy of the molecules in
ments investigating the
effects of temperature that substance.
changes on the volume of When substances are cooled, they lose kinetic energy. How does this
gases affect their volume? Remember, for an ideal gas, we can think of its
(cid:2) solveproblems using particles as having mass but no volume. When you perform Investigation
Charles’ law and 11-B on page 438, imagine air behaving as an ideal gas. How do you think
Gay-Lussac’s law air, in an expandable container will react to temperature changes?
(cid:2) convertunits between
the Celsius and Kelvin Temperature and Volume
temperature scales
Sometimes, scientific discoveries are made well before any technological
(cid:2) communicateyour under-
application of them can be envisioned. At other times, the desire to
standing of the following
develop new technologies leads to experiments from which discoveries
terms: Kelvin scale,
absolute zero, Charles’ law, are made.
Gay-Lussac’s law, pressure- Jacques Charles (1746–1823), a French scientist, was the first to fill a
relief valve, fusible plugs balloon with hydrogen. He was also interested in hot-air balloons, which
were being developed in France at the time. Charles investigated the
expansion rates of nitrogen, oxygen, hydrogen, and carbon dioxide. He
found that these gases all expanded by the same ratio. For each degree
As you perform Investigation Celsius increase in temperature, all of these gases would expand by a
11-B, keep in mind the ratio certain fraction. This fraction was 1/273rd of their volume at 0˚C. For each
of 1/273 discovered by Charles.
degree Celsius decrease in temperature, their volume would decrease by
Can you recall from your
the same fraction. Thus, if a gas at 0˚C were to be heated to 273˚C, its
previous studies a special sig-
volume would double. This held true when the pressure and the amount
nificance for the number 273?
of gas remained constant. Figure 11.16 shows the expansion of the volume
of gas in a hot-air balloon as the air inside the balloon is heated.
A B C
Figure 11.16 These photographs show the gradual expansion of a hot air balloon.
Since hot air is less dense than cooler air, the balloon rises.
436 MHR • Unit 4 Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
Chemistry Bulletin
Gas Temperature and Cryogenics
Some people wish to be frozen when they die,
trusting that future technologies will be able to
revive them. This untested process is called
cryonics. It was first suggested by Robert C.W.
Ettinger in 1962. Ettinger has since set up his
own Cryonics Institute in Michigan, where
people can have their bodies frozen and stored.
We still cannot freeze and re-animate higher
animals, such as people. Cryogenic freezing,
however, can suspend the life of tissues and
organs used for transplants. Cryogenics has
also made many other technologies possible.
It has proven that science and science fiction
are often closer than we think!
The term cryogenics can be applied to all
temperatures below the normal boiling point
of oxygen, or –183˚C.
When substances encounter temperatures
Cryogenically cooled magnets are used in MRI
this low, they often behave strangely. Liquid technology.
helium, for example, becomes a “superfluid”
at temperatures below −270.97˚C. The principle Cryogenics produces large-scale amounts of
of “superconductivity” is just as interesting nitrogen and oxygen. Scuba divers and astro-
Cryogenically cooled rings made out of metals nauts use compressed oxygen tanks that
such as lead and aluminum become “supercon- provide a six to eight hour supply of oxygen.
ductors.” They can keep currents travelling in Rocket engines use liquid oxygen as fuel.
circles for hours even after scientists have We use liquid nitrogen to make ammonia for
removed the original source of electricity. fertilizers, to keep frozen foods cold during
Scientists have made use of the strange transport, and to fast-freeze these foods.
things that happen to matter at low tempera- The list of applications of cryogenics is
tures. Superconductors have been used to long and varied, and research continues.
make huge electromagnets, like the one at the Maybe Ettinger is right and one day all of the
Argonne National Laboratory near Chicago. occupants of the Cryonics Institute will live
Argonne’s electromagnet can produce a again!
magnetic field 134 000 times as strong as
Earth’s. It operates on relatively little power Making Connections
because of its superconducting capabilities. 1. What do you think might be some possible
Such magnets are used in nuclear power future applications of cryogenics?
research to find new nuclear particles. And
2. Scientists use Dewar Flasks to contain
while cryogenics has advanced nuclear
cryogenic fluids. How do these flasks work?
science, it also helps scientists to study the
Do some research to find out.
effects of nuclear radiation. Scientists study
cryogenically frozen atoms suspended in an
irradiated state to understand how nuclear
radiation can harm human health.
Chapter 11 The Behaviour of Gases • MHR 437
S K I L L F O C U S
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
Identifying variables
The Relationship Between
Temperature and Volume of a Gas
As you learned in Investigation 11-A, the length 2. Using a flame from a match or Bunsen burner,
of a column of trapped air is directly proportion- carefully seal the open end of the pipette
al to its volume. In this investigation, you will completely. Allow the pipette to cool for at
see the effect of temperature changes on the least 3 min before carrying on with the rest of
volume of a gas, also measured in terms of the the procedure.
length of a column of trapped air.
3. Using scissors, cut off the tip of the bulb of
the pipette.
Question
4. Carefully attach the pipette to the ruler, using
What is the relationship between the temperature
a rubber band, so that the bottom of the tube
and volume of a fixed amount of gas at a
is even with the 1.0 cm mark of the ruler.
constant external pressure?
5. Fill a 400 mL beaker about two thirds full of
Materials tap water and add 3 or 4 ice cubes. Place the
thermometer in the water. Then put the ruler
thin stem plastic pipette
with attached pipette into the water. Allow
metric ruler (with mm)
the ruler and pipette to sit for 5 min.
Celsius thermometer
400 mL beaker
ice
hot plate
match or Bunsen burner top of pipette cut open
2 elastics
scissors
coloured water
tap water
elastic band
Safety Precautions
•Be very careful when sealing the end of the
plastic pipette with a flame. The plastic will
melt and may begin to burn. Hot, molten
plastic can burn your skin. plug of coloured water
•Do not inhale any of the fumes from the
plastic.
plastic pipette
•Before lighting the Bunsen burner, check that
there are no flammable solvents nearby.
Procedure
1. Squeezing the pipette bulb, draw enough
water into the pipette to form a small plug. metric ruler (with mm)
The rest of the pipette should contain air.
438 MHR • Unit 4 Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
6. Copy the data table into your notebook. Your
table should have at least eight rows for data.
Temp. (˚C) V (length of trapped air in mm)
7. After 5 min, measure the length (or “volume”)
of the trapped gas in mm. Remember that the
bottom of the pipette stem is set at the 1.0 cm
mark. Record these values in your data table.
8. Place the beaker on the hot plate and slowly
heat the water in the beaker. Measure the
length (“V”) and temperature of the trapped
gas at every 10˚C to 15˚C. Measure the length
and temperature to a maximum of 60˚C.
9. Clean the apparatus and dispose of the pipette
as directed.
10. Complete the data table. Find the average
of the V/T column.
11. Plot a graph of V (mm) versus T. The
horizontal axis (temperature) must extend
from −300˚C to 100˚C.
12. Draw a line of best fit. Extrapolate this line to
the x-intercept.
Analysis
1. What is the independent variable in this
investigation? What is the dependent
variable?
2. What relationship did you notice between
temperature and volume?
3. When Jacques Charles did an activity similar
to this one, he obtained an x-intercept of
−273˚C. What is significant about this value?
4. If the value obtained by Charles was correct,
what is the percentage error in your
x-intercept?
Conclusion
5. In your own words, state the qualitative rela-
tionship that exists between the temperature
and volume of a fixed amount of gas at con-
stant pressure.
Chapter 11 The Behaviour of Gases • MHR 439
The Kelvin Scale and Absolute Zero
Charles found that, regardless of the gas tested,
the x-intercept on a graph would always be
−273˚C. In 1848, Lord Kelvin (1824–1907), a
Scottish scientist, realised the significance of
this finding. He reasoned that at −273˚C, molec-
ular motion would cease. At this temperature,
kinetic energy would be zero. The volume of
a gas would, hypothetically, also be zero.
Of course, real gas molecules do have
volume. Also, at low temperatures all gases
will condense and change state. Still, Kelvin
used this reasoning as the basis for a new tem-
perature scale, the Kelvin scale. The starting
point for the scale, 0 K, is called absolute zero.
Figure 11.17 shows how absolute zero can be
hypothesized, based on data from experiments. The modern accepted
value for 0 K, derived with equipment more sophisticated than that avail-
able to Charles, is −273.15˚C. Each unit in the Kelvin scale is exactly the
same as a unit in the Celsius scale.
There are no degree signs used in the Kelvin scale. More importantly,
there are no negative values. What would happen if you tried to calculate
a temperature twice as warm as −5˚C? Mathematically, the answer would
be −10˚C, but this is a colder temperature. When mathematical manipula-
tions are involved in studying gas behaviour, you need to convert degree
Celsius temperatures into kelvins. This is done using the relationship
T = ˚C+273.15 or ˚C+273
K
Most often, you will round off and use 273 as the conversion factor
relating K and ˚C.
Charles’ Law
Although Charles discovered that the volume of a fixed amount of gas
at constant pressure was proportional to its temperature, he never pub-
lished this finding. In 1802, Joseph Louis Gay-Lussac (1778–1850), a
French scientist, made reference to Charles’ work in a published paper.
The relationship between temperature and volume has since become
known as Charles’ law. Charles’ law states that the volume of a fixed
mass of gas is proportional to its temperature when the pressure is kept
constant.
As you can see from Figure 11.19 on page 442, the volume of a gas
increases or decreases by a fixed increment when subjected to a change in
temperature. The algebraic statement of Charles’ law depends on using
absolute, or Kelvin, temperatures. This law is stated as V α T, where T
is measured in kelvins. (Figure 11.18 uses Charles’ law to explain how a
thermometer works.)
Introducing a proportionality constant (k ), this relationship can be 1
restated as
V = k T or V = k
1 T 1
This relationship only applies if pressure is kept constant and tempera-
ture is given in kelvins. If a sample of gas is collected at initial conditions
(i), this relationship can be rewritten as
V i = k
T 1
i
440 MHR • Unit 4 Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
)L(
emuloV
3.0
2.0
1.0
−273 −200 −100 0 100 200 300 400 500 (˚C)
0 73 173 273 373 473 573 673 773 (K)
Temperature
Figure 11.17 Absolute zero for
an ideal gas is −273.15˚C or 0 K,
the point at which all molecular
motion theoretically ceases.
Figure 11.18 As temperature
increases, particles move more
rapidly, striking the outside of the
thermometer with greater force
and frequency. The kinetic energy
of the particles is transferred to
the particles inside the tube of
the thermometer. The volume of
the liquid inside the tube (usually
mercury or coloured alcohol)
expands.
Suppose the gas sample is subjected to a change in temperature. Under
Electronic Learning Partner
the final conditions (f), there will be a volume change such that
V
f = k Go to the Chemistry 11
T 1
f Electronic Learning Partner
Since both initial and final conditions are equal to the proportionality for a demonstration of
Charles’ law.
constant, Charles’ law can be written as
V i = V f
T T
i f
Thus, Charles’ law can be restated as: the volume of a fixed mass of gas
at constant pressure is directly proportional to its Kelvin temperature.
In the next ThoughtLab, you will convert your temperature findings from
Investigation 11-B into kelvins and see why you must use Kelvin tempera-
ture when performing calculations with gases.
ThoughtLab Charles’ Law and Kelvin Temperature
As you have learned, when making calculations 2. How do the values of V/T(K) compare to the
involving temperature in gas samples, Kelvin values of V/T(˚C) in the data table? Explain the
temperatures must be used. You will see why for significance of these two sets of data.
yourself in this ThoughtLab.
3. What mathematical relationship seems to
exist between volume and temperature when
Materials
temperature is recorded in ˚C? In kelvins?
data table from Investigation 11-B
graph paper Extension
4. Make a new data table like the one below.
Procedure
Include at least eight rows for data.
1. Make a new data table like the one below. You
At 100 kPa At 163 kPa At 346 kPa
should include at least eight rows for data.
V (mm) V (mm) T (K) V (mm) T (K) V (mm) T (K) V (mm)
Temp (˚C) Temp (K) V (mm) T (˚C) T (K)
In columns 1 and 2, enter your data from
2. Fill in columns 1, 3, and 4 with your data from
columns 2 and 3 of the data table you made
Investigation 11-B.
above. Carry the data from column 1 into
3. Convert temperature data in column 1 from columns 3 and 5.
˚C to kelvins. Enter the new values in columns 5. Using the Boyle’s law formula (P i V i = P f V f at
2 and 5.
constant Tand n), calculate the “volume” of
4. Plot a graph of V(mm) versus T(K). The the gas sample at 163 kPa and at 346 kPa.
horizontal axis (T) must extend from 0 K to
6. Plot a graph of your new data table. Use a
400 K.
different colour for each line. Extrapolate each
5. Draw a line of best fit. Extrapolate this line line to the x-intercept.
to the x-intercept.
7. Of what significance are the results obtained
from this graph?
Analysis
1. What did you notice about the values of
V/T(K) in the data table?
Chapter 11 The Behaviour of Gases • MHR 441
P
Patm Patm Pgas
T1
T2 T2
T increases V increases
atm
Pgas
fixed n
Pgas
Pgas = Patm Higher T increases V increases until
collision frequency: Pgas = Patm
Pgas > Patm
CHEM
Figure 11.19 As a gas is heated from T to T, the molecules move faster and collide
i f
FACT
with the container walls more frequently, increasing the pressure applied by the gas
(P ). This added pressure increases the volume of the container until the pressure
As helium gas is cooled below gas
−268.95˚C, it forms a liquid. At exerted by the gas is equal to the pressure exerted by the atmosphere.
−270.97˚C, helium still looks
like a liquid, but a liquid with
unusual properties. Suddenly, Sample Problem
liquid density drops and this
“liquid” gains the ability to Charles’ Law: Calculating Volume
move through very small holes
that helium gas cannot pass
Problem
through. It flows up the walls
of its container defying gravity, Using a glass syringe, a scientist draws exactly 25.5 cm3 of dry
and has zero viscosity. Below oxygen at 20.0˚C from a metal cylinder. She needs to heat the oxygen
−270.97˚C, helium becomes for an experiment, so she places the syringe in an oven at 65.0˚C and
a superfluid, the only one
leaves it there for 30 min. Assuming the atmospheric pressure
discovered so far. Helium
remains the same, what volume will the oxygen occupy?
never changes to a solid.
What Is Required?
You need to find the volume of the oxygen in the syringe after it has
been heated for 30 min. (V =?)
f
What Is Given?
• You know the initial volume and temperature.
Initial volume (V ) = 25.5cm3
i
Initial temperature (T ) = 20.0˚C
i
• You know the final temperature.
Final temperature (T ) = 65.0˚C
f
• You know that the pressure does not change.
Continued ...
442 MHR • Unit 4 Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
Continued ...
PROBLEM TIP
FROM PAGE 442
In these Sample Problems, you
Plan Your Strategy
will see two different methods
of solving the problem:the
Algebraic method
algebraic method and the ratio
• Since the pressure is constant and the temperature of the gas method. Choose the method
increases, you will need to use the Charles’ law formula to you prefer to solve this type
find the final volume of the gas sample. of problem.
• Since T is given in ˚C, you will need to convert it to kelvins.
• You can substitute numbers and units for the variables in the
formula to solve for the unknown (V).
f
Ratio method
• Since the pressure is constant and the gas is subjected to an
increase in temperature, you know that, according to Charles’
law, the volume will increase.
• Since T is given in ˚C, you will need to convert it to kelvins.
• To find the final volume, you can multiply the initial volume
by a ratio of the kelvin temperatures that is greater than one.
Act on Your Strategy
Algebraic method
T = (20.0˚C+273) T = (65.0˚C+273)
i f
= 293K = 338K
V i = V f
T T
i f
25.5cm3
=
V
f
293K 338K
To isolate V, you need to multiply both sides of the equation
f
by 338 K.
25.5cm3
×338K =
V
f ×338K
293K 338K
(25.5cm3)(338K)
= V
(293K) f
V = 29.42cm3
f
Ratio method
T = (20.0˚C+273) T = (65.0˚C+273)
i f
= 293K = 338K
V = V × temperatureratio
f i
= 25.5˚C× 338K
293K
= 29.42cm3
Continued ...
Chapter 11 The Behaviour of Gases • MHR 443
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 443
Since the least number of significant digits in the question is three,
the final volume will be reported to three significant digits.
V = 29.4cm3
f
Check Your Solution
• The units for the answer are in cubic centimetres.
• When the units cancel out, cm3 remains.
• The volume of the oxygen gas increased due to an increase
in temperature.
Sample Problem
Charles’ Law: Calculating Temperature
Problem
A balloon is filled with 2.50 L of dry helium at 23.5˚C. The balloon
is placed in a freezer overnight. The next morning, the balloon is
removed and the volume is found to be 2.15 L. What was the temper-
ature (in ˚C) inside the freezer if the pressure remained constant?
What Is Required?
You need to find the temperature of the freezer in ˚C. (T =?)
f
What Is Given?
• You know the initial volume and temperature.
Initial volume (V) = 2.50L
i
Initial temperature (T) = 23.5˚C
i
• You know the final volume.
Final volume (V ) = 2.15L
f
• You know that the pressure does not change.
Plan Your Strategy
Algebraic method
• Since pressure is constant and the volume and temperature
change, you will need to use the Charles’ law formula to find
the final temperature of the gas sample.
• Since T is given in ˚C, you need to convert it to kelvins.
• You can substitute numbers and units for the variables in the
formula to solve for the unknown (T ).
f
Continued ...
444 MHR • Unit 4 Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 444
Ratio method
• Since pressure remains constant and the volume of the balloon
decreases, you know that according to Charles’ law, the
temperature of the gas must also decrease.
• Since T is given in ˚C, you need to convert it to kelvins.
• To find the final temperature inside the freezer, you can
multiply the initial temperature by a volume ratio that is less
than one.
Act on Your Strategy
Algebraic method
T = (23.5˚C+273)
i
= 297K
V i = V f
T T
i f
2.50L = 2.15L
297K T
f
To simplify the equation and make it easier to solve, you can
first cross-multiply the above equation.
(2.50L)(T ) = (296.5K)(2.15L)
f
To isolate T , you need to divide both sides of the equation
f
by 2.50 L.
(2.50L)(T f ) = (297K)(2.15L)
(2.50L) (2.50L)
T = (297K)(2.15L)
f (2.50L)
= 255.42K
Since the question asks for the temperature in ˚C, you need to
convert kelvins to ˚C. To do this, subtract 273 from the answer.
T = (255.42K−273)
f
= −17.6˚C
Ratio method
T = (23.5˚C+273) T = 297K×volumeratio
i f
= 297K = 297K× 2.15L
2.50L
= 255.42K
Since the question asks for the temperature in ˚C, you need to
convert kelvins to ˚C. To do this, subtract 273 from the answer.
T = (255.42K−273)
f
= −17.6˚C
Continued ...
Chapter 11 The Behaviour of Gases • MHR 445
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 445
Since the least number of significant digits in the question is three
significant digits, the final temperature will be reported to the same
Using the formula y = mx +b, significant digits.
see if you can derive the T = −17.6˚C
f
Charles’ law formula from the
Check Your Solution
graph that you produced in
the ThoughtLab on page 441. • The unit for the answer is in kelvins.
For help in deriving equations • When the units cancel out, kelvins remain.
from graphs, see Appendix E.
• Kelvins have been converted to ˚C.
• The temperature of the balloon has decreased, which is reflected in
its decrease in volume.
Practice Problems
5. Convert the following temperatures to the Kelvin scale.
(a) 25˚C
(b) 37˚C
(c) 150˚C
6. Convert the following temperatures to degrees Celcius.
(a) 373 K
(b) 98 K
(c) 425 K
7. Give an example of something that might be at each temperature
in question 5.
PROBLEM TIP 8. A sample of nitrogen gas surrounding a circuit board occupies a
volume of 300 mL at 17˚C and 100 kPa. What volume will the
In question 8, the smallest
nitrogen occupy at 100.0˚C if the pressure remains constant?
number of significant digits is
two (17˚C). However, before 9. A 2.5 L balloon is completely filled with helium indoors at a
doing your calculations, you
temperature of 24.2˚C. The balloon is taken out on a cold winter
must convert this value to day (−17.5˚C). What will the volume of the balloon become,
kelvins (290 K). This value now
assuming a constant pressure?
has threesignificant digits.
Round off your final answer to 10. 10.0 L of neon at 20.0˚C is expanded to a volume of 30.0 L. If
threesignificant digits.
the pressure remains constant, what must the final temperature
be (in ˚C)?
11. A 14.5 cm3 sample of oxygen gas at 24.3˚C is drawn into a syringe
with a maximum volume of 60 cm3. What is the maximum
change in temperature that the oxygen can be subjected to before
the plunger pops out of the syringe?
12. Methane gas can be condensed by cooling and increasing the
pressure. A 600 L sample of methane gas at 25˚C and 100 kPa is
cooled to −20˚C. In a second step, the gas is compressed until the
pressure is quadrupled. What will the final volume be? (Hint: Use
both Boyle’s law and Charles’ law to answer this question.)
446 MHR • Unit 4 Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
Gay-Lussac’s Law
Technology
LINK
Aside from balloons and syringes, most containers that are used to store
gases have a fixed volume. You know that temperature is a measure of Underinflated vehicle tires
the average kinetic energy of the molecules making up a substance. If the contribute to unsafe road
temperature of a gas increases, but the volume of its container cannot handling and to lower fuel
economy. Based on what you
increase, what happens to the pressure of the gas inside?
know about Gay-Lussac’s law,
Extending the work of Charles, Joseph Louis Gay-Lussac discovered
why should you measure the
the relationship between temperature and pressure acting on a fixed
pressure in vehicle tires
volume of a gas. (Remember that for gases, V = volume of container
gas before driving the vehicle
holding the gas.) As you will learn later in this section, this relationship for a long distance?
is very important for the safe handling of gases under pressure in steel
tanks or aerosol cans. Gay-Lussac’s law states that the pressure of a fixed
amount of gas, at constant volume, is directly proportional to its Kelvin
temperature. (See Figure 11.20.)
P α T
(if T is given in kelvins and volume and amount of gas is constant)
Introducing a new proportionality constant (k ), this relationship can be
2
restated as
P = k T or P = k
2 T 2
If we assign P and T as the initial conditions, and P and T for the final
i i f f
conditions, the above relationship can be rewritten as
P i = P f
T T
i f
As you will notice, this mathematical relationship is very similar to that
of Charles’ law.
1.0 atm 2.0 atm
T
increases
Web
higher LINK
collison
frequency www.school.mcgrawhill.ca/
resources/
Refrigerators and air conditi-
ioners function because of the
T T
1 2 relationship between pressure
and temperature. Research the
A B
Joule-Thomson Effect. Go to
the web site above. Go to
Figure 11.20 When temperature increases from T i to T f in a rigid container with a con- Science Resources, then to
stant volume, the average speed of the gas molecules increases. Since the molecules
Chemistry 11to find out
move faster, they collide with each other and with the walls of the container more force-
where to go next.
fully and more frequently. The gas pressure increases.
Chapter 11 The Behaviour of Gases • MHR 447
Sample Problem
Gay-Lussac’s Law: Calculating Pressure
Problem
A cylinder of chlorine gas (Cl ) is stored in a concrete-lined room for
2
safety. The cylinder is designed to withstand 50 atm of pressure.
The pressure gauge reads 35.0 atm at 23.2˚C. An accidental fire in
the room next door causes the temperature in the storage room
to increase to 87.5˚C. What will the pressure gauge read at this
temperature?
What Is Required?
You need to find the pressure of the oxygen once the temperature has
been increased. (T = ?)
f
What Is Given?
• You know the initial pressure and temperature.
Initial pressure (P) = 35.0atm
i
Initial temperature (T) = 23.2˚C
i
• You know the final temperature.
Final temperature (T ) = 87.5˚C
f
• You know that the volume of the rigid metal tank will not change
appreciably.
Plan Your Strategy
PROBLEM TIP
In these Sample Problems, you
Algebraic method
will see two different methods
• Since the volume of the cylinder is essentially constant,
of solving the problem:the
algebraic method and the ratio and the temperature increases, you will need to use the
method. Choose the method Gay-Lussac’s law formula to find the final pressure of the
you prefer to solve this type gas sample.
of problem. • Since T is given in ˚C, you need to convert it to kelvins.
• You can substitute numbers and units for the variables in the
formula to solve for the unknown. (P = ?)
f
Ratio method
• Since the volume of the cylinder is essentially constant, and
the temperature increases, you know that according to Gay-
Lussac’s law, the pressure exerted by the gas increases as well.
• Since T is given in ˚C, you need to convert it to kelvins.
• To find the final pressure of the gas, you can multiply the
initial pressure by a temperature ratio that is greater than one.
Continued ...
448 MHR • Unit 4 Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 448
Act on Your Strategy
Algebraic method
T = (23.2˚C+273) = 296K T = (87.5˚C+273) = 360K
i f
P i = P f
T T
i f
35.0atm = P f
296K 361K
To simplify the equation and make it easier to solve, you can
first cross-multiply the above equation.
(35.0atm)(361K) = (P )(296K)
f
To isolate P, you need to divide both sides of the equation
f
by 296 K.
(35.0atm)(361K) = (P f )(296K)
(296K) (296K)
(35.0atm)(361K) = P
(296K) f
P = 42.69atm
f
Ratio method
T = (23.2˚C+273) = 296K T = (87.5˚C+273) = 361K
i f
P = 35.0atm×temperatureratio
f
= 35.0atm× 361K
296K
= 42.69atm
Since the least number of significant digits in the question is three,
the final pressure will be rounded off to the same number of
significant digits.
P = 42.7atm
f
Check Your Solution
• The unit for the answer is in atmospheres.
• When the units cancel out, atm remains.
• Kelvins have been converted to ˚C.
• The pressure inside the cylinder has increased, as would
be expected when the temperature increases.
Practice Problems
13. An unknown gas is collected in a 250.0 mL flask and sealed.
Using electronic devices, it is found that the gas inside the flask
exerts a pressure of 135.5 kPa at 15˚C. What pressure will the gas
exert if the temperature (in Kelvins) is doubled?
Continued ...
Chapter 11 The Behaviour of Gases • MHR 449
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 449
14. At 18˚C, a sample of helium gas stored in a metal cylinder exerts
a pressure of 17.5 atm. What will the pressure become if the tank
is placed in a closed room where the temperature increases to
40˚C?
15. A gaseous refrigerant, enclosed in copper tubes, surrounds the
freezer in a small refrigerator. The gas is found to exert a pressure
of 110 kPa at 45˚C. The refrigerant is allowed to expand through a
nozzle into an expansion chamber such that the exerted
pressure decreases to 89 kPa. What is the temperature inside
the freezer?
16. Before leaving on a trip to Florida, you measure the pressure
inside the tires of your car at a gas station. At −7.5˚C the tire
pressure is found to be 206.5 kPa. When you arrive in Florida,
you stop for dinner. Before leaving, you once again measure the
tire pressure at a gas station beside the restaurant. Most pressure
gauges in the United States are calibrated in psi. You find the tire
pressure to be 34.3 psi. What is the approximate temperature in
Florida? (Hint: See the MathLink on page 428 to find out how to
convert psi to kPa.)
Compressed Gases and Safety Concerns
The Gay-Lussac’s law Sample Problem in this section indicates how care-
fully gases under pressure must be handled. Chlorine gas can cause seri-
ous respiratory problems and irritate the skin and mucous membranes. In
extreme cases, death from suffocation could result from exposure to this
gas. Yet chlorine is an important industrial product. Compounds of chlo-
rine are used in bleaches, oxidizing agents, and solvents, and as interme-
diates in the manufacture of other substances.
Compressed gases are commonly stored in thick-walled
metal cylinders designed especially for this purpose. All
cylinders must comply with Canadian Transport Commission
(CTC) regulations. Containers must be permanently marked with
a serial number and specifications for the volume of the cylinder
and the maximum pressure it can withstand. Containers must be
tested every five to ten years, with the date of the test stamped
on the cylinder.
Figure 11.22 on the next page shows a typical compressed
gas cylinder. You can see that it is built to withstand high
pressures. There are other safety precautions as well, however.
Most cylinders used to store gases have safety devices
regulating the internal gas pressure. The most common of these
is a pressure relief valve. If the pressure inside the cylinder
increases to a dangerous level, a spring allows the valve to open
and release excess gas until the internal pressure returns to a
safe level. Some pressure relief valves will close once excess
Figure 11.21 Gas cylinders have pressure gas is released. These valves are relatively expensive compared
valves to help the user regulate the amount of to non-reclosing valves. Non-reclosing valves are found on
gas escaping when the cylinder is opened. common household products such as aerosol hairsprays.
450 MHR • Unit 4 Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
Cylinders used to store gases such as acetylene (C H ), that
2 2
could cause an explosive chemical reaction at high tempera-
tures, are fitted with fusible plugs. These plugs are designed to
melt and allow gas to escape at temperatures lower than those at
which hazardous reactions can start. Fusible plugs for acetylene
cylinders are made of a metal alloy that melts at 100˚C.
Not all compressed gas cylinders are fitted with pressure-
relief valves or fusible plugs. Cylinders containing toxic gases
such as chlorine or phosgene (COCl ) are one example. These
2
gases could cause serious harm to health if released into the
air in sufficient quantities. Therefore, these gases, like all
compressed gases, must be handled with great care. They
must be stored in a well-ventilated, dry area. The surrounding
storage area must be fire-resistant, and proper fire-fighting
equipment must be immediately available. Gas cylinders should
never be stored near electrical circuits that might spark or near
other ignition sources such as open flames. Material Data Safety
Sheets must be available, and all cylinders must
be clearly labelled with WHMIS warning signs.
Section Wrap-up
In this section, you learned about the relationship between
Figure 11.22 Pressure relief valves prevent
volume and temperature (Charles’ law). You also learned about
a compressed gas cylinder from exploding
the relationship between pressure and temperature (Gay-Lussac’s
if the temperature, and thus the pressure
law). In the next section, you will see how these relationships increases.
can be combined with Boyle’s law to produce one equation that
works in all three situations.
Section Review
1 K/U What safety concerns and precautions should be taken
with compressed gases? Use what you know about the movement
of particles to explain these precautions.
2 (a) I A gas at 107 kPa and 300 K is cooled to 146 K at the same
volume. What is the new pressure?
(b) I 17 L of gas at 300 K are cooled to 146 K at the same pressure.
What is the new volume?
3 MC Describe the relationship between your answers in parts (a) and (b)
of question 2.
4 C Explain in terms of molecular motion why, when the temperature
is increased:
(a) a gas increases in volume
(b) the pressure of a gas increases
5 K/U A balloon at a party drifts above a hot stove, and explodes. Why
did this happen?
Chapter 11 The Behaviour of Gases • MHR 451
11.4 Combined Gas Law Calculations
Section Preview/ You may have heard a common joke about Canadian weather: “If you
Specific Expectations don’t like it, wait an hour and it will change.” While this is an exaggera-
tion, atmospheric pressure and temperature rarely remain constant for
In this section, you will
any extended period of time. Since the volume of gases changes when
(cid:2) solveproblems involving
pressure and temperature change, standards have been designed to allow
the combined gas law
and Dalton’s law of partial a comparison of different gas volumes.
pressures The average pressure of the atmosphere at sea level is taken as stan-
(cid:2) identifythe components dard pressure (760 mm Hg = 760 torr = 1 atm = 101.3 kPa). The freezing
of Earth’s atmosphere point of water (0˚C or 273 K) is defined as standard temperature.
Together, these conditions are referred to as standard temperature and
(cid:2) communicateyour under-
standing of the following pressure (STP). (See Figure 11.23.) The normal conditions under which
terms: standard tempera- we live are referred to as standard ambient temperature and pressure.
ture, standard temperature These conditions are known as SATP, defined as 25˚C and 100 kPa.
and pressure, standard How could we find what the volume of a gas, measured under
ambient temperature and
different conditions, would be when changed to STP or SATP?
pressure, combined gas law,
Dalton’s law of partial
pressures
Figure 11.23 This photograph
illustrates typical STP conditions:
0˚C at sea level.
Boyle established that pressure and volume are inversely proportional:
PV = P V
i i f f
Charles found that volume and temperature are directly proportional:
V i = V f
T T
i f
Gay-Lussac discovered that pressure has the same relationship to
temperature as volume does:
P i = P f
T T
i f
Under what conditions might Do you notice a pattern here?
you use standard ambient tem-
Pressure and volume are directly related to temperature, and inversely
perature and pressure as a
related to each other. Write this as one law, and it is possible to calculate
reference rather than standard
situations in which three variables change at the same time. The mathe-
temperature and pressure ?
matics work out just as consistently as in the two-variable equations.
452 MHR • Unit 4 Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
The Combined Gas Law
Boyle’s law can be used to solve for changes in volume when pressure
changes. The gas must be in a closed system and the temperature must
remain constant. You can use Charles’ law to solve for changes in volume
with temperature changes. This law works only in a closed system in
which pressure remains constant. Gay-Lussac’s law can solve problems in
which the amount and volume of gas remain constant while the tempera-
ture and pressure change.
As you learned, Boyle’s law (V α 1/P) is expressed mathematically
as PV = k. Charles’ law (V α T) is expressed mathematically as V/T = k
1
when temperature is recorded in kelvins. Combining these two
expressions gives:
V α 1 ×T or V α T
P P
Introducing a new proportionality constant (k ), we can write
3
V = T ×k or PV = k
P 3 T 3
This mathematical relationship is the combined gas law.
If a sample of a gas is trapped at a measured set of initial conditions,
the combined gas law can be rewritten as
P i V i = k
T 3
i
As this gas is then subjected to changes in pressure and temperature,
the final condition of the gas can be described mathematically as
P V
f f = k
T 3
f
Since both expressions are equal to the same proportionality constant (k ),
3
the combined gas law can be written as
P i V i = P f V f
T T
i f
Sample Problem
Finding Volume: The Combined Gas Law
Problem
Sandra is having a birthday party on a mild winter’s day. The weath-
er changes and a higher-pressure (103.0 kPa) cold front (−25˚C) rush-
es into town. The original air temperature was −2˚C and the pressure
was 100.8 kPa. What will happen to the volume of the 4.2 L balloons
that were tied to the front of the house?
What Is Required?
You need to find the volume of the balloons under the new
conditions of temperature and pressure. (V =?)
f
Continued ...
Chapter 11 The Behaviour of Gases • MHR 453
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 453
What Is Given?
• You know the initial pressure, volume, and temperature.
Initial pressure (P) = 100.8kPa
i
Initial volume (V) = 4.2L
i
Initial temperature (T) = −2˚C
i
• You know the final pressure and temperature.
Final pressure (P ) = 103.0kPa
f
Final temperature (T ) = −25˚C
f
Plan Your Strategy
Algebraic method
• Since pressure and temperature both change, use the combined
gas law to find the final volume of the balloon.
• Since T is given in ˚C, you need to convert it to kelvins.
• You can rearrange the combined gas law and substitute num-
bers and units for the variables in the formula to solve for V.
f
Ratio method
• Since pressure and temperature change, you know that the
volume of the balloon will also change.
• Since T is given in ˚C, you need to convert it to kelvins.
• To find the new volume based on the increase in pressure,
you need to multiply the initial volume by a pressure ratio
that is less than one.
• To find the new volume based on the decrease in temperature,
you need to multiply the initial volume by a temperature ratio
that is less than one.
• To find the new volume based on both pressure and tempera-
ture changes, you can multiply the initial volume by the
pressure and temperature ratios.
PROBLEM TIP Act on Your Strategy
In these Sample Problems, you
Algebraic method
will see two different methods
T = (−2˚C+273) = 271K T = (−25˚C+273) = 248K
of solving the problem:the i f
algebraic method and the ratio P i V i = P f V f
method. Choose the method T T
f f
you prefer to solve this type
Solve the combined gas law, in this case for V.
of problem. f
Continued ...
454 MHR • Unit 4 Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 454
To isolate V , move T and P. Multiply T up to
f f f f
the numerator on the left side, and divide P down
f
to the denominator. This leaves
PVT
i i f = V
TP f
i f
(100.8kPa)(4.2L)(248K) = V
(271K)(103.0kPa) f
V = 3.76L
f
So V = 3.8L
f
Ratio method
T = (−2˚C+273) = 271K T = (−25˚C+273) = 248K
i f
V = V ×pressureratio×temperatureratio
f i
= 4.2L× 100.8kPa × 248K
103.0kPa 271K
= 3.76L ≅ 3.8L
Remember to change the answer to correct significant digits. The
least number of digits in the question was two, so the answer must
have only two significant digits. V f = 3.8 L.
Check Your Solution
• The unit for the answer is in litres.
• When the units cancel out, L remains.
• The volume of the balloon has decreased, as would be expected
when pressure increases and temperature decreases.
Sample Problem
Combined Gas Law
Problem
An automated instrument has been developed to help drug-research
chemists determine the amount of nitrogen in a compound. Any
compound containing carbon, nitrogen, and hydrogen is reacted
with copper(II) oxide to produce CO , H O, and N gases. The gases
2 2 2
are collected separately and analyzed.
In an analysis of 39.8 mg of caffeine using this instrument,
10.1 mL of N gas is produced at 23˚C and 746 torr. What must the
2
new temperature of nitrogen be, in ˚C, if the volume is increased
to 12.0 mL, and the pressure is increased to 780 torr?
What Is Required?
You need to find the temperature of the nitrogen under the new
conditions of volume and pressure. (T =?)
f
Continued ...
Chapter 11 The Behaviour of Gases • MHR 455
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 455
What Is Given?
• You know the initial pressure, volume, and temperature.
Initial pressure (P) = 746torr
i
Initial volume (V) = 10.1mL
i
Initial temperature (T) = 23˚C
i
• You know the final pressure and volume.
Final pressure (P ) = 780torr
f
Final volume (V ) = 12.0mL
f
Plan Your Strategy
Algebraic method
• Since pressure and volume both change, you will need to use
the combined gas law formula to find the final temperature of
the nitrogen.
• Since T is given in ˚C, you need to convert it to kelvins.
• You can rearrange the combined gas law and substitute num-
bers and units for the variables in the formula to solve for T .
f
Ratio method
• Since pressure and volume change, you know that the
temperature of the nitrogen will also change.
• Since T is given in ˚C, you need to convert it to kelvins.
• To find the new temperature based on the increase in pressure,
you need to multiply the initial volume by a pressure ratio that
is greater than one.
• To find the new temperature based on an increase in volume,
you need to multiply the initial temperature by a volume ratio
that is less than one.
• To find the new temperature based on both pressure and
volume changes, you can multiply the initial temperature by
the pressure and volume ratios.
Act on Your Strategy
Algebraic method
T = (23˚C+273) = 296K
i
P i V i = P f V f
T T
i f
Divide both sides by P V to isolate T .
f f f
P i V i = 1
TP V T
i f f f
Now flip both sides of the equation over:
TP V T
i f f = f
PV 1
i i
Continued ...
456 MHR • Unit 4 Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 456
Alternatively, you could have divided down PV and multiplied
i i
both T and T up. This is an equally correct procedure and the
f i
result would be the same. Put in the numbers:
(296K)(780torr)(12.0ml) = T
(746torr)(10.1ml) f
T = 368K
f
Since the question asks for the temperature in ˚C, you need to
convert kelvins to ˚C. To do this, subtract 273 from the answer.
T = (368−273)
f
= 95˚C (Note the correct number of significant digits.)
Ratio method
T = (23˚C+273) = 296K
i
T = T ×pressureratio×temperatureratio
f i
= 296K× 780torr × 12.0mL
746torr 10.1mL
= 368K
Since the question asks for the temperature in ˚C, you need to
convert kelvins to ˚C. To do this, subtract 273 from the answer.
T = (368−273)
f
= 95˚C (Note the correct number of significant digits.)
Check Your Solution
• The unit for the answer is in degrees Celcius.
• The temperature of the nitrogen has increased, as would be
expected when pressure and volume increase.
Practice Problems
17. A sample of gas has a volume of 150 mL at 260 K and 92.3 kPa.
What will the new volume be at 376 K and 123 kPa?
18. A cylinder at 48 atm pressure and 290 K releases 35 mL of carbon
dioxide gas into a 4.0 L container at 297 K. What is the pressure
inside the container?
19. In a large syringe, 48 mL of ammonia gas at STP is compressed
to 24 mL and 110 kPa. What must the new temperature of the
gas be?
20. A 100 W light bulb has a volume of 180.0 cm3 at STP. The light
bulb is turned on and the heated glass expands slightly, changing
the volume of the bulb to 181.5 cm3 with an internal pressure
of 214.5 kPa. What is the temperature of the light bulb (in ˚C)?
21. Sulfur hexafluoride, SF , is used as a chemical insulator. A
6(g)
5.0 L sample of this gas is collected at 205.0˚C and 350 kPa. What
pressure must be applied to this gas sample to reduce its volume
to 1.7 L at 25˚C?
Chapter 11 The Behaviour of Gases • MHR 457
Gases and Natural Phenomena
Gases under pressure are responsible for natural phenomena such as
volcanoes and geysers. On March 20, 1980, residents in the northern part
of Washington state heard a rumble from the mountains. They were told it
was only a minor earthquake. By March 27, seismologists were sure that
something more was involved. Deep inside one of the mountains, Earth’s
crust was moving. The lower portion of the crust was melting into hot
liquid called magma. The magma started rising up through cracks in the
crust. Trapped water quickly turned into superheated steam. Trapped
gases added to the increasing pressure inside the mountain. Then, on
May 18, 1980, the top half of Mount St. Helens blew away in a gigantic
explosion. It released all of the built-up pressure, along with many tonnes
of rock and ash, twenty kilometres into the atmosphere. It also released
steam, and gases such as carbon dioxide, nitrogen, and sulfur dioxide.
(See Figure 11.24.)
Figure 11.24 Before a volcano
erupts, there is a tremendous
build-up of fluid and gas
pressures inside the volcano due
to magma, steam, and gases.
Other gases released in volcanic explosions include the oxides, sulfides,
and chlorides of carbon, sulfur, hydrogen, chlorine, and fluorine. These
include CO , CO, SO , SO , H , H S, Cl , HCl, and F . It is estimated that
2 2 3 2 2 2 2
the eruption of Mt. Pinatubo in the Philippines on June 15, 1991 released
about 1.8×1010 kg of gases and ash into the atmosphere.
After a volcanic blast, or in an area of volcanic activity, geysers may
form. Cool water from Earth’s surface trickles down between rocks. It
drains deep into Earth’s crust, into regions where hot magma is still
present. As the water is heated, it forms steam. The steam rises back up
though fissures and cracks, meeting more water and heating it up as well.
More and more boiling water accumulates, until suddenly, through a
narrow opening, the pressurized hot water is violently ejected. As the
Figure 11.25 Geysers form in water cools in the air, it falls back and the process starts again.
areas of early volcanic activity Yellowstone National Park in the United States has one of the most
or after a volcanic blast. They famous geysers in the world, Old Faithful. It erupts approximately once
should be approached with every sixty-five minutes. (Figure 11.25 shows Old Faithful erupting.)
caution since the hot water that
In Chapter 12, you will learn more about the gas chemistry of
erupts can cause severe burns.
our atmosphere.
458 MHR • Unit 4 Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
Dalton’s Law of Partial Pressures
water
vacuum vapor
What if there are two gases in one container, or as in the case of the
atmosphere, a mixture of many gases? How does this affect the pressure? vapour
pressure
air pressure
The English scientist John Dalton did a very thorough analysis of the of water
of 101.3 kPa
atmosphere. He concluded that it comprised about 79% nitrogen and 21%
oxygen. (See Table 11.2 to find out how close he really was.) Dalton noticed
that the water vapour, however, seemed quite variable, so he did further
column of Hg
experiments. He obtained some very dry air, and measured the pressure 760 mm high
in the container. He then introduced some water vapour. The pressure
increased! Dalton repeated and adjusted his experiment time after time,
always with the same results. He concluded that the total pressure of a
mixture of gases is the sum of the pressures of each of the individual gases.
This is called Dalton’s Law of partial pressures. (See Figure 11.27 below.)
Figure 11.26 A method of
1.0 atm 1.5 atm
determining water vapour pres-
Gas A Gas B
Mixture of sure. A drop of water vapourizes
A and B
in the vacuum and the water
vapour exerts a pressure on the
mercury in the tube.
Piston
depressed
Figure 11.27 Gas A is stored
Closed Open at 0.5 atm and gas B at 1.0 atm.
When gas A is added to gas B,
PA = Ptotal PB = Ptotal Ptotal = PA + PB the total pressure exerted is now
= 0.50 atm = 1.0 atm = 1.5 atm 1.5 atm while the volume of the
nAA = 0.30 mol nB = 0.60 mol ntota l = 0.90 mol flask remains the same.
XA = 0.33 mol
A B XB = 0.67 mol
Table 11.2 Components of the Dry Atmosphere
The action of winds mixes the atmosphere so that the
Components Percentage
composition of the dry atmosphere is fairly constant over
Nitrogen (N 2 ) 78.08 the entire Earth. Water vapour, though an important compo-
Oxygen (O ) 20.95 nent of the atmosphere, is not listed in the table. The quantity
2
of water vapour in the air, or humidity, is variable. In desert
Argon (Ar) 0.93
climates, the quantity of water vapour will be very small (low
Carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) 0.03 humidity). In tropical areas, or near large bodies of water, the
Neon (Ne) 0.002 quantity of water vapour in the air can be quite substantial
(high humidity).
Other gases 0.008
Dalton extended this idea to enhance what he had discovered about the
composition of the atmosphere. If the atmosphere is 79% nitrogen, and
the atmospheric pressure on a certain day is, for example, 101.3 kPa,
then he concluded that the nitrogen itself must be contributing
79 ×101.3kPa = 80kPa
100
The other gases in the atmosphere contribute pressures corresponding to
their percentage of the total composition of air.
The generalized form of Dalton’s law of partial pressures is
P = P +P +P +... +P
total 1 2 3 n
This law can be applied to any mixture of gases. Study the following
Sample Problem and try the Practice Problems to verify your understand-
ing of how Dalton’s law works.
Chapter 11 The Behaviour of Gases • MHR 459
Sample Problem
Applying Dalton’s Law of Partial Pressures
Problem
What is the pressure contribution of CO to the atmospheric pressure
2
on a very dry day when the barometer read 0.98 atm? Convert your
answer into three different units.
What Is Required?
You must find the contribution of CO to the atmospheric pressure,
2
and then convert the units.
What Is Given?
• According to Table 11.2, CO contributes 0.03% of the
2
atmospheric pressure. The total atmospheric pressure is 0.98 atm.
The conversion factors of pressure are
1 atm = 760 torr = 760 mm Hg = 101.3 kPa
Plan Your Strategy
• You need to multiply the total atmospheric pressure times CO ’s
2
contribution to the total.
• Then you can multiply the answer in atm by the conversion factors
to cancel out atm and obtain other units.
Act on Your Strategy
0.03 ×0.98atm = 2.9×10 −4atm
100
2.9×10 −4atm× 101.3kPa = 0.030kPa
1atm
2.9×10 −4atm× 760torr = 0.22torr = 0.22mmHg
1atm
Check Your Solution
• The answers given are all very small. This is expected, as CO only
2
contributes a small percentage of gas molecules to the atmosphere.
Practice Problems
22. To speed up a reaction in a vessel pressurized at 98.0 kPa, a
chemist added 202.65 kPa of hydrogen gas. What was the
resulting pressure?
23. A gas mixture contains 12% Ne, 23% He, and 65% Rn. If the
total pressure is 116 kPa, what is the partial pressure of each gas?
24. The partial pressure of argon gas, making up 40% of a mixture,
is 325 torr. What is the total pressure of the mixture in kPa?
25. A mixture of nitrogen and carbon dioxide gas is at a pressure
of 1.00 atm and a temperature of 278 K. If 30% of the mixture is
nitrogen, what is the partial pressure of the carbon dioxide?
460 MHR • Unit 4 Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
Molar Mass and Gas Behaviour
In the following ThoughtLab, you will examine one more factor affecting
gas behaviour:
ThoughtLab Boiling Points of Gases
What effect does molar mass have on the Procedure
behaviour of a gas? In fact, molar mass helps to
1. Using a periodic table, record the molar mass
determine whether a compound or element is
of each of the gases listed in the table.
gaseous or not. You will examine the connection
2. Plot a graph of boiling points of gases (y-axis)
between boiling point and molar mass here.
versus their molar masses (x-axis).
Table 11.3 The Boiling Points of Various Gases
Analysis
Gas Boiling Point (˚C)
He −269 1. From the graph obtained, what relationship
Ne −246 exists between the molar mass of a gas and
N −196 its boiling point?
2
Ar −186 2. Using the graph, what would be the boiling
O −183 points of gases such as hydrogen (H 2 ),
2
Kr −153 fluorine (F 2 ) and radon (Rn)?
Xe −108 3. Predict whether a substance such as bromine
(Br ) would be a gas or liquid at room
2
temperature. Use a reference book to check
Materials
your answer.
graph paper; periodic table
Section Wrap-up
In this section, you learned how to use the combined gas law for gas
calculations. You also learned about natural phenomena that are related
to gases. Finally, you learned about Dalton’s law of partial pressures. In
Chapter 12, you will learn more about gas laws. First, however, you will
take a closer look at some technological applications of the gas laws.
Section Review
1 K/U In a large syringe, 48 mL of ammonia gas at STP is compressed
to 24 mL and 110 kPa. What must the new temperature of the gas be?
Explain the result in terms of kinetic molecular theory.
2 I Design an investigation to test Dalton’s law of partial pressure.
Write a procedure and list the materials and equipment you need.
3 C Explain Dalton’s law of partial pressure.
4 K/U What are the main components of the atmosphere?
5 MC Popcorn pops as the water in the kernel is vapourized. The
building pressure becomes too much for the shell of the kernel, and it
explodes. Explain, using your knowledge of the behaviour of gases,
what happens to the temperature just before and just after the kernel
pops. (Use a diagram to help you to visualize the situation.)
Chapter 11 The Behaviour of Gases • MHR 461
11.5 Gas Applications
Section Preview/ In the previous section, you learned about the colourless, odorless
Specific Expectations mixture of gases that make up the atmosphere. It is easy to take the air
around us for granted. You know that you need oxygen to breathe, but
In this section, you will
does it serve any other purposes? Nitrogen is not required for respiration,
(cid:2) identifytechnological prod-
but it composes about four-fifths of our atmosphere. Is nitrogen a
ucts based on compressed
gas “useless” gas? In this section, you will learn about how gases are used.
You will find out more about oxygen and nitrogen, and discover the
(cid:2) describehow a knowledge
of gases is used in other importance of gases in deep-sea exploration.
areas of study
Compressed Oxygen
(cid:2) communicateyour under-
standing of the following
You may never really think about breathing—until it becomes hard to do.
term: fuel cell
In certain situations, normal human respiratory functions are disrupted.
Hospitals use compressed oxygen for patients with respiratory disorders
such as emphysema, pneumonia, or lung cancer.
You may have heard of hyperbaric oxygen (HBO) chambers being used
to treat sports injuries. A high oxygen concentration in the blood causes
blood vessels to constrict. This lowers the swelling that can occur in
injured tissues. How is this high oxygen content delivered to the blood?
In an HBO chamber such as that shown in Figure 11.28, air is compressed
to three times normal atmospheric pressure. The patient breathes pure
oxygen (O ) through a mask. The highly compressed air forces O in
2(g) 2(g)
the lungs into the blood. This increases of dissolved O in the blood-
2(g)
stream. Consequently, oxygen is delivered rapidly to all the blood vessels
of the body. In fact, oxygen can reach the injured tissue at 15 times the
normal rate!
The use of compressed oxygen can benefit not only athletes, but also
vulnerable premature babies. Premature babies can be afflicted with hya-
line-membrane disease. This condition prevents the alveoli in their lungs
Figure 11.28 Medical applica-
from inflating, which leads to serious breathing difficulties. Placing these
tions of pressurized oxygen can
babies in an oxygen-rich environment such as an HBO or an incubator
help the very strong, the very
(Figure 11.28) helps inflate the alveoli. This increases the infants’ chances
weak, and everyone in between.
for survival.
462 MHR • Unit 4 Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
Oxygen at High Altitudes
At other times, respiratory functions may be normal, but the environment
poses problems. Commercial jet planes fly at an altitude of around 9.5 km.
Airplanes carry pressurized oxygen for their passengers to breathe as they
fly at high altitudes. Mountain climbers also need compressed oxygen
when climbing to great heights. Those exploring ocean depths need oxy-
gen as well. Scuba divers and submarine crews need compressed oxygen
to breathe when they are underwater. You will learn more about undersea
exploration later in this section.
Careers in Chemistry
Cancer Research Specialist into a specially designed incubator kept at about
37˚C, the optimum temperature for cell growth.
The National Cancer Institute of Canada estimates
This CO -enriched atmosphere plays two roles:
2
that in the year 2000 there were more than
• it is required for rapid cellular metabolism; and
132 000 new cases of cancer and 65 000 deaths
• it interacts with a bicarbonate buffer in the
caused by cancer in Canada. People are desper-
growth medium to maintain an optimum pH
ate for treatment.
balance.
Dr. Abdullah Kirumira, President and lead
scientist at BioMedica Diagnostics in Windsor,
Global Ties
Nova Scotia, has developed a way to speed up
drug testing. This method uses compressed In 1975, during the reign of dictator Idi Amin,
carbon dioxide and a dry chemistry diagnostics Dr. Kirumira fled his native Uganda to Iraq,
system including the firefly enzyme, luciferase. where he earned a B.Sc. in food technology.
He then travelled to England for a Master’s
degree in dairy chemistry. From there, he moved
to Australia where he earned his Ph.D. in
biotechnology. In 1990, he and his wife moved to
Nova Scotia in search of a slower-paced lifestyle.
At BioMedica, Dr. Kirumira oversees
12 employees, six of whom have advanced
degrees, three technicians and three administra-
tors. In addition, Dr. Kirumira teaches biochem-
istry and biotechnology at Acadia and Dalhousie
Universities.
He frequently visits his home in Uganda.
From Uganda, Dr. Kirumira says he can “take
back what I have learnt from the West to help
the people who probably need it the most.”
Make Career Connections
1. To learn more about the biotech applications
of using the firefly enzyme, luciferase, you can
Growing Cancer Cells for Testing go to BioMedica’s web site.
To obtain a consistent supply of cancer cells to 2. What universities offer degrees in biotechno-
test, CO is pumped from a compressed gas logy? Do research to find two universities near
2
cylinder. It is depressurized through a regulator you that offer this program.
Chapter 11 The Behaviour of Gases • MHR 463
Oxygen and Combustion
Web
LINK
A fire breaks out and smoke begins to fill the room. Breathing becomes
difficult. Should you open a window to let the smoke out before you leave
www.school.mcgrawhill.ca/re
sources/ through the door? You may have learned you should never open windows
CO is a greenhouse gas, before leaving the area of a fire. A fire can only burn as long as it has
2
thought to contribute to global sufficient oxygen. (See Figure 11.29.)
warming. Many countries Oxygen is an extremely important gas because it supports combustion.
around the world have sought
(You will learn more about combustion reactions in Unit 5.) The more
to reduce their emissions of
oxygen available, the hotter a fire will burn. Pressurized oxygen is used
CO . International climate con-
2
in the manufacture of steel and specialized alloys. In the manufacture of
trol treaties, such as the
Montréal Protocol, have set steel, oxygen is used to remove excess carbon by burning the carbon into
targets to do this. carbon monoxide or carbon dioxide. High levels of carbon make steel too
Since plants cycle CO out of brittle for many uses.
2
the atmosphere, several coun- A remarkable invention called the fuel cell is used by the space
tries including Canada have industry. Some fuel cells burn hydrogen and oxygen gas, leaving water as
argued that countries with a by-product (which astronauts can then drink). Companies such as
large forest resources should
Ballard Power Systems Inc. of Vancouver, British Columbia are working to
be able to claim them as “car-
make this technology practical for automobiles. Fuel cells are completely
bon sinks.” Rather than cutting
non-polluting. However, the current process for making large amounts of
their CO emissions by the tar-
2
hydrogen gas does create a good deal of pollution, in the form of CO .
get amount, Canada and other 2
countries maintain that they Coal or another hydrocarbon is used to heat up and decompose water in a
should be allowed to claim a reaction similar to the following:
reduction for the CO 2 absorbed CH +2H O h → eat CO +4H
by their large forests. 4(g) 2 (g) 2(g) 2(g)
Research the current debate Before astronauts can use the fuel cell in space, they first have to get
over “carbon sinks.” Do you there! Liquid oxygen is an important component of rocket fuel. Liquid
agree with the idea that CO 2 hydrogen and liquid oxygen are mixed and ignited in a combustion
absorbed by plant life provides
chamber. This reaction provides a very rapid expansion of gas. It produces
a valid strategy for controlling
enough energy to lift extremely heavy rockets carrying crewed vessels,
pollution? Go to the web site
such as the Space Shuttle, into orbit (Figure 11.30).
above. Go to Science
Resources, then toChemistry
11to find out where to go next.
Figure 11.29 Liquid water becomes water vapour Figure 11.30 The large centre tank that is attached to the shuttle
when exposed to the heat of a fire. Firefighters must orbiter has two compartments, one containing liquid hydrogen and
take precautions to avoid steam burns. the other containing liquid oxygen. The energy released by the reac-
tion between these two substances provides the thrust needed to
propel the orbiter into space.
464 MHR • Unit 4 Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
Nitrogen’s Many Uses
Inert gases are not very reactive. The word inert is also a synonym for
sluggish and slow. Something with the property of inertness hardly
sounds useful! Yet this very property makes nitrogen extremely valuable
in technological and industrial applications.
Because nitrogen gas reacts with very few substances, it can be used
to blanket substances, preventing them from reacting with oxygen. (A
reaction with oxygen is called oxidation.) Blanketing means covering
something with nitrogen, displacing all of the oxygen. This usually hap-
pens in a closed container. For example, ground coffee can taste bitter
when exposed to oxygen for long periods of time. Packaging coffee in a
nitrogen-enhanced container helps coffee keep its flavour. Gaseous nitro-
gen is also used for the long-term storage of fruits such as apples, allowing
us to enjoy a wide variety of produce out of season.
Liquid nitrogen’s low boiling point (77 K) means that it can be used in
food preservation. Foods frozen quickly in liquid nitrogen retain more
nutrients than slowly frozen foods. Less damage is done to cell structure
during the quick-freezing process. Freezing foods this way also removes
moisture, decreasing their weight and size. Freeze-dried foods are often
used by people who require easily portable, lightweight food, such as
campers, the military, and space explorers.
In cryosurgery, liquid nitrogen is used to fast-freeze cancerous tissues
and warts. This proven new technique kills the cancerous area and allows
surgeons to safely remove the dead tissue.
Gases and Undersea Exploration
Throughout history, humans have tried to explore the little-known world
of the deep seas. Even with modern diving gear, the deep oceans are a
dangerous place for humans. The air that a diver breathes to stay alive
underwater can itself be one of the greatest hazards. That’s because of the
tremendous pressure exerted by the waters above a diver. For roughly
every 10 metres of depth, water pressure on the diver’s body adds the
equivalent of one unit of atmospheric pressure (Figure 11.31).
The air that a diver breathes (mainly nitrogen and oxygen) must equal
the pressure of the surrounding water if the diver’s lungs are to stay
inflated. Of course, this gas pressure increases as a diver goes deeper.
As the gas pressure increases, the diver’s bloodstream and body tissues
absorb higher and higher volumes of gases.
Beyond depths of roughly 40–60 metres,
the increased volumes of gas in the diver’s body
can cause nitrogen narcosis. When nitrogen
narcosis strikes, normal feelings become danger-
ously exaggerated. A diver may experience a
blissful giddiness, along with disorientation and
impaired judgement. This condition is called
“rapture of the deep.” Divers in this state
have been known to remove their breathing
apparatus to swim like fish, mistake up for
down, or simply lose track of how long they
have been underwater.
At the other extreme, a diver’s normal sense
of caution may degenerate into irrational fear or Figure 11.31 At 50 m underwater, a diver experiences pressure
even panic. A panicked diver may do the very about five times higher than normal.
Chapter 11 The Behaviour of Gases • MHR 465
worst thing—rush to the surface without pausing to decompress on the
way up. Why is this dangerous?
The dissolved gases such as nitrogen in the diver’s bloodstream are
under pressure. This is much like the carbon dioxide that is dissolved in a
can of soda. If the diver returns to the surface too quickly, these dissolved
gases behave similarly to the gas in soda when a can is opened. The gases
escape from the blood as bubbles in the diver’s blood vessels. These bub-
bles can block the flow of blood. They produce a painful and potentially
fatal condition called “the bends.”
Both nitrogen narcosis and the bends make prolonged deep diving a
risky business. They limit both the safe depth and safe duration of human
diving. Even skilled professional divers rarely descend beyond about
50 metres. Also, they rarely remain at that depth for much more than
30 minutes.
Section Wrap-up
Electronic Learning Partner In this section, you learned about some technological products
and applications involving gases. You also learned that a knowledge of
Your Chemistry 11 Electronic gases is important in other areas of study, such as medicine and deep-sea
Learning Partner has a demon- exploration.
stration of CO 2 fire extinguish- In Chapter 12, you will find out about the ideal gas law. This law
ers and the chemistry behind
covers the many different gas laws you explored in this chapter. You will
their use.
also discover a practical application for Dalton’s law of partial pressures.
You will learn how to do stoichiometric calculations for reactions that
consume or produce a gas. In the laboratory, you will have a chance
to produce and collect a gas. At the end of the next chapter, you will
examine some of the chemistry that takes place in our atmosphere.
Section Review
1 C Why is fuel-cell technology, in its present state, not a pollution-free
Unit Issue Prep alternative to the internal combustion gasoline engine?
What gases are produced as a
2 K/U Describe three industrial uses for liquid nitrogen.
result of human technologies
such as fuel-burning engines? 3 MC How might covering apples with nitrogen or carbon dioxide
gas preserve them longer through the winter?
4 K/U How does a hyperbaric oxygen chamber work to assist
human healing?
5 MC Look up the standard mixture of gases for scuba diving tanks.
What problem arises in using nitrogen gas in scuba tanks? How is this
problem solved?
6 MC What does lightning (or bacteria) do to the nitrogen in the diatom-
ic gas in order to make the atoms useful to plants? Use what you know
about compounds and elements to answer this question.
7 MC Interview the science teachers at your school. Are there any
compressed gas cylinders in the school? Ask the teachers about the
appropriate safety precautions for compressed gases. Then prepare a
short safety report on compressed gases in your school.
466 MHR • Unit 4 Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
Review
Reflecting on Chapter 11 2. Using the kinetic molecular theory, answer
each of the following questions.
Summarize this chapter in the format of your
(a) What does it mean when we say that the
choice. Here are a few ideas to use as guidelines.
• Describe the structure of solids, liquids, and pressure of a gas has increased?
(b) What does it mean when we say that the
gases in simple terms.
• Compare the intermolecular forces that hold temperature of a gas has decreased?
solids together with those that hold liquids and 3.(a) Give a real example that illustrates
gases together. Boyle’s law.
• Use the kinetic molecular theory to describe the (b) Give an example that illustrates Charles’ law.
behaviour of ideal gases. 4. What is the kinetic molecular theory
• Explain Boyle’s law. explaination for 0 K?
• Explain Charles’ law.
5. Explain Gay-Lussac’s law in terms of the
• Explain Gay-Lussac’s law.
motion of gas particles.
• Describe how gases under pressure are the cause
6. Explain Dalton’s law of partial pressures in
of some of the natural wonders of our Earth.
• Describe how gases under pressure have many terms of the motion of gas particles.
industrial and medical uses. 7. How is a volcano an example of a natural
• Explain Dalton’s law of partial pressure. occurrence in which pressures of gases are of
major importance?
Reviewing Key Terms
8. List four major and four minor components of
For each of the following terms, write a sentence the atmosphere.
that shows your understanding of its meaning. 9. How is pure oxygen used medically and
atmospheres absolute zero industrially?
Boyle’s law Charles’ law
10. Nitrogen is one of the most important industri-
closed system combined gas law
al substances produced on Earth. Why is it so
Condensation fuel cell
important industrially?
Dalton’s law of partial Gay-Lussac’s law
11. Would the column of mercury in a barometer
pressures kilopascals
be shorter at the top of a mountain or at the
fusible plugs mmHg
base of the mountain? Explain.
ideal gas pressure-relief valve
Kelvin scale standard temperature 12. Using the kinetic molecular theory, explain
kinetic molecular theory and pressure (STP) why the density of a gas is less than that of a
of gases standard temperature liquid. (Density is mass per unit of volume.)
pascal standard atmospheric 13. A weather balloon containing helium is
standard atmospheric pressure released into the atmosphere. As it rises, atmos-
pressure pheric pressure and temperature both decrease.
standard ambient Explain why the size of the balloon increases.
temperature and
pressure (SATP) Inquiry
14. Below are two diagrams showing a trapped gas.
Knowledge/Understanding
The volume of the gas in container A can be
1. Gases behave differently than solids and changed to become the same volume as the gas
liquids. Using what you know about forces in container B. Describe how you could do this
between molecules, explain some of these in the laboratory.
differences.
Chapter 11 The Behaviour of Gases • MHR 467
nitrogen, at a pressure of 101.3 kPa. What
volume will the nitrogen occupy at this
temperature?
21. A 75.3 L sample of oxygen gas at 25.7˚C is
cooled until its final volume becomes 10 L.
If the pressure remains constant, what is the
final temperature (in ˚C)?
22. Calculate the volumes that each of the
following gases would occupy at STP.
(a) 22.4 L of oxygen at 75˚C and 700 torr.
A B (b) 100 cm3 of nitrogen at 20˚C and 150.0 kPa.
(c) 45 mL of neon at −50.˚C and 200 kPa.
15. You have carried out investigations to deter-
23. A birthday balloon contains 2.0 L of air at STP.
mine the relationship between pressure and
What volume will the balloon have at SATP?
volume, and between temperature and volume.
How could you investigate the relationship 24. A mixture of neon and argon gases is collected
between pressure and temperature? at 102.7 kPa. If the partial pressure of the neon
(a) Write up a procedure to determine the is 52.5 kPa, what is the partial pressure of
relationship between the pressure and argon?
temperature of a gas. 25. A 250 mL glass vessel is filled with krypton gas
(b) Identify any problems with your procedure. at a pressure of 700 torr at 25.0˚C. If the glass
How could you overcome these problems? vessel is made to withstand a pressure of
(c) What materials will you need? 2.0 atm, to what maximum temperature (in ˚C)
(d) What variables will you hold constant? can you safely heat the flask?
(e) What variable will you change?
26. A cylinder with a moveable piston contains
(f) What variable will you measure?
hydrogen gas collected at 30˚C. The piston is
16. The pressure exerted on 0.25 L of nitrogen is moved until the volume of the hydrogen is
120 kPa. What volume will this gas occupy at halved. The pressure inside the container has
60 kPa if the temperature and number of moles increased to 125 kPa at 30˚C. What was the
is constant? initial pressure inside the cylinder?
17. Ammonia gas, NH 3(g) , is used in the production 27. Argon gas is used inside light bulbs because it
of fertilizer. At 55.0˚C, a sample of ammonia is a plentiful inert gas. 650 cm3 of argon gas at
gas is found to exert a pressure of 7.5 atm. STP is heated in order to double its volume at
What pressure will the gas exert if its volume is 101.3 kPa. What is the final temperature (in˚C)?
reduced to one fifth of its original volume at
28. A truck leaves Yellowknife in early January
55.0˚C? when the temperature is −30.0˚C. The tires of
18. A 35.0 L sample of dry air at 750 torr is com- the truck are inflated to 210 kPa. Four days
pressed to a volume of 20 L. What is the final later, the truck arrives in California where the
pressure exerted on the gas if the temperature temperature is 30.0˚C. What is the air pressure
remains constant? in the tires when the truck arrives at its
19. A 25 g sample of dry air in a large party destination?
balloon at 20˚C occupies a volume of 20 L. If 29. Methane (CH ), a natural gas, is stored in a
4
the temperature is increased to 40˚C at constant 100 L tank at −10˚C and a pressure of
pressure, how large will the balloon become? 125 atm. The gas is used to provide fuel for
20. A sample of nitrogen gas has a volume of a furnace that heats a country home during the
10 L at 101.3 kPa and 20˚C. To preserve winter. The furnace consumes an average of
biological tissue, the nitrogen gas is cooled 500 L of methane a day. How long will this
to −190˚C, almost the temperature of liquid supply of methane last if it is burned at 450˚C
at a pressure of 102 kPa?
468 MHR • Unit 4 Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
30. Neon gas is widely used as the luminous gas in 38. Do research to find out how carbonated drinks
signs. A sample of neon has a volume of 5.5 L get their “fizz.” Prepare a short PowerPoint™
at 750 torr at 10.0˚C. If the gas is expanded to a presentation to the class that describes the
volume of 7.5 L at a pressure of 400 torr, what manufacture of a typical soft drink.
will its final temperature be (in ˚C)?
Making Connections
31. Halogen lamp bulbs are usually filled with
bromine or iodine vapour at 5.0 atm pressure. 39. Coal is a fossil fuel that is burned to obtain
When turned on, the glass bulb can heat up to energy. However, carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) gas is
more than 1150˚C. If room temperature is 20˚C, produced whenever coal is burned. What are
what will the pressure in the bulb be when it the benefits and risks of burning coal to obtain
reaches its operating temperature? energy? What are the alternatives?
(a) Do research to answer these questions.
32. Helium gas is stored in a steel cylinder with a
(b) Should the government shut down all
volume of 100 L at 20˚C. The pressure gauge on
coal-burning power plants in Canada to help
the cylinder indicates a pressure of 25 atm. The
prevent global warming? Carry out this
cylinder is used to blow up a weather balloon
debate with your class. Divide the class into
at 25˚C. If the final pressure in the cylinder
the executives of a coal-burning power plant,
and the balloon is 1.05 atm, how large will the
and scientists representing an environmen-
balloon be?
talist group.
33. A scuba diver is swimming 30.0 m below the
40. Interview a doctor or nurse who works at a hos-
surface of Lake Ontario. At this depth, the
pital. Find out how compressed gases are used
pressure of the water is 4.0 atm and the temper-
at the hospital, and what safety precautions
ature is 8.0˚C. A bubble of air with a volume of
are taken.
5.0 mL escapes from the diver’s mask. What
will the volume of the bubble be when it breaks 41. Suppose you are a member of a consulting firm
the surface of the water? The atmospheric that is approached by the Ministry of the
pressure is 101.3 kPa and the temperature of Environment. You are asked to prepare a report
the water is 24.0˚C. on how the government can help reduce CO 2
and CH gas emissions. Both gases are impor-
4
Communication tant greenhouse gases that may be causing
34. The weather person on television reports that global warming.
the barometric pressure is 100.2 kPa. How (a) Identify the information you will need to
prepare this report. This may take the form
high a column of mercury will this air pressure
of a list of questions.
support?
(b) Research the answers to your questions.
35. Convert each of the following pressures:
(c) Prepare a short report giving suggestions on
(a) 1.5 atm to kPa
how the Canadian government could help
(b) 135.5 kPa to mm Hg
reduce CO and CH gas emissions.
(c) 750 mm Hg to torr 2 4
Answers to Practice Problems and
36. On a visit to your doctor, your blood pressure
Numerical Section Review Questions
is taken. The reading is 125.0 mm Hg systolic
Practice Problems: 1.1.0×103kPa 2.1644 L 3.4.5cm3
and 80.0 mm Hg diastolic. What is your blood
4.0.01 L 5.(a)298 K (b)310 K (c)423 K 6.(a)100˚C
pressure in kPa? (b)–175˚C (c)152˚C 8.3.86×102mL 9.2.1 L 10.606˚C
37. Convert the following temperatures. 11.957˚C 12.127 L 13.2.71×102kPa 14.18.8 atm
(a) −185.5˚C to K 15.–16˚C 16.31˚C 17.163 mL 18.0.43 atm 19.148 K
20.310˚C 21.6.4×102kPa 22.300.6 kPa 23.14 kPa,
(b) 125 K to ˚C
27 kPa, 75 kPa 24.1.08×102kPa 25.0.70 atm
Section Review: 11.1 3.(a)liquid (b)gas (c)solid
11.2 1.(a)206 kPa (b)0.841 atm (c)1.14×103torr
(d) 80.0 kPa 4.1.04 L 5.152 kPa 6.811 torr
11.3 2.(a)52.1 kPa (b)8.3 L 11.4 1.148 K
Chapter 11 The Behaviour of Gases • MHR 469
470
Exploring Gas Laws
You are probably used to sharing scientific ideas and observations with
your classmates as you work in pairs or in small groups. If you are famil- Chapter Preview
iar with Internet chat rooms and e-mail, you may even share your ideas
12.1 The Ideal Gas Law
with people around the world. Sharing scientific ideas is an essential part
12.2 Applications of the Ideal
of scientific discovery. Back in the early nineteenth century, the ideas that
Gas Law
led to the complete gas laws were shared between colleagues in much the
same way that you share scientific ideas with your classmates. 12.3 Gas Law Stoichiometry
During the nineteenth century, scientists across Europe organized 12.4 Atmospheric Reactions
academies, or science societies. (This practice still exists today.) and Pollution
Belonging to an academy allowed much more communication among
scientists. They read the papers and reports that other scientists had
published, wrote letters, and held meetings to discuss ideas. They worked
together to develop many important theories and laws, including the
gas laws.
In this chapter, you will study more of the gas laws. Although these
laws were discovered almost 200 years ago, they are still accepted today.
You will learn how the gas laws allow you to solve many problems
involving gas behaviour. You will also learn about some of the modern
Concepts and Skills
applications and technological advances associated with the gas laws.
You Will Need
You will have a chance to test the gas laws through your own experiments
Before you begin this chapter,
and to compare your results with those of early scientists. Finally, you
review the following concepts
will learn about some of the gas reactions that occur in our atmosphere.
and skills:
(cid:2) manipulating equations
algebraically, and
applying them to solve
problems (Chapter 11,
section 11.4)
(cid:2) using correct significant
digits in problem solving
(Chapter 1, section 1.2)
(cid:2) converting an amount
in grams to an amount in
moles, and then to a num-
ber of atoms or molecules
(Chapter 5, section 5.3)
(cid:2) solving stoichiometry
problems, including writ-
ing balanced equations
(Chapter 4, section 4.1
and Chapter 7, section7.1)
How did sharing scientific
observations lead to the
gas laws?
Chapter 12 Exploring Gas Laws • MHR 471
12.1 The Ideal Gas Law
Section Preview/ Near the beginning of the nineteenth century, Joseph Gay-Lussac experi-
Specific Expectations mented with the volumes of gases. He found that adding two volumes
of gas to one volume of gas produced only two volumes of gas. Puzzled,
In this section, you will
Gay-Lussac tried adding three volumes of gas to one volume. The result
(cid:2) stateAvogadro’s hypothesis,
was still two! When he tried adding one volume of gas to a second
and explainhow it con-
tributes to our understanding volume of gas, again the result was two. What was going on?
of the reactions of gases In England, around the same time, John Dalton studied the masses
(cid:2) describethe quantitative of compounds as they reacted to produce products. After Dalton read
relationships that exist about the similar work of other scientists, such as Lavoisier and the
among pressure, volume, British scientist Joseph Priestley, he contacted Gay-Lussac. He described
temperature, and amount his results and hypotheses to Gay-Lussac. In 1808, both men published
of substance, based on the
their theories. After examining the theories of Dalton and Gay-Lussac, an
ideal gas law
Italian scientist named Amedeo Avogadro formulated a hypothesis that
(cid:2) solvequantitative problems combined their theories.
involving the ideal gas law
(cid:2) useand convertappropriate
units to express pressure
and temperature
(cid:2) communicateyour under-
standing of the following
terms: law of combining
volumes, law of multiple
proportions, Avogadro’s
hypothesis, molar volume,
ideal gas law
Joseph Louis John Dalton Amedeo Avogadro
Gay-Lussac
French English Italian
1778-1853 1766-1844 1776-1856
\Figure The information that was shared by these three scientists led to the gas
laws that we use today.
The Molar Volume of Gases
Gay-Lussac measured the volumes of gases before and after a reaction.
His research led him to devise the law of combining volumes: When gases
react, the volumes of the reactants and the products, measured at equal
temperatures and pressures, are always in whole number ratios. For
example, 2 volumes of hydrogen gas react with 1 volume of oxygen gas
to produce 2 volumes of water vapour.
472 MHR • Unit 4 Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
John Dalton examined the masses of compounds before and after a
Language
LINK
reaction. Dalton’s research led him to propose the law of multiple
proportions: The masses of the elements that combine can be expressed
The word symposiumcomes
in small whole number ratios.
from the ancient Greeks. A
By combining these ideas, Avogadro related the volume of a gas to the symposium was a gathering
amount that is present (calculated from the mass). Avogadro divided of intellectuals to drink, feast,
Dalton’s mass ratios by the molar masses of the elements to obtain the and talk. All sorts of new ideas
mole ratios. He realized that these mole ratios were the same as the vol- arose from these meetings.
The participants took away
ume ratios that Gay-Lussac had obtained. For example, 1 L of hydrogen
the new ideas to work on them
gas reacts with 1 L of chlorine gas. Avogadro decided that there must be
further. Then they brought
the same number of molecules in each litre of gas. Thus, Avogadro’s
their findings back to the next
hypothesis was formulated: Equal volumes of all ideal gases at the same
symposium.
temperature and pressure contain the same number of molecules.
Many scientific laws are given
Figures 12.2, 12.3, and 12.4 show the three reactions that produced
the name of one person. It
Gay-Lussac’s confusing observations. You can see that the mole ratios are is important to remember, how-
the same as the volume ratios. Today our knowledge of atoms and mole- ever, that most laws are the
cules helps us understand Gay-Lussac’s results. We know that gases are culmination of many scientists’
made of molecules that may contain more than one atom. work over a long time. Science
would never move forward
without ideas being shared.
Look up the word “symposium”
in a dictionary. What meaning
does it have today? Do a quick
Internet search of the word
“symposium.” What modern
symposiums can you find?
What subjects do they cover?
hydrogen gas + oxygen gas water vapour
2 H + 1 O 2 H O
2(g) 2(g) 2 (g)
2 mol 1 mol 2 mol
2 volumes 1 volume 2 volumes
Figure 12.2 Hydrogen and oxygen gases combine to form water vapour. As a class, hold a symposium
about gas balloons. Research
hot air balloons and helium
balloons. Also research any
other information about bal-
loons, the history of ballons,
and balloon travel that
interests you. Prepare papers
and posters to share your
information.
hydrogen gas + chlorine gas hydrogen chloride gas
1 H + 1 Cl 2 HCl
2(g) 2(g) (g)
1 mol 1 mol 2 mol
1 volume 1 volume 2 volumes
Figure 12.3 Hydrogen and chlorine gases combine to form hydrogen chloride gas.
Chapter 12 Exploring Gas Laws • MHR 473
hydrogen gas + nitrogen gas ammonia gas
3 H + 1 N 2 NH
2(g) 2(g) 3(g)
3 mol 1 mol 2 mol
3 volumes 1 volume 2 volumes
Figure 12.4 Hydrogen and nitrogen combine to form ammonia gas.
Avogadro’s hypothesis can be written as a mathematical law, shown here.
Avogadro’s Law
Avogadro’s law gives us a mathematical relationship between the
volume of a gas (V) and the number of moles of gas present (n).
n α V or n = kV or n 1 = n 2
V V
1 2
where n = numberofmoles
V = volume
k = aconstant
The next Sample Problem Based on Avogadro’s law, one mole of a gas occupies the same volume as
involves the combined gas law. one mole of another gas at the same temperature and pressure. The molar
Review this law in section 11.4 volume of a gas is the space that is occupied by one mole of the gas. Molar
before continuing.
volumeis measured in units of L/mol. You can find the molar volume of
V
a gas by dividing its volume by the number of moles that are present ( ).
n
Look at the Sample Problem below to find out how to calculate molar
volume. Then complete the following Thought Lab to find the molar
volumes of carbon dioxide gas, oxygen gas, and methane gas at STP.
Sample Problem
The Molar Volume of Nitrogen
Problem
A resealable 1.30 L container has a mass of 4.73 g. Nitrogen gas,
N , is added to the container until the pressure is 98.0 kPa at
2(g)
22.0˚C. Together, the container and the gas have a mass of 6.18 g.
Calculate the molar volume of nitrogen gas at STP.
What Is Required?
You need to find the volume of one mole of nitrogen (the molar
volume) at STP.
Continued ...
474 MHR • Unit 4 Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 474
What Is Given?
Set out all the data in a table like the one shown below.
Situation 1: in the container Situation 2: at STP
P = 98.0 kPa P = 101.3 kPa
i f
V = 1.30 L V = ?
i f
T = 22.0˚C, or 295 K T = 0˚C, or 273 K
i f
m = 6.18 g − 4.73 g = 1.45 g m = 1.45 g
i f
(Subtract the mass of the container.) (The mass remains the same.)
n = ? n = n = ?
i f i
Plan Your Strategy
PROBLEM TIP
Algebraic method
In the Sample Problem, you
Step 1 Calculate the number of moles of nitrogen gas (n) by will see two different methods
i
dividing the mass of the nitrogen in the container by of solving the problem: the
algebraic method and the
the molar mass of nitrogen gas (28.02 g/mol).
ratio method. Choose the
n = m method you prefer to solve
M
this type of problem.
Step 2 Use the combined gas law from Chapter 11 to find the
volume of nitrogen at STP (V).
f
Step 3 Use the volume (V) and the number of moles (n = n ) to
f f i
V
find the molar volume ( ). The molar volume is the
n
volume of one mole of gas.
Molarvolumes = V
n
Ratio method
Step 1 Calculate the number of moles of nitrogen gas (n) by
i
dividing the mass of the nitrogen in the container by the
molar mass of nitrogen gas (28.02 g/mol).
n = m
M
Step 2 Since the pressure increases from 98.0 kPa to 101.3 kPa,
the volume will decrease. Multiply the initial volume by a
pressure ratio that is less than 1. Since the temperature
decreases from 295 K to 273 K, the volume will decrease
further. Multiply the initial volume by a temperature ratio
that is less than 1.
Step 3 Since there is less than 1 mol of nitrogen gas present, the
volume of 1 mol of nitrogen gas (the molar volume) will be
greater than the volume you calculated in step 2. To find
the molar volume, multiply by a mole ratio that is greater
than 1.
Continued ...
Chapter 12 Exploring Gas Laws • MHR 475
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 475
Act on Your Strategy
Algebraic method
Step 1 Calculate the number of moles.
n = m
M
1.45g
=
28.02g/mol
= 0.0517mol
Step 2 Find the volume of nitrogen at STP.
P i V i = P f V f
T T
i f
∴V = P i V i T f
f TP
i f
=
98.0kPa×1.30L×273K
295K×101.3kPa
= 1.16L
Step 3 Find the molar volume.
Molarvolume = V/n
= 1.16L
0.0517mol
= 22.4L/mol
Therefore, the molar volume of nitrogen at STP is 22.4 L/mol.
Ratio method
Step 1 Calculate the number of moles.
n = m
M
1.45g
=
28.02g/mol
= 0.0517mol
Step 2 V is the final volume of the nitrogen gas.
f
V = 1.30L× 98.0kPa × 273K
f 101.3kPa 295K
= 1.16L
Step 3 V is the volume of 1 mol of the nitrogen gas.
m
V = 1.16L× 1.00mol
m 0.0517mol
= 22.4L
The molar volume is equal to the volume V divided by 1.00
m
mol. Thus the molar volume is 22.4 L/mol.
Check Your Solution
The answer is expressed in the correct units. It agrees with the
accepted value. There are three significant digits in the answer. This
is consistent with the least number of significant digits in the question.
Continued ...
476 MHR • Unit 4 Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 476
Practice Problems
1. At 19˚C and 100 kPa, 0.021 mol of oxygen gas, O , occupy a
2(g)
volume of 0.50 L. What is the molar volume of oxygen gas at this
temperature and pressure?
2. What is the molar volume of hydrogen gas, H , at 255˚C and
2(g)
102 kPa, if a 1.09 L volume of the gas has a mass of 0.0513 g?
3. A sample of helium gas, He , has a mass of 11.28 g. At STP, the
(g)
sample has a volume of 63.2 L. What is the molar volume of this
gas at 32.2˚C and 98.1 kPa?
4. In the Sample Problem, you discovered that the molar volume of
nitrogen gas is 22.4 L at STP.
(a) How many moles of nitrogen are present in 10.0 L at STP?
(b) What is the mass of this gas sample?
ThoughtLab Molar Volume of Gases
Two students decided to calculate the molar Procedure
volumes of carbon dioxide, oxygen, and methane
1. Copy the table into your notebook.
gas. First they measured the mass of an empty
2. Calculate the molar volume of carbon dioxide
150 mL syringe under vacuum conditions. This
gas at the given temperature and pressure,
ensured that the syringe did not contain any air.
and at STP. Write your calculations and
Next they filled the syringe with 150 mL of carbon
answers in the table.
dioxide gas. They measured and recorded the
mass of the syringe plus the gas. The students 3. Do the same calculations for oxygen and
repeated their procedure for oxygen gas and for methane gas. Write your calculations and
methane gas. answers in the table.
Finally, the students found the temperature
Analysis
of the room to be 23.0˚C (296 K). They found the
pressure to be 98.7 kPa. They took these values 1. Compare the three molar volumes at STP.
to be the temperature and pressure of the three What do you observe?
gases. The students’ results are given in the table. 2. The accepted molar volume of a gas at STP
is 22.4 L/mol. Use this value to calculate the
percent error in your experimental data for
each gas.
Three Gases at 296 K and 98.7 kPa
Gas carbon dioxide oxygen methane
Volume of gas (V) 150 mL 150 mL 150 mL
Mass of empty syringe 25.08 g 25.08 g 25.08 g
Mass of gas + syringe 25.34 g 25.27 g 25.18 g
Mass of gas (m)
Molar mass (M)
Number of moles of gas (n = m/M)
Volume of gas at STP (273 K and 101.3 kPa)
Molar volume at STP (MV = V/n)
Chapter 12 Exploring Gas Laws • MHR 477
In the Thought Lab, you found that the molar volume of one gas is roughly
the same as the molar volume of another gas at the same temperature and
pressure. In fact, the molar volume of an ideal gas at STP is 22.4 L/mol.
Figure 12.5 shows a balloon with a volume of 22.4 L compared to some
common objects. This is a fairly large volume of gas. For example, a
basketball has a volume of only 7.5 L.
Figure 12.5 One mole of any gas at STP occupies 22.4 L (22.4 dm3). How large is 22.4 L?
The other objects are shown for comparison.
In Chapter 11, you learned that temperature, pressure, and volume are
What are the temperature and
related. Based on Avogadro’s law, the number of moles is related to the
pressure at STP? Go back to
temperature, pressure, and volume of a gas. Therefore, Avogadro’s law can
section 11.4 to remind yourself.
be applied to solve gas problems involving moles and volume, when the
temperature and pressure remain constant. Figure 12.6 explains the rela-
tionship among temperature, pressure, volume, and number of moles of
a gas.
The following Sample Problems show you how to do gas calculations
using Avogadro’s law.
Patm
Gas
Patm Patm Pgas
n increases V increases
Pgas Pgas
fixedT
Pgas = Patm More molecules V increases until
increase collisions: Pgas = Patm
Pgas > Patm
Figure 12.6 At a temperature (T), a given amount of a gas (n) produces a pressure (P).
When more gas is added, the number of moles (n) increases. This results in more molec-
ular collisions with the container walls, thus increasing the pressure of the gas. The
volume (V) of the gas increases until the pressure is again equal to the pressure of the
surroundings.
478 MHR • Unit 4 Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
Sample Problem
Volumes of Gases
Problem
What is the volume of 3.0 mol of nitrous oxide, NO , at STP?
2(g)
What Is Required?
You need to find the volume of nitrous oxide at STP (V).
f
What Is Given?
You know that 1.00 mol of a gas occupies 22.4 L at STP.
∴ n = 1.0mol
i
V = 22.4L
i
n = 3.0 mol of NO
f 2
Plan Your Strategy
PROBLEM TIP
Algebraic method
In these Sample Problems, you
Use Avogadro’s law: n i = n f will see two different methods
V V
i f of solving the problem: the
Cross multiply to solve for V f , the unknown volume of NO 2 . algebraic method and the
ratio method. Choose the
method you prefer to solve
Ratio method
this type of problem.
There are 3 mol of nitrous oxide. Thus, the volume of nitrous
oxide at STP must be larger than the volume of 1 mol of gas at
STP. Multiply by a mole ratio that is greater than 1.
Act on Your Strategy
Algebraic method
V = n f V i
f n
i
=
3.0mol×22.4L
1.00mol
= 67L
Ratio method
V = 22.4L× 3.0mol
f 1.0mol
= 67L
Therefore, there are 67 L of nitrous oxide.
Check Your Solution
The significant digits and the units are all correct.
The volume of nitrous oxide is three times the volume of 1 mol of
gas at STP. This makes sense, since there are 3 mol of nitrous oxide.
Chapter 12 Exploring Gas Laws • MHR 479
Sample Problem
Moles of Gas
Problem
Suppose that you have 44.8 L of methane gas at STP.
(a) How many moles are present?
(b) What is the mass (in g) of the gas?
(c) How many molecules of gas are present?
What Is Required?
(a) You need to calculate the number of moles.
(b) You need to calculate the mass of the gas.
(c) You need to calculate the number of molecules.
What Is Given?
The gas is at STP. Thus 1.00 mol of gas has a volume of 22.4 L.
You know that one mole contains 6.02×1023 molecules. There are
44.8 L of gas.
Plan Your Strategy
Algebraic method
(a) Use Avogadro’s law. Solve for the number of moles by cross
multiplying.
(b) Multiply the number of moles (n) by the molar mass (M) to
find the mass of the gas (m).
m = n×M
(c) Multiply the number of moles (n) by the Avogadro constant
(6.02×1023) to find the number of molecules.
# ofmolecules = n×6.02×1023molecules/mol
Ratio method
(a) The volume of the unknown gas is 44.8 L. Since the volume
is greater than 22.4 L, there is more than 1 mol of gas. To find
the unknown number of moles (n), multiply by a volume ratio
that is greater than 1.
(b) Multiply the number of moles (n) by the molar mass (M) to
find the mass of the gas (m).
m = n×M
(c) Multiply the number of moles (n) by the Avogadro constant
(6.02×1023) to find the number of molecules.
# ofmolecules = n×6.02×1023molecules/mol
Continued ...
480 MHR • Unit 4 Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 480
Act on Your Strategy
Algebraic method
(a) n i = n f
V V
i f
n = n i V f
f V
i
=
1.00mol×44.8L
22.4L
= 2.00mol
(b) Find the molar mass of methane, CH .
4
1C = 1×12.01 g/mol
4H = 4×1.01g/mol
M = 16.05g/mol
CH4
m = n×M
= 2.00mol×16.05g/mol
= 32.1g
(c) # molecules = 2.00mol×6.02×1023 molecules
mol
= 1.20×1024molecules
Ratio method
(a) n = 1.00mol× 44.8L
22.4L
= 2.00mol
(b) Find the molar mass of methane, CH .
4
1C = 1×12.01 g/mol
4H = 4×4.04g/mol
M = 16.05g/mol
CH4
m = n×M
= 2.00mol×16.05g/mol
= 32.1g
(c) # molecules = 2.00mol×6.02×1023 molecules
mol
= 1.20×1024molecules
Therefore, 2.00 mol of methane are present. The mass
of the gas is 32.1 g. 1.20×1024 molecules are present.
Check Your Solution
The significant digits are correct.
The volume of methane is double the volume of 1 mol of gas.
It makes sense that 2 mol of methane are present. It also makes
sense that the number of molecules present is double the
Avogadro constant.
Chapter 12 Exploring Gas Laws • MHR 481
Practice Problems
PROBLEM TIP
To solve many of these 5. A balloon contains 2.0 L of helium gas at STP. How many moles of
problems, try setting up a helium are present?
proportion and solving by
6. How many moles of gas are present in 11.2 L at STP? How many
cross multiplication.
molecules?
7. What is the volume, at STP, of 3.45 mol of argon gas?
8. A certain set of conditions allows 4.0 mol of gas to be held in
Table 12.1 Molar Volume
of Several Real Gases at STP a 70 L container. What volume do 6.0 mol of gas need under
the same conditions of temperature and pressure?
Molar volume
Gas (L/mol) 9. At STP, a container holds 14.01 g of nitrogen gas, 16.00 g of oxygen
helium, He 22.398 gas, 66.00 g of carbon dioxide gas, and 17.04 g of ammonia gas.
What is the volume of the container?
neon, Ne 22.401
argon, Ar 22.410 10.(a) What volume do 2.50 mol of oxygen occupy at STP?
hydrogen, H 22.430 (b) How many molecules are present in this volume of oxygen?
2
nitrogen, N 22.413 (c) How many oxygen atoms are present in this volume of oxygen?
2
oxygen, O 2 22.414 11. What volume do 2.00×1024 atoms of neon occupy at STP?
carbon 22.414
dioxide, CO
2
ammonia, NH 22.350 Volumes of Real Gases
3
You know that ideal gases have a volume of 22.4 L at STP. Do real gases
have the same volume? The volumes of several real gases at STP are given
in Table 12.1. All the volumes are very close to 22.4 L/mol, the molar
volume of an ideal gas. Scientists have decided that 22.4 L/mol is an
acceptable approximation for any gas at STP when using gas laws.
Although the volumes are the same, one mole of a gas will have a differ-
ent mass and density than one mole of another gas. (See Figure 12.7.)
22.4 L 22.4 L 22.4 L
He N2 O2
n = 1 mol n = 1 mol n = 1 mol
P = 1 atm (760 torr) P = 1 atm (760 torr) P = 1 atm (760 torr)
T = 0˚C (273 K) T = 0˚C (273 K) T = 0˚C (273 K)
V = 22.4 L V = 22.4 L V = 22.4 L
Figure 12.7 At STP, gases such Number of gas particles Number of gas particles Number of gas particles
= 6.022 x 1023 = 6.022 x 1023 = 6.022 x 1023
as helium, nitrogen, and oxygen
Mass = 4.003 g Mass = 28.02 g Mass = 32.00 g
behave as ideal gases. They have
d = 0.179 g/L d = 1.25 g/L d = 1.43 g/L
a molar volume of 22.4 L.
482 MHR • Unit 4 Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
A Deeper Look: Real Gas Deviations
Do real gases always behave like ideal gases? At STP, you have seen
that most real gases behave like ideal gases. At high pressures and/or
Look back at Table 12.1. It
low temperatures, however, gases no longer behave ideally. To understand
gives more accurate molar vol-
why, recall the characteristics of an ideal gas, according to the kinetic
umes for several gases. Using
molecular theory. (You learned this in Chapter 11.) what you have learned about
• Gas molecules have insignificant volume of their own. the way real gases behave,
• Molecules have no attractive forces between each other or with their explain why these molar
container. volumes are slightly different
• Molecules move in perfectly straight lines. from the molar volume of an
ideal gas.
• Collisions are completely elastic and, thus, do not use up energy.
These characteristics led to the ideal gas law. They are accurate enough
for most applications. They are not perfect, however. In fact, most gases
fall short of these characteristics in many ways:
• The particles of a real gas have a significant volume of their own.
• Molecules do attract each other.
• Molecules do not necessarily move in straight lines.
• Collisions are not completely elastic.
At high pressures and/or low temperatures, gases have smaller volumes.
This means that the gas molecules are closer together. Since they are
closer together, the molecules interact more than when they are far apart.
It is no longer true to say that the molecules have no attractive forces
between each other or with their container. Part A of Figure 12.8 illus-
trates how this affects the pressure of a gas. Also, since the total volume
is smaller, the amount of space taken up by the gas molecules is more
important. You can no longer ignore the volume of the gas molecules.
Part B of Figure 12.8 illustrates that gas molecules do occupy part of the
volume of the container.
Figure 12.8 (A) Because parti-
cles are attracted to each other,
the pressure is reduced. (B) Since
particles take up space, the total
A B volume of empty space is smaller
than the volume of the container.
Scientists who want more accuracy in their experiments have adapted
the ideal gas law to reflect the behaviour of real gases. In later chemistry
courses, you will learn more about this corrected version of the ideal gas
law, called the Van der Waals equation.
To summarize, at low pressures and high temperatures, most gases
behave as ideal gases. Under any conditions that allow attractive forces
between molecules to occur, gases no longer behave as an ideal gas. They
behave as real gases.
Chapter 12 Exploring Gas Laws • MHR 483
Arriving at the Ideal Gas Law
History
LINK
In the Sample Problem earlier, you used three steps to find the molar
The French chemist, Antoine volume of nitrogen gas. After calculating the number of moles, you
Lavoisier (1743–1794), was the
calculated the final volume using the combined gas law. Then you used
first person to notice the gas-
Avogadro’s law to find the volume of one mole of nitrogen. There is an
volume relationship. He
easier way to do problems like this—by combining the two gas laws.
observed water decomposing
After Avogadro’s work, it did not take scientists long to connect V α n
to give two volumes of hydro-
gen and one volume of oxygen. (Avogadro’s law) with V α T (the combined gas law).
P
He mentioned this relationship
in his 1789 textbook Eléments V α n
de la Chemie.
V α T
P
∴V α nT
P
∴PV = R, where R is a constant
nT
As you know, all gases behave in a similar way. The universal gas
constant (R), which applies to all gases, was derived for the final equation
given above. Examine the calculation below to see how R was derived.
For one mole of gas at STP,
P = 101.3 kPa
T = 273 K
V = 22.4 L
n = 1.00 mol
R = PV
nT
=
101.3kPa×22.4L
1.00mol×273.15K
= 8.31 kPa·L
mol·K
Electronic Learning Partner When it is measured more accurately, the universal gas constant (R)
kPa·L
has a value of 8.314 . This was the final piece of the equation. The
Go to the Chemistry 11 mol·K
resulting equation is an efficient tool for solving many problems that
Electronic Learning Partner
involve gases.
for an interactive simulation
The ideal gas law states that the pressure multiplied by the volume is
on the ideal gas law.
equal to the number of moles multiplied by the universal gas constant and
the temperature.
PV = nRT
Guidelines for Using the Ideal Gas Law
• Always convert the temperature to kelvins (K).
• Always convert the masses to moles (mol).
• Always convert the volumes to litres (L).
• Using the ideal gas law will be easier if you always convert the
pressures to kilopascals (kPa). Then you can memorize the value
kPa·L
of R (8.314 ) and use it for every calculation. If you happen to
mol·K
forget the value of R, you can calculate it by finding R for 1 mol of
gas at STP.
484 MHR • Unit 4 Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
Converting the Units of the Universal Gas Constant
Some people prefer to use a converted value of R, rather than converting
all the pressures to kilopascals, as suggested in the guidelines above.
Go back to section 11.2 to
What are the units for R if the pressure is given in atmospheres?
review the units for pressure.
8.314kPa·L × 1atm = 0.08206 atm·L
mol·K 101.3kPa mol·K
What are the units for R if the pressure is given in torr (mm Hg)?
8.314 kPa·L × 760mmHg = 62.37 mmHg·L
mol·K 101.3kPa mol·K
Since R is an exact constant, always express it with four significant digits.
Do not worry about changing the significant digits of R in your calcula-
tions. Always keep four digits, and then fix the number of significant
digits in your answer.
The diagram below illustrates the evolution of the ideal gas law. It is
a brief summary of what you have learned so far in this section. The
following Sample Problems show you how to do calculations using the
ideal gas law.
Concept Organizer The Evolution of the Ideal Gas Law
Boyle’s law Dalton’s iaw of
P∝PI multiple proportions
V
Charles’ law PV PV = nRT n∝V
V∝T T
Gay-Lussac’s law Gay-Lussac’s law of
P∝T combining volumes
experimental
derivation of R
Sample Problem
=
Calculating Molar Volume Using PV nRT
Problem
Use the ideal gas law to calculate the molar volume of a gas at
standard ambient temperature and pressure (SATP). The conditions
for SATP are 298 K and 100 kPa.
What Is Required?
You need to find the molar volume, MV = V , at SATP. The units
n
for your answer will be in mol/L.
Continued ...
Chapter 12 Exploring Gas Laws • MHR 485
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 485
What Is Given?
P = 100 kPa
n = 1.00 mol
R = 8.314 kPa·L/mol·K
T = 298 K
Plan Your Strategy
PROBLEM TIP
Let PV = nRT, and solve for V. Then substitute the known values
The molar volume is in
into the equation.
L/1.00 mol. If you let
n = 1.00 mol, you only need
to find V. Act on Your Strategy
PV = nRT
∴V = nRT
P
=
1.00mol×8.314kPa·L/mol·K×298K
100kPa
= 24.8L
The molar volume of a gas at SATP is 24.8 L/mol.
Check Your Solution
The molar volume is in units of L/mol. 24.8 L/mol is slightly larger
than the 22.4 L/mol molar volume at STP. This is the expected
result, since the pressure has decreased and the temperature has
increased.
Sample Problem
A Laughing Matter
Problem
Dentists sometimes use laughing gas (dinitrogen oxide, N O) to keep
2
patients relaxed during dental procedures. A cylinder of laughing gas
has a diameter of 23.0 cm and a height of 140 cm. The pressure is
108 kPa, and the temperature is 294 K. How many grams of laughing
gas are in the cylinder?
What Is Required?
You need to find the mass (in g) of laughing gas in a cylinder at
108 kPa and 294 K.
What Is Given?
P = 108 kPa
V = πr2h, where r = 11.5 cm and h = 140 cm
Continued ...
486 MHR • Unit 4 Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 486
R = 8.314 kPa·L/mol·K
T = 294 K
Plan Your Strategy
Step 1 Use the formula for the volume of a cylinder (πr2h) to
approximate the volume of the gas inside.
Step 2 Solve the ideal gas equation for n. Put the known values
into the equation to find the number of moles present (n).
Step 3 Calculate the molar mass (M) of dinitrogen oxide. Use it
to find the mass (m) of the gas present.
Act on Your Strategy
Step 1 Find the volume of the cylinder.
V = πr2h
= π×11.52cm2×140cm
= 5.73×104cm3
= 57.3L
Step 2 Use the gas law to find the number of moles.
PV = nRT
∴n = PV
RT
=
108kPa×57.3L
8.314kPa·L/mol·K×294K
= 2.53mol
Step 3 Calculate the mass of the gas.
For N O, the molar mass is
2
2N = 2×14.01g/mol
1O = 1×16.00g/mol
M = 44.02g/mol
N2O
For 2.53 mol, the mass (m) is
m = n×M
= 2.53mol×44.02g/mol
= 111g
Therefore, 111 g of laughing gas is in the cylinder.
Check Your Solution
The answer is in grams, which is the unit you were asked for.
There are three significant digits. This is consistent with the least
number of significant digits in the question.
Practice Problems
12. 4.00 L of ammonia gas in a container holds 2.17 mol at 206 kPa.
What is the temperature inside the container?
Continued ...
Chapter 12 Exploring Gas Laws • MHR 487
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 487
13. How many kilograms of chlorine gas are contained in 87.6 m3
at 290 K and 2.40 atm? Hint: 1m3 = 1000L
14. Calculate the volume of 3.03 g of hydrogen gas at a pressure
of 560 torr and a temperature of 139 K.
15. A 6.0×102 L reaction tank contains 5.0 mol of oxygen gas and
28 mol of nitrogen gas. If the temperature is 83˚C, what is the
pressure of the oxygen, in kPa?
Section Wrap-up
In this section, you learned that the ideal gas law was derived from
Avogadro’s law and the combined gas law. You can use the ideal gas law
to calculate the pressure, temperature, volume, or number of moles of
a gas. In the next section, you will learn how to apply the ideal gas law
to identify unknown gases on the basis of their densities and/or molar
masses.
Remember that you can manipulate the ideal gas law to solve for any
variable.
P = nRT V = nRT n = PV T = PV
V P RT nR
The universal gas constant (R) always has the same value:
8.314 kPa·L/mol·K. (You need to use an alternative value of R if
pressure is given in atmospheres or in torr.)
Section Review
1 I How many grams of sulfur dioxide are in 36.2 L at STP?
PROBEWARE 2 I At certain conditions, 20 mol of a gas occupy 498 L. What volume
do 35 mol occupy?
If you have access to probe-
ware, do the Gas Laws lab, or 3 I What is the pressure of 0.76 mol of gas at 48˚C in 8.0 L?
a similar lab available from a
probeware company. 4 I How many grams of bromine gas, Br 2 , are in 3.12 L at a pressure of
2.4 atm and a temperature of −20˚C? How many molecules of bromine
gas are there?
5 I What is the temperature of 6.02 mol of hydrogen sulfide in a 132 L
tank at 0.95 atm?
6 K/U What was Avogadro’s hypothesis? Explain how Avogadro
contributed to our understanding of gases and the relationships
among the properties of gases.
7 K/U 1.00 m3 of regular air at 1.0 atm is compressed to one eighth
of the volume at a constant temperature. What is the pressure
contribution of the nitrogen? Hint: See the Table 11.2 in Chapter 11,
section 11.4.
488 MHR • Unit 4 Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
Applications of 12.2
the Ideal Gas Law
Studying gases and their properties becomes more interesting when you Section Preview/
realize that your own body is a container for gases. Your lungs hold air, an Specific Expectations
important solution of gases that you need to live. As well, there is the
In this section, you will
embarrassing type of gas, called methane, that results from the digestive
(cid:2) solvemore quantitative
process. How many moles of oxygen do your lungs hold? Using the laws
problems using the ideal
and properties you have learned, you can now calculate this fact about gas law
your own body. (See Figure 12.9.)
(cid:2) determinethe molar mass
of an unknown gas through
experimentation
Biology
LINK
As you breathe in, your
diaphragm moves down and
your rib cage moves out to
increase the volume of your
lungs. As the volume increas-
es, the air pressure in your
lungs decreases. Air from the
outside rushes in to fill the
expanded volume. This is an
application of Boyle’s law. In
the same way, your lungs
decrease in volume when you
exhale. The resulting increase
in pressure pushes air out of
your lungs.
Figure 12.9 Your lungs hold about 4 L of air. When you breathe out,
only 500 mL of air is expelled. The same amount of air is taken in when
you inhale one breath. If air contains 20% oxygen gas, how many moles
of oxygen gas do your lungs contain at 37˚C and 100 kPa?
In this section, you will learn more about two properties of a gas that
are closely related to molar volume: density and molar mass. You have
already encountered these properties, but now you will use them to help
you with your gas calculations.
Chapter 12 Exploring Gas Laws • MHR 489
Density and Molar Mass
As you learned in the last section, the molar volume of a gas is defined as
the space that is occupied by one mole of the gas. It is always given in
In this book, we use a capital
units of L/mol.
Mto symbolize molar mass.
The density of a gas is similar to the density of a solid or a liquid.
When working with solutions,
you may see M used to Density is found by dividing mass by volume. The density of a gas is
express the molar concentra- usually reported in units of g/L.
tion of a solution (for example, The molar mass of a gas refers to the mass (in g) of one mole of the
6 MHCl (aq) . Make sure that gas. You can calculate molar mass by adding the masses of atoms in the
you do not become confused!
periodic table. You can also calculate molar mass by dividing the mass of
Always check to make sure
a sample by the number of moles that are present. Molar mass is always
that you understand what
expressed in the units g/mol. Table 12.2 summarizes molar volume,
Mis referring to.
density, and molar mass.
Table 12.2 Molar Volume, Density, and Molar Mass
Molar volume Density Molar mass
Unit L/mol g/L g/mol
Meaning volume/amount mass/volume mass/amount
Calculations Molar volume = Volume Density = Mass Molar mass = Sum of molar masses
Number of moles Volume of the atoms in the compound
or
MV = V/n D = m/V
Molar mass = Mass
Number of moles
M = m/n
Dense Gases Can Be Deadly
You have learned that the volume of a gas at a certain temperature and
Molar volume (L/mol), density pressure is the same as the volume of any other gas at the same tempera-
(g/L), and molar mass (g/mol) ture and pressure. For example, all gases have the approximate volume
are closely related. You can of 22.4 L at STP. The molecular masses of different gases, however, are all
calculate each property using different. This means that each gas has a different density, or mass per
the other two. Analyze the
unit of volume. (Look back at Figure 12.7 to see three examples.)
units to discover the exact
Understanding the densities of gases can be useful in the everyday
relationship.
world. For example, miners who drill deep into the ground must know
which gases are present, and which have the highest densities. (See
Figure 12.10.) They must take appropriate safety precau-
tions to avoid explosions, poisoning, or suffocation.
On December 3, 1984, an industrial accident in
Bhopal, India, released a large quantity of methyliso-
cyanate, CH NCO, a dense gas, into the air. This highly
3
irritating and toxic gas caused the death of more than
3000 people living nearby. The Chemistry Bulletin on
the next page gives an example of a natural disaster
involving a dense gas. Figure 12.11, on page 492,
illustrates a popular use for gases that are less dense
than air.
Figure 12.10 Dense gases sit at the bottoms of pits, such as
mines and wells. Miners must understand the behaviour of these
gases to avoid accidents. For example, dense carbon dioxide gas
can cause suffocation.
490 MHR • Unit 4 Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
Chemistry Bulletin
The Killing Lakes of Cameroon the lakes with carbon dioxide, which remains
trapped at the bottom. Fresher surface water
On August 15, 1984, a cloud of deadly gas
sits on this dense lower layer.
burst from Lake Monoun in Cameroon, a coun-
Scientists believe that the tragedies at Lake
try in western Africa. Thirty-seven people died
Nyos and Lake Monoun were caused by a dis-
from suffocation. Two years later, on August
ruption of the water layers, perhaps triggered
21, 1986, Lake Nyos, a larger and deeper lake,
by a landslide, an earthquake, or even a strong
ejected a full cubic kilometre of the same gas.
wind. Lower carbonated water was suddenly
The gas travelled silently into neighbouring vil-
released into the upper water. As it moved up
lages, killing 1700 people and thousands of
to the surface, the pressure on the gas
livestock. What was this toxic gas?
decreased while the temperature increased. As
a result, the carbon dioxide gas rapidly bub-
bled out of solution. At Lake Nyos, the sudden
release of the lower lake water into the upper
layers caused a plume of water and gas to rise
high into the air.
How did this massive release of carbon
dioxide cause so many deaths? Carbon dioxide
gas is one-and-a-half times as dense as air.
It sinks to the ground and displaces the oxy-
genated air we need to breathe. The invisible,
odourless carbon dioxide that was released
from Lake Nyos and Lake Monoun settled
Lake Nyos and Lake Monoun both sit in
on the ground. It travelled rapidly down the
volcanic craters. The lakes are hazardous
slopes into populated regions. People quickly
because of their volcanic origin, even though
became unconscious and died of suffocation.
both volcanoes are dormant. Volcanoes are
Carbon dioxide continues to accumulate at
vents through Earth’s crust. They carry magma,
the bottoms of both lakes. An international
a mixture of molten rock and dissolved gases,
team of scientists is developing a plan to
to the surface of Earth. When magma rises to
release this carbon dioxide by controlled
Earth’s surface in volcanoes, the pressure is
degassing. They plan to insert long pipes deep
decreased. The gases come out of solution and
into both lakes and suck up some of the dense
expand.
bottom water. This will create a pressure differ-
Magma contains a large quantity of dis-
ence and cause a fountain of gas-rich water to
solved carbon dioxide and minerals. These are
jet from the pipes.
released from the magma into the ground water
under a volcano’s crater. Lake Nyos and Lake
Making Connections
Monoun are both fed at the bottom by volcanic
springs of mineral-rich carbonated ground 1. Calculate and compare the density of one
mole of CO with the density of one mole
water. In some crater lakes, there is enough 2(g)
of N at STP. (Nitrogen gas is the main
water circulation for the carbon dioxide to bub- 2(g)
constituent of air.) Explain the significance
ble up from the bottom and be released at the
of your calculations.
surface. The surface waters of Lake Nyos and
Lake Monoun, however, do not mix with deep- 2. How is carbonated water produced
er waters. The carbon dioxide remains at the artificially, and what is it used for?
bottom. Volcanic springs continue to supply Do research to find out.
Chapter 12 Exploring Gas Laws • MHR 491
Web
LINK
www.school.mcgrawhill.ca/
resources/
Many accidents have
occurred because of dense
gases in mines. Which gases
are dangerous? What safety
precautions should be taken?
To learn more, go to the web
site above. Go to Science
Resources, then to Chemistry
11to find out where to go next.
Figure 12.11 Helium balloons and hot air balloons also depend on the density of
gases. These objects are filled with gases that are less dense than air. Therefore, they
are able to float.
In the following Sample Problem, you will use the ideal gas law to find
the density of nitrogen gas.
Sample Problem
Finding the Density of Nitrogen Gas
Problem
Nitrogen gas makes up almost 80% of our atmosphere. What is the
density of pure nitrogen gas, in g/L, at 12.50˚C and 126.63 kPa?
What Is Required?
Find the density of nitrogen gas, in g/L, at 12.50˚C
and 126.63 kPa pressure.
What Is Given?
P = 126.63 kPa
History
LINK T = 12.50˚C
In World War I, a highly
Plan Your Strategy
irritating gas called phosgene,
COCl 2 , was used against the Step 1 Change the temperature to kelvins. The temperature in this
Allied troops. Phosgene is question is given to two decimal places. Therefore, use a
about 3.4 times more dense conversion factor with two decimal places: + 273.15.
than air. In concentrations
Step 2 Calculate the molar mass (M) of nitrogen gas, N , using the
above 50 ppm, it causes the 2
lungs to fill up with fluid. This molar mass in the periodic table.
results in diminished lung Step 3 Since the volume is not given, set it as 1.00 L. Since the
capacity, and subsequent col- pressure is given in kilopascals, use R = 8.314 kPa·L/mol·K.
lapse of the heart. Phosgene
Substitute the numbers and units for P, T, R, and V into the
can bring about death within
ideal gas law equation. Solve for n.
hours.
Continued ...
492 MHR • Unit 4 Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 492
Step 4 Convert n to the mass of nitrogen (m) by multiplying the
number of moles by the molar mass (M) of N .
2
Step 5 Find the density by dividing the mass by the volume (1.00 L).
Act on Your Strategy
Step 1 T = (12.50˚C+273.15)
= 285.65K
Step 2 M = 2×14.01g/mol
N2
= 28.02g/mol
Step 3 PV = nRT
∴ n = PV
RT
= (126.63kPa)(1.00L)
(8.314kPa·L/mol·K)(285.65K)
= 5.3320×10 −2mol
Step 4 The mass of N is
2
m = n×M
= (5.3348×10 −2mol)(28.02g/mol)
= 1.4940g
Step 5 The mass of 1.00 L of nitrogen gas is 1.494 g. By dividing this
by the volume, 1.00 L, we obtain a density of 1.494 g/L.
Check Your Solution
When the units cancel out in the ideal gas equation, mol remains.
When units cancel in the density equation, g/L remain.
The least number of digits in the question is four. Therefore, the
answer should have four significant digits, which it does.
Practice Problems
16. Oxygen makes up about 20% of our atmosphere. Find the density
of pure oxygen gas, in g/L, for the conditions in the Sample
Problem: 12.50˚C and 126.63 kPa.
17. Find the density of butane gas, C H , (in g/L) at SATP
4 10
conditions: 298 K and 100 kPa.
18. The atmosphere of the imaginary planet Xylo is made up entirely
of poisonous chlorine gas, Cl . The atmospheric pressure of this
2
inhospitable planet is 155.0 kPa, and the temperature is 89˚C.
What is the density of the atmosphere?
19. The atmosphere of planet Yaza, from the same star system as
Xylo, is made of fluorine gas, F . The density of the atmosphere
2
on Yaza is twice the density of the atmosphere on Xylo. The
temperature of both planets is the same. What is the atmospheric
pressure of Yaza?
Chapter 12 Exploring Gas Laws • MHR 493
Molar Mass of a Gas
You can find the molar mass of a gaseous element or compound in the
same way that you find the molar mass of any other element or compound:
by adding up the masses of the atoms. You can also find the molar mass
by dividing the mass by the number of moles. (See Figure 12.12.)
COURSE
CHALLENGE
How can you use what you
learn in this Sample Problem to
help you identify the gas given
off by water plants? You will
apply your learning later on,
in the Chemistry Course
Challenge.
Figure 12.12 How could you determine the molar mass of vaporized iodine gas on
paper? How could you determine it in a laboratory?
In the laboratory, calculating the molar mass of an unknown gas can help
you identify it. The next Sample Problem will demonstrate this.
Sample Problem
Using Molar Mass to Identify an Unknown Gas
Problem
A scientist isolates 2.366 g of a gas. The sample occupies a volume of
800 mL at 78.0˚C and 103 kPa. Use these data to calculate the molar
mass of the gas. Is the gas most likely to be bromine, krypton, neon,
or fluorine?
What Is Given?
P = 103 kPa
V = 800 mL
m = 2.366 g
R = 8.314 kPa·L/mol·K
T = 78.0˚C
What Is Required?
You need to find the number of moles. Then you need to use the
mass and the number of moles to find the molar mass of the gas.
Continued ...
494 MHR • Unit 4 Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 494
Plan Your Strategy
Convert the temperature to kelvins. Solve PV = nRT for n. Then
substitute in the known values to find the number of moles. Finally,
set up a proportion to find the number of grams that would be in one
mole, using the equation M = m , where M is the molar mass, m is
n
the mass, and n is the number of moles.
Act on Your Strategy
T(K) = T(˚C)+273
= 78.0˚C+273
= 351K
Using the ideal gas law,
PV = nRT
∴ n = PV
RT
=
103kPa×0.800L
8.314kPa·L/mol·K×351K
= 0.0282mol
M = m
n
2.366g
=
0.0282mol
= 83.9g/mol
The molar mass of the gas is 83.9 g/mol.
To identify the gas, compare the molar masses of the four
gases mentioned.
Bromine, Br , has a molar mass of 2×79.9g/mol = 141.8g/mol.
2
Krypton, Kr, has a molar mass of 83.8 g/mol.
Neon, Ne, has a molar mass of 20.2 g/mol.
Fluorine, F , has a molar mass of 2×18.9g/mol = 38.0g/mol.
2
Therefore, the gas must be krypton.
Check Your Solution
The units of the answer are g/mol, the correct units for molar mass.
The answer has three significant digits, equal to the least number of
digits in the question.
The answer is probably correct, since it is so close to the molar
mass of one of the given gases.
In the following investigation, you will find the molar mass of an
unknown gas. You will use this mass to identify the gas.
The ideal gas law gives great flexibility for solving many different
types of problems. After the investigation, you will find another Sample
Problem. It illustrates how you can use the ideal gas law with methods
you have previously learned, to identify an unknown gas. Practice
problems are located at the end of this Sample Problem.
Chapter 12 Exploring Gas Laws • MHR 495
S K I L L F O C U S
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
Communicating results
Calculating the Molar
Mass of an Unknown Gas:
Teacher Demonstration
Cigarette lighters contain a gaseous fuel that 2. Fill the 4 L beaker (or pail) about two-thirds
burns quickly. It produces a large amount of heat full of tap water. Determine the temperature
using only a small amount of gas. Your teacher of the tap water. Use this measurement to
will measure the volume and mass of a sample approximate the temperature of the gas.
of this gas. Then you will use these data to
3. Briefly immerse the lighter in the water, then
calculate the molar mass of the gas.
shake it dry. Use the hair dryer on a low or
cool setting to dry the lighter as much as
Materials possible. This is to set a standard for drying
the empty lighter later. CAUTION Do not
4 L beaker or plastic pail
overheat the lighter.
500 mL graduated cylinder
disposable cigarette lighter 4. Determine the mass of the lighter.
needle nose pliers
5. Fill the graduated cylinder with water. Cover
plastic wrap
the cylinder tightly with a piece of plastic
balance or scale
wrap. With your hand over the plastic wrap,
tap water
place the cylinder upside down into the
thermometer
beaker. Make sure that no air bubbles are
barometer
trapped in the cylinder. Slide the plastic
hair dryer
wrap away. A water-filled measuring tube
Your teacher will take the following Safety
to collect gas that has been created. The gas
Precautions and perform the following steps.
will displace the water as it rises, giving an
accurate measurement.
Safety Precautions
gas collected
• Remember that this gas is flammable. Do not
try to produce flames with the lighters. Before
beginning, check that there are no flames (such
as lit Bunsen burners) in the laboratory.
• If water is spilled on the floor, wipe it up
immediately so that no one steps in it.
• Release all the gas collected into an operating
fume hood after the investigation. Expel the
remaining gas in the lighter outside before dis-
posing of the lighter.
cigarette
lighter
Procedure
1. Use pliers to remove the striker, flint, and
water
spring from the disposable lighter.
496 MHR • Unit 4 Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
6. As shown in the diagram, hold the lighter
underwater, below the graduated cylinder in
the beaker. Carefully depress the button on
the lighter to release gas into the cylinder.
The entire lighter does not need to be emp-
tied. Just gather enough gas for an accurate
measurement.
7. Add tap water to the beaker (or pail), or lift
the cylinder, so that the water inside the cylin-
der is at exactly the same level as the water in
the beaker. This equalizes the pressure in the
cylinder with the pressure of the atmosphere.
Record the volume of the gas collected when
the water levels are equal inside and outside
the cylinder.
8. Dry the lighter with the hair dryer. Measure
its mass.
9. Record the air pressure in the room.
10. Wash your hands.
Analysis
1.(a) Subtract the final mass of the lighter from
its initial mass. This will give you the mass
of the gas used.
(b) Use the volume, the mass, the temperature
of the water, and the air pressure to calcu-
late the number of moles of gas.
2. Use the mass of the gas and the number of
moles to calculate the molar mass.
Conclusions
3. The gas in the lighter has the formula C n H 2n+2 .
(a) Use the periodic table to calculate the
molar masses of the compounds with n = 1
to n = 5.
(b) Identify the gas in the lighter. You will
learn how to name this gas in Chapter 13.
4. How do your results compare with the
theoretical molar mass calculated from the
periodic table?
5. Calculate the percent error for your results.
6. What were the sources of error?
Chapter 12 Exploring Gas Laws • MHR 497
Sample Problem
Identifying a Compound Using
Percent Composition and the Ideal Gas Law
Problem
As geologists study the area where an ancient marsh was located,
they discover an unknown gas seeping from the ground. They collect
a sample of the gas, and take it to a lab for analysis. Lab technicians
find that the gas is made up of 80.0% carbon and 20.0% hydrogen.
They also find that a 4.60 g sample occupies a volume of 2.50 L at
1.50 atm and 25.0˚C. What is the molecular formula of the gas?
Figure 12.13 Methane gas, What Is Required?
CH , is used as a fuel for Bunsen
4
You need to find the molecular formula (and thus the identity)
burners. Suppose that you are
given a container of an unknown of an unknown gas.
gas. What methods could you use
to find out if it is methane? What Is Given?
P = 1.50 atm
V = 2.50 L
m = 4.60 g
R = 8.314 kPa·L/mol·K
T = 25.0˚C
The percentage composition of the gas is 80.0% carbon
and 20.0% hydrogen.
Plan Your Strategy
Step 1 Find the empirical formula of the gas, using the molar masses
of carbon and hydrogen and the percent compositions.
Step 2 Solve the ideal gas law for the number of moles. First change
the temperature to kelvins. Then change the pressure to
kilopascals and use R = 8.314 kPa·L/mol·K. (You could also
use R = 0.08206 atm·L/mol·K.)
Step 3 Find the molar mass (M) of the compound by dividing the
mass of the sample (m) by the number of moles (n) in the
sample.
Step 4 Compare the molar mass of the unknown gas with the molar
mass of the empirical formula. To find the molecular formula,
multiply the empirical formula by the ratio of the two molar
masses.
Act on Your Strategy
Step 1 Find the empirical formula. Assume that the total mass of the
sample is 100.0 g. Thus the mass of the carbon in the sample
is 80.0%×100.0g = 80.0g. The mass of the hydrogen is
20.0%×100.0g = 20.0g.
Continued ...
498 MHR • Unit 4 Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 498
Now find the number of moles of carbon and hydrogen
using the formula n = m
M
For carbon, For hydrogen,
80.0g 20.0g
n = n =
12.01g/mol 1.01g/mol
= 6.67mol = 20.0mol
Finally, find the simplest mole ratio of the two elements in
the compound. This will be the empirical, or simplest, formula
of the gas.
The ratio of the elements in the compound is
6.67 20.0
mol of C to mol of H
6.67 6.67
or 1.0 mol of C to 3.0 mol of H
The empirical formula of the unknown gas is CH .
3
Step 2 Use the ideal gas law.
T = (25.0˚C+273)
= 298K
PV = nRT
∴n = PV
RT
If you convert the units of R … If you convert the pressure to kPa …
R = 0.08206 atm·L/mol·K P = 1.50 atm × 101.3 kPa/atm
= 152 kPa
n == (1.50 atm)(2.50 L) n = (1.52 kPa)(2.50 L)
(0.08206 atm·L/mol·K)(298 K) (8.314 kPa·L/mol·K)(298 K)
= 0.153 mol = 0.153 mol
Step 3 Find the molar mass.
M = m
n
4.60g
=
0.153mol
= 30.1g/mol
Step 4 Find the molecular formula.
The molar mass of the compound is 30.1 g/mol.
The molar mass of the empirical formula, CH , is 15.04 g/mol.
3
30.07g/mol
Ratioofmolarmasses =
15.04g/mol
= 2.00
Thus, the molecular formula of the unknown gas is twice the
empirical formula.
CH ×2 = C H
3 2 6
Continued ...
Chapter 12 Exploring Gas Laws • MHR 499
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 499
Check Your Solution
In step 2, the units in the ideal gas equation cancel out to give moles.
C H is a reasonable answer for the molecular formula of the gas,
2 6
since it is a simple integer ratio of the two molar masses.
Practice Problems
20. A 1.56 L gas sample has a mass of 3.22 g at 100 kPa and 281 K.
What is the molar mass of the gas?
21. 2.0 L of haloethane has a mass of 14.1 g at 344 K and 1.01 atm.
What is the molar mass of haloethane?
22. A vapour has a mass of 0.548 g in 237 mL, at 373 K and 755 torr.
What is the molar mass of the vapour?
23. The mass of a 5.00 L evacuated container is 125.00 g. When the
container is filled with argon gas at 298 K and 105.0 kPa, it has
a mass of 133.47 g.
(a) Calculate the density of argon under these conditions.
(b) What is the density of argon at STP?
24. A gaseous compound contains 92.31% carbon and 7.69%
hydrogen by mass. 4.35 g of the gas occupies 4.16 L at 22.0˚C
and 738 torr. Determine the molecular formula of the gas.
Section Wrap-up
In this section, you learned how density and molar mass are related to
the ideal gas law. You also learned how to identify an unknown substance
by calculating its molar mass, both theoretically and in the laboratory.
Before you continue, take the time to complete the following Section
Review questions. They will help you remember what you have learned.
Section Review
Unit Issue Prep 1 I What is the density of methane, CH 4(g) , if 4.5 mol are in 100 L?
You will be debating a question 2 I 8.1 g of a gas occupy 12.3 L of space at 27˚C and 8 atm.
related to gas pollution in the
(a) What is the molar mass of the gas?
Unit Issue. How does the
density of a gas determine (b) What might the gas be?
whether the gas pollutes
3 I A gas that consists of only nitrogen and oxygen atoms is found to
Earth’s surface or the
atmosphere? contain 30% nitrogen. A 9.23 g sample of the gas occupies 2.2 L
at STP. What is the gas?
4 I You are given a sample of an unknown gas. Describe how you can
identify the gas in the laboratory. What measurements will you take?
What apparatus might you need?
5 K/U How can the densities of two gases at STP be different, even
though their volumes are the same?
500 MHR • Unit 4 Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
Gas Law Stoichiometry 12.3
Many chemical reactions in everyday life involve gases. Figure 12.14 Section Preview/
shows a common reaction that has a gas as a reactant. Other reactions, Specific Expectations
such as the electrolyzation of salt to give chlorine gas, have gases as
In this section, you will
products. To carry out an accurate and efficient reaction, scientists must
(cid:2) performstoichiometric
know the number of moles of all the reactants. When one or more of the
calculations involving the
reactants is a gas, this means using the ideal gas law. number of moles, number of
atoms, number of molecules,
mass, and volume of sub-
stances in a balanced
chemical reaction
(cid:2) determinethe molar
volume of hydrogen in
an investigation
Figure 12.14 In this photograph, oxygen gas reacts with calcium to produce
calcium oxide.
You have already learned that the ideal gas law can be used to solve for
different variables in several different types of situations. As you may
recall, the term “stoichiometry” refers to the relationship between the
number of moles of the reactants and the number of moles of the products
in a chemical reaction. In this section, you will learn how to use
Gay-Lussac’s law of combining volumes and the ideal gas law to solve
stoichiometric problems that involve gases.
Volume to Volume Stoichiometry
At the beginning of this chapter, you were introduced to Gay-Lussac’s
Go back to the beginning of
law of combining volumes: When gases react, the volumes of the reactants
this chapter. Make sure that
and the products, measured at equal temperatures and pressures, are
you understand why the mole
always in whole number ratios. As well, you learned that the mole ratios
ratios are the same as the
from a chemical equation are the same as the ratios of the volumes of
volume ratios.
the gases.
This information will help you with a certain type of gas stoichio-
metry problem. When a gas reacts to produce another gas, you can use
Gay-Lussac’s law of combining volumes to find the volumes of the gases.
The following Sample Problem shows you how.
Chapter 12 Exploring Gas Laws • MHR 501
Sample Problem
Gay-Lussac’s Law of Combining Volumes
Problem
Ammonia is produced by a reaction of nitrogen gas and hydrogen
gas. The chemical equation for the reaction is
N +3H → 2NH
2(g) 2(g) 3(g)
Suppose that 12.0 L of nitrogen gas reacts with hydrogen gas at the
same temperature and pressure.
(a) What volume of ammonia gas is produced?
(b) What volume of hydrogen is consumed?
What Is Required?
(a) Calculate the volume of ammonia gas produced when 12.0 L of
nitrogen gas reacts.
(b) Calculate the volume of hydrogen gas used up by the reaction.
What Is Given?
From the equation, you know that 12.0 L of nitrogen gas is used.
The mole ratios from the equation are
2molNH
3(g)
1molN
2(g)
3molH
2(g)
1molN
2(g)
Plan Your Strategy
You know that the mole ratios of the volumes of gases are the same
as the ratios of the volumes. Therefore, you can use the mole ratios
to find the volumes of ammonia gas and hydrogen gas. You do not
need to use the temperature and pressure, since they remain the
same in this problem.
Act on Your Strategy
(a) Let x be the volume of ammonia gas.
2molNH x LNH
3(g) = 3(g)
1molN 12.0LN
2(g) 2(g)
2molNH x LNH
(12.0LN ) 3(g) = 3(g) (12.0LN )
2(g) 1molN 12.0LN 2(g)
2(g) 2(g)
x = 24.0LNH
3(g)
Therefore, 24.0 L of ammonia gas is produced.
Continued ...
502 MHR • Unit 4 Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 502
(b) Let y be the volume of hydrogen gas.
3molH y LH
2(g) = 2(g)
1molN 12.0LN
2(g) 2(g)
3molH y H
(12.0LN ) 2(g) = 2(g) (12.0LN )
2(g) 1molN 12.0LN 2(g)
2(g) 2(g)
y = 36.0LH
2(g)
Therefore, 36.0 L of hydrogen gas is consumed.
Check Your Solution
The number of significant digits in the answer is the same as the
number of significant digits in the question.
The mole ratio of ammonia to nitrogen is 2:1. Thus, it makes sense
that the volume of ammonia gas is twice the volume of nitrogen gas.
The mole ratio of hydrogen to nitrogen is 3:1. It makes sense that the
volume of hydrogen gas is three times the volume of nitrogen gas.
Practice Problems
25. Use the following balanced equation to answer the questions
below.
2H +O → 2H O
2(g) 2(g) 2 (g)
(a) What is the mole ratio of oxygen gas to water vapour?
(b) What is the volume ratio of oxygen gas to water vapour?
(c) What is the volume ratio of hydrogen gas to oxygen gas?
(d) What is the volume ratio of water vapour to hydrogen gas?
26. 1.5 L of propane gas are burned in a barbecue. The following
equation shows the reaction. Assume all gases are at STP.
C H +5O → 3CO +4H O
3 8(g) 2(g) 2(g) 2 (g)
(a) What volume of carbon dioxide gas is produced?
(b) What volume of oxygen is consumed?
27. Use the following equation to answer the questions below.
SO +O → SO
2(g) 2(g) 3(g)
(a) Balance the equation.
(b) 12.0 L of sulfur trioxide, SO , are produced at 100˚C.
3(g)
What volume of oxygen is consumed?
(c) What assumption must you make to answer part (b)?
28. 2.0 L of gas A react with 1.0 L of gas B to produce 1.0 L of gas C.
All gases are at STP.
(a) Write the balanced chemical equation for this reaction.
(b) Each molecule of gas A is made of two identical “a” atoms.
That is, gas A is really a . In the same way, each molecule of
2(g)
gas B is made of two identical “b” atoms. What is the chemical
formula of gas C in terms of “a” and “b” atoms?
Chapter 12 Exploring Gas Laws • MHR 503
Solving Gas Stoichiometry Problems
Earlier in this course, you learned how to do stoichiometry calculations.
To solve gas stoichiometry problems, you will incorporate the ideal gas
law into what you learned previously. The following steps will help you
do this.
How to Solve Gas Stoichiometry Problems
1. Write a balanced equation for the reaction.
2. Write the given information under the appropriate reactants and
products. Put a question mark under the reactant or product for
which information is needed.
3. Convert all amounts to moles.
4. Compare molar amounts using stoichiometry ratios from the
balanced equation. Solve for the unknown molar amount.
5. Convert the new molar amount into the units required. You may
multiply by a conversion factor, or use a set of conditions with
the ideal gas law, PV = nRT.
Using the Ideal Gas Law for the Gaseous Product of a Reaction
The best way to find out how to do a stoichiometry problem using the
ideal gas law is to study an example. In the following Sample Problem,
you will use a balanced equation and the ideal gas law to find the volume
of a gas produced. (Refer to Chapter 4, section 4.1, if you want to review
how to write balanced equations.)
Sample Problem
Mass to Volume Stoichiometry
Problem
Ancient alchemists liked to use strong sulfuric acid to produce
dramatically dangerous effects. One interesting reaction occurs when
sulfuric acid reacts with iron metal to produce gas and an iron(II)
compound. What volume of gas is produced when excess sulfuric
acid reacts with 40.0 g of iron at 18.0˚C and 100.3 kPa?
What Is Required?
Calculate the volume of gas that is produced when sulfuric acid
reacts with iron under specific temperature and pressure conditions.
What Is Given?
Reactants: sulfuric acid and iron
Products: an iron(II) compound and a gas
Mass of iron = 40.0 g
Temperature = 18.0˚C
Pressure = 100.3 kPa
Continued ...
504 MHR • Unit 4 Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 504
Plan Your Strategy
Step 1 Write a balanced equation for the chemical reaction.
Step 2 Find the number of moles of iron present. Use this value,
along with the mole ratios from the balanced equation, to
find the number of moles of gas produced.
Step 3 Use the ideal gas law. You know the number of moles of gas,
the temperature, and the pressure. (Do not forget to change
the temperature to kelvins.) Solve for the volume of the gas.
Act on Your Strategy
Step 1 Write the balanced equation. (This reaction is a single
displacement reaction.)
Fe +H SO → H +FeSO
(s) 2 4(aq) 2(g) 4(aq)
40.0 g ? L
Step 2 Find the number of moles of iron, and the number
of moles of gas.
To find the number of moles of iron, divide the mass by
the molar mass. You can find the molar mass of iron in Web
LINK
the periodic table: 55.85 g/mol. Note: If the reactant was a
compound, such as FeCl , you would need to calculate the
2 www.school.mcgrawhill/
molar mass by adding the molar masses of all the atoms. resources
n = m One of the problems with air
M bags (see Figure 12.15 on the
= 40.0gFe next page) is that they can
55.85g/mol harm a child or small adult
= 0.716molFe because too much gas is pro-
duced. To find out what volume
From the balanced equation, the mole ratio is of nitrogen gas in an air bag is
1molH safe for a child, go to the web
2
1molFe site above. Go to Science
Resources, then to Chemistry
Use this ratio to find the number of moles of hydrogen gas formed by
11to find out where to go next.
the reaction.
nmolH 2 = 1molH 2 Use the volume you find to
0.716molFe 1molFe calculate the mass of NaN 3(s)
that is needed to produce this
(0.716molFe) nmolH 2 = 1molH 2 (0.716molFe) volume at 22.0˚C and 105 kPa.
0.716molFe 1molFe
n = 0.716molH
2
Step 3 Use the ideal gas law to solve for the volume, since all the
other quantities are now known.
First change the temperature to kelvins.
18.0˚C+273 = 291K
You now have all the values you need to solve for volume.
P = 100.3 kPa
n = 0.716 mol
R = 8.314 kPa·L/mol·K
T = 291 K
Continued ...
Chapter 12 Exploring Gas Laws • MHR 505
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 505
PV = nRT
∴V = nRT
P
=
0.716mol×8.314kPa·L/mol·K×291K
100.3kPa
= 17.3L
Therefore, 17.3 L of hydrogen gas is produced by this reaction at
18.0˚C and 100.3 kPa.
Check Your Solution
The answer is slightly less than the molar volume of hydrogen gas
at STP. Since less than one mole of hydrogen gas was formed, this
seems reasonable.
Practice Problems
Figure 12.15 Air bags must be 29. Engineers design automobile air bags that deploy almost instantly
tested thoroughly before being on impact. To do this, an air bag must provide a large amount
manufactured for public use. of gas in a very short time. Many automobile manufacturers use
solid sodium azide, NaN , along with suitable catalysts, to pro-
3
vide the gas that is needed to inflate the air bag. The balanced
equation for this reaction is
2NaN → 2Na +3N
3(s) (s) 2(g)
(a) What volume of nitrogen gas will be produced if 117.0 g of
sodium azide are stored in the steering wheel at 20.2˚C and
101.2 kPa?
(b) How many molecules of nitrogen are present in this volume?
(c) How many atoms are present in this volume?
CHEM
FACT 30. 0.72 g of hydrogen gas, H , reacts with 8.0 L of chlorine gas, Cl , at
2 2
An automobile air bag fills STP. How many litres of hydrogen chloride gas, HCl, are produced?
up with about 65 L of nitrogen
31. How many grams of baking soda (sodium hydrogen carbonate,
gas in approximately 27 ms.
NaHCO ), must be used to produce 45 mL of carbon dioxide gas
This can prevent a driver from 3
at 190˚C and 101.3 kPa in a pan of muffins? (The mole ratio of
being seriously injured. The
sodium that is produced is NaHCO 3 to CO 2 is 2:1.)
extremely caustic, however.
32. How much zinc (in grams) must react with hydrochloric acid to
It reacts with iron(III) oxide
produce 18 mL of gas at SATP? (Hint: Zinc chloride, ZnC(cid:2) is
as follows: 2(s)
a product.)
6Na +FeO →
(s) 2 3(s)
3NaO +2Fe 33. 35 g of propane gas burned in a barbecue, according to the
2 (s) (s)
The sodium oxide then reacts following equation:
with carbon dioxide and water C H +5O → 3CO +4H O
3 8(g) 2(g) 2(g) 2 (g)
vapour.
All the gases are measured at SATP.
NaO(s)+2CO +HO →
2 2(g) 2 (g)
(a) What volume of water vapour is produced?
2NaHCO
3(s)
(b) What volume of oxygen is consumed?
The sodium hydrogen carbon-
ate that is produced is a
34. What mass of oxygen is reacted to produce 0.62 L of water vapour
harmless substance. It is
at 100˚C and 101.3 KPa? Start by balancing the following equation:
better known as baking soda.
H +O → H O
2(g) 2(g) 2 (g)
506 MHR • Unit 4 Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
Including Water Vapour Pressure in Gas Calculations
You can collect many gases by allowing them to bubble up
through water into a container that is filled with water. (See
Figure 12.16). This is the method your teacher used to collect
the gas in Investigation 12-A. Unfortunately, molecules of water
vapour mix with the gas sample. To avoid error, the pressure that
was contributed by the water vapour must be subtracted when
finding the pressure of the gas.
As an example, consider hydrogen gas, which is often
collected over water. The hydrogen that is collected is a mixture
of hydrogen and water vapour. As you learned from Dalton’s law
of partial pressures in Chapter 11, the pressure of this mixture is
P = P +P
total hydrogen watervapour
To find the partial pressure of dry hydrogen, subtract the pressure
of the water vapour from the total pressure. Figure 12.16 This is an
P = P −P efficient and convenient method
hydrogen total watervapour
for collecting hydrogen gas.
The pressure of the water vapour is the same for any gas that is collected Unfortunately molecules of water
at a particular temperature. For example, the pressure of water vapour at vapour mix with the gas sample.
25˚C is 3.17 kPa. Table 12.3 gives the pressure of water vapour at different
temperatures.
When using the ideal gas law for a gas collected over water, you
must correct the pressure before you substitute it into the gas law. The
following Sample Problem shows you how to do this.
Table 12.3
Sample Problem
Pressure of Water Vapour
Calculating the Volume Temperature (˚C) Pressure (kPa)
17 1.94
of a Gas Collected Over Water
18 2.06
Problem 19 2.20
A student reacts magnesium with excess dilute hydrochloric acid to 20 2.34
produce hydrogen gas. She uses 0.15 g of magnesium metal. What 21 2.49
volume of dry hydrogen does she collect over water at 28˚C and
22 2.64
101.8 kPa?
23 2.81
What Is Required? 24 2.98
25 3.17
You need to find the volume of hydrogen collected over water
in this reaction. 26 3.36
27 3.56
What Is Given?
28 3.78
T = 28.0˚C 29 4.00
P = 101.8 kPa 30 4.24
Mass of magnesium (m) = 0.15 g
Pressure of water vapour at 28˚C = 3.78 kPa
Continued ...
Chapter 12 Exploring Gas Laws • MHR 507
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 507
Plan Your Strategy
Step 1 Write a balanced chemical equation for the reaction.
Step 2 Calculate the number of moles of magnesium by dividing the
mass given (m) by the molar mass of magnesium (M). Use the
number of moles of magnesium, along with the mole ratio
from the equation, to calculate the number of moles of
hydrogen gas produced by the reaction.
Step 3 Convert the temperature to kelvins. Since the hydrogen is
collected over water, subtract the pressure of the water vapour
at 28˚C from the atmospheric pressure.
Step 4 Use the ideal gas law to find the unknown volume (V) of
hydrogen gas.
Act on Your Strategy
Step 1 The balanced chemical equation is
Mg +2HCl → MgCl +H
(s) (aq) 2(aq) 2(g)
0.15 g ? L
Step 2 Find the number of moles of magnesium.
From the periodic table, the molar mass
of magnesium is 24.31 g/mol.
n = m
M
0.15g
=
24.31g/mol
= 6.2×10 −3mol
The mole ratio of hydrogen gas to magnesium
in this reaction is
1molH
2
1molMg
Using the mole ratio,
nmolH 2 = 1molH 2
6.2×10 −3mol 1molMg
Cross multiply to get
(6.2×10−3molMg)
6.2×
n
1
m
0−
o
3
l
m
H
o
2
lMg
=
1
1
m
m
o
o
l
l
M
H 2
g
(6.2×10−3molMg)
n = 6.2×10 −3mol
Step 3 Convert the temperature and pressure to kelvins.
T = (28˚C+273)
= 301K
The pressure that is exerted by the hydrogen gas is
P = 101.8kPa−3.78kPa
hydrogen
= 98.0kPa
Continued ...
508 MHR • Unit 4 Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 508
Step 4 Use the ideal gas law.
PV = nRT
∴V = nRT
P
=
(6.2×10 −3mol)(8.314kPa·L/mol·K)(301K)
(98.0kPa)
= 0.16L
The student collects 0.16 L of dry hydrogen.
Check Your Solution
The final answer is rounded to two significant digits. This
is the least number of significant digits in the question.
The mass of the magnesium is a small number. Therefore,
the volume of the hydrogen produced is also a small number.
Using the Ideal Gas Law for the Gaseous Reactant of a Reaction
So far, you have used the ideal gas law for reactions with a gas product.
You can also use the ideal gas law for reactions with a gas as a reactant.
The following Sample Problem shows you how to do this.
Sample Problem
Space Shuttle Science: Gas as a Reactant
Problem
When astronauts travel in a space shuttle
(Figure 12.17), carbon dioxide must be removed
from the air they breathe. One method is to bubble
the air in the shuttle though a solution of lithium
hydroxide. The lithium hydroxide converts any
carbon dioxide into lithium carbonate.
2LiOH (aq) +CO 2(g) → Li 2 CO 3(aq) +H 2 O ((cid:2))
(You learned about a different method in
Chapter 7 using solid LiOH.) Air containing 25.0 L
of carbon dioxide is passed through 1.5 mol/L LiOH
solution over a 20 min period. The atmospheric
pressure in the shuttle is 0.85 atm, and the
temperature is 28.3˚C. What mass of lithium
carbonate is produced?
Note: Although the air is bubbled through an
aqueous solution, you do not need to consider the
pressure of the water vapour. This is because you
are dealing with the reactant not the product.
Figure 12.17
Continued ...
Chapter 12 Exploring Gas Laws • MHR 509
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 509
What Is Required?
Find the mass of lithium carbonate that is produced when 25.0 L
of carbon dioxide is bubbled through an aqueous solution of lithium
hydroxide.
What Is Given?
2LiOH (aq) +CO 2(g) → Li 2 CO 3(aq) +H 2 O ((cid:2))
1.0 L V = 25.0 L
1.5 mol/L T = 28.3˚C
P = 0.85 atm
Plan Your Strategy
Step 1 Convert the temperature to kelvins. Convert the pressure
from atm to kPa, or use R = 0.8206 atm·L/mol·K.
Step 2 Use the ideal gas law to find the number of moles of
carbon dioxide that reacts.
Step 3 Use the stoichiometry of the equation to determine the
number of moles of lithium carbonate produced.
Step 4 Use the periodic table to determine the molar mass of lithium
carbonate. To find the mass of lithium carbonate produced,
multiply the number of moles by the molar mass.
Act on Your Strategy
Step 1 Convert the temperature and pressure.
T = 28.3˚C+273
= 301K
0.85atm× 101.3kPa = 86kPa
1atm
Step 2 Find the number of moles of CO .
2(g)
PV = nRT
∴n = PV
RT
= (0.85atm)(25.0L)
(0.08206atm·L/mol·K)(301K)
= 0.86mol
Therefore, 0.86 mol of CO passes through
2(g)
the LiOH solution.
Step 3 Find the number of moles of Li CO produced.
2 3
From the balanced equation, we know that 1 mol
of carbon dioxide produces 1 mol of lithium carbonate.
nmolLi 2 CO 3 = 1molLi 2 CO 3
0.86molCO 1molCO
2 2
Continued ...
510 MHR • Unit 4 Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 510
(0.86molCO ) nmolLi 2 CO 3 = 1molLi 2 CO 3 (0.86molCO )
2 0.86molCO 1molCO 2
2 2
n = 0.86molofLi CO
2 3
Step 4 Find the molar mass of Li CO . Then find the mass
2 3
of Li CO produced.
2 3
M = (2×6.94+12.01+3×16.00)g/mol
Li2CO3
= 73.89g/mol
Thus, the mass of Li CO produced is
2 3
m = n×M
= 0.86mol×73.89g/mol
= 64g
Therefore, 64 g of Li CO is produced in this reaction.
2 3
Check Your Solution.
The answer has two significant digits. This is the least number
of significant digits in the question.
When the units cancel in the ideal gas equation, mol remains.
When the units cancel in the final calculation, g remains.
The answer seems reasonable.
Practice Problems
35. Oxygen, O , reacts with magnesium, Mg, to produce 243 g of
2
magnesium oxide, MgO, at 101.3 kPa and 45˚C. How many litres
of oxygen are consumed? Start by writing the balanced equation.
36. Zinc reacts with nitric acid to produce 34 L of dry hydrogen gas
at 900 torr and 20˚C. How many grams of zinc are consumed?
37. 0.75 L of hydrogen gas is collected over water at 25.0˚C and
101.6 kPa. What volume will the dry hydrogen occupy at
103.3 kPa and 25.0˚C?
38. 3070 kg of coal burns to produce carbon dioxide. Assume that the
coal is 95% pure carbon and the combustion is 80% efficient.
(Hint: The mole ratio of C to CO is 5:4.) How many litres of
(s) 2(g)
carbon dioxide are produced at SATP?
39. When 7.48 g of iron reacts with chlorine gas, 21.73 g of product
is formed.
(a) How many moles of chlorine are used?
(b) What is the formula for the product?
(c) Write the equation for the reaction that occurs.
Now you have a chance to do an exciting investigation: the reaction
of magnesium metal with strong acid. Remember to take appropriate
safety precautions and follow your teacher’s directions when working
with the acid.
Chapter 12 Exploring Gas Laws • MHR 511
S K I L L F O C U S
Predicting
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
The Production
of Hydrogen Gas
In this investigation, you will produce hydrogen 1 L beaker or bowl
gas by reacting strong acid with magnesium water at room temperature
metal. 6.0 mol/L hydrochloric acid, HCl
Mg +2HCl → MgCl +H 6 to 7 cm piece of magnesium ribbon
(s) (aq) 2(aq) 2(g)
You will collect the hydrogen gas over water in a 10 to 15 cm piece of copper wire
graduated cylinder. steel wool
barometer and thermometer
clamp and ring stand (optional)
Question
What is the molar volume of dry hydrogen gas at
STP? Calculate it using the volume of hydrogen 6 mol/L HCl
gas that you produce and the mass of one reactant.
100 mL graduated cylinder
Prediction
Predict the volume of hydrogen gas that will
be produced. Use the mass of the magnesium
1 L beaker or bowl
and the balanced chemical equation given above.
Assume 100% yield, and use regular stoichi-
ometry. Organize your calculations clearly.
magnesium ribbon
Safety Precautions
copper wire
stopper
• Before beginning this investigation, check that water
there are no open flames (such as lit Bunsen
burners) in the laboratory.
• The acid that you are using in this investiga- Procedure
tion is strong enough to burn. Wear your safety
1. Prepare a table, in your notebook. Show
glasses and lab apron at all times. Handle the
your calculations.
acid carefully. Wipe up any spills of water or
acid immediately. If you accidentally spill any Observations and Results
acid on your skin, wash it off immediately with
Trial 2
large amounts of cool water.
Observations Trial 1 (if time permits)
• When you have finished the investigation, you
mass of magnesium
can safely wash the products down the sink.
ribbon (g)
You must dilute them, however, by running
temperature of water (˚C)
water down afterward.
barometric pressure (kPa)
Materials volume of hydrogen
collected (mL → L)
scale or balance
vapour pressure of water
100 mL graduated cylinder
at this temperature (kPa)*
stopper with two holes to fit graduated cylinder
512 MHR • Unit 4 Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
get into the cylinder. Hold or clamp the tube
Trial 2
Results Trial 1 (if time permits) into place. Watch the reaction proceed.
Record your observations in your notebook.
number of moles of
magnesium (mol)
9. Add water, at room temperature, to the beaker
volume of collected until the level of the water inside the cylinder
dry hydrogen at STP (L) is exactly the same as the level of the water in
molar volume of hydrogen the beaker. This equalizes the pressure of the
at STP (L/mol) hydrogen gas with the air pressure outside the
tube. Note: Another way to equalize the pres-
*Find the pressure of the water vapour in Table 12.3,
sure is to raise the graduated cylinder slightly
or ask your teacher.
to align the water levels.
2. Obtain a piece of magnesium ribbon that is
10. Record the volume of the trapped gas.
about 6 to 7 cm long. Use steel wool to clean
the outside of the ribbon. Measure the mass 11. All the magnesium should be used up by the
of the ribbon. reaction, since it is the limiting reagent. If any
magnesium ribbon does remain after the reac-
3. Use the mass of the magnesium and the
tion, rinse it with water, dry it with a paper
balanced equation to predict the volume of
towel, and measure its mass. To find the mass
hydrogen gas that will be produced. Show
of the magnesium used up by the reaction,
your calculations in your notebook.
subtract the final mass from the initial mass.
4. Fill the beaker (or bowl) about half full of
12. Empty and clean all your apparatus. Clean
water at room temperature. Measure the
your work space. Wash your hands.
temperature of the water. (You will use this
temperature to approximate the temperature
of the gas produced.) Analysis
1. Calculate the molar volume of hydrogen. Use
5. Measure and record the barometric pressure.
the volume of the H gas, and the water tem-
2
6. Add 15 mL of water to the graduated cylinder.
perature. Also, use the barometric pressure
Then, very carefully, pour 10 to 15 mL of
minus the pressure of the water vapour.
6 mol/L HCl into the graduated cylinder.
2. Use the combined or ideal gas law to translate
Very slowly and carefully, pour water at room
the conditions to STP. Redo the calculations.
temperature down the sides of the cylinder
until the cylinder is completely filled. Your
objective in pouring the water this way is to Conclusions
avoid mixing it with the acid at the bottom of 3. What was the class average for the molar vol-
the cylinder. CAUTION Normally you should ume of dry hydrogen gas at STP? How close
avoid adding water to an acid. Be particularly was your molar volume to the class average?
careful during this step.
4. How close was your molar volume to the
7. Attach the magnesium ribbon to the copper accepted molar volume of a gas at STP?
wire. Dangle the magnesium in the graduated Calculate the percent error for your molar
cylinder. The magnesium should hang 1 to volume.
2 cm below the stopper. Put the stopper in
5. How would your results have been different
the cylinder. Do not worry if a small amount
had you not cleaned the magnesium ribbon
of water overflows out of the cylinder.
before you used it?
8. Hold your gloved finger over the holes in the
6. What were some possible sources of error in
stopper. Tip the cylinder upside down into
your investigation?
the 1 L beaker. Be careful that no air bubbles
CChhaapptteerr 1122 EExxpplloorriinngg GGaass LLaawwss •• MMHHRR 551133
Section Wrap-up
In this section, you learned how to use Gay-Lussac’s law to calculate vol-
umes of gases in a gas reaction. You also learned how to use the ideal gas
law to find the volumes of gases used or produced in reactions. Building
on Dalton’s law of partial pressures, from Chapter 11, you learned how
to calculate the molar volume of a gas collected over water. Finally, you
learned, first-hand, how to produce hydrogen gas in a laboratory.
In the next section, you will see how gases in the atmosphere inter-
act with the Sun’s light. You will also find out about the dangers of gas
pollution.
Section Review
Web LINK 1 K/U Gay-Lussac’s law of combining volumes provides a short-cut for
some gas calculations. What type of gas reaction lets you use this law?
www.school.mcgrawhill.ca/
2 K/U What values should you measure in the laboratory in order to
resources/
calculate the molar volume of a gas?
What kind of company or
industry uses, produces, or
3 C Why is it necessary to correct the pressure of a gas that is collected
sells hydrogen gas? What is
over water? How would you do this?
hydrogen gas used for? What
safety precautions must be 4 K/U Which will occupy a greater volume: 2.0 mol of nitrogen gas
taken when handling it? To at STP or 1.9 mol of oxygen gas at SATP? Explain.
answer these questions, go to
the web site above. Go to 5 I 2.0 L of hydrogen gas reacts with oxygen at 5˚C and 99 kPa.
Science Resources, then to How many litres of water vapour are produced?
Chemistry 11to find out where
6 I 13 g of lead reacts with hydrofluoric acid to produce hydrogen
to go next.
gas at 22˚C and 88.3 kPa.
(a) Describe the apparatus you would need to carry out this reaction
in the laboratory.
(b) How many litres of dry hydrogen gas are collected?
7 I Plants consume carbon dioxide gas as they produce sugar
during photosynthesis.
6CO +6H O → C H O +6O
2 2 6 12 6 2
To produce 50 g of sugar, C H O , how many litres of gas at SATP
6 12 6
does a sugar beet need to consume?
8 I 28 L of oxygen gas reacts with 52 L of hydrogen gas in an 80 L
vessel at 25˚C and 3.0 atm.
(a) How many grams of water are produced? Hint: Find out which
reagent will be used up by the reaction.
(b) What will the pressure be in the cylinder after the reaction if all
of the water that is formed condenses and is removed?
9 MC After completing the Web Link task on this page, prepare a
brochure for an imaginary hydrogen manufacturing company. Your
brochure should advertise the many uses of your product. It must also
contain safety information for the customer.
514 MHR • Unit 4 Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
Atmospheric Reactions 12.4
and Pollution
It is a warm summer weekend, so you decide to visit a national park. It is Section Preview/
nice to be away from all that pollution. But are you bringing the pollution Specific Expectations
with you? Take a look at Figure 12.18. How did these campers get to the
In this section, you will
park? Cars and buses release gaseous pollution into the air. On the other
(cid:2) explainCanadian initiatives
hand, what would it be like to live without vehicles? Can we compromise
to improve air quality
in a way that protects the environment while maintaining a reasonable
(cid:2) communicateyour under-
standard of living?
standing of the following
terms: chlorofluorocarbons
(CFCs), Montréal Protocol
Figure 12.18 These campers are enjoying the environment, but they are harming it at
the same time. How?
Fortunately many people are now aware of issues such as pollution
from car exhaust and ozone depletion. At the same time, Canadian chemi-
cal and related industries employ about 250 000 people and generate tens
of billions of dollars annually. These industries make the products that
entertain, feed, clothe, and keep Canadians comfortable. When discussing
atmospheric chemistry and pollution, we must consider two important
influences: the economy and the environment.
In this section, you will look at the chemistry that takes place among
the gases in the atmosphere. You will examine an important gas called
ozone and the pollutants that affect this gas.
Gas Chemistry in the Atmosphere
Many important chemical reactions take place in the atmosphere. All
these reactions involve gases. There are two main types of gas chemistry
in the atmosphere:
• interactions between gases already present in the atmosphere
• interactions between atmospheric gases and gases produced by
processes on Earth
Chapter 12 Exploring Gas Laws • MHR 515
The Ozone Cycle
High in the atmosphere, a gas called ozone, O , absorbs ultraviolet (UV)
3
mesosphere
radiation from the Sun. The radiation separates the ozone into oxygen gas,
stratosphere O
2
, and an oxygen atom. After passing through a few more steps, ozone
is re-formed when molecules of oxygen gas combine with oxygen atoms.
35
By absorbing energy from the Sun in this way, ozone prevents harmful
30 UV radiation from reaching Earth’s surface. Figure 12.19 illustrates the
25
cycle that occurs as ozone is formed, absorbs UV radiation, and breaks up.
20
Figure 12.20 shows where ozone is located in the atmosphere.
15
troposphere
10
UV radiation
limit of most clouds 5
A
B
UV radiation
oxygen oxygen
molecule atom
ozone molecule
C
Figure 12.19 The ozone cycle: (A) Oxygen gas in the atmosphere absorbs energy from
the Sun. Each oxygen molecule breaks up into two oxygen atoms. (B) An oxygen atom
combines with a molecule of oxygen gas to form ozone. Another molecule is needed to
absorb extra energy. (C) Ozone absorbs ultraviolet radiation and breaks up again into
oxygen gas and an oxygen atom.
Pollutants in the Atmosphere
Gases from living and non-living processes on Earth’s surface interact
with the gases in the atmosphere. For example, oxygen and carbon diox-
ide in the air are involved in animal and plant respiration. A forest fire
burns plants to produce carbon dioxide gas. On a more damaging level,
human technology and industrial processes produce many polluting
gases. As you will learn in Chapter 14, burning fossil fuels is a major
source of gas pollution in the atmosphere.
Chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) are an important class of polluting gases
that are not usually caused by burning fossil fuels. CFCs are stable and
harmless near the ground. When they make their way up into the atmos-
phere, however, they interact and interfere with atmospheric processes. In
particular, these gases interfere with the production and reactions of
ozone, O . You will learn more about CFCs later in this section.
3
Ozone Near the Ground
Ozone does not only exist high up in the stratosphere. It is also present
much closer to us, in the troposphere: the layer of the atmosphere that
lies directly over Earth. Ozone near the ground is largely produced
when nitrogen oxide gas from car and truck exhaust fumes reacts with
oxygen gas in sunlight. Ozone is a major component of smog in cities.
(See Figure 12.21.)
516 MHR • Unit 4 Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
)mk(
edutitlA
protective natural
ozone layer
Figure 12.20 Most ozone is
located about 25 km above Earth’s
surface. This is a very thin level,
however. If all the ozone in the
atmosphere were compressed, it
would be only a few millimetres
thick.
Figure 12.21 Smog was
originally defined as a mixture
of smoke and fog. Today it can
also be photochemical, caused
by sunlight breaking down air
pollutants.
At this level, ozone is a pollutant with a harsh odour. In humans and
animals, it causes respiratory problems, including coughing, wheezing,
and eye irritation. It retards plant growth, reduces the productivity of
crops, and damages forests. Concentrations of ozone as low as 0.1 ppm
(parts per million) can decrease photosynthesis by 50%. In addition, it
damages plastics, breaks down rubber, and corrodes metals.
Careers in Chemistry
Environmental Technician mathematics, English, and science (preferably
chemistry or physics). You also need a two- or
Gases in the atmosphere (such as carbon
three-year community college program in
dioxide and methane) allow heat from the Sun
environmental technology.
to enter the atmosphere and prevent it from
leaving again. This is called the greenhouse
effect. Thanks to the greenhouse effect, Earth
remains fairly warm, with an average tempera-
ture of about 15.5˚C. Without this effect, Earth’s
temperature would be about −18˚C.
Human activities over the last hundred
years have caused the level of carbon dioxide
and other gases in the atmosphere to increase.
As a result, more heat is trapped in Earth’s
atmosphere. According to Environment Canada,
Canada’s average temperature has risen by about
1˚C over the last century. This is causing more
Environmental technicians gather gas samples from
frequent and more intense winter storms.
smokestacks and PCBs from transformers. They also set
up equipment in the field to create baseline studies and
Change from the Ground Up monitor changes in the environment.
How can we decrease the production of green-
Make Career Connections
house gases? One way is to focus on the sources
of these gases. As global warming increases, Human Resource Development Canada has
chemists who study atmospheric processes will offices in every province. It also has a web
be more in demand. site where you can access descriptions and
Change begins with accurate measurements. requirements for many careers, including
Environmental technicians assess and monitor that of environmental technician. What other
pollution levels in air, water, and soil. To become environmental career opportunities can you
an environmental technician, you need a high locate? Prepare a brief report of your findings,
school diploma, with advanced-level credits in and present it to the class.
CFCs and Ozone Depletion
As you learned earlier, chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) are chemicals that
interfere with the ozone cycle high up in the atmosphere. CFCs are non-
toxic, nonflammable compounds that contain atoms of chlorine, carbon,
and fluorine. These gases are human-made compounds that were released
into the atmosphere primarily from refrigeration and aerosol devices.
In 1928, Thomas Midgley invented the first CFC compound. Because
they were useful but safe, they were referred to as “miracle compounds.”
In particular, dichlorodifluoromethane, CCl F , also known as Freon, was
2 2
discovered to be an efficient refrigerant.
Chapter 12 Exploring Gas Laws • MHR 517
Because of Freon, household refrigeration became common. In fact, much
of our modern-day life style first became possible because of CFCs.
By 1974, millions of tonnes of CFCs had been produced (see Figure 12.22).
At the University of California, chemists F. Sherwood Rowland and Mario
Molina began to wonder where all of these CFCs ended up. They realized
that CFCs are chemically very stable. However, they began to calculate
what happens when CFCs are exposed to high levels of radiation far up in
the atmosphere. As it turned out, their fears were well-founded. In 1985,
British scientists in the Antarctic noticed a large decrease in the ozone
layer above the Antarctic. A “hole” in the ozone layer was beginning to
form. In 1995, Rowland and Molina, along with a third ozone scientist,
won the Nobel Prize for their work with CFCs.
How CFCs Attack Ozone
Today we know that CFCs high in the atmosphere break apart under
ultraviolet radiation to produce chlorine atoms. These chlorine atoms
Figure 12.22 CFCs have been destroy ozone molecules.
used as refrigerants, coolants Cl+O → ClO+O
3 2
in home and automobile air
conditioners, and propellants The product, ClO, reacts with an oxygen atom and releases the chlorine
in aerosol containers such as atom. The chlorine atom attacks another ozone molecule. Over time, one
hair sprays. chlorine atom can destroy thousands of ozone molecules. Figure 12.23
illustrates this process for the CFC trichlorofluoromethane, CCl F.
3
Eventually the chlorine atom reacts with a different compound in the
atmosphere to form a stable, less harmful product.
A radiation from the Sun B chlorine atom breaks free C chlorine atom collides with
breaks down the CFC molecule ozone molecule
oxygen gas
F oxygen gas is produced and
the chlorine atom is free to E ClO collides with oxygen atom D chlorine picks up oxygen atom
attack more ozone to become ClO
Figure 12.23 The breakdown of a CFC by ultraviolet radiation produces single chlorine
atoms that attack and destroy ozone. Because the chlorine atoms are released, they
attack ozone again and again in a chain reaction.
Although they are the most abundant ozone-depleting substance, CFCs
are not the only culprits. Other chemicals that damage the ozone layer
include methyl bromide, CH Br, carbon tetrachloride, CCl , and halons
3 4
such as carbon trifluorobromide, CF Br.
3
518 MHR • Unit 4 Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
The Effects of Ozone Depletion
How do we know that CFCs and other ozone-destroying
molecules are having an effect on the atmosphere? As
Figure 12.24 illustrates, ozone levels over Canada and
other parts of the world have decreased significantly
since the late 1970s.
With reduced ozone levels, more ultraviolet
radiation from the Sun reaches Earth. Among
humans, UV-induced skin cancer and eye damage
are becoming a serious threat. The increased levels
of radiation also damage phytoplankton in fresh
and marine ecosystems. Since phytoplankton are
the base of the aquatic food chain, this damage
affects all other water species. As you learned
earlier, the presence of ozone close to Earth damages
crops and forests. A lack of ozone in the atmosphere,
however, also reduces the yield of crops, such as barley
and canola, and harms forests.
Improving Air Quality
Figure 12.24 Ozone thinning is
What has happened since the discovery that CFCs and other chemicals still occurring over the northern
hemisphere, as shown here. The
were harming the ozone layer? The chemical industry has invented and
dark blue in the centre indicates
produced environmentally friendly refrigerants. All new cars produced
the presence of an ozone “hole.”
in North America have air conditioners that contain ozone-friendly
refrigerants. Used CFCs from older refrigeration units are being recycled
so that they do not escape into the atmosphere. A lot has already been
accomplished, but more remains to be done.
Much of the positive activity comes from an international agreement
called the Montréal Protocol. This agreement was signed in Montréal,
Canada, on September 16, 1987. It has been successful in drastically
reducing the use of CFCs worldwide. The Montréal Protocol is particular-
ly significant because, for the first time, individual countries put a
common planetary goal ahead of their own economic interests.
The Montréal Protocol stated that the production and consumption
CHEM
of all substances that deplete the ozone layer would be phased out by the FACT
year 2000 in developed countries. (Methyl chloroform would be phased
In 1993, a scientific link was
out by 2005.) The chemicals that are named in the agreement include
established between ozone
CFCs, halons, carbon tetrachloride, methyl chloroform, and methyl
depletion and increases in
bromide. Once CFC production and consumption are stopped, scientists
ultraviolet radiation. It was
hope that the ozone layer will recover within 50 or 60 years. The success found that increased exposure
of the Montréal Protocol depends however, on the co-operation of both to UV-B radiation causes
developed and developing countries. skin cancer, the formation of
cataracts, and the suppression
of the human immune system.
Section Wrap-up
Research has shown skin
In this section, you learned how ozone high in the atmosphere interacts cancer to be as common as
with UV light from the Sun. In addition, you learned where CFCs come all other types of cancer com-
bined. Sunscreens can protect
from, and how they damage the ozone layer. Finally, you saw that the
humans from the risk of some
Montréal Protocol is striving to prevent further ozone damage.
skin cancers. Unfortunately
they do not appear to provide
protection against damage to
the immune system.
Chapter 12 Exploring Gas Laws • MHR 519
Canadians in Chemistry
Parisa Ariya was born in Tehran, the capital of human activities. The oceans emit these halogens
Iran. She chose atmospheric chemistry for a into the atmosphere. There they react with, and
career. Scientists in this field study the transfor- destroy, ozone, O .
3
mation of molecules in the atmosphere (the layer Ariya and her students are trying to deter-
of gases surrounding Earth). They also study the mine what kinds of halogens exist in Earth’s
atmosphere’s interactions with oceans, land, and atmosphere, how quickly they are produced and
living things. After studying in several countries, degraded, and what their major sources are. As
Dr. Ariya became a professor at McGill University they find answers to these questions, they may
in Montréal. be able to recommend ways to reduce halogens
in the oceans and atmosphere. They may also
develop ways to modify halogens’ reactions with
ozone and other gases so that the halogens do
less harm.
Another of Ariya’s research interests is
sulfur, S. She and her students are studying its
atmospheric reactions with ozone and hydrogen
peroxide, H O . Through field studies, laboratory
2 2
experiments, and modelling, they are trying to
determine the impacts of such reactions.
Dr. Parisa Ariya “You can enjoy nature through sports,” says
Dr. Ariya, who is an avid soccer player and swim-
One of Dr. Ariya’s particular areas of interest is mer. “But as a scientist you also enjoy nature
halogen chemistry. Halogens such as chlorine, Cl, intellectually, methodically. Science keeps the
and bromine, Br, occur naturally in ocean waters. mind alive because you’re constantly learning.
As well, they enter ocean waters as run-off from Science is fun!”
Section Review
Unit Issue Prep 1 C Describe the cycle that ozone goes through as it absorbs ultraviolet
radiation. Use a diagram.
Research the Ontario
Drive-Clean program. How
2 C Compare the effects of ozone near the ground with its effects high
is pollution from car exhausts
in the atmosphere.
being regulated by the
government? Search for 3 K/U What are chlorofluorocarbons? How do they affect the ozone layer?
information in preparation
for the Unit Issue. 4 K/U Describe the Montréal Protocol. Why is it so significant?
5 MC Canadian scientists developed the Brewer Ozone Spectrophoto-
meter, a state-of-the-art ozone-measuring device. It is the most accurate
ozone-measuring device in the world. Use the Internet or reference
books to find out how the Brewer Ozone Spectrophotometer works.
Report your findings to the class.
520 MHR • Unit 4 Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
Review
Reflecting on Chapter 12 (b) A balloon filled with gas experiences a drop
in pressure. What happens to the volume of
Summarize this chapter in the format of your
the gas?
choice. Here are a few ideas to use as guidelines:
• Describe Avogadro’s hypothesis, and explain 7. A student reacts a sample of zinc with
how it relates to the properties of gases. hydrochloric acid. He collects the gas as it
• Explain how the ideal gas law came about. bubbles through water. How will this student
Describe how to use it to calculate gas need to correct his measurements? Explain
properties. your answer.
• Explain how to use the ideal gas law for 8. What are the effects of ozone pollution near
stoichiometric problems involving gases as the ground?
reactants or products in a chemical reaction.
9. Why are high levels of ultraviolet radiation
• Describe how to identify an unknown gas using
potentially dangerous?
the ideal gas law.
• Explain the importance of ozone, and describe 10. How is the Montréal Protocol attempting to
improve future air quality?
the action of CFCs on ozone. Explain what the
Montréal Protocol has done for the ozone issue.
Inquiry
Reviewing Key Terms 11. As you work on gas reactions in the laboratory,
For each of the following terms, write a sentence your barometer shatters. Now it is impossible
that shows your understanding of its meaning. to measure the pressure of the room.
(a) Design a simple investigation that allows
law of combining molar volume
you to calculate the pressure of the room.
volumes ideal gas law
Assume you have a thermometer.
law of multiple chlorofluorocarbons
(b) Identify the materials and equipment you
proportions (CFCs)
will need to carry out the investigation.
Avogadro’s hypothesis Montréal Protocol
(c) Which variables will you hold constant?
Which will you change? Which will you
Knowledge/Understanding
measure?
1.(a) How did the work of John Dalton and Joseph
12. What volume does each amount of helium
Gay-Lussac lead to Avogadro’s hypothesis?
occupy at STP?
(b) How does Avogadro’s hypothesis help us to
(a) 1.00 mol
understand gas behaviour and gas reactions?
(b) 12.5 mol
2.(a) What is the law of multiple proportions? (c) 100.0 g
(b) State Gay-Lussac’s law of combining 13. How many molecules are in 0.250 m3 of
volumes.
oxygen at STP?
(c) How are the two laws related? What useful
14. What volume does 2.00 mol of oxygen occupy
problem-solving gas law did they lead to?
at 750 torr and 30.0˚C?
3. What is the molar volume of an ideal gas
15. What volume does 1.50 g of nitrogen gas
at STP?
occupy at 100.0˚C and 5.00 atm?
4. What are the characteristics of an ideal gas?
16. Oxygen that is needed in a school laboratory
How is it different from a real gas?
is stored in a pressurized 2.00 L cylinder.
5. Is the density of one mole of hydrogen gas at
25.0 g of oxygen is contained in the cylinder
STP the same as the density of one mole of
at 20.0˚C. Under what pressure is the oxygen
oxygen gas at STP? Explain your answer.
stored?
6.(a) Additional gas is added to a container with a
17. Propane, C H , that is needed for a barbecue
3 8
fixed volume. What happens to the pressure is stored in a 40.0 dm3 metal cylinder. The
and temperature of the gas?
pressure gauge on the cylinder reads 25.0 atm
Chapter 12 Exploring Gas Laws • MHR 521
at 20.0˚C. What mass of propane is in the a volume of 2.2 L. What is the molecular
cylinder? (Hint: 1dm3 = 1L) formula of the liquid?
18. Find the density (in g/L) of each 26. Methanol has potential to be used as an alter-
atmospheric gas. native fuel. It burns in the presence of oxygen
(a) oxygen at 1000 torr and 30.0˚C to produce carbon dioxide and water.
(b) helium at 10.0 atm and 20˚C CH 3 OH ((cid:2)) +O 2(g) → CO 2(g) +2H 2 O (g)
19.(a) Pressurized CO is used in the soft-drink (a) Balance this equation.
2
manufacturing industry. How many grams (b) 10 L of oxygen is completely consumed at
of carbon dioxide are in a 500.0 cm3 tank STP. What volume of CO 2 is produced?
at −50.0˚C and 2.00 atm? (c) What mass of methanol is consumed in
(b) How many grams of oxygen does this tank this reaction?
hold at the same temperature and pressure? 27. A student wants to prepare carbon
20. 9.0 g of an unknown gas is stored in a 5.00 L dioxide using sodium carbonate and dilute
metal tank at 0.0˚C and 202.0 kPa. To identify hydrochloric acid.
the gas, investigators decide to find out its Na 2 CO 3(s) +2HCl (aq) → 2NaCl (aq) +CO 2(g) +H 2 O ((cid:2))
How much sodium carbonate should the
molecular mass.
(a) What is the molecular mass of the gas? student react with excess hydrochloric acid
to produce 1.00 L of carbon dioxide at 24.0˚C
(b) What is the gas?
and 760 torr?
21. A 25.0 L tank, stored at −20.0˚C, contains
10.0 g of helium and 10.0 g of hydrogen gas. 28. A scientist makes hydrogen gas in the laborato-
(a) What is the total number of moles of gas ry by reacting calcium metal with an excess of
in the tank? hydrochloric acid.
Ca +2HCl → CaCl +H
(b) What is the total pressure (in kPa) in (s) (aq) 2(aq) 2(g)
the tank? The scientist reacts 5.00 g of calcium and
(c) What is the partial pressure of helium in collects the hydrogen over water at 25.0˚C
the tank? and 103.0 kPa. What volume of dry hydrogen
is produced?
22. A 60.0 g sample of nitrogen gas is stored in
a 5.0 L tank at a pressure of 10.0 atm. At what 29. A chemist collects oxygen over water at 22.0˚C
temperature (in ˚C) is the gas stored? and 105.0 kPa using the following reaction:
2KClO → 2KCl +3O
23. A 13.4 g sample of an unknown liquid is 3(s) (s) 2(g)
What volume of dry oxygen is obtained if the
vapourized at 85.0˚C and 100.0 kPa. The
chemist heats 25.0 g of potassium chlorate?
vapour has a volume of 4.32 L. The percentage
composition of the liquid is found to be 52.1% 30. Ammonia, a useful fertilizer, is produced
carbon, 13.2% hydrogen, and 34.7% oxygen. by the following reaction:
What is the molecular formula of the liquid? CH 4(g) +H 2 O ((cid:2)) +N 2 O (g) → 2NH 3(g) +CO 2(g)
500.0 g of methane reacts with excess H O
24. An unlabelled bottle of an unknown liquid 2
and N O. At 27.0˚C and 1.20 atm, what
is found on a shelf in a laboratory storeroom. 2
volume of ammonia gas is produced?
10.0 g of the liquid is vaporized at 120.0˚C and
5.0 atm. The volume of the vapour is found to 31. Hydrochloric acid dissolves limestone, as
be 568.0 cm3. The liquid is found to be made shown in the following chemical equation:
up of 84.2% carbon and 15.8% hydrogen. CaCO 3(s) +2HCl (aq) → CaCl 2(aq) +CO 2(g) +H 2 O ((cid:2))
What is the molecular formula of the liquid? 12.0 g of CaCO 3 reacts with 110 mL of 1.25
mol/L HCl. At 22.0˚C and 99.0 kPa, what
25. A 4.2 g sample of a volatile liquid contains
volume of carbon dioxide is produced?
1.0 g of carbon and 0.25 g of hydrogen. The rest
of the liquid is chlorine. When the sample is 32. Butane from a disposable lighter burns
vaporized at 101.0 kPa and 60.0˚C, it occupies according to the following equation:
C 4 H 10(g) + O 2(g) → CO 2(g) + H 2 O ((cid:2))
522 MHR • Unit 4 Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
(a) Balance this chemical equation. (c) Suppose that the water vapour Myri breathes
(b) How many grams of butane are needed out is condensed to its liquid form. If the
to produce 300.0 mL of carbon dioxide at density of the water is 1.0 g/mL, what is its
50.0˚C and 1.25 atm? How many grams of volume?
oxygen are needed? 37. Sulfur dioxide reacts with oxygen in air to
produce sulfur trioxide. The sulfur trioxide
Communication then reacts with water to produce sulfuric
33. Draw a concept map showing the connections acid. Write balanced chemical equations for
between the following gas laws: these reactions.
• Boyle’s law 38. Write a story to describe what your life
• Charles’ law would be like if you did not participate in any
• Gay-Lussac’s law polluting activities (such as riding in petrole-
• the combined gas law um-powered cars) or use any products (such as
• the ideal gas law plastic) that cause pollution. Include as many
• Gay-Lussac’s law of combining volumes pollution-causing products as possible.
• Dalton’s law of partial pressures
Answers to Practice Problems and
34. Prepare a poster that will explain the relation- Short Answers to Section Review Questions:
ships between the pressure, volume, and Practice Problems: 1.24 L/mol 2.42.8 L/mol
temperature of a gas to students in a younger 3.25.9 L/mol 4.(a)0.446 mol (b)12.5 g 5.0.089 mol
grade. 6.0.500 mol, 3.01×1023 molecules 7.77.3 L
8.1.0×102 L 9.78.38 L 10.(a)56. 0 L
35. Express the ideal gas constant in each (b)1.51×1024 molecules (c)3.01×1024 atoms 11.74.4 L
of the following units. 12.45.7 K 13.626 kg 14.23.3 L 15.25 kPa 16.1.71 g/L
(a) kPa·L/mol·K 17.2.35 g/L 18.3.65 g/L 19.578 kPa 20.48.2 g/mol
(b) atm·L/mol·K 21.2.0×102g/mol 22.71.3 g/mol 23.(a)1.69 g/L
(c) torr·L/mol·K (b)1.78 g/L 24.C 2 H 2 25.(a)1:2 (b)1:2 (c)2:1 (d)1:1
26.(a)4.5 L (b)7.5 L 27.(b)6.00 L 28.(b)a
4
b
2
29.(a)65.0 L
Making Connections (b)1.63×1024 molecules(c)3.25×1024 atoms 30.16 L
31.0.20 g 32.0.047 g 33.(a)79 L (b)98 L 34.0.32 g 35.79 L
36. Complex carbohydrates are starches that 36.1.1×102 g 37.0.71 L 38.4.8×106 L 39.(a)0.201 mol
your body can convert to glucose, a type of (b)FeCl
3
sugar. Simple carbohydrate foods contain Section Review: 12.1: 1.104 g 2.8.7×102 L
glucose, ready for immediate use by the human 3.2.5×102 kPa 4.58 g; 2.2×1023 molecules 5.–19˚C
body. Breathing and burning glucose, C H O , 7.6.2 atm 12.2: 1.0.72 g/L 2.(a)2.0 g/mol (b)hydrogen gas
produces energy in a jogger’s muscles, a
6
cc
1
o
2
rd
6
-
3.N
2
O
4
12.3: 5.2.0 L 6.(b)1.7 L 7.41 L 8.(a)1.1×102 g
(b)0.075 atm
ing to the following unbalanced equation:
C H O +O → CO +H O
6 12 6(aq) 2(g) 2(g) 2 (g)
Just before running, Myri eats two oranges.
The oranges give her body 25 g of glucose to
make energy. The temperature outside is 27˚C,
and the atmospheric pressure is 102.3 kPa.
Although 21% of the air Myri breathes in is
oxygen, she breathes out about 16% of this oxy-
gen. (In other words, she only uses about 5%.)
(a) How many litres of air does Myri breathe
while running to burn up the glucose she
consumed?
(b) How many litres of water vapour does she
produce? How many litres of carbon dioxide
gas does she produce?
Chapter 12 Exploring Gas Laws • MHR 523
An Issue to Analyze
UNIT 4
The Costs of human health. It is estimated that many cases of bron-
chitis, asthma, and even early death could be eliminat-
Getting Around ed, by removing sulfur from fossil fuels before burning
them. This process is possible, but it costs money.
Ultimately, these additional costs would be paid by
Many people blame the government for not enforcing the consumer—you!
sufficient regulations to protect and clean up the envi-
ronment. New, cleaner technologies have been devel-
oped by science. Why don’t we use them? The fact is,
Canadians are accustomed to a comfortable lifestyle,
and may not be willing to change it. How would you
feel about stricter government regulations that affected
yourtransportation and recreation?
Often, Canadians do not appreciate or approve of
government efforts to reduce automobile emissions.
Some people were angry when, decades ago, the gov-
ernment asked them to switch to unleaded gasoline.
Even now, many people remove factory-installed,
pollution-reducing resonators and catalytic converters
from their new cars. They do this in an effort to
increase the power of their vehicles.
Environment Canada has copious amounts of
research suggesting that reducing automobile emis-
sions would improve the health of Canadians. The
restrictions that would make these improvements,
however, have not yet been enforced. For example,
Background
motorboats can be equipped with motors that are near-
People have always turned to the cheapest and ly silent and that do not dump oil into the water.
most efficient technologies. In the last few centuries, Because these cleaner, quieter motors are more expen-
fossil fuels such as coal and oil were discovered in sive, most boaters still use the old cheaper motors.
large amounts. These fuels were also very efficient, To what extent should individuals be allowed
producing large amounts of energy. It is only recently to make such choices? Should the good of the
that we have become aware of the environmental community and the overall environment have a higher
consequences of our use of fossil fuels. priority than personal choice?
Today, we are attempting to reduce environmental
harm. Coal- and oil-burning engines have been Plan and Present
replaced by cleaner gas-burning engines. Many engines
As a class, you will debate the following proposal:
are equipped with “scrubbers” that help remove toxins
before releasing gases into the atmosphere. Most envi- All vehicles must meet strict environmentally-
ronmental problems have not been solved, however. friendly emissions standards. Any vehicles, new or
Automobile emissions are one of our most serious old, that do not meet these standards must not be used
environmental problems today. until they are upgraded to the new emission stan-
Automobiles expel an enormous amount of dards. Individual owners must pay for this upgrading.
toxins into the air every day. Besides harming the Those individuals who cannot afford to upgrade their
environment, these toxins are also dangerous to vehicles willbe obliged to relyon public transportation.
524 MHR • Unit 4 Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
Assessment
After you have explored this issue,
(cid:2) Assess the debate based on feedback from your
classmates. How could you improve your debating
skills?
There are many angles to this issue. You may wish
(cid:2) Assess your research skills during the course of
to consider motorboat engines, private vehicles, com-
analyzing this issue. How have your skills
mercial vehicles such as transport trucks, and the
improved?
development and availability of public transportation.
1 Before starting your research, make a journal entry
describing what you think of the proposal. (b) How will you respond to special interest
groups who approach you and disagree with
2 Look at the people listed below. How would each
your decision?
person react to the proposal? Why? For each
person, write two comments expressing that 4 How do you think the issue of vehicle emissions
person’s point of view. will be addressed in the future?
(a) someone your age who lives in a rural area
where there is no public transportation at all
(b) someone your age who lives downtown in a city
with excellent public transportation
(c) a commercial truck driver who uses thousands of
litres of fuel each week
(d) a used-car salesperson
(e) an autoworker
3 Write a counterpoint or amendment to the
resolution in order to respond to each of the
comments in your answer to question 2.
4 Research the facts behind this situation. Before you
start, brainstorm some specific questions to
research. Some suggestions are given below.
•What gases do cars and trucks emit?
•Why are these gases harmful?
•What emission standards might be set?
•Who uses the most fuel?
•What standards do other developed
countries have?
•What standards (if any) are in place in third
world countries?
5 Predict two future consequences of not adopting
the resolution,and two consequences of adopting it.
6 You will be assigned a viewpoint in a debate of the
proposal. Prepare your arguments and participate
in the debate.
Evaluate the Results
1 Did your class come to a conclusion about the
proposal? Was a compromise reached, or are some
parties still unsatisfied?
2 List any solutions or suggestions your class devel-
oped. Are these suggestions likely to work? Why or Web LINK
why not?
3 Suppose you were a member of the government To help you with your research, visit www.school.
who had to decide on this issue. mcgrawhill.ca/resources/; go to Science Resources,
(a) Now that you have debated the issue, what is then to Chemistry 11 for web site suggestions.
your decision?
Unit 4 An Issue to Analyze • MHR 525
Review
Knowledge/Understanding (c) maintains a steady height in the moving
air currents
In your notebook, write the letter of the best
(d) maintains a constant volume
answer for each of the following questions.
(e) remains in the stratosphere
1. Which of the following statements is not con-
6. An engineer experiments with different air
sistent with the kinetic molecular theory?
mixtures in a car tire. First, she removes the air
(a) Gases react with each other in simple whole
from a tire and fills it with pure nitrogen. She
number ratios of volumes.
measures the pressure exerted inside the tire,
(b) Particles in the gaseous state move slower
then adds a measured amount of helium. After
than particles in the liquid state.
measuring the pressure a second time, she
(c) The particles of a solid are strongly attracted
adds a certain amount of argon. This engineer
to each other.
is investigating:
(d) Gas particles move in all directions, in
(a) Boyle’s law
straight lines.
(b) Dalton’s law of partial pressures
(e) Elements combine in simple ratios to
(c) Charles’ law
form compounds.
(d) Gay-Lussac’s law
2. Gases that obey the postulates of the kinetic
(e) The combined gas law
molecular theory:
(a) are not affected by pressure 7. Avogadro made an important contribution
(b) behave according to Charles’ law at very low to the understanding of gases when he
temperatures only concluded that:
(c) are called ideal gases (a) The molar volume of a gas is 24.8 L at STP.
(d) are affected by a change in pressure, which (b) Any volume of a gas contains
causes particles to move faster 6.02×1023 molecules.
(e) are called real gases (c) At the same temperature and pressure, equal
volumes of gases contain equal numbers
3. After it has been driven for several hours, a car
of molecules.
tire heats up. As a result, the tire pressure
(d) PV = nRT
increases. This is an example of:
(e) As the temperature of a gas increases, so
(a) Boyle’s law
does its pressure and volume.
(b) Charles’ law
(c) Avogadro’s law 8. At constant temperature, the pressure-volume
(d) Gay-Lussac’s law relationship of an ideal gas is governed by:
(e) Torricelli’s relationship (a) Boyle’s law
(b) Avogadro’s law
4. At 20˚C, a moving piston reduces the volume of
(c) The fact that pressure and temperature are
a cylinder by one half. The gas pressure inside
directly related
the cylinder will:
(d) Gay-Lussac’s law
(a) decrease by one half
(e) The fact that temperature and volume are
(b) double
directly related
(c) increase by one half
(d) remain the same 9. Which if the following sets of coefficients will
(e) cause the gas particles to speed up balance this chemical equation?
NaN → Na +N
5. A weather balloon floats up into the 3(s) (s) 2(g)
(a) 3, 2, 2
atmosphere. The air pressure decreases as the
(b) 2, 2, 3
balloon floats higher. Assuming the tempera-
(c) 1, 2, 1.5
ture remains constant, the balloon:
(d) 1, 2, 3
(a) increases in volume
(e) 1, 1, 2
(b) decreases in volume
526 MHR • Unit 4 Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
10. Which of the following compounds is not 14. Boyle’s law gives the relationship between the
responsible for removing ozone from the pressure and volume of a gas at constant tem-
stratosphere? perature. Avogadro’s law gives the relationship
(a) carbon dioxide between the number of moles and the volume
(b) chlorofluorocarbons of a gas.
(c) methyl bromide (a) Write these two relationships in equation
(d) CCl F form, using k as a constant.
2 2
(e) carbon tetrachloride (b) What is the relationship between pressure
11. The main reason why the Montréal Protocol is and number of moles?
so important is: 15.(a) At constant pressure, the temperature, in
(a) It cuts down on greenhouse gases in kelvins, is doubled. What effect will this
our atmosphere. have on a gas? Explain.
(b) It protects our oceans. (b) At constant pressure, the temperature, in
(c) It brought industrialized countries together degrees Celcius, is doubled. How is this
to sign an environmental agreement reducing different from the situation in part (a)? How
the production of carbon dioxide from fuel will the effect on a gas be different? Explain.
emissions from vehicles and industries. (c) At constant temperature, the pressure on a
(d) It preserves our Arctic regions. gas is reduced by a factor of 5. What effect
(e) It cuts down on ozone depleting gases in will this have on the volume of a gas? Why?
our atmosphere. 16. A sample of oxygen gas occupies a volume of
10.0 L at 546 K. At what temperature (in ˚C)
Inquiry
would the gas occupy a volume of 5.0 L?
12. A group of students measured the effect of
17. A sample of nitrogen gas occupies 11.20 L at
pressure on the volume of different gases.
0˚C and 101.3 kPa. How many moles of
One group observed the effect of pressure on
nitrogen are there in this sample? Explain.
pure oxygen gas. The other group observed
18. The chemical equation below describes what
pure nitrogen gas. The results obtained are
happens when a match is struck against a
shown below.
rough surface to produce light and heat.
Pressure (kPa) Volume O 2 (mL) Volume N 2 (mL) P 4 S 3(s) +O 2(g) → P 4 O 10(g) +SO 2(g)
(a) Balance this chemical equation.
60.0 333.0 212.8
(b) If 5.3 L of oxygen gas were consumed,
80.0 250.0 156.2
how many litres of sulfur dioxide would
120.0 166.5 104.0 be produced?
160.0 125.0 78.8 19. A 250.0 mL balloon, full of pure helium
200.0 100.0 63.4 at 101.3 kPa, is subjected to a pressure of
125.0 kPa at a constant temperature. What is
(a) On the same set of axes, plot a graph of P the final volume of the balloon?
versus V for oxygen and for nitrogen. Use a
20. A sample of chlorine gas is used as a pool
different colour for each gas.
disinfectant. The sample occupies a volume of
(b) For each of the volumes given, calculate a
500 mL in a cylinder with a moveable piston.
value for the inverse of the volume (1/V).
The piston forces the gas out into the water
(c) On the same set of axes, plot a graph of P
when needed. The gas is stored at 25.0 atm at
versus 1/V. Use a different colour for
standard temperature. If the temperature
each gas.
remains unchanged and the piston compresses
(d) What conclusions can you make from the
the gas to 220 mL,what isthe pressure inside
graphs that you have drawn?
the cylinder?
13. What is a real gas? How does it differ in the
laboratory from an ideal gas?
Unit 4 Review • MHR 527
21. A sample of air occupies a volume of 35.75 L at tank at 5.5 atm and 27.5˚C. What is the mass
25.0˚C and 101.3 kPa. What pressure is needed of nitrogen in the tank?
to reduce the volume of air to 9.85 L at 25.0˚C? 32. Ethanol vapour burns in air according to the
22. Hydrogen gas occupies a volume of 500 dm3 at following equation:
125˚C. If the pressure remains constant, what 2C 2 H 5 OH (g) +6O 2(g) → 4CO 2(g) +6H 2 O ((cid:2))
volume will the hydrogen occupy at 25.0˚C?
If 2.5 L of ethanol burns at STP, what volume
23. A sample of natural gas occupies a volume of oxygen is required? What volume of carbon
of 350 L at 20.0˚C. The pressure remains dioxide will be produced?
unchanged, and the temperature is increased
33. The head of a match contains approximately
until the volume of natural gas becomes 385 L.
0.75 g of diphosphorus trisulfide. When the
What is the final temperature (in ˚C) of the gas?
match is struck on a rough surface, it explodes
24. A sample of gas is collected at 25˚C. If the into flame producing diphosphorus pentaoxide
temperature of the gas is tripled and the and sulfur dioxide (this is a slightly different
pressure on the gas is doubled, what portion reaction from that in question 18). What
of the original volume of gas will remain? volume of sulfur dioxide will be produced if
25. For each blank cell in the table below, calculate the temperature is 26.5˚C and the pressure
the missing quantity. is 102.8 kPa?
34. Nitrogen monoxide, NO, is one of the gases
Initial Final Initial Final Initial Final
that is responsible for smog. It is produced in
temperature temperature pressure pressure volume volume
(˚C) (˚C) (kPa) (kPa) (L) (L) various ways, one of which is during the
100 100 101.3 110.0 5.0 combustion of ammonia.
0 0 1.5 × 102 25.0 10.0 4NH 3(g) +5O 2(g) → 4NO (g) +6H 2 O ((cid:2))
35 150 101.3 101.3 750 If 25.0 L of ammonia reacts with 27.5 L of oxy-
85.0 125.0 125.0 35.5 25.5 gen at STP, what mass of nitrogen monoxide
27.0 45.5 102.5 86.7 1.00 will be produced?
85 99.5 88.7 450 500 35. When baking a tray of blueberry muffins, you
need to use baking soda (sodium hydrogen car-
26. A student collects 55.0 mL of hydrogen gas
bonate). The baking soda acts as a leavening
over water at 23.0˚C and 750 torr. What
agent, causing the muffin dough to rise as it
volume will the dry hydrogen occupy at 40˚C
bakes. One of the reactions that occurs during
and 775 torr?
baking is:
27. A mixture of gases in a cylinder contains 0.85
mol of methane (CH ), 0.55 mol of oxygen, 1.25 2NaHCO 3(s) → Na 2 CO 3(s) +H 2 O ((cid:2)) +CO 2(g)
4
mol of nitrogen, and 0.27 mol of propane Suppose your recipe calls for 5 mL (approxi-
(C H ). The pressure on the cylinder gauge mately 3.0 g) of baking soda. What volume of
3 8
reads 2573 kPa. What pressure does each gas carbon dioxide will be generated at 195˚C and
exert in the cylinder? 100 kPa to make the dough rise?
28. What volume will a weather balloon occupy if 36. An anesthetic used in hospitals after World
it contains 10 mol of air at 75.5 kPa and −45˚C? War II was made up of 64.8% carbon, 13.67%
hydrogen, and 21.59% oxygen. It was found
29. A 180 mL light bulb contains approximately
5.8×10 −3 mol of argon in a 20˚C room. What is that a 5.0 L sample of this anesthetic had a
mass of 16.7 g at STP. What is the molecular
the pressure of the argon inside the light bulb?
formula of this gas?
30. A 13.65 L vessel contains 0.750 mol of chlorine
37. When you peel an orange, you usually smell a
at 135 kPa. What is the temperature of the
pleasant, tangy odour. This odour is due to the
chlorine gas (in ˚C)?
presence of a chemical compound called an
31. Nitrogen gas is used to produce ammonia
ester. The ester in orange peel is made up of
fertilizer. A sample of gas occupies a 2500 L
528 MHR • Unit 4 Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry
69.8% carbon, 18.6% oxygen, and 11.6% Making Connections
hydrogen. When 53 g of this compound is
44. Nitrogen monoxide is used to produce nitric
vapourized at 125˚C and 102 kPa, it is found to
acid, a widely used industrial compound.
occupy a volume of 1.0 L. What is the molecu-
Unfortunately, this same gas is also partly
lar formula of this compound?
responsible for the production of smog and
38. Each time you inhale, you take in about 0.50 L acid rain. Research the amount of nitrogen
of air. How many molecules of each of the monoxide produced by an average automobile
following gases do you inhale in one breath at per hour.
22˚C and 101.3 kPa? (a) Estimate the number of cars in your commu-
(a) nitrogen nity (assume two cars per family). Calculate
(b) oxygen the number of grams of nitrous oxide
(c) argon released into the air in your area per hour at
(d) carbon dioxide rush hour.
39. The space shuttle orbits Earth at an altitude of (b) Approximately how many grams of nitrogen
approximately 300 km. Canadian astronauts monoxide are produced per day in a large
worked outside the shuttle using the Canadarm city such as Toronto,Montréal, or Vancouver?
to repair a satellite. They were working in what 45. During World War II, Allied pilots carried
is commonly referred to as a vacuum. However, lithium hydride tablets taped inside their life
accurate measurements show that the atmos- belts. Research why this was done. Hint: Look
pheric pressure at this altitude is 1.33×10 −9 for chemical reactions involving lithium
kPa. Facing the sun, the average temperature hydride that might be useful for these pilots.
is 223˚C. How many molecules of gas are there
46. The Montréal Protocol is an agreement between
in one litre of this so-called “vacuum” in
industrialized nations to reduce the amount of
outer space?
ozone-depleting chemicals released into the
atmosphere. Do research to discover answers to
Communication
these questions:
40. Define each of the following: (a) What amount of ozone-depleting chemicals
(a) Charles’ law was released in a typical year before the
(b) standard temperature Montréal Protocol was signed?
(c) standard pressure (b) What amount of ozone-depleting chemicals
(d) ideal gas was released this year (or in the most recent
(e) Gay-Lussac’s law year you can find)?
41. Convert each of the following temperatures (c) Compare the two values. Have there been
as indicated: any measurable decreases? By how much?
(a) 250.1˚C to kelvins (d) How does Canada compare to the other
(b) 373 K to degrees Celcius countries in the agreement?
(c) absolute zero to degrees Celcius
42. Convert each of the following pressure values
COURSE
as indicated:
CHALLENGE
(a) 725 torr to kPa
(b) 105.1 kPa to torr Planet Unknown
(c) 1.4×102 kPa to atm In the Course Challenge, you will collect and analyze an
(d) 320 torr to atm unknown gas.
• What laboratory techniques have you learned that
43. Prepare a concept map to explain the depletion
could help you identify an unknown gas?
of ozone in the atmosphere. Include details on
the different chemicals responsible. Also, make • How do you collect a gas?
sure you include information on how this • What gases are used and produced by plants?
depletion occurs.
Unit 4 Review • MHR 529
Hydrocarbons
and Energy
T
UNIT 5 CONTENTS
hink of what the world must have
CHAPTER 13
been like 560 million years ago.
The Chemistry of Hydrocarbons
Temperatures were much warmer
CHAPTER 14 than they are now. Lush green
Energy Trapped in Hydrocarbons vegetation covered much of the
North American landscape. Through
UNIT 5 PROJECT
photosynthesis, these ancient plants
Consumer Chemistry
(like plants today) stored energy
from the Sun as food. Abundant
marine life filled the oceans. Other
UNIT 5 OVERALL EXPECTATIONS animals thrived on the land.
Humans did not yet exist.
What are the structures of dif-
Today our society relies heavily
ferent types of hydrocarbons?
on the remains of ancient forests
What are the properties of
and long-dead marine life. From
hydrocarbons?
these remains, we manufacture
What energy changes occur
products such as the gasoline that
when hydrocarbons are
fuels cars and the plastic wrap
combusted?
that covers the sandwich in your
How do hydrocarbons affect
lunch. How does this incredible
our lives? How do they affect
transformation take place?
the environment?
In this unit, you will learn about
fossil fuels. Fossil fuels are carbon
compounds that have been produced
Unit Project Prep
over millions of years from the
Look ahead to the end-of-unit remains of ancient living things.
project, “Consumer Chemistry.”
You will examine the structures
Start thinking now about the
and properties of many hydrocarbon
consumer item that you would like
compounds that we obtain from
to investigate. As you study this
fossil fuels. As well, you will find
unit, plan how you will investigate
the chemical nature of the product out how these compounds can be
you have chosen. refined to produce many useful
materials.
Later in this unit, you will
discover how modern society
obtains energy from hydrocarbons.
530
532
The Chemistry
of Hydrocarbons
D
id you know that you have bark from a willow tree in your medicine Chapter Preview
cabinet at home? The model at the bottom right of the opposite page
13.1 Introducing Organic
shows a compound that is found naturally in willow bark. This chemical
Compounds
is called salicin. It is a source of pain relief for moose, deer, and other
13.2 Representing
animals that chew the bark. For thousands of years, Aboriginal people in
Hydrocarbon
Canada and around the world have relied on salicin’s properties for the
Compounds
same pain-relieving purpose.
13.3 Classifying
The model at the bottom left of the opposite page shows a close
Hydrocarbons
relative of salicin. Scientists made, or synthesized, this chemical near the
13.4 Refining and Using
end of the nineteenth century. It is called acetyl salicylic acid (ASA). You
Hydrocarbons
probably know it better by its brand name, Aspirin™.
Chemists refer to salicin, ASA, and more than ten million other
chemicals like them as organic compounds. An organic compound is a
molecular compound of carbon. Despite the tremendous diversity of
organic compounds, nearly all of them share something in common. They
are structured from a “backbone” that consists of just two kinds of atoms:
carbon and hydrogen.
Compounds that are formed from carbon and hydrogen are called
Concepts and Skills
hydrocarbons. In this chapter, you will explore the sources, structures,
You Will Need
properties, and uses of hydrocarbons—an enormous class of compounds.
Review the following concepts
As well, you will learn how scientists and engineers use the properties
and skills before you begin this
of hydrocarbons to produce a seemingly infinite variety of chemicals
chapter:
and products.
(cid:2) identifying characteristics
of covalently bonded
compounds (Chapter 3,
How can just two sections 3.1, 3.3, 3.4.)
elements, carbon (cid:2) relating physical properties
and hydrogen, to the polarity of molecules
account for 90% of and intermolecular forces
all the biological (Chapter 3, section 3.3;
matter on Earth? Chapter 8, section 8.2)
(cid:2) drawing Lewis structures
and structural formulas
(Chapter 3, sections 3.2, 3.3)
Chapter 13 The Chemistry of Hydrocarbons • MHR 533
13.1 Introducing Organic Compounds
Section Preview/ As stated in the chapter opener, an organic compound is a molecular com-
Specific Expectations pound of carbon. There are a few exceptions to this definition, however.
For example, scientists classify oxides of carbon, such as carbon dioxide
In this section, you will
and carbon monoxide, as inorganic. However, the vast majority of carbon-
(cid:2) identifythe origins and
containing compounds are organic.
major sources of hydro-
carbons and other organic
compounds Organic Compounds: Natural and Synthetic
(cid:2) communicateyour under- Organic compounds abound in the natural world. In fact, you probably ate
standing of the following
sugar or starch at your last meal. Sugars, starches, and other carbohydrates
terms: organic compound,
are natural organic compounds. So are fats, proteins, and the enzymes
hydrocarbons, petroleum
that help you digest your food. Do you wear clothing made from wool,
silk, or cotton? These are natural organic compounds, too. So are the
molecules of DNA in the nuclei of your cells.
Until 1828, the only organic compounds on Earth were those that
occur naturally. In that year, a German chemist named Friedrich Wohler
synthesized urea—an organic compound found in mammal urine—from
an inorganic compound, ammonium cyanate. (See Figure 13.1.) This was
Cyanides (containing carbon
a startling achievement. Until then, chemists had assumed that only living
bonded to nitrogen, CN) and
or once-living organisms could be the source of organic compounds. They
carbides, (such as calcium
believed that living matter had an invisible “vital force.” According to
carbide, CaC ) are compounds
2
that contain carbon, but these early chemists, this vital (life) force made organic matter fundamen-
scientists classify them as tally different from inorganic (non-living) matter.
inorganic. The same is true of
carbonates, such as sodium
hydrogen carbonate, NaHCO
3
(baking soda). Why are car-
bonate compounds inorganic,
rather than organic,
compounds?
Language
LINK
Acetylsalicylic acid (ASA) was
first produced commercially
under the brand name
Aspirinby Frederick Bayer
and Company in 1897. The Urea
word “aspirin” comes from
“a,” for acetyl, and “spir,” for Figure 13.1 When Friedrich Wohler (1800–1882) synthesized urea, he wrote a letter
spirea. Spireais a genus of to his teacher. In his letter, he said, “I must tell you that I can make urea without the
plants that is another natural use of kidneys…Ammonium cyanate is urea.” About 20 years earlier, Wohler’s teacher,
source of salicylic acid. Jons Jakob Berzelius (1779–1848), had invented the system that distinguishes organic
substances from inorganic substances.
534 MHR • Unit 5 Hydrocarbons and Energy
During the mid-1850s, chemists synthesized other organic
compounds, such as methane and ethanol, from inorganic chemicals.
Eventually chemists abandoned their vital-force ideas. We still use the
terms “organic” and “inorganic,” however, to distinguish carbon-based
compounds from other compounds. For example, sugar is an organic
compound since it is carbon based. Salt is inorganic since it contains
no carbon.
During the last century, the number of synthetic (human-made)
organic compounds has skyrocketed. Chemists invent more than 250 000
new synthetic organic chemicals each year. With almost endless varia-
tions in properties, chemists can synthesize organic compounds to make
products as diverse as life-giving drugs, and toys. Nearly all medicines,
such as painkillers, cough syrups, and antidepressants, are based on
organic compounds. Perfumes, food flavourings, materials such as rubber
and plastic, and fabrics such as nylon, rayon, and polyester are all organic
compounds as well.
The next ExpressLab gives you a chance to make one such product.
It is up to you to decide what purpose it could have.
ExpressLab Making Polymer Putty
Polymers are a fundamental part of your life. 3. Pour 30 mL of the borax solution into the
They also happen to be organic. Polymersare glue mixture. Then quickly and thoroughly stir
long molecular chains that are made up of the mixture.
smaller molecular units called monomers.
4. Remove the material from the beaker,
Natural polymers include cellulose (the “fibre” in
and “experiment” with it. Here are a few
your food) and DNA. Synthetic polymers include
suggestions. Record your observations.
plastics, polystyrene (see below), and the material • Hold the putty in one hand. Put your other
you will produce in this activity.
hand below the putty, and let the putty
slowly ooze into it.
CH CHCH CHCH CH
2 2 2
• Pull the putty apart slowly.
• Pull the putty apart quickly.
• Try bouncing the putty.
5. If time permits, you may wish to try changing
Polystyrene is an example of a polymer.
the ratio of borax to glue to water. Test
Safety Precautions your results.
6. Dispose of any excess borax solution as
directed by your teacher.
Avoid inhaling the powdered borax. It may
cause an allergic reaction. Wash your hands
Analysis
after working with the putty.
1. Compare the properties of the starting
Procedure materials with the properties of the product.
Is the putty a solid or a liquid? Explain.
1. Measure about 45 mL of white glue into a
250 mL beaker. Add an equal amount of warm 2. What practical applications for this product
can you think of?
water and a few drops of food colouring.
2. Measure 15 mL of solid borax into another
250 mL beaker. Add 60 mL of warm water. Stir
for about 2 min. Note:You may find that not
all of the solid borax dissolves. This is all right.
Chapter 13 The Chemistry of Hydrocarbons • MHR 535
The Origins of Hydrocarbons and Other Organic Compounds
COURSE
CHALLENGE Most hydrocarbons and other organic compounds have their origins deep
below Earth’s present surface. In the past, as now, photosynthetic organ-
Why does society depend on
isms used energy from the Sun to convert carbon dioxide and water into
fossil fuels? What are they
oxygen and carbohydrates, such as sugars, starches, and cellulose. When
used for? In the Course
Challenge at the end of this these organisms died, they settled to the bottom of lakes, rivers, and ocean
book, you will investigate a beds, along with other organic matter. Bacterial activity removed most of
different type of fossil fuel the oxygen and nitrogen from the organic matter, leaving behind mainly
from an imaginary planet. hydrogen and carbon.
Over time, the organic matter was covered with layers of mud and
sediments. As layer upon layer built up, heat and tremendous pressure
transformed the sediments into shale and the organic matter into solid,
liquid, and gaseous materials. These materials are the fossil fuels—coal,
oil, and natural gas—that society depends on today. (See Figure 13.2.)
Canadians in Chemistry
Dr. Raymond Lemieux plants such as sugar beets and sugar cane.
Sucrose is related to glucose, C H O , and
6 12 6
Raymond Lemieux was born into a carpenter’s
other sugars.
family in 1920 at Lac La Biche, Alberta. He
Lemieux continued his research at the
obtained a B.Sc. degree at the University of
University of Ottawa, and then at the University
Alberta and a Ph.D. at McGill University in
of Alberta in Edmonton. He was especially inter-
Montréal. Lemieux then worked briefly at Ohio
ested in how molecules “recognize” each other
State University, where he met Dr. Virginia
and interact in the human body. For example,
McConaghie. They were married and soon moved
different blood groups, such as group A and
to Saskatoon, Saskatchewan. There Lemieux
group B, are determined by carbohydrate mole-
became a senior researcher at a National
cules that differ by only a single sugar. The body
Research Council (NRC) laboratory.
is able to recognize these specific sugars and
adapt its response to foreign substances, such
as bacteria and transplanted organs.
Since it was hard to obtain natural samples of
the body sugars that Lemieux wanted to study, he
found ways to synthesize them. This was ground-
breaking research. Seeing the practical applica-
tions of his research, Lemieux was instrumental
in starting several chemical companies. Today
these companies make products such as antibi-
otics, blood-group determinants, and immunizing
agents that are specific to various human blood
groups. They also make complex carbohydrates
that absorb antibodies from the blood in order
to prevent organ transplant rejection.
Raymond Lemieux (1920–2000) Lemieux and his wife had six children and a
In 1953, while at the NRC lab, Lemieux conquered number of grandchildren. With all that he had
what some have called “the Mount Everest of accomplished in life, Lemieux said, “My proudest
organic chemistry.” He became the first person achievement is my family.” His autobiography,
to completely synthesize sucrose, or table sugar. titled Explorations with Sugar: How Sweet It Was,
Sucrose is a carbohydrate with the chemical for- was published in 1990.
mula C H O . It is the main sugar in the sap of
12 22 11
536 MHR• Unit 5 Hydrocarbons and Energy
Origin of Fossil Fuels Geology LINK
The origin of fossil fuels,
depicted in Figure 13.2, is
Coal is formed mainly from Petroleum (crude oil) is Natural gas may form based on a theory called the
the remains of land-based formed mainly from the under the same conditions biogenic theory. Most geolo-
plants. remains of marine-based as petroleum. gists accept this theory. A
microscopic plants, small minority of geologists
plant-like organisms, and have proposed an alternative
animal-like organisms. theory, called the abiogenic
theory. Use print and
Figure 13.2 Ancient eras that had higher carbon dioxide concentrations, as well as electronic resources to
warmer climates, gave rise to abundant plant and animal life on land and under water. investigate the following:
Over time, as these organisms died, the organic substances that made up their bodies • the main points of each
were chemically transformed into the materials known today as fossil fuels. theory, and the evidence
used to support these
points
Sources of Hydrocarbons
• the reasons why one
Sources of hydrocarbons include wood, the products that result from theory is favoured over
the other
the fermentation of plants, and fossil fuels. However, one fossil fuel—
petroleum—is the main source of the hydrocarbons that are used for Record your findings in the
form of a brief report. Include
fuels and many other products, such as plastics and synthetic fabrics.
your own assessment of the
Petroleum, sometimes referred to as crude oil, is a complex mixture
two theories.
of solid, liquid, and gaseous hydrocarbons. To understand the importance
of petroleum in our society, you need to become better acquainted with
hydrocarbons. Your introduction begins, in the next section, with
carbon—one of the most versatile elements on Earth.
Section Review
1 (a) K/U Name three compounds that you know are organic.
(b) K/U Name three compounds that you know are inorganic.
(c) K/U Name three compounds that may be organic, but you do not
know for sure.
2 K/U What are the origins of hydrocarbons and other organic
compounds?
3 K/U Identify at least two sources of hydrocarbons and other organic
compounds.
4 C Design a concept map (or another kind of graphic organizer) to
show the meanings of the following terms and the relationships among
them: organic compound, inorganic compound, hydrocarbon, fossil
fuels, petroleum, natural gas.
5 K/U Copy the following compounds into your notebook. Identify each
carbon as organic or inorganic, and give reasons for your answer. If
you are not sure whether a compound is organic or inorganic, put a
question mark beside it.
(a) CH (c) CO (e) C H (g) CH COOH
4 2 6 6 3
(b) CH OH (d) HCN (f) NH SCN (h) CaCO
3 4 3
Chapter 13 The Chemistry of Hydrocarbons • MHR 537
13.2 Representing Hydrocarbon
Compounds
Section Preview/ Examine the three substances in Figure 13.3. It is hard to believe that they
Specific Expectations have much in common. Yet each substance is composed entirely of carbon
atoms. Why does the carbon atom lead to such diversity in structure? Why
In this section, you will
do carbon compounds outnumber all other compounds so dramatically?
(cid:2) demonstratean under-
The answers lie in carbon’s atomic structure and behaviour.
standing of the bonding
characteristics of the carbon
atom in hydrocarbons
(cid:2) draw structural
representations of aliphatic
hydrocarbon molecules
(cid:2) demonstratethe arrange-
ment of atoms in isomers
of hydrocarbons using
molecular models
(cid:2) communicateyour under-
standing of the following
terms: expanded molecular
formula, isomers, structural
model, structural diagram
Figure 13.3 Each of these
substances is pure carbon. What
makes carbon a “chemical
chameleon?”
Figure 13.4 outlines three key properties of carbon. Throughout this
section and the next, you will explore the consequences of each of these
properties.
Properties of Carbon
Carbon has four bonding electrons. This electron Carbon can form strong single, Carbon atoms can bond
structure enables carbon to form four strong covalent double, and triple bonds with itself. together to form a variety of
bonds. As a result, carbon may bond to itself, as well This allows carbon to form long geometrical structures. These
as to many different elements (mainly hydrogen, chains of atoms—something that structures include straight
oxygen, and nitrogen, but also phosphorus, sulfur, and very few other atoms can do. In chains, branched chains, rings,
halogens such as chlorine). addition, the resulting compounds sheets, tubes, and spheres. No
are fairly stable under standard other atom can do this.
conditions of temperature and
pressure.
Figure 13.4 Three key properties of carbon
538 MHR • Unit 5 Hydrocarbons and Energy
Representing Structures and Bonding
Math
LINK
You have written chemical formulas for inorganic compounds such as
ammonia, NH 3 , and calcium carbonate, CaCO 3 . As well, you have Graph the data in the table
represented these compounds using Lewis diagrams, and perhaps other below. Note:Bond energy is
models. Such compounds are fairly small, so they are easy to represent the amount of energy that is
needed to break a chemical
using these methods. Many organic compounds—such as methane, CH ,
4
bond.
and ethanol, C H O—are also fairly small. With patience, you might even
2 6
figure out how to draw a Lewis diagram for cholesterol, C H O! Most Some Average Bond
27 46
hydrocarbons and other organic compounds are quite large, however. Energies
They are also structurally complex. Therefore chemists have devised other
Bond Bond energy (kJ/mol)
methods to represent them, as explained below.
C C 346
Using Expanded Molecular Formulas to Represent Hydrocarbons C C 610
One method that chemists use to represent a large molecule is the C C 835
expanded molecular formula. This type of formula shows the groupings Si Si 226
of atoms, and it often gives an idea of molecular structure. For example,
Si Si 318 (estimate)
the chemical formula for propane is C H . This formula tells you that
3 8
C H 413
propane contains three carbon atoms and eight hydrogen atoms. It gives
no clue, though, about the way in which the atoms are bonded together. Si H 318
Propane’s expanded molecular formula is CH CH CH . As you can see
3 2 3
Infer a relationship between
from this formula, the expanded molecular formula gives a clearer idea of
the stability of a compound and
atomic arrangement. It implies that a CH group is attached to a CH
3 2 bond energy. Then suggest a
group, which is attached to another CH 3 group. reason why there are many
Writing expanded molecular formulas becomes more helpful when more carbon-based com-
you are dealing with larger hydrocarbons. For example, C H is a pounds than silicon-based
6 14
component of gasoline. It is also used as a solvent for extracting oils compounds.
from soybeans and other edible oil seeds. Depending on how the carbon
and hydrogen atoms are bonded together, C H can have any of the five
6 14
structural arrangements shown in Figure 13.5. Each arrangement has a
different name.
CH CH CH CH CH CH
3 2 2 2 2 3
CH CH(CH )CH CH CH CH C(CH ) CH CH
3 3 2 2 3 3 3 2 2 3
The Five
Isomers of
CH
6 14
CH CH CH(CH )CH CH CH CH(CH )CH(CH )CH
3 2 3 2 3 3 3 3 3
Figure 13.5 Expanded molecular formulas for five structural arrangements of CH
6 14
Keep in mind that all five of these arrangements have the same chemical
formula: C H . Compounds that have the same formula, but different
6 14
structural arrangements, are called isomers. Hexane, for example, is one
isomer of C H . You will learn more about isomers as you study this
6 14
chapter.
Chapter 13 The Chemistry of Hydrocarbons • MHR 539
CHEM The expanded molecular formulas of C 6 H 14 give you a better idea
FACT of the arrangement of the carbon and hydrogen atoms in its five possible
isomers. You can use other methods as well, however, to represent hydro-
The number of isomers of an
carbons and other organic compounds. These methods are outlined below.
organic compound increases
greatly as the number of
Using Structural Models to Represent Hydrocarbons
carbon atoms increases. For
example, CH has three iso- A structural model is a three-dimensional representation of the structure
5 12
mers, C 6 H 14 has five isomers, of a compound. There are two kinds of structural models: ball-and-stick
and CH has 18 isomers.
8 18 models and space-filling models. Figure 13.6 shows ball-and-stick models
C H , a large hydrocarbon,
30 62 for the five isomers of C H . Notice that they show how the carbon and
6 14
has over four billion isomers!
hydrogen atoms are bonded within the structures.
CH 3 CH 2 CH 2 CH 2 CH 2 CH 3 CH 3 CH(CH 3 )CH(CH 3 )CH 3
The Five
Isomers of
C H
6 14
CH CH(CH )CH CH CH CH C(CH ) CH CH
3 3 2 2 3 3 3 2 2 3
CH CH CH(CH )CH CH
3 2 3 2 3
Figure 13.6 CH can have any one of these five structural arrangements. How do the
6 14
ball-and-stick models compare with the expanded molecular formulas for CH ? How
6 14
does each isomer differ from the rest?
540 MHR• Unit 5 Hydrocarbons and Energy
A space-filling model, such as the one in Figure 13.7, also shows the
Electronic Learning Partner
arrangement of the atoms in a compound. As well, it represents the
molecular shape and the amount of space that each atom occupies within
To see an animation comparing
the structure.
structural diagrams with
molecular formulas, go to
your Chemistry 11 Electronic
Partner now.
Figure 13.7 A space-filling model for hexane, one of the isomers of CH
6 14
Using Structural Diagrams to Represent Hydrocarbons
A structural diagram is a two-dimensional representation of the structure
of a compound. (In some chemistry textbooks, structural diagrams are
called structural formulas.) There are three kinds of structural diagrams:
complete structural diagrams, condensed structural diagrams, and line
structural diagrams. As you can see in Figure 13.8, each serves a specific
purpose in describing the structure of a compound.
In the next investigation, you will have an opportunity to make your
own models of the isomers of several organic compounds.
H
H C H
H H H H CH
3
H C C C C C H CH CH CH CH CH
3 2 2 3
H H H H H
A complete structural A condensedstructural A line structural diagramis
diagramshows all the atoms diagramsimplifies the presenta- evensimplerthan acondensed
in a structure and the way tion of the structure. It shows the structuraldiagram.Theend of
they are bonded to one another. bonds between the carbon atoms eachline,andthepointsatwhich
Straight lines represent the bonds but not the bonds between the thelinesmeet,representcarbon
between the atoms. carbon and hydrogen atoms. atoms.Thiskind ofdiagramgives
Chemists assume that these youasenseofthethree-dimen-
bonds are present. Notice how sionalnatureof ahydrocarbon.
much cleaner and clearer this Note:Linestructuraldiagrams
diagram is, compared with the are used onlyforhydrocarbons,
complete structural diagram. not for other organic compounds.
Figure 13.8 Comparing complete, condensed, and line structural diagrams
Chapter 13 The Chemistry of Hydrocarbons • MHR 541
S K I L L F O C U S
Predicting
Analyzing and interpreting
Communicating results
Modelling Organic Modelling concepts
Compounds
Figure 13.6 showed you that an organic com- Procedure
pound can be arranged in different structural
1. Construct three-dimensional models of the
shapes, called isomers. All the isomers of a com-
three isomers of C H . Use your predictions
5 12
pound have the same molecular formula. In this
to help you. As you complete each model,
investigation, you will make two-dimensional
draw a careful diagram of the structure. Your
and three-dimensional models of isomers. Your
diagram might be similar to the one below.
models will help you explore the arrangements
of the atoms in organic compounds.
Question
How do models help you visualize the isomers of
organic compounds?
Predictions
Predict the complete, condensed, and line
structural diagrams for the three isomers of
2. Repeat step 1 for each isomer of C H N.
C H . Then predict the complete and condensed 3 9
5 12
structural diagrams for the four isomers of C H N.
3 9
Analysis
Materials 1. In what ways were your completed models
similar to your predictions? In what ways
paper and pencil
were they different?
molecular modelling kit
2. How do the models of each compound help
you understand the concept of isomers?
Conclusion
3. How accurately do you think your models
represent the real-life structural arrangements
of C H and C H N?
5 12 3 9
Applications
4. In earlier units, you considered how the
structure and polarity of molecules can affect
the boiling point of a compound. For each
compound you studied in this investigation,
These representations of the hydrocarbon ethane, CH ,
2 6 predict which isomer has the higher boiling
were made using different modelling kits. Your school
point. Explain your prediction.
may have one or more of these kits available.
5. Construct models for C H . How many
7 16
isomers are possible?
542 MHR • Unit 5 Hydrocarbons and Energy
Section Wrap-up
CHEM
FACT
The names of the isomers of hydrocarbons and other organic compounds
are quite different from the names of inorganic compounds. For example, When is an isomer not an
go back to the structural diagrams shown in Figure 13.8. They all repre- isomer? When it is exactlythe
sent the same isomer of C H . Its name is 2-methylpentane. Now look at same compound! The hydro-
6 14
Figure 13.9. It shows the names and condensed structural diagrams for the carbon C 6 H 14 has only five
isomers. Examine these two
four other isomers of C H . Why do these names look so different from
6 14
representations for one of
the names of inorganic compounds? Scientists have devised a systematic
them, hexane.
way to communicate all the possible atoms and structures for each
organic compound—all in its name! In the next section, you will learn the
CH3 CH2 CH2 CH2 CH2 CH3
rules for naming hydrocarbons. You will also learn how to interpret the CH2 CH2 CH3
information that hydrocarbon names communicate. CH2
CH3 CH2
You might think that these are
CH CH CH CH CH CH hexane different isomers, but they are
3 2 2 2 2 3
actually the same. The struc-
CH ture on the bottom is just a
3
bent version of the structure
CH CH CH CH CH 3-methylpentane on the top. Think about a
3 2 2 3
length of chain. You can lay it
CH out straight, or you can bend it.
3
The chain is still a chain in
CH 3 CH CH CH 3 2,3-dimethylbutane either case. It just looks differ-
ent. Naming a compound helps
CH 3 you recognize the difference
between a true isomer and a
CH 3 structure that just looks like an
isomer.
CH C CH CH 2,2-dimethylbutane
3 2 3
CH
3
Figure 13.9 Four of the five isomers of CH
6 14
Section Review
1 K/U Identify the three properties of carbon that allow it to form such a
great variety of compounds.
2 I Chose one of the hydrocarbon molecules in this section to represent,
using as many different kinds of models as you can. Identify each
model you used.
3 C You have seen the expanded molecular formulas and condensed
structural diagrams for the five isomers of C H . Draw the complete
6 14
and line structural diagrams for each of these isomers.
4 C Draw the complete, condensed, and line structural diagrams for
the isomers of C H . How many true isomers did you draw? (See the
5 12
ChemFact above to help you interpret this question.)
5 C Many organic compounds contain elements such as oxygen,
nitrogen, and sulfur, as well as carbon and hydrogen. For example,
think about ethanol, CH CH OH. Draw complete and condensed
3 2
structural diagrams for ethanol. Can you draw a line structural
diagram for ethanol? Explain your answer.
Chapter 13 The Chemistry of Hydrocarbons • MHR 543
13.3 Classifying Hydrocarbons
Section Preview/ Chemists group hydrocarbons and other organic compounds into the
Specific Expectations categories shown in Figure 13.10. The International Union of Pure and
Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) has developed a comprehensive set of rules
In this section, you will
for naming the compounds within each category. Using these rules, you
(cid:2) demonstrate an understand-
will be able to classify and name all the hydrocarbon compounds that you
ing of the carbon atom by
classifying hydrocarbons will encounter in this unit.
and by analyzing the bonds The names that are based on the IUPAC rules are called systematic
that carbon forms in aliphat- names. During your study of organic chemistry, you will also run across
ic hydrocarbons many common names for organic compounds. For example, the system-
(cid:2) namealkanes, alkenes, and atic name for the organic acid CH 3 CO 2 H is ethanoic acid. You are probably
alkynes, and drawstructural more familiar with its common name: vinegar.
representations for them
(cid:2) describesome of the physi- Hydrocarbons
cal and chemical properties
of hydrocarbons
(cid:2) determinethrough experi-
mentation some of the aliphatics aromatics hydrocarbon derivatives
characteristic properties of such as alcohols, esters
saturated and unsaturated (the compounds that give
hydrocarbons fruits their aromas), and
amines (components of
(cid:2) communicateyour under- alkanes alkenes alkynes amino acids)
standing of the following
terms:alkanes,aliphatic
Figure 13.10 This concept map illustrates a system for classifying organic compounds.
hydrocarbons, saturated
In this chapter, you will explore only part of the family of organic compounds—the
hydrocarbons, homologous
aliphatic hydrocarbons shown by the boldface type.
series, alkenes, unsaturated
hydrocarbons, cis-trans
Alkanes
isomer, alkynes, cyclic
hydrocarbons
Alkanes are hydrocarbon molecules that are joined by single covalent
bonds. They are the simplest hydrocarbons. Methane, CH , is the simplest
4
alkane. It is the main component of natural gas. Alkanes are aliphatic
hydrocarbons: organic compounds in which carbon atoms form chains
and non-aromatic rings.
Figure 13.11 on the next page compares the structural formulas of
methane and the next three members of the alkane family. Notice three
facts about these alkanes:
1. Each carbon atom is bonded to the maximum possible number of
Language
LINK atoms (either carbon or hydrogen atoms). As a result, chemists refer to
alkanes as saturated hydrocarbons.
The name “aliphatic”
2. Each molecule differs from the next molecule by the structural unit
comes from the Greek word
–CH –. A series of molecules like this, in which each member increases
aleiphatos, meaning “fat.” 2
Early chemists found these by the same structural unit, is called a homologous series.
compounds to be less dense
3. A mathematical pattern underlies the number of carbon and hydrogen
than water and insoluble in
water, like fats. “Aliphatic” atoms in each alkane. All alkanes have the general formula C n H 2n+2 ,
where n is the number of carbon atoms. For example, propane has
now refers to the classes of
hydrocarbons called alkanes, 3 carbon atoms. Using the general formula, we find that
alkenes, and alkynes. 2n+2 = 2(3)+2 = 8
Thus propane should have the formula C H , which it does.
3 8
544 MHR • Unit 5 Hydrocarbons and Energy
H H H
Why is methane the simplest
H C H H C C H
of all the millions of hydrocar-
bons? Hint:Recall what you
H H H
know about chemical bonding
and the common valences of
methane ethane
elements.
H H H H H H H
H C C C H H C C C C H
H H H H H H H
propane butane
Figure 13.11 Carefully examine these four molecules. They are the first
four alkanes. In what ways are they similar? In what ways are they different?
Figure 13.12 illustrates these three important facts about alkanes. Study
the two alkanes, then complete the Practice Problems that follow.
Figure 13.12 How are these
two alkanes similar? How are
CH 3 CH 3 + −CH 2− → CH 3 CH 2 CH 3 they different? Use the ideas and
ethane propane terms you have just learned to
help you answer these questions.
Practice Problems
1. Heptane has 7 carbon atoms. What is the chemical formula of
heptane?
2. Nonane has 9 carbon atoms. What is its chemical formula?
3. An alkane has 4 carbon atoms. How many hydrogen atoms does
it have?
4. Candle wax contains an alkane with 52 hydrogen atoms. How
many carbon atoms does this alkane have?
Properties of Alkanes
Alkanes (and all other aliphatic compounds) have an important physical
property. They are non-polar. As you know from Chapter 8, non-polar
molecules have fairly weak intermolecular forces. As a result, hydrocar-
bons such as alkanes have relatively low boiling points. As the number
of atoms in the hydrocarbon molecule increases, the boiling point
increases. Because of this, alkanes exist in a range of states under
standard conditions.
Chapter 13 The Chemistry of Hydrocarbons • MHR 545
Table 13.1 compares the sizes(number of atoms per molecule)and boil-
ing points of alkanes. Notice how the state changes as the size increases.
Table 13.1 Comparing the Sizes and Boiling Points of Alkanes
Size (number of Boiling point
atoms per molecule) range (°C) Examples of products
1 to 5 below 30 gases: used for fuels to cook and heat homes
5 to 16 30 to 275 liquids: used for automotive, diesel, and jet
engine fuels; also used as raw materials for the
Many industries rely on alkane
petrochemical industry
hydrocarbons. The states of
these hydrocarbons can 16 to 22 over 250 heavy liquids: used for oil furnaces and
affect how they are stored at lubricating oils; also used as raw materials to
industrial sites. For example, break down more complex hydrocarbons into
methane is a gas under smaller molecules
standard conditions. In what over 18 over 400 semi-solids: used for lubricating greases and
state would you expect a large paraffin waxes to make candles, waxed paper,
quantity of methane to be and cosmetics
stored? What safety precau-
over 26 over 500 solid residues: used for asphalts and tars in the
tions would be necessary?
paving and roofing industries
Naming Alkanes
The IUPAC system for naming organic compounds is very logical and
thorough. The rules for naming alkanes are the basis for naming the other
organic compounds that you will study. Therefore it is important that you
understand how to name alkanes.
Naming Straight-Chain Alkanes
Recall that carbon can bond to form long, continuous, chain-like struc-
tures. Alkanes that bond in this way are called straight-chain alkanes.
(They are also called unbranched alkanes.) Straight-chain alkanes are
the simplest alkanes. Table 13.2 lists the names of the first ten straight-
chain alkanes.
Table 13.2 The First Ten Straight-Chain Alkanes
Name Number of carbon atoms Expanded molecular formula
methane 1 CH
4
ethane 2 CH CH
3 3
propane 3 CH CH CH
3 2 3
butane 4 CH (CH ) CH
3 22 3
pentane 5 CH (CH ) CH
3 23 3
hexane 6 CH (CH ) CH
3 24 3
heptane 7 CH (CH ) CH
3 25 3
octane 8 CH (CH ) CH
3 26 3
nonane 9 CH (CH ) CH
3 27 3
decane 10 CH (CH ) CH
3 28 3
The root of each name (highlighted in colour) serves an important
function. It tells you the number of carbon atoms in the chain. The
suffix -ane tells you that these compounds are alkane hydrocarbons.
Thus the root and the suffix of one of these simple names provide the
complete structural story of the compound.
546 MHR• Unit 5 Hydrocarbons and Energy
Naming Branched-Chain Alkanes
The naming rules for straight-chain alkanes can, with a few additions,
help you recognize and name other organic compounds. You now know
The root and the suffix of an
that the name of a straight-chain alkane is composed of a root (such as
alkane name do not tell you
meth-) plus a suffix (-ane). Earlier in the chapter, you saw the isomers of
directly about the number of
C 6 H 14 . Figure 13.13 shows one of them, called 2-methylpentane. hydrogen atoms in the com-
pound. If you did not know the
CH CH molecular formula of heptane,
3 3
for example, how would
CH CH CH CH you still know that heptane
3 2 2
contains 16 hydrogen atoms?
Figure 13.13 2-methylpentane
Notice four important facts about 2-methylpentane:
1. Its structure is different from the structure of a straight-chain alkane.
Like many hydrocarbons, this isomer of C H has a branch-like
6 14
structure. Alkanes such as 2-methylpentane are called branched-chain
alkanes. (The branch is sometimes called a side-chain.)
2. The name of this alkane has a prefix (2-methyl-) as well as a root
and a suffix. Many of the hydrocarbons you will name from now on
have a prefix.
3. This alkane has a single CH unit that branches off from the main
3
(parent) chain of the compound.
Language
LINK
4. There is another CH unit bonded to a CH unit at the right end of the
3 2
chain. This is not another branch. It is a bend in the parent chain. You are probably familiar with
Before continuing, refer to the ChemFact on page 543. Make sure that the origins of some of the roots
you understand why the CH unit is not another branch. that are used for naming
3
organic compounds, especially
the roots for naming alkanes
Rules for Naming Alkanes
with five or more carbons. The
The names of branched-chain alkanes (and most other aliphatic com- roots for the first four alkanes
pounds) have the same general format, as shown in Figure 13.14. This may be unfamiliar, however.
Use a comprehensive diction-
format will become clearer as you learn and practise the rules for naming
ary (one that gives information
hydrocarbons. To start, read the steps on the next page to see how
about word origins) to find out
2-methylpentane gets its name.
the meanings of the roots
2-methylpentane is a simple example of a branched hydrocarbon.
meth- through dec-.
Later you will see more complicated examples.
+ +
prefix root suffix
indicates the name of the indicates the number of indicates the type of
branch or branches and carbon atoms in the compound: ane—alkane,
their locations on the main main (parent) chain ene—alkene, yne—alkyne
(parent) carbon chain
Figure 13.14 Parts of a hydrocarbon name
Chapter 13 The Chemistry of Hydrocarbons • MHR 547
Naming 2-Methylpentane
Step 1
Find the longest continuous chain (cid:2) The parent chain for 2-methylpen-
(the parent chain). It does not have tane is not straight. It is bent.
to be straight. The number of
(cid:2) There are five carbons in the
carbons in the parent chain forms
longest chain, as highlighted.
the root of the name.
Therefore the root of the name
is -pent-.
CH CH
3 3
(cid:2) Since the compound contains only
CH 3 CH CH 2 CH 2 single carbon-carbon bonds, the
suffix of the name is -ane.
(cid:2) So far, then, you have pentane as
part of the name.
Step 2
Identify any branches that are (cid:2) There is only one branch here.
present. Then number the main Since the branch is closer to the
chain from the end that gives the left end of the molecule, you num-
lowest number to the first location ber the carbon at the left end “1.”
at which branching occurs. Then you number the other main
chain carbons consecutively.
CH CH
3 5 3
CH CH CH CH
1 3 2 3 2 4 2
Step 3
Identify the location of any branches (cid:2) Here there is only one carbon.
with numbers. Use the number of Instead of calling the branch
carbons in each branch to name it. methane, you replace the -ane
ending with -yl. So the name for
CH 3 5 CH 3 this branch is methyl.
CH CH CH CH (cid:2) You also give the branch name a
1 3 2 3 2 4 2 number. The number indicates
(cid:2) You name a branch based on the which carbon in the main chain it
appropriate root name for the is bonded with. Here the branch is
number of carbons it contains. You bonded with the number 2 carbon
change the ending to –yl, however. in the main chain. So the numeral
(IUPAC rules identify branches by 2 is added to the prefix.
using the -yl ending.)
(cid:2) You now have the full prefix name
for the compound: 2-methyl.
Step 4
Put the complete compound name together in this general form:
prefix +root +suffix. The name of the compound is
2-methyl +pent +ane =2-methylpentane.
The structure of an alkane can be much more complex than the structure
of 2-methylpentane. For instance, there can be many branches bonded to
the main chain, and the branches can be quite long. As a result, you need
to know several other IUPAC rules for naming branched-chain alkanes
and other aliphatic compounds.
548 MHR• Unit 5 Hydrocarbons and Energy
Additional IUPAC Rules for Naming
Branched-Chain Alkanes and Other Aliphatic Compounds
1. If there are two or more of the same type of branch, give each branch a
position number. Also, use multiplying prefixes such as di- (meaning
2), tri- (meaning 3), and tetra- (meaning 4) to indicate the number of
branches.
CH CH
3 3
CH C CH CH CH
3 2 3
CH
3
Figure 13.15 This compound is 2,2,4-trimethylpentane, an isomer of CH . It is one
8 18
of the main ingredients in gasoline.
2. Put commas between numbers, and hyphens between numbers
and letters.
3. When possible, put numbers in ascending order. (For example, the
compound in Figure 13.15 compound is 2,2,4-trimethylpentane, not
4,2,2-trimethylpentane.)
4. If there is more than one type of branch, name the branches in alpha-
betical order. Determine the alphabetical order by using the first letter
of the root (for example, -methyl-or-ethyl-), not the multiplying prefix
(for example, di- or tri-).
CH
3
CH C CH CH CH
3 2 3
CH CH CH
3 2 3
Figure 13.16 3-ethyl-2,2-dimethylpentane
5. If more than one chain could be the main chain (because they are the
same length), choose the chain that has the most branches attached.
CH
3
CH CH CH CH CH
3 2 3
CH CH
3
CH
3
Figure 13.17 3-ethyl-2,4-dimethylpentane
Now practise naming the compounds in the Practice Problem below. Work
slowly and patiently. The names become more challenging as you proceed.
Practice Problems
5. Name each compound.
(a) CH (b) CH
3 3
CH CH CH CH CH C CH
3 2 3 3 3
CH
3
Continued ...
Chapter 13 The Chemistry of Hydrocarbons • MHR 549
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 549
(c) CH CH
2 3
CH CH CH CH CH CH
3 2 3
CH CH
2 3
CH
3
(d) CH CH
3 3
CH C CH C CH CH
3 2 2 3
CH CH
3 3
(e) CH CH
3 3
CH CH CH C CH C CH
3 2 2 2 3
CH CH
2 3
CH
2
CH
2
CH
3
Drawing Alkanes
As you learned earlier in this chapter, three kinds of diagrams can be used
to represent the structure of a hydrocarbon. The easiest kind is probably
the condensed structural diagram. When you are asked to draw a con-
densed structural diagram for an alkane, such as 2,3-dimethylhexane,
you can follow several simple rules. These rules are listed below. After
you have studied the rules, use the Practice Problems to practise your
alkane-drawing skills.
CHEM Rules for Drawing Condensed Structural Diagrams
FACT 1. Identify the root and the suffix of the name. In 2,3-dimethylhexane,
You have learned how the for example, the root and suffix are -hexane. The -hex- tells you that
non-polar nature of alkanes there are six carbons in the main chain. The -ane tells you that the
affects their boiling point. compound is an alkane. Therefore this compound has single carbon-
This non-polarity also affects carbon bonds only.
another physical property: the
solubility of alkanes in water. 2. Draw the main chain first. Draw it straight, to avoid mistakes caused
For example, the solubility by a fancy shape. Do not include any hydrogen atoms. You will need
of pentane in water is only to add branches before you finalize the number of hydrogen atoms on
5.0×10−3 mol/L at 25°C. each carbon. Leave space beside each carbon on the main chain to
Hydrocarbon compounds,
write the number of hydrogen atoms later.
such as those found in crude
oil, do not dissolve in water. C C C C C C
Instead they float on the sur-
3. Choose one end of your carbon chain to be carbon number 1. Then
face. This physical property
locate the carbon atoms to which the branches must be added. Add
helps clean-up crews minimize
the appropriate number and size of branches, according to the prefix in
the devastating effects of an
oil spill. the name of the compound. In this example, 2,3-dimethyl tells you that
there is one methyl (single carbon-containing) branch on the second
550 MHR• Unit 5 Hydrocarbons and Energy
carbon of the main chain, and another methyl branch on the third
carbon of the main chain. It does not matter whether you place both
branches above the main chain, both below, or one above and one
below. The compound will still be the same.
CH
3
C C C C C C
CH
3
4. Finish drawing your diagram by adding the appropriate number of
hydrogen atoms beside each carbon. Remember that each carbon has a
valence of four. So if a carbon atom has one other carbon atom bonded
to it, you need to add three hydrogen atoms. If a carbon atom has two
other carbon atoms bonded to it, you need to add two hydrogen atoms,
and so on.
carbon number 3:
bonded to 3 C‘s + 1 H = 4 bonds
CH
3
CH CH CH CH CH
3 2 3
CH
3
carbon number 1: carbon number 4:
bonded to 1 C + 3 H‘s = 4 bonds bonded to 2 C‘s + 2 H‘s = 4 bonds
Practice Problems
6. Draw a condensed structural diagram for each alkane.
(a) 3-ethyl-3,4-dimethylhexane
(b) 2,3,4-trimethylpentane
(c) 5-ethyl-3,3-dimethylheptane
(d) 4-butyl-6-ethyl-2,5-dimethylnonane
7. One way to assess how well you have learned a new skill is to
identify mistakes. Examine the following compounds and their
names. Identify any mistakes, and correct the names.
(a) 4-ethyl-2-methylpentane
CH
3
CH CH CH CH CH
3 2 3
CH
2
CH
3
(b) 4,5-methylhexane
CH
3
CH CH CH CH CH CH
3 2 2 3
CH
3
Continued ...
Chapter 13 The Chemistry of Hydrocarbons • MHR 551
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 551
(c) 3-methyl-3-ethylpentane
CH
3
CH CH C CH CH
3 2 2 3
CH
2
CH
2
CH
3
Alkenes
Did you know that bananas are green when they are picked? How do they
become yellow and sweet by the time they reach your grocer’s produce
shelf or your kitchen? Food retailers rely on a hydrocarbon to make the
transformation from bitter green fruit to delicious ripe fruit. The hydrocar-
bon is ethene. It is the simplest member of the second group of aliphatic
compounds: the alkenes.
Alkenes are hydrocarbons that contain one or more double bonds.
Like alkanes, alkenes can form continuous chain and branched-chain
structures. They also form a homologous series. As well, they are non-
polar, which gives them physical properties similar to those of alkanes.
Alkenes are different from alkanes, however, in a number of ways.
First, their bonds are different, as indicated by their suffixes. As you
will recall, the -ane ending tells you that alkane compounds are joined by
single bonds. The -ene ending for alkenes tells you that these compounds
have one or more double bonds. A double bond involves four bonding
electrons between two carbon atoms, instead of the two bonding electrons
in all alkane bonds. Examine Figure 13.18 to see how the presence of a
double bond affects the number of hydrogen atoms in an alkene.
single bond double bond
H H
H H
H C C H H C C H C C
H H H H H H
Ethane Ethene
CH CH
2 6 2 4
2 hydrogen atoms must be the 2 bonding electrons the molecule then contains a
removed in order to free are then shared between double bond with a new ratio of
up 2 bonding electrons the 2 carbon atoms carbon atoms to hydrogen atoms
H H H H
H C C H C C
H H H H
Figure 13.18 This diagram shows how an ethane molecule can become an ethene
molecule. The two hydrogen atoms that are removed from ethane often form hydrogen
gas, H .
2(g)
552 MHR• Unit 5 Hydrocarbons and Energy
The general formula for an alkene is C H . You can check this against
n 2n
the next two members of the alkene series. Propene has three carbon
atoms, so you would expect it to have six hydrogens. Butene has four car-
bon atoms, so it should have eight hydrogens. The formulas for propene
and butene are C H and C H , so the general formula is accurate. Note,
3 6 4 8
however, that the general formula applies only if there is one double bond
per molecule. You will learn about alkenes with multiple double bonds in
future chemistry courses.
Properties of Alkenes
The general formula for alkenes implies that at least two carbon atoms
in any alkene compound have fewer than four bonded atoms. As a result,
chemists refer to alkenes as unsaturated compounds. Unlike saturated
compounds, unsaturated hydrocarbons contain carbon atoms that can
potentially bond to additional atoms.
Unsaturated compounds have physical and chemical properties that
Figure 13.19 Plastics made
differ from those of saturated compounds. For example, the boiling points
from ethene
of alkenes are usually slightly less than the boiling points of similar-sized
alkanes (alkanes with the same number of carbon atoms). This difference
reflects the fact that the forces between molecules are slightly less for
alkenes than for alkanes. For example, the boiling point of ethane is
–89˚C, whereas the boiling point of ethene is –104˚C. On the other hand,
both alkenes and alkanes have a low solubility in water. Alkenes, like all
aliphatic compounds, are non-polar.
The double bond in alkenes has important consequences for their
PROBEWARE
chemical properties. Alkenes are much more reactive than alkanes. For
example, alkenes react with halogens in the absence of light, but alkanes If you have access to probe-
do not. ware, do the Properties of
The chemical reactivity of alkenes makes them a popular choice Hydrocarbons lab, or a similar
lab available from a probeware
among chemical engineers. For example, nearly half of the ethene used
company.
industrially is in the plastics industry. Beverage containers, boil-in-the-bag
food pouches, milk bottles, motor oil bottles, many toys, shrink-wrap, and
plastic bags are all based on the small ethene molecule.(See Figure 13.19.)
The ethene in these products undergoes a process called polymerization.
In polymerization, hundreds of ethene molecules are reacted and strung
together to make long chains of molecules. Another alkene, propene,
undergoes a similar process and thus increases the variety of possible
polymers.
On the previous page, you learned that ethene is used to ripen fruit.
How does this work? When a fruit ripens, enzymes in the fruit begin to
produce ethene gas. The ethene is responsible for the colour change, as
well as the softening and sweetening that occur as the fruit ripens. Food
chemists have learned that they can suppress ethene production (and
delay ripening) by keeping fruits at a low temperature as they are
transported. Once the fruits reach their final destination, ethene can be
pumped into the fruit containers to hasten the ripening process. No
wonder you can get such a variety of fresh fruit at the supermarket!
In the next investigation, you will use reactivity to identify saturated
and unsaturated compounds in some everyday products. Saturated and
unsaturated compounds play an important part in healthy eating, as you
will discover.
Chapter 13 The Chemistry of Hydrocarbons • MHR 553
S K I L L F O C U S
Predicting
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
Comparing the Reactivity Conducting research
of Alkanes and Alkenes
Because of differences in reactivity, you can use Question
aqueous potassium permanganate, KMnO ,
4(aq) How can you use aqueous potassium
to distinguish alkanes from alkenes. When the
permanganate in a test to identify unsaturated
permanganate ion comes in contact with unsatu-
compounds in fats and oils?
rated compounds, such as alkenes, a reaction
occurs. The permanganate ion changes to become
Predictions
manganese dioxide. This is shown by a colour
change, from purple to brown. When the per- Predict whether each substance to be tested will
manganate ion comes in contact with saturated react with aqueous potassium permanganate. (In
compounds, such as alkanes, that have only part, you can base your predictions on what you
single bonds, no reaction occurs. The colour of know about saturated and unsaturated fats from
the permanganate does not change. the media, as well as from biology and health
classes.)
− unsaturated
MnO MnO
4(aq) compounds 2(s) Safety Precautions
MnO − saturated no change Do not spill any KMnO 4(aq) on your clothing or
4(aq) compounds
skin, because it will stain. If you do accidentally
spill KMnO on your skin, remove the stain
4(aq)
using a solution of sodium bisulfite.
Materials
test tubes (13×100mm)
test tube rack
stoppers
medicine droppers
hot plate
5.0 mmol/L KMnO
4(aq)
water bath
samples of vegetable oils, such as varieties of
margarine, corn oil, and coconut oil
samples of animal fats, such as butter and lard
Aqueous potassium permanganate was added to the two
test tubes on the left. One test tube contains an alkane
compound. The other test tube contains an alkene
compound. Which is which?
554 MHR • Unit 5 Hydrocarbons and Energy
4. Dispose of the reactants as directed by your
teacher.
Analysis
1. On what basis did you make your
predictions? How accurate were they?
2. Did any of your results surprise you? Explain
your answer.
Conclusion
3. Is there a connection between your results
and the unsaturated or saturated compounds
in the substances you tested? Explain your
answer.
Application
Procedure
4. Investigate the possible structures of some of
1. Read steps 2 and 3. Design a table to the compounds (fatty acids) that are contained
record your predictions, observations, and in various fats and oils. Use both print and
interpretations. Give your table a title. electronic resources. See if you can verify a
link between the tests you performed and the
2. Place about two full droppers of each test
structures of these fats and oils. Check out
substance in the test tubes. Use a different
compounds such as trans-fats (trans-fatty
dropper for each substance, or clean the
acids) and cis-fats (cis-fatty acids). Record
dropper each time. Melt solids, such as butter,
your findings, and compare them with your
in a warm water bath (40°C to 50°C). Then test
classmates’ findings.
them as liquids.
3. Use a clean dropper to add one dropper full
of potassium permanganate solution to each
substance. Record your observations.
Chapter 13 The Chemistry of Hydrocarbons • MHR 555
Naming Alkenes
CH The names of alkenes follow the same format as the names of alkanes:
3
prefix + root + suffix. The prefixes and the steps for locating and identify-
CH
2 ing branches are the same, too. The greatest difference involves the double
bond. The suffix -ene immediately tells you that a compound has at least
CH CH C CH
3 2 2
one double bond. The rest of the necessary information—the location of
Figure 13.20 the double bond, and the number of carbon atoms in the main chain—is
communicated in the root. Follow the steps below to find out how to
name the compound in Figure 13.20.
Naming 2-Ethyl-1-Butene
Biology LINK Step 1
Find the longest continuous chain (cid:2) The main chain must contain the
According to many nutrition
that contains the double bond. (This double bond, even though it may
scientists, foods that contain
step represents the main difference not be the longest chain.
double or triple bonds
from naming alkanes.)
(cid:2) Here it is possible to have a main
(unsaturated compounds) are
healthier for us than foods that CH 3 chain of five carbons. However,
this chain would not include the
contain single bonds (saturat-
ed compounds). Research CH 2 double bond. Instead, choose the
the implications of including shorter chain with only four car-
CH CH C CH
unsaturated and saturated fats 3 2 2 bons. This chain includes the dou-
and oils in your diet. Use a ble bond. We now have part of the
library, the Internet, or any root, along with the suffix: -butene.
other sources of information.
Decide on a suitable format in Step 2
which to present your findings.
Number the main chain from the end (cid:2) You need the number that locates
that is closest to the double bond. the double bond. Here the double
bond is between carbon number 1
CH
3
and carbon number 2. Which
CH should you use? Logic and the
2
IUPAC rules suggest that you
CH CH C CH should use the lowest possible
4 3 3 2 2 1 2
number. Therefore the double
(cid:2) Here you number the main chain bond is located with the number 1.
from the right side of the chain. So the root and suffix of the name
This ensures that the double bond are -1-butene.
gets the lowest possible position
number.
Step 3
To create the prefix, identify and (cid:2) If there is more than one branch,
locate the branches with numbers. remember to put the branches in
alphabetical order.
CH 3 (cid:2) There are two carbons in the
branch that is attached to the
CH
2 number 2 carbon of the main
chain. Therefore the prefix is
CH CH C CH
3 2 2 2-ethyl-. (Make sure that you
understand why -ethyl is used.)
Step 4
Use the formula prefix +root +suffix to put the name together. The full
name of this compound is 2-ethyl-1-butene. Remember that a hyphen is
placed between numbers and letters, and commas are placed between
consecutive numbers.
556 MHR• Unit 5 Hydrocarbons and Energy
In 2-ethyl-1-butene, the double bond and the branch are near each other
on the carbon chain. What happens if the double bond is close to one end
of the carbon chain, but the branches are close to the other end? For
example, how would you name the compound in Figure 13.21?
CH
3
The methyl branch is close to the right end of the main chain. The
double bond is close to the left end of the main chain. Therefore you CH CH CH CH CH
3 3
need to follow the rule in step 2: the double bond has the lowest possible
Figure 13.21
position number. Now you can combine the name as follows:
• The 5-carbon main chain is numbered from the left. The double bond is
given the number 2 (because 2 is lower than 3). The root and the suffix
are -2-pentene.
• The prefix is 4-methyl- since there is a 1-carbon branch on the fourth
carbon of the main chain.
• The complete name is 4-methyl-2-pentene.
Although the compounds you have just named have different structural
formulas, they both have the same molecular formula: C H . These
6 12
compounds are both isomers of C H ! You worked with structural iso-
6 12
mers earlier in this chapter. You have seen that isomers can be made by
rearranging carbon and hydrogen atoms and creating new branches. Now
you will learn that isomers can also be made by rearranging double bonds.
Drawing Alkenes
You draw alkenes using the same method you learned for drawing CH 3 CH C CH 3
alkanes. There is only one difference: you have to place the double bond
CH
in the main chain. Remember the valence of carbon, and be careful to 3
count to four for each carbon atom on the structure. (Figure 13.22 gives Figure 13.22 Each carbon atom
an example of another alkene, 2-methyl-2-butene.) Be especially careful is bonded four times, once for
with the carbon atoms on each side of the double bond. The double bond each valence electron.
is worth two for each carbon! Now complete the Practice Problems to
reinforce what you have learned about naming and drawing alkenes.
Practice Problems
8. Name each hydrocarbon.
(a) CH CH CH CH CH CH
3 2 2 3
(b) CH 3 CH 2 CH 2 CH 2 CC CH CH 3
CCHH
22
CH
22
CH
3
(c) CH
3
CH CCHH CH C CH CH
3 2 3
CH CH CH CH CH
3 2 2 3
Continued ...
Chapter 13 The Chemistry of Hydrocarbons • MHR 557
Continued ...
PROBLEM TIP
FROM PAGE 557
The easiest way to tell whether 9. Draw a condensed structural diagram for each compound.
or not isomers are true isomers
(a) 2-methyl-1-butene
is to name them. Two struc-
tures that look different may (b) 5-ethyl-3,4,6-trimethyl-2-octene
turn out to have the same
10. You have seen that alkenes, such as C H , can have isomers. Draw
6 12
name. If this happens, they
condensed structural formulas for the isomers of C H . Then name
are not true isomers. 4 8
the isomers.
Cis-Trans (Geometric) Isomers
CH CH You have seen that isomers result from rearranging
3 3
cis-2-Butene C C carbon atoms and double bonds in alkenes. Another
type of isomer results from the presence of a double
H H
bond. It is called a cis-trans isomer (or geometric
isomer). Cis-trans isomers occur when different
groups of atoms are arranged around the double bond.
CH H
3 Unlike the single carbon-carbon bond, which can
trans-2-Butene C C rotate, the double carbon-carbon bond remains fixed.
H CH Figure 13.23 shows one of the compounds you have
3
worked with already: 2-butene.
Remember these general rules:
Figure 13.23 These diagrams
•To have a cis-trans (geometric) isomer, each carbon in the C C double
show the cis and trans isomers of
bond must be attached to two different groups.
2-butene. Notice that the larger
•In a cis isomer, the two larger groups are attached to each C C double
methyl groups are on the same
bond on the same side.
side of the double bond (both
above) in the cis isomer. They are •In a trans isomer, the two larger groups are attached to each C C
on opposite sides (one above and double bond on opposite sides.
one below) in the trans isomer.
Like all isomers, cis-trans isomers have different physical and chemical
properties. For example, the cis-2-butene isomer has a boiling point of
3.7˚C, while the trans-2-butene isomer has a boiling point of 0.9˚C.
Practice Problems
11. Draw and name the cis-trans isomers for C H .
5 10
12. Why can 1-butene not have cis-trans isomers? Use a structural
diagram to explain.
13. Like other isomers, two cis-trans isomers have the same atomic
Electronic Learning Partner weight. They also yield the same elements when decomposed.
How might you distinguish between two such isomers in the lab?
Go to the Electronic Learning
14. C H has four possible pairs of cis-trans isomers. Draw and name
Partner to find out more about 6 12
cis-trans isomers. all four pairs.
558 MHR• Unit 5 Hydrocarbons and Energy
Chemistry Bulletin
Elastomer Technology: Useful or Harmful? Although elastomers and rubber have many
helpful and useful properties, they can also
What do tires and chewing gum have in
cause problems. For example, rubber is used to
common? They are both made of elastomers:
make safe tires for cars, trucks, and other vehi-
any substance you can pull or flex. Elastomer
cles. These tires wear out and must be changed
molecules can be crosslinked, or chemically
regularly. As a result, Canada and the United
linked, to produce rubber that retains its shape.
States accumulate 275 million used tires every
You can find elastomers and/or rubber in many
year! What can be done with these used tires?
everyday products, such as running shoes,
Scrap tires that are left in piles may catch
tires, underwear, and bubble gum.
on fire. Since tires usually burn with incom-
Elastomers are a type of polymer, or giant
plete combustion, many dangerous and
molecule. To form a polymer such as an elas-
polluting gases are emitted into the environ-
tomer, many small molecules are connected to
ment. In addition, burning tires can leak oil
form a chain with thousands of repeatingunits.
and aromatic hydrocarbons into the soil.
Elastomer technology is useful in medicine.
Thus they can contaminate drinking water
Muscles and arteries contain giant molecules,
in the area.
called elastin, that make muscles and arteries
Tire manufacturers try to reduce waste
contract. Doctors can give artificial arteries to
by making tires that last longer. Unfortunately,
people with severe heart problems or other
when these durable radial tires break down,
diseases. Unfortunately these artificial arteries
they disintegrate into small airborne particles,
do not last long enough. Can they be replaced
instead of large pieces as older tires do. This
by a new type of elastomer?
“tire dust” contains latex rubber, which is an
allergen. As well, tire dust is small enough to
be breathed deeply into the lungs. Tire dust
may be one reason why asthma is becoming
more common in North America.
Since tires are made of hydrocarbons, scrap
tires can be used as a fuel source. Tire derived
fuel (TDF) is used in power plants, paper mills,
and cement kilns. Environmentalists are con-
cerned, however, that incomplete combustion
may result in the release of toxins.
Making Connections
A large company is proposing to build a
Judit Puskas cement kiln to produce cement. It will use
scrap tires as fuel. Divide the class into various
Dr. Judit Puskas holds Canada’s first Industrial stakeholders, such as
Research Chair in Elastomer Technology at the
• local citizens
University of Western Ontario in London,
• an environmental group
Ontario. She thinks that an elastomer called
• the company
polyisobutylene, along with some of its deriva-
• the provincial ministry of the environment
tives, looks promising. In the future, it may be
•the owners of a scrap tire storage facility
used to make better artificial arteries. It may
also be useful for other implants, since it can Debate the proposal.
imitate the rubber-like properties of elastin.
Chapter 13 The Chemistry of Hydrocarbons • MHR 559
Alkynes
Carbon and hydrogen atoms can be arranged in many ways to produce a
great variety of compounds. Yet another way involves triple bonds in the
structure of compounds. This bond structure creates a class of aliphatic
compounds called alkynes. Alkynes are aliphatic compounds that contain
one or more triple bonds.
Naming and Drawing Alkynes
Both double and triple bonds are multiple bonds. Therefore alkynes are
unsaturated hydrocarbons, just as alkenes are. To name alkynes and draw
their structures, you follow the same rules that you used for alkenes. The
only difference is the suffix -yne, which you need to use when naming
alkyne compounds. Also, remember to count the number of bonds for
each carbon. An alkyne bond counts as three bonds.
CH C C CH CH As you might expect, the presence of a triple bond in alkynes makes
3 3
their physical and chemical properties different from those of alkanes and
CH
3 alkenes. A structure with a triple bond must be linear around the bond.
(See Figure 13.24.) This means that the shapes of alkynes are different
from the shapes of alkanes and alkenes. As well, the triple bond makes
the molecule much more reactive—even more so than the double bond.
In fact, few alkynes occur naturally because they are so reactive.
Alkynes are similar to both alkanes and alkenes because they form a
Figure 13.24 Alkynes are linear
homologous series. Alkynes have the general formula of C n H 2n−2 . So, for
around the triple bond, as these
example, the first member of the alkyne series, ethyne, has the formula
examples show.
C H . (You may know this compound by its common name: acetylene.)
2 2
The next member, propyne, has the formula C H .
3 4
Practice Problems
15. Name each alkyne.
(a) CH 3
CH C C C CH
3 3
CH
3
(b) CH
3
CH CH
3 2
CH CH CH C C CH
3 2
CH
2
CH
2
CH
3
16. Draw a condensed structural diagram for each compound.
(a) 2-pentyne
(b) 4,5-dimethyl-2-heptyne
(c) 3-ethyl-4-methyl-1-hexyne
(d) 2,5,7-trimethyl-3-octyne
560 MHR• Unit 5 Hydrocarbons and Energy
Cyclic Hydrocarbons
You have probably heard the term “steroid” used in the context of athlet-
ics. (See Figure 13.25.) Our bodies contain steroids, such as testosterone
(a male sex hormone) and estrone (a female sex hormone). Steroids also
have important medicinal uses. For example, budesonide is a steroid
that is used to treat asthma. One of the most common steroids is
cholesterol. This compound is essential to your normal body functions,
but it has been linked to blocked artery walls and heart disease, as well.
Steroids have also been associated with misuse, especially at the
Olympics and other sporting events. Some athletes have tried to gain an
advantage by using steroids to increase their muscle mass.
H C OH
3
H C
3
O
testosterone
H C O
3
HO
estrone
Figure 13.25 Steroids are organic compounds. Our bodies make steroids naturally.
Steroids may also be synthesized in chemical laboratories. What do the structures of
these steroids have in common?
What do steroids have to do with hydrocarbons? Steroids are
unsaturated compounds. Although they are complex organic molecules,
their basic structure centres on four rings of carbon atoms. In other words,
steroids are built around ring structures of alkanes and alkenes.
Hydrocarbon ring structures are called cyclic hydrocarbons. They
occur when the two ends of a hydrocarbon chain join together. In order to
do this, a hydrogen atom from each end carbon must be removed, just as
in the formation of a multiple bond. (See Figure 13.26 on the next page.)
Chapter 13 The Chemistry of Hydrocarbons • MHR 561
You should have no trouble recognizing cyclohexane as a member of
the alkane family. Notice, however, that cycloalkanes, such as cyclohexa-
ne, have two fewer hydrogen atoms compared with other alkanes. Thus
they have the general formula C H . (This is the same as the general for-
n 2n
mula for alkenes.)
Naming and Drawing Cyclic Hydrocarbons
To draw the structure of a cyclic hydrocarbon, use a line diagram in a
ring-like shape, such as the one shown in Figure 13.26. Each carbon-
carbon bond is shown as a straight line. Each corner of the ring represents
a carbon atom. Hydrogen atoms are not shown, but they are assumed to be
present in the correct numbers.
H H
H H H H H H H H H H H H H C H
H C C H
lose bond
H C C C C C C H C C C C C C
2 H‘s formation
H C C H
H H H H H H H H H H H H H C H
H H
hexane
C H
6 14
+ 2H
cyclohexane
C H
6 12
Figure 13.26 How hexane, CH , can become cyclohexane, CH
6 14 6 12
Because of the ring structure, the naming rules for cyclic hydro-
carbons, including cycloalkanes and cycloalkenes, are slightly different
from those for alkanes and alkenes. Below are four examples to illustrate
the naming rules.
To draw cyclic hydrocarbons, start with the rules you learned for
drawing other types of compounds. To place multiple bonds and branches,
you have the option of counting in either direction around the ring.
Naming Cyclic Hydrocarbons
Example 1: You can still use the general formula: prefix +root +suffix. In
Figure 13.27, there are only single carbon-carbon bonds. There are also five
corners (carbon atoms) in the ring, which is the main chain. Since there are
no branches, the name of this compound is cyclopentane. Notice the addi-
Figure 13.27 tion of cyclo- to indicate the ring structure.
Example 2: When naming cyclic compounds, all carbon atoms in the ring
CH are treated as equal. This means that any carbon can be carbon number 1.
3
In Figure 13.28, only one branch is attached to the ring. Therefore the
carbon that the branch is attached to is carbon number 1. Because this
branch automatically gets the lowest possible position number, no position
number is required in the name. Thus the name of this compound is
Figure 13.28 methylcyclohexane.
562 MHR• Unit 5 Hydrocarbons and Energy
Example 3: When two or more branches are on a ring structure, each must
CH
have the lowest possible position number. Which way do you count the 3
carbons around the ring? You can count in either direction around the ring. In
Figure 13.29, a good choice is to make the ethyl branch carbon number 1 and
then count counterclockwise. This allows you to sequence the branches in
CH CH
2 3
alphabetical order and to add the position numbers in ascending order. So
the name of this structure is 1-ethyl-3-methylcyclohexane. Figure 13.29
Example 4: In Figure 13.30, there is a double bond, represented by the
extra vertical line inside the ring structure. You must follow the same rules
as for alkenes. That is, the double bond gets priority for the lowest number.
This means that one of the carbon atoms, on either end of the double bond, CH
3
must be carbon number 1. The carbon atom at the other end must be carbon
number 2. Next you have to decide in which direction to count so that the
branch gets the lowest possible position number. In this compound, the
carbon atom on the bottom end of the double bond is carbon number 1.
Then you can count clockwise so that the methyl group on the top carbon Figure 13.30
of the ring has position number 3. (Counting in the other direction would
give a higher locating number for the branch.) The name of this structure
is 3-methyl-1-cyclohexene.
Practice Problems
17. Name each compound. CH
3
(a) CH CH CH (e)
3 2 3
(b) H 3 C CH 3 (f) CH 2 CH 3
CH
3
H C CH
3 3
CH
3
(c) CH (g) CH CH
3 3 2
CH CH
2 3
(d) (h) CH
3
CH 3 CH 2 CH 2 CH 3 CH 2 CH 2 CH 2 CH 2 CH 3
18. Draw a condensed structural diagram for each compound.
(a) 1,2,4-trimethylcycloheptane (e) 1,3-ethyl-2-methylcyclopentane
(b) 2-ethyl-3-propyl-1-cyclobutene (f) 4-butyl-3-methyl-1-cyclohexene
(c) 3-methyl-2-cyclopentene (g) 1,1-dimethylcyclopentane
(d) cyclopentene (h) 1,2,3,4,5,6-hexamethyl
cyclohexane
You have now had some experience naming and drawing aliphatic
compounds. In the next investigation, you will develop a more
thorough understanding of them by examining their structural and
physical properties.
Chapter 13 The Chemistry of Hydrocarbons • MHR 563
S K I L L F O C U S
Predicting
Modelling concepts
Analyzing and interpreting
Structures and Properties
of Aliphatic Compounds
To compare the properties of alkanes, alkenes, 4. Look up the boiling points of these four
and alkynes, you will be working with com- compounds in the table below. Draw a bar
pounds that have the same number of carbon graph to compare the boiling points.
atoms. First, you will construct and compare
5. Repeat steps 1 to 3 for pentane, trans-2-
butane, trans-2-butene, 2-butyne, and cyclobu-
pentene, 2-pentyne, and cyclopentane.
tane. You will use a graph to compare the boiling
points of each compound. Next, you will use 6. Predict the relative boiling points for these
what you have just observed to predict the rela- four compounds. Use a reference book to find
tive boiling points of pentane, trans-2-pentene, and graph the actual boiling points.
2-pentyne, and cyclopentane. You will construct
Comparing the Boiling Points
and compare these structures and graph their
of Four-Carbon Compounds
boiling points.
Compound Boiling point (°C)
Question
butane –0.5
How can constructing models of butane, trans-2-butene 0.9
trans-2-butene, 2-butyne, and cyclobutane help
2-butyne 27
you understand and compare their physical
cyclobutane 12
properties?
Predictions Analysis
Predict the structural formula for each com- 1. What are the differences between the
pound. After completing steps 1 to 4, predict multiple-bond compounds and the alkanes?
what the graph of the boiling points of pentane,
2. What type of compound has the highest
trans-2-pentene, 2-pentyne, and cyclopentane
boiling point? What type has the lowest
will look like.
boiling point?
Materials
Conclusion
molecular model kits
3. Identify possible reasons for the differences in
reference books
boiling points between compounds.
Procedure
Application
1. Construct models of butane, trans-2-butene,
4. Compare the boiling points of cyclopentane
2-butyne, and cyclobutane.
and cyclobutane. Use this information to
2. Examine the structure of each model. Draw a put the following compounds in order from
diagram of it in your notebook. highest to lowest boiling point: cyclohexane,
cyclobutane, cyclopropane, cyclopentane.
3. If possible, rotate the molecule around each
Use a reference book to check your order.
carbon-carbon bond to see if this changes the
appearance of the structure.
564 MHR • Unit 5 Hydrocarbons and Energy
Summary: Rules for Naming and Drawing Aliphatic Compounds
Naming Alkanes
• Find the longest continuous chain. This is the parent (main) chain.
Number the parent chain so that the branches have the lowest
possible position numbers.
CH
3
• Locate any branches. Use the number of carbons in each branch to
name it (for example, ethyl). Give it a position number. CH C CH
3 3
• When writing the parts of the name, separate two numbers by a
CH
comma. Separate a number from a word by a hyphen. 3
• Write the prefix. Each branch has a position number. Write the Figure 13.31 Can you name this
branches in alphabetical order. More than one of each type of branch alkane?
is shown by di-, tri-, and so on.
• Write the root. This depends on the number of carbons in the main
chain.
• Write the suffix -ane. (See Figure 13.31 for practice.)
Drawing Alkanes
• In a straight line, draw the carbon atoms in the parent (main) chain.
The number of carbon atoms is indicated by the root of the name.
• Give position numbers to the carbon atoms in the parent chain.
Attach all the branches to their appropriate parent chain carbon
atoms.
• Add enough hydrogen atoms and bonds for each carbon atom to have
four bonds.
Naming Alkenes and Alkynes
• Find the longest continuous chain containing the multiple bond. This
is the parent chain. Number the parent chain so that the multiple
bond has the lowest possible position number.
• Locate any branches. Identify the position number and number of
carbons for each branch.
CH
3
• When writing the parts of the name, separate two numbers by a
comma. Separate a number from a word by a hyphen. CH C C CH CH
3 3
• Write the prefix. Each branch has a position number. Write the Figure 13.32 Can you name this
branches in alphabetical order. More than one of each type of alkyne?
branch is shown by di-, tri-, and so on.
• Write the root. This includes the position number of the multiple
bond and the name for the number of carbon atoms in the parent
chain.
• Write the suffix -ene for alkenes and -yne for alkynes. (See Figure
13.32 for practice.)
Drawing Alkenes and Alkynes
• In a straight line, draw the carbon atoms in the parent chain. The
number of carbon atoms is indicated by the root of the name. Place
the multiple bond between two carbon atoms in the chain, as
indicated by the number in the name.
• Give position numbers to the carbon atoms in the parent chain.
Attach all the branches to their appropriate parent chain carbon
atoms.
• Add enough hydrogen atoms and bonds for each carbon atom to have
four bonds.
Chapter 13 The Chemistry of Hydrocarbons • MHR 565
Naming Cycloalkanes
• Identify the branches.
• Number the carbons in the ring, in either direction, so that the
branches have the lowest possible position numbers.
• Write the prefix, as for naming alkanes.
• Write the root -cyclo- plus the name for the number of carbon
atoms in the ring. For example, a five-carbon ring would have the
root-cyclopent-.
• Write the suffix -ane.
Drawing Cycloalkanes
• Draw the ring, according to the root of the name.
• Choose one of the ring carbon atoms as carbon number 1. Place each
branch accordingly.
Naming Cycloalkenes and Cycloalkynes
CH CH
2 3
• Identify the branches.
CH 3 CH 2 • Number the carbons in the ring, in either direction, so that the
multiple bond is between the two lowest numbers, and the branches
get the lowest possible position numbers.
CH 3 • Write the prefix and root, as for cycloalkanes.
Figure 13.33 Can you name this • Write the suffix -ene for cycloalkenes or -yne for cycloalkynes.
cycloalkene? (See Figure 13.33 for practice.)
Drawing Cycloalkenes and Cycloalkynes
• Draw the ring, according to the root of the name.
• Choose one of the ring carbon atoms as carbon number 1. Place the
multiple bond accordingly.
• Add each branch according to its type and position number.
Section Wrap-up
Now you know how to name and draw alkanes, alkenes, alkynes, and ring
compounds. In the next section, you will discover how petroleum, the
source of most hydrocarbons, can be separated into its components.
Section Review
1 (a) K/U What are the names of the three types of aliphatic compounds
that you studied in this section?
(b) K/U Which of these are saturated compounds, and which are unsat-
urated compounds? How does this difference affect their properties?
2 K/U List the roots used to name the first ten members of the alkane
homologous series. Indicate the number of carbon atoms that each
represents.
3 C If water and octane are mixed, does the octane dissolve in the
water? Explain.
566 MHR• Unit 5 Hydrocarbons and Energy
4 (a) K/U Name each compound.
CH CH
3 3
CH CCCHHH CCHH CH CH CH
3 2 3
CH CH
2 3
(b) CH CH (d) CH
3 3 3
CH 3 C CH 2 C CH 2 CH 3
CH
3 CH CH CH
3 2 3
CH
3
(c) CH
3
CH
2
CH C CH CH CH CH
2 3
CH
2
CH
2
CH
3
5 C Draw a condensed structural diagram for each compound.
(a) 2,4-dimethyl-3-hexene
(b) 5-ethyl-4-propyl-2-heptyne
(c) 3,5-diethyl-2,4,7,8-tetramethyl-5-propyldecane
(d) trans-4-methyl-3-heptene
6 C Draw and name all the isomers that are represented by each
molecular formula.
(a) C H (b) C H (c) C H
3 4 5 12 5 10
7 K/U Identify any mistakes in the name and/or structure of
each compound.
(a) 3-methyl-2-butene (b) 2-ethyl-4,5-methyl-1-hexene
CH CH
3 3
CH
CH C C CH 3
3 3
CH CH
2 3
8 C What happens when there is more than one double bond or more
than one ring? Try to draw a condensed structural diagram for each of
the following compounds.
(a) propadiene
(b) 2-methyl-1,3-butadiene
(c) 1,3,5-cycloheptatriene
(d) cyclopentylcyclohexane
Chapter 13 The Chemistry of Hydrocarbons • MHR 567
13.4 Refining and Using Hydrocarbons
Section Preview/ Is it possible to take hydrocarbons straight out of the ground and use them
Specific Expectations as they are? Since the earliest recorded history, people have done just
that. In the past, people used crude oil that seeped up to Earth’s surface
In this section, you will
to waterproof boats and buildings. They also used it to grease wheels and
(cid:2) describethe steps involved
even dress the wounds of animals and humans. As well, people burned
in refining petroleum to
obtain gasoline and other natural gas, mainly to supply lighting for temples and palaces.
useful fractions Today hydrocarbons are extracted from the ground at well sites, then
(cid:2) explainthe importance processed further at refineries. (See Figure 13.34.) The first commercial oil
of hydrocarbons in the well in North America was located in southern Ontario’s Enniskillen
petrochemical industry Township. It began production in 1858. At that time, kerosene (which was
(cid:2) communicateyour under- used to fuel lamps) was the principal focus of the young petroleum indus-
standing of the following try. Paraffin (for making candles) and lubricating oils were also produced,
terms: petrochemicals, but there was little demand for other hydrocarbon materials, such as gaso-
fractional distillation, line.
cracking, reforming
Figure 13.34 This oil refinery is in Clarkson, Ontario.
Reliance on hydrocarbons has increased substantially since the nineteenth
century. Our society now requires these compounds for fuel, as well as for
the raw materials that are used to synthesize petrochemicals.
Petrochemicals are basic hydrocarbons, such as ethene and propene, that
are converted into plastics and other synthetic materials. Petroleum is the
chief source of the petrochemicals that drive our cars and our economy.
Petroleum is not a pure substance, however. Rather, petroleum is a com-
plex mixture of hydrocarbons—mainly alkanes and alkenes—of varying
molecular sizes and states. Because petroleum is a mixture, its composi-
tion varies widely from region to region in the world. An efficient process
is essential for separating and collecting the individual, pure hydrocarbon
components. Read on to learn about this process in greater detail.
568 MHR • Unit 5 Hydrocarbons and Energy
Using Properties to Separate Petroleum Components
Web
LINK
Fractional distillation is a process for separating petroleum into its
hydrocarbon components. This process relies on a physical property— www.school.mcgrawhill.ca/
boiling point. Each of the hydrocarbon components, called fractions, has resources/
its own range of boiling points. At an oil refinery, the separating (refining) Canada’s land mass has expe-
rienced dynamic changes over
of petroleum begins in a large furnace. The furnace vaporizes the liquid
tens of millions of years.
components. The fluid mixture then enters a large fractionation tower.
Climatic conditions, along with
Figure 13.35 outlines how the various hydrocarbon fractions are separated
the deposition of countless
in the tower. (Note: The temperatures shown are approximate
remains of organisms, created
boiling points for the hydrocarbon fractions.) the areas in which petroleum
is found today. These areas are
gases (up to 32˚C) called sedimentary basins.
Where are the sedimentary
basins? Are they all active
sites for oil and gas extraction?
How much oil and gas do sci-
entists estimate there is? How
bubble cap do Canada’s reserves compare
straight-run with those of other petroleum-
gasoline producing nations? Go to the
(32˚C–104˚C) web site above to “tap” into
Canada’s and the world’s
petroleum resources. Go to
naptha Science Resources, then to
(104˚C–157˚C) Chemistry 11to find out where
to go next. Decide on a
suitable format in which to
record your findings.
kerosene
(157˚C–232˚C)
gas oil
(232˚C–426˚C)
crude oil Figure 13.35 This diagram
shows how petroleum is
separated into its hydrocarbon
steam fractions. Each fraction has a
different range of boiling points.
The tower separates the fractions
residue by a repeated process of heating,
fractionation
evaporating, cooling, and
tower
condensing.
Perforated plates, which are fitted with bubble caps, are placed at various
levels in the tower. As each fraction reaches a plate where the temperature
is just below its boiling point, it condenses and liquefies. The liquid
fractions are taken from the tower by pipes. Other fractions that are still
vapours continue to pass up through the plates to higher levels.
Several plates are needed to collect each fraction. Heavier hydro-
carbons (larger molecules) have higher boiling points. They condense first
and are removed in the lower sections of the tower. The lighter hydrocar-
bons, with lower boiling points, reach the higher levels of the tower
before they are separated.
Chapter 13 The Chemistry of Hydrocarbons • MHR 569
Cracking and Reforming
Once the fractions are removed from the distillation tower, they may
be chemically processed or purified further to make them marketable.
(See Figure 13.36.) There has been a tremendous increase in the demand
for a variety of petroleum products in the early twentieth century. This
demand has forced the oil industry to develop new techniques to increase
the yield from each barrel of oil. These techniques are called cracking and
reforming.
Petroleum Fractionation Products
gases gas LPG (liquid petroleum gases)
condenser
cooking
straight-run chemicals plastics
gasoline gas fibers
catalytic recovery further drugs
straight-run reforming and processing detergents
gasoline separation gasoline synthetic rubber
high octane airplanes
gasoline automobiles
naphtha hydro-
farming
kerosene
cracking
kerosene home heating
furnace oil jet fuel
gas oil
rail roads/trucks
diesel oil
catalytic rail roads/trucks
cracking heavy fuel oils factories
crude
ships
oil
asphalts
roads
steam
vacuum lubricating residue lubricating oil
residue further
distillation
refining wax paper
petroleum coke waxes
fractionation
coke
tower
Figure 13.36 Selected uses of petroleum fractions
Cracking was first introduced in Sarnia, Ontario. This process uses heat to
break larger hydrocarbon molecules into smaller gasoline molecules.
Cracking is done in the absence of air and can produce different types of
hydrocarbons. For example, the cracking of propane can produce methane
and ethene, as well as propene and hydrogen. (See Figure 13.37.)
Electronic Learning Partner
500˚C–700˚C
The Chemistry 11 Electronic 2CH CH CH CH + CH CH +CH CH CH +H
3 2 3 4 2 2 3 2 2
Learning Partner has an ani-
propane methane ethene propene hydrogen
mation that illustrates how a
fractionation tower works.
Figure 13.37 This chemical equation summarizes the cracking of propane.
570 MHR• Unit 5 Hydrocarbons and Energy
Reforming is another technique that uses heat, pressure, and catalysts to
Language
LINK
convert large hydrocarbons into other compounds. Reforming can produce
larger hydrocarbons or a different type of hydrocarbon, called aromatic
What is a catalyst? Use
compounds. (See Figure 13.38.) Aromatic compounds contain special ring
reference books to find out.
structures. You will learn about them in a later chemistry course.
Cracking
Heat
Larger
Smaller Hydrocarbon + Smaller Hydrocarbon
Hydrocarbon
Catalyst
Reforming
Heat, Pressure
Larger
Smaller Hydrocarbon + Smaller Hydrocarbon
Hydrocarbon
Catalyst
Figure 13.38 Comparing cracking and reforming
Some of the products of the refining process are transported to fuel 95%
petrochemical plants. These plants convert complex hydrocarbons,
such as naphtha, into simple chemical compounds, or a small
number of compounds, for further processing by other industries.
Canadian petrochemical plants produce chemicals such as
methanol, ethylene, propylene, styrene, butadiene, butylene,
toluene, and xylene. These chemicals are used as building blocks
in the production of other finished products. Nearly every room petrochemicals
in your school, your home, and your favourite shopping centre 5%
contains, or is made from, at least one petrochemical product.
plastics
Yet, as you can see in Figure 13.39, petrochemicals represent detergents
only a small fraction of society’s uses of petroleum. drugs
In the next chapter, you will discover why hydrocarbons are synthetic fibres
synthetic rubber
so highly valued as fuels. As well, you will unravel the mystery
of how so much energy can be locked up inside a hydrocarbon
molecule.
Petroleum
Section Wrap-up
Figure 13.39 A tremendous
In this section, you learned that petrochemicals, an essential part of our
number of petrochemical prod-
society and technology, are obtained from petroleum. You discovered how ucts enrich your life. Yet they
petroleum is separated into its components by fractional distillation, still make up only about 5% of
cracking, and reforming. what is produced from a barrel
In this chapter, you learned a great deal about hydrocarbons. You of crude oil. A staggering 95%
of all petroleum is used as fuel.
learned how hydrocarbons are formed in section 13.1. In sections 13.2
and 13.3, you learned to draw, classify, and name different hydrocarbons.
Finally, you learned about the practical side of hydrocarbons—how they
are produced and used in everyday life.
Chapter 13 The Chemistry of Hydrocarbons • MHR 571
Careers in Chemistry
Polymer Chemist manipulate these polymers in various ways.
Polymer chemists have invented an amazing
array of materials. These include polyvinyl chlo-
ride (used to make garden hose and duct tape),
polyurethane (used to stuff teddy bears and
make spandex bicycle pants), and acrylonitrile-
butadiene-styrene, or ABS (used to make brakes
and other auto body parts).
Make Career Connections
Bulletproof vests used to be heavy, bulky, and
What kind of education do polymer chemists
uncomfortable. Stephanie Kwolek changed that.
need for their jobs?
Now police officers, police dogs, and soldiers,
• Find out about polymer chemistry programs
can wear light, strong bulletproof vests made of
that are offered by a university near you.
a synthetic fibre called Kevlar™. Kwolek (shown
• Research different companies that employ
above) developed Kevlar™ while working for the
polymer chemists. If possible, interview a
DuPont chemical company. Kevlar™ first came
polymer chemist who is employed by one of
into general use in 1971. It is five times stronger
these companies.
than steel, gram for gram, but almost as light as
nylon. It is flame resistant, resists wear and tear,
and does not conduct electricity. This versatile
material is used not only in bulletproof vests, but
also in other manufactured items, including hock-
ey helmets, firefighters’ suits, spacecraft shells,
and surgeons’ gloves.
Kwoluk’s branch of organic chemistry—poly-
mer chemistry—specializes in creating synthetic
materials that are cheaper, faster, and stronger
than natural materials. Polymer chemists often
work by stringing together thousands of atoms to
form long molecules called polymers. Then they
Section Review
Unit Project Prep 1 (a) K/U What physical property allows various fractions of crude oil
Before you choose a product to be separated in a fractionation tower?
to investigate for the end-of- (b) C What is this process of separation called? Briefly describe it.
unit Project, consider what
Include a diagram in your answer if you wish.
you have learned about
petrochemical products. What 2 MC Our society’s demand for petroleum products has increased
compound is used to produce dramatically over the last century. Describe two techniques that can
most plastics, and thus almost
be used to transform the petroleum fractions from a fractionation
all products’ packaging?
tower, in order to meet this demand.
3 MC List five types of petrochemicals that can be produced from refined
hydrocarbons. Describe briefly how each type has affected your life.
4 MC Petrochemicals are not always helpful. Do research and prepare
a presentation illustrating the effects of petrochemicals on the
environment.
572 MHR• Unit 5 Hydrocarbons and Energy
Review
Reflecting on Chapter 13 5. What are isomers? Give one example of a set
of isomers for a molecular formula.
Summarize this chapter in the format of your
choice. Here are a few ideas to use as guidelines: 6. Describe how the boiling point changes as
• Identify the origins and sources of hydrocarbons the chain length of an aliphatic compound
and other organic compounds. increases. Explain why this happens.
• Describe the characteristics that enable carbon to 7. Briefly compare alkanes, alkenes, and alkynes.
form so many, varied compounds. (Give both similarities and differences.)
• Distinguish among complete, condensed, and
8. Describe the difference between structural
line structural diagrams.
isomers and cis-trans isomers.
• Identify, draw, and name at least two examples
9. Name each compound.
of each kind of hydrocarbon you studied:
alkanes, alkenes, alkynes, and cyclic (a) CH 3 CH 2 CH 2 CH 3
hydrocarbons.
• Demonstrate, using suitable examples, true (b) CH 3 CH 3
isomers of a hydrocarbon.
• Compare physical properties, such as boiling (c) CH 3 CH 3
point, of aliphatic compounds. CH CH CH CH CH
3 3
• Describe the processes and techniques that the
petrochemical industry depends on. Identify at CH 3
least ten products of this industry.
(d) CH 2 CH 3
Reviewing Key Terms
CH CH CH CH CH
3 2 3
For each of the following terms, write a sentence
CH CH
that shows your understanding of its meaning. 2 3
aliphatic hydrocarbons alkanes
10. For each structural diagram, write the IUPAC
alkenes alkynes
name and identify the type of aliphatic
cis-trans isomer cracking
compound.
cyclic hydrocarbons expanded molecular
(a) CH
fractional distillation formula 3
homologous series geometric isomer
CH C CH
2 3
hydrocarbons isomers
petrochemicals organic compound (b) CH CH
2 3
reforming petroleum
structural diagram saturated hydrocarbons
CH
3
unsaturated structural model
hydrocarbons
(c) CH
3
Knowledge/Understanding CH C CH CH CH
2 3
1.(a) What are the origins of most hydrocarbons
(d) CH CH
and other organic compounds? 3 3
C C
(b) List three sources of hydrocarbons.
H CH CH
2 3
(c) What is the main s’ource of hydrocarbons
used for fuels? (e)
CH
3
2. List three factors that are required to change
biological matter into petroleum. CH 2
3. What are the key properties of the carbon atom
CH CH C CH
3 2 3
that allow it to form such diverse compounds?
CH CH CH CH
4. Define the following terms: fractional 3 2 3
distillation, petrochemical.
Chapter 13 The Chemistry of Hydrocarbons • MHR 573
11. Name the following isomers of 2-heptene. 16. Which combinations of the following structural
H CH 2 CH 2 CH 2 CH 3 diagrams represent true isomers of C 6 H 14 ?
Which structural diagrams represent the
C C
same isomer?
CH H
3 (a) CH
3
CH CH CH CH
3 3
CH CH CH CH CH
3 2 2 2 3
CH
3
C C
CH
H H (b) 3
12. Match the following names and structural CH 3 CH CH 2 CH 2 CH 3
diagrams. Note that only four of the six names
match. (c) CH 3 CH 3 (d) CH 3 CH 3
(a) cis-3-methyl-3-hexene
CH CH CH CH CH
(b) trans-3-hexene 2 2
(c) trans-3-methyl-2-hexene CH CH CH
3 3 3
(d) trans-3-methyl-3-hexene
(e) CH
(e) cis-3-methyl-2-hexene 3
(f) cis-3-hexene
CH C CH CH
3 2 3
(A) CH CH CH
3 2 3
CH
C C 3
CH 3 CH 2 H Inquiry
(B) H H
17. Someone has left two colourless liquids, each
C C in an unlabelled beaker, on the lab bench. You
CH CH CH CH know that one liquid is an alkane, and one is
3 2 2 3
an alkene. Describe a simple test that you can
(C) CH CH
3 3
use to determine which liquid is which.
C C
18. Suppose that you were given a liquid in a
H CH CH CH
2 2 3 beaker labelled “C H .” Discuss how you
6 12
would determine whether the substance was an
(D) CH H
3 alkane, a cycloalkane, an alkene, or an alkyne.
C C
19.In Investigation 13-C, you constructed cyclobu-
CH 3 CH 2 CH 2 CH 3 tane. In order to construct this isomer, you had
to use springs for bonds.
13. Is 1-methyl-2-cyclobutene the correct name for
(a) Why did you have to use springs?
a compound? Draw the structural diagram for
(b) What do you think the bulging springs tell
the compound, and rename it if necessary.
you about the stability of cyclobutane in
14. Explain why the rule “like dissolves like” is
real life?
very useful when cleaning up an oil spill on a
body of water. Communication
15. Why is it impossible for the correct name of a
20. Draw a complete structural diagram for each of
linear alkane to begin with 1-methyl?
these compounds.
(a) 3-ethylhexane
(b) 1-butene
(c) 2,3-dimethylpentane
574 MHR • Unit 5 Hydrocarbons and Energy
21. Draw a condensed structural diagram for Making Connections
each of these compounds.
29. List two ways in which ethene is important in
(a) methylpropane
everyday life.
(b) 1-ethyl-3-propylcyclopentane
30. Research the similarities and differences in
(c) cis-3-methyl-3-heptene
drilling for oil offshore versus onshore. Write a
(d) 3-butyl-4-methyl-1-octyne
report of your findings.
(e) 4-ethyl-1-cyclooctene
31. The National Energy Board has estimated that
22.(a) Draw three structural isomers of C H .
5 12
Canada’s original petroleum resources included
(b) Draw four cis-trans isomers of C H .
8 16 4.3×1011m3 (430 billion cubic metres) of
23. In a fractionation tower, the gaseous fractions
oil and bitumen (a tar-like substance) and
are removed from the top and the solid 1.7×1014m3 (170 trillion cubic metres) of
residues are removed from the bottom.
natural gas. Canada’s petroleum-producing
(a) Explain why the fractions separate like this.
companies have used only a small fraction
(b) A sample of crude oil was tested and found
of these resources. Why, then, do you think
to contain mostly smaller hydrocarbon mole-
many people are so concerned about
cules, less than 15 carbon atoms long. From
exhausting them?
what part of the tower would most of the
Answers to Practice Problems and
fractions of this sample be removed? Why?
Short Answers to Section Review Questions:
24. Use a diagram to describe the steps involved in Practice Problems: 1.C
7
H
16
2.C
9
H
20
3.10 4.25
refining petroleum to obtain gasoline. 5.(a)2-methylbutane (b)2,2-dimethylpropane
25. Draw a concept map to illustrate how hydro- (c)3-ethyl-2,5-dimethylheptane (d)2,2,4,4-tetramethyl-
hexane (e)2,2,4-trimethyl-4-propyloctane
carbon molecules can start as crude oil and
7.(a)2,4-dimethylhexane (b)2,3-dimethylhexane
end up as synthetic rubber.
(c)3-ethyl-3-methylhexane 8.(a)3-hexene
26. Imagine that you are the owner of an oil refinery. (b)3-propyl-2-heptene (c)4-ethyl-2,3-dimethyl-4-octene
Your main supply of crude oil contains a high 10.2-butene, 1-butene, 2-methyl-1-propene
percent of longer-chain hydrocarbons (greater 11.cis-2-pentene, trans-2-pentene 14.cis-2-hexene,
trans-2-hexene; cis-3-hexene, trans-3-hexene;
than 15 carbon atoms per molecule). A new cus-
3-methyl-cis-2-pentene, 3-methyl-trans-2-pentene;
tomer is looking for a large supply of gasoline,
4-methyl-cis-2-pentene, 4-methyl-trans-2-pentene
which contains 7- and 8-carbon molecules.
15.(a)4,4-dimethyl-2-pentyne (b)3-ethyl-5-methyl-3
How will you meet your customer’s needs?
-propyl-1-hexyne 17.(a)1-ethyl-3-methylcyclopentane
27. Place the following alkanes in order from (b)1,2,3,4-tetramethylcyclohexane (c)methylcyclobutane
lowest to highest boiling point. Explain your (d)3-methyl-5-propyl-1-cyclopentene
reasoning.
(e)4-methyl-1-cyclooctene
(f)5-ethyl-3,4-dimethyl-1-cyclononene
(a) CH 3 CH 2 CH 2 CH 2 CH 3 (g)3,5-diethyl-1-cyclohexene
(h)1-methyl-2-pentylcyclopentane
(b) CH CH CH
3 2 3 Section Review 13.1: 5.(a)organic (b)organic (c)inorganic
CH 3 (d)inorganic (e)organic (f)inorganic (g)organic
(h)inorganic 13.3: 1.(a)alkane, alkene, alkyne
(c) CH 3 CH CH 3 2.meth (1), eth (2), prop (3), but (4), pent (5), hex (6),
(d) CH CH CH CH hept (7), oct (8), non (9), dec (10) 4.(a)3-ethyl-2,4-
3 2 2 3
dimethylhexane (b)2,4,4-trimethyl-1-pentene
28. Draw the complete, condensed, and line (c)4-ethyl-3-propyl-1-hexyne
structural diagrams for 2,3,4-trimethylpentane. (d)2-ethyl-3,4,5,6-tetramethyl-1-cycloheptene
Discuss the main advantange of each type of 6.(a)propyne, cyclopropene (b)pentane, 2-methylbutane,
structural diagram. 2,2-dimethylpropane (c)1-pentene, cis-2-pentene,
trans-2-pentene, 2-methyl-2-butene, 2-methyl-1-butene,
cyclopentane 13.4: 1.(a)boiling point
(b)fractional distillation
Chapter 13 The Chemistry of Hydrocarbons • MHR 575
576
Energy Trapped
in Hydrocarbons
T
Chapter Preview
he whole world runs on energy—and so do you! Fossil fuels provide
14.1 Formation and
energy to power cars and heat buildings. Food provides energy to keep
Combustion Reactions
your body alive and warm. Both sources of energy come from organic
14.2 Thermochemical
compounds, such as hydrocarbons, sugars, and proteins.
Equations
Green plants, algae, and plankton trap the Sun’s energy through the
14.3 Measuring Energy
process of photosynthesis. After these organisms die, they are broken
Changes
down by natural processes. Their remains accumulate on Earth’s surface.
In some areas, these remains build up in thick layers, which are eventual- 14.4 The Technology of Heat
Measurement
ly covered by rock and soil. Under certain conditions, over billions of
years, pressure changes these layers into something new: fossil fuels. 14.5 The Impact of Petroleum
Products
Fossil fuels (such as coal, natural gas, and petroleum) are fuels that are
made from fossilized organic materials. The trapped energy from the Sun
is still present in fossil fuels. To use this energy, we need to extract it.
Combustion, or burning, is the most common way to extract energy from
fossil fuels.
In this chapter, you will explore the ways in which our society obtains
energy from fossil fuels. You will get a chance to measure exactly how
much energy is obtained from an organic substance by doing your own
Concepts and Skills
combustion reaction. As well, you will learn how dangerous incomplete
You Will Need
combustion reactions can be.
Before you begin this chapter,
review the following concepts
and skills:
spark plug
fuel, air (cid:2) explaining bonding in
mixture molecular compounds
(Chapter 3, section 3.3)
(cid:2) writing and balancing
chemical equations for
exhaust gases
combustion occurring different reactions
here converts fuel (Chapter 4, section 4.1)
into energy (cid:2) significant digits
(Chapter 1, section 1.2)
Fossil fuels take
millions of years to (cid:2) problem solving in gas laws
accumulate. They (Chapter 12, section 12.3)
are burned in min- (cid:2) naming and drawing
utes by the internal aliphatic compounds
combustion engine (Chapter 13, section 13.2)
of a car. How have
fossil fuels changed
your life? How long
do you think our
supplies of fossil
fuels will last?
Chapter 14 Energy Trapped in Hydrocarbons • MHR 577
14.1 Formation and
Combustion Reactions
Section Preview/ One of our most common uses of hydrocarbons is as fuel. (See Figure
Specific Expectations 14.1.) The combustion of fossil fuels gives us the energy we need to travel
and to keep warm in cold climates. Fossil fuel combustion is also an
In this section, you will
important source of energy in the construction and manufacturing indus-
(cid:2) writebalanced chemical
tries. As well, many power plants burn natural gas when generating
equations for the complete
and incomplete combustion electricity. Even goldsmiths use hydrocarbons, such as butane, as a heat
of hydrocarbons source when crafting gold jewellery. At home, we often burn fossil fuels,
(cid:2) performan experiment such as natural gas, to cook our food.
to produce and burn a How do we get energy from these compounds? In this section, you
hydrocarbon will learn how complete and incomplete combustion can be expressed as
(cid:2) recognizethe importance of chemical equations. Combustion in the presence of oxygen is a chemical
hydrocarbons as fuels and property of all hydrocarbons. (In Chapter 13, you learned about some
as precursors for the pro- physical properties of hydrocarbons, such as boiling point and solubility.)
duction of petrochemicals
(cid:2) identifythe risks and
benefits of the uses of
hydrocarbons, for society
and the environment
(cid:2) communicateyour under-
standing of the following
terms: complete combustion,
incomplete combustion
Figure 14.1 How are fossil fuels being used in these photographs?
578 MHR • Unit 5 Hydrocarbons and Energy
Chemistry Bulletin
Lamp Oil and the Petroleum Age Gesner distilled this oil again, and then
treated it with sulfuric acid and calcium oxide.
Abraham Gesner was born in 1797 near
Finally he distilled the oil once more.
Cornwallis, Nova Scotia. Although Gesner
By 1853, Gesner had perfected his process.
became a medical doctor, he was much more
In New York, he helped to start the North
interested in fossils. Gesner was fascinated by
American Kerosene Gas Light Company.
hydrocarbon substances, such as coal, asphal-
Gesner distinguished between three grades
tum (asphalt), and bitumen. These substances
of kerosene: grades A, B, and C. Grade C, he
were formed long ago from fossilized plants,
said, was the best lamp oil. Grades A and B
algae, fish, and animals.
could also be burned in lamps, but they were
When Gesner was a young man, the main
dangerous because they could cause explosions
light sources available were fire, candles, and
and fires.
whale oil lamps. Gesner had made several
Although Gesner never knew, his grades
trips to Trinidad. He began to experiment with
A and B kerosene became even more useful
asphaltum, a semisolid hydrocarbon from
than the purer grade C. These grades were
Trinidad’s famous “pitch lake.” In 1846, while
later produced from crude oil, or petroleum,
giving a lecture in Prince Edward Island, he
and given a new name: gasoline!
startled his audience by lighting a lamp that
Gesner laid the groundwork for the
was filled with a fuel he had distilled from
entire petroleum industry. All the basics of
asphaltum. Gesner’s lamp fuel gave more light
later petroleum refining can be found in his
and produced less smoke than any other lamp
technology.
fuel the audience had ever seen used.
Gesner needed a more easily obtainable
Making Connections
raw material to make his new lamp fuel. He
tried a solid, black, coal-like bitumen from 1. In the early nineteenth century, whales
were hunted extensively for their oil,
Albert County, New Brunswick. This sub-
which was used mainly as lamp fuel. When
stance, called albertite, worked better than
kerosene became widely available, the
any other substance that Gesner had tested.
demand for whale oil decreased. Find out
Making Kerosene what effect this had on whalers and whales.
One residue from Gesner’s distillation process 2. How do you think the introduction of
was a type of wax. Therefore, he called his kerosene as a lamp oil changed people’s
lamp fuel kerosolain, from the Greek word for lives at the time? What conclusions can
“wax oil.” He soon shortened the name to you draw about the possible impact of
kerosene. To produce kerosene, Gesner heated technology?
chunks of albertite in a retort (a distilling ves-
sel with a long downward-bending neck). As
the albertite was heated, it gave off vapours.
The vapours passed into the neck of the retort,
condensed into liquids, and trickled down into
a holding tank. Once Gesner had finished the
first distillation, he let the tank’s contents stand
for several hours. This allowed water and solid
to settle to the bottom. Then he drew off the oil
that remained on top.
Chapter 14 Energy Trapped in Hydrocarbons • MHR 579
Complete and Incomplete Combustion
During a typical combustion reaction, an element or a compound reacts
with oxygen to produce oxides of the element (or elements) found in the
compound. Figure 14.2 shows an example of a combustion reactions.
Hydrocarbon compounds will burn in the presence of air to produce
oxides. This is a chemical property of all hydrocarbons. Complete
combustion occurs if enough oxygen is present. A hydrocarbon that
undergoes complete combustion produces carbon dioxide and water
vapour. The following equation shows the complete combustion of
propane. (See also Figure 14.3.)
C H +5O → 3CO +4H O
3 8(g) 2(g) 2(g) 2 (g)
If you burn a fuel, such as propane, in a barbecue, you want complete
combustion to occur. Complete combustion ensures that you are getting
maximum efficiency from the barbecue. More importantly, toxic gases
can result from incomplete combustion: combustion that occurs when not
Figure 14.2 Sour gas, H 2 S (g) , is enough oxygen is present. During incomplete combustion, other products
sometimes “flared off” (burned)
(besides carbon dioxide and water) can form. The equation below shows
from an oil well. This combustion
the incomplete combustion of propane. Note that unburned carbon, C ,
produces sulfur dioxide gas, (s)
and carbon monoxide, CO , are produced as well as carbon dioxide
which reacts with the water in (g)
the atmosphere to produce acid and water.
rain. Oil companies are now 2C H +7O → 2C +2CO +2CO +8H O
3 8(g) 2(g) (s) (g) 2(g) 2 (g)
making an effort to reduce this
Figure 14.4 shows another example of incomplete combustion.
type of pollution.
Go back to the equation for the complete combustion of propane. Notice
that the mole ratio of oxygen to propane for the complete combustion
(5 mol oxygen to 1 mol propane) is higher than the mole ratio for the
incomplete combustion (7 mol oxygen to 2 mol propane, or 3.5 mol oxy-
gen to 1 mol propane). These ratios show that the complete combustion
of propane used up more oxygen than the incomplete combustion. In
fact, the incomplete combustion probably occurred because not enough
oxygen was present. You just learned that incomplete combustion pro-
duces poisonous carbon monoxide. This is why you should never operate
a gas barbecue or gas heater indoors, where there is less oxygen available.
This is also why you should make sure that any natural gas or oil-burning
furnaces and appliances in your home are working at peak efficiency, to
reduce the risk of incomplete combustion. Carbon monoxide detectors are
a good safeguard. They warn you if there is dangerous carbon monoxide
in your home, due to incomplete combustion.
Figure 14.4 The yellow flame of
this candle indicates that incom- Balancing Combustion Equations
plete combustion is occurring.
Have you ever seen a construction worker
Carbon, C , emits light energy in
(s)
the yellow wavelength region of using an oxyacetylene torch? (See Figure
the visible spectrum. 14.6.) A brilliant white light comes from
the torch as it cuts through steel. The
intense heat that is associated with this
flame comes from the combustion of
ethyne, a very common alkyne. Ethyne
is also known as acetylene.
Figure 14.3 Propane burning in a propane torch:
A blue flame indicates that complete combustion
is occurring.
580 MHR • Unit 5 Hydrocarbons and Energy
How do you write the balanced equation for the complete combustion of
acetylene (ethyne)? Complete hydrocarbon combustion reactions follow a
general format:
hydrocarbon+oxygen → carbondioxide+watervapour
You can use this general format for the complete combustion of any
hydrocarbon, no matter how large or how small. For example, both
acetylene and propane burn completely to give carbon dioxide and water
vapour. Each hydrocarbon, however, produces different amounts, or mole
ratios, of carbon dioxide and water.
You have seen, written, and balanced several types of reaction
equations so far in this textbook. In the following sample problem, you
will learn an easy way to write and balance hydrocarbon combustion
equations.
Sample Problem
Complete Combustion of Acetylene
Problem
Write the balanced equation for the complete combustion of
acetylene (ethyne).
What Is Required?
You need to write the equation. Then you need to balance the atoms
of the reactants and the products.
What Is Given?
You know that acetylene (ethyne) and oxygen are the reactants. Since
the reaction is a complete combustion reaction, carbon dioxide and
water vapour are the products.
Plan Your Strategy
Step 1 Write the equation.
Step 2 Balance the carbon atoms first.
Step 3 Balance the hydrogen atoms next.
Step 4 Balance the oxygen atoms last.
Act on Your Strategy
Step 1 Write the chemical formulas and states for the reactants and
products.
ethyne + oxygen → carbon dioxide + water vapour
C H + O → CO + H O
2 2(g) 2(g) 2(g) 2 (g)
Step 2 Balance the carbon atoms first.
C H +O → 2CO +H O
2 2(g) 2(g) 2(g) 2 (g)
(2 carbons) (2 carbons)
Continued ...
Chapter 14 Energy Trapped in Hydrocarbons • MHR 581
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 581
Step 3 Balance the hydrogen atoms next.
C H +O → 2CO +H O
2 2(g) 2(g) 2(g) 2 (g)
(2 hydrogens) (2 hydrogens)
Step 4 Balance the oxygen atoms last.
The product coefficients are now set. Therefore, count the total num-
ber of oxygen atoms on the product side. Then place an appropriate
coefficient in front of the reactant oxygen.
C H +?O → 2CO +H O
2 2(g) 2(g) 2(g) 2 (g)
(4+1 oxygens)
You end up with an odd number of oxygen atoms on the product
side of the equation. When this happens, use a fractional coefficient
so that the reactant oxygen balances. Here you have
C 2 H 2(g) + 5 2 O 2(g) → 2CO 2(g) +H 2 O (g)
You may prefer to balance the equation with whole numbers. If so,
multiply everything by a factor that is equivalent to the denominator
of the fraction. Since the fractional coefficient of O has a 2 in the
2(g)
denominator, multiply all the coefficients by 2 to get whole number
coefficients.
2C H +5O → 4CO +2H O
2 2(g) 2(g) 2(g) 2 (g)
Check Your Solution
The same number of carbon atoms appear on both sides of the
equation.
The same number of hydrogen atoms appear on both sides of the
equation.
The same number of oxygen atoms appear on both sides of the
equation.
Sample Problem
Incomplete Combustion of 2,2,4-Trimethylpentane
Problem
2,2,4-trimethylpentane is a major component of gasoline.
Write one possible equation for the incomplete combustion of
2,2,4-trimethylpentane.
What Is Required?
You need to write the equation for the incomplete combustion of
2,2,4-trimethylpentane. Then you need to balance the atoms of the
reactants and the products. For an incomplete combustion reaction,
more than one balanced equation is possible.
Continued ...
582 MHR • Unit 5 Hydrocarbons and Energy
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 582
What is given?
You know that 2,2,4-trimethylpentane and oxygen are the reactants.
Since the reaction is an incomplete combustion reaction, the
products are unburned carbon, carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide,
and water vapour.
Plan Your Strategy
Draw the structural diagram for 2,2,4-trimethylpentane to find
out how many hydrogen and oxygen atoms it has. Then write the
equation and balance the atoms. There are many carbon-containing
products but only one hydrogen-containing product, water.
Therefore, you need to balance the hydrogen atoms first. Next
balance the carbon atoms, and finally the oxygen atoms.
Act on Your Strategy
CH CH
3 3
CH C CH CH CH +O → C+CO+CO +H O
3 2 3 2 2 2
CH
3
(C H )
8 18
Count the carbon and hydrogen atoms, and balance the equation.
Different coefficients are possible for the carbon-containing product
molecules. Follow the steps you learned in the previous sample
problem to obtain the balanced equation shown below.
CH CH
3 3
CH C CH CH CH + 15 O → 4C+2CO+2CO +9H O
3 2 3 2 2 2 2
CH
3
or
CH CH
3 3
2 CH C CH CH CH +15O → 8C+4CO+4CO +18H O
3 2 3 2 2 2
CH
3
Check Your Solution
The same number of carbon atoms appear on both sides of the
equation.
The same number of hydrogen atoms appear on both sides of the
equation.
The same number of oxygen atoms appear on both sides of the
equation.
Continued ...
Chapter 14 Energy Trapped in Hydrocarbons • MHR 583
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 583
Practice Problems
1. The following equation shows the combustion of
3-ethyl-2,5-dimethylheptane:
C H +17O → 11CO +12H O
11 24 2 2 2
(a) Does this equation show complete or incomplete combustion?
(b) Draw the structural formula for 3-ethyl-2,5-dimethylheptane.
2.(a) Write a balanced equation for the complete combustion of
pentane, C H .
5 12
(b) Write a balanced equation for the complete combustion of
octane, C H .
8 18
(c) Write two possible balanced equations for the incomplete
combustion of ethane, C H
2 6
3.(a) The flame of a butane lighter is usually yellow, indicating
incomplete combustion of the gas. Write a balanced chemical
equation to represent the incomplete combustion of butane
in a butane lighter. Use the condensed structural formula
for butane.
(b) If you supplied enough oxygen, the butane would burn with
a blue flame. Write a balanced chemical equation for the
complete combustion of butane.
4. The paraffin wax in a candle burns with a yellow flame. If it had
sufficient oxygen to burn with a blue flame, it would burn rapidly
and release a lot of energy. It might even be dangerous! Write the
balanced chemical equation for the complete combustion of
candle wax, C H .
25 52(s)
5. 4-propyldecane burns to give solid carbon, water vapour, carbon
monoxide, and carbon dioxide.
(a) Draw the structural formula for 4-propyldecane.
(b) Write two different balanced equations for the reaction
described in this problem.
(c) Name the type of combustion. Explain.
Large quantities of acetylene are produced each year by an inexpensive
process that combines calcium carbide and water. In the next investiga-
tion, you will use this process to produce your own acetylene.
584 MHR • Unit 5 Hydrocarbons and Energy
S K I L L F O C U S
Predicting
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
The Formation and Communicating results
Combustion of Acetylene
In this investigation, you will produce acetylene matches (or Bunsen burner and splints)
(ethyne) gas by mixing solid calcium carbide 1 or 2 calcium carbide chips
with water. phenolphthalein indicator
CaC 2(s) +2H 2 O ((cid:2)) → C 2 H 2(g) +Ca(OH) 2(s) limewater
medicine dropper
Then you will combine the acetylene with
distilled water
different quantities of air to determine the best
test tube tongs
reaction ratio for complete combustion. Make
sure that you follow all the safety precautions
Procedure
given in this investigation and by your teacher.
1. Make a table to record your observations.
Question Give your table a title.
What is the ideal ratio of fuel to air for the 2. Mark each test tube with a grease pencil to
1 1
complete combustion of acetylene (ethyne) gas? indicate one of the following volumes: , ,
2 3
1 1
, and . To find out where to mark the test
5 10
Prediction tube, measure the total length of the test tube
with a ruler. Then multiply the length by the
Air contains 20% oxygen, O . How much air do
2(g)
appropriate fraction. Measure the fraction
you think is needed for the complete combustion
from the bottom of the test tube.
of acetylene gas? Predict which proportion will
react best: 3. Fill the four test tubes completely with
• 1 acetylene to 1 air distilled water.
2 2
• 1 acetylene to 2 air 4. Invert the four test tubes in a 400 mL beaker,
3 3
half full of distilled water. Make sure that the
• 1 acetylene to 4 air
5 5 test tubes stay completely full.
• 1 acetylene to 9 air.
10 10 5. Add three to five drops of phenolphthalein to
the water in the beaker.
Safety Precautions
6. Using tweezers, drop a small chip of calcium
carbide into the water. CAUTION Do not touch
• Be careful of the flames from Bunsen burners. calcium carbide with your hands!
Check that there are no flammable solvents 7. Capture the gas that is produced by holding
close by. If your hair is long, tie it back. the test tube marked 1 over the calcium
2
Confine loose clothing. carbide chip. Fill the test tube to the 1 mark
2
with the gas. Remove the test tube from the
Materials beaker, still inverted. Let the water drain out.
Air will replace the water and mix with the
4 test tubes (100 mL)
gas in the test tube. Insert a rubber stopper.
4 rubber stoppers
Invert the test tube a few times to mix the
grease pencil
acetylene gas with the air in the test tube.
ruler
400 mL beaker
tweezers
Chapter 14 Energy Trapped in Hydrocarbons • MHR 585
8. Repeat step 7 with the other three test tubes. 12. Repeat steps 9 to 11 with the other test tubes
1 1 1
Fill each test tube to the volume that you in order: , , and then full.
3 5 10
1 1 1
marked on it: , , or . After filling each
3 5 10 13. Dispose of all chemical materials as instructed
test tube, remove it from the water and insert
by your teacher.
a rubber stopper.
Analysis
1. What happened to the phenolphthalein
acetylene gas indicator during the production of the gas?
Explain your observation. Note: phenolph-
thalein is an acid/base indicator.
2. What products may have formed during the
combustion of the gas? Support your answers
with experimental evidence. Note: Limewater
reacts with carbon dioxide to produce a milky
white solid.
Conclusions
3.(a) Write a balanced chemical equation for the
incomplete combustion of acetylene gas.
calcium carbide
(b) Write a balanced chemical equation for the
chip
complete combustion of acetylene gas.
4. The air that we breathe is approximately
20% oxygen. Think about the reaction you
just wrote for the complete combustion of
Figure 14.5
acetylene. Which ratio in this investigation
9. Invert the first test tube ( 1 full). Light a match ( 1 , 1 , 1 , or 1 ) allowed the closest amount
2 2 3 5 10
or a splint. Using test tube tongs, hold the test of oxygen needed for complete combustion?
tube inverted, and take out the stopper. Ignite Support your answer with calculations. Do
the gas in the test tube by holding the lighted the observations you made support your
match or splint near the mouth of the test answer? Explain.
tube. CAUTION If you are using a Bunsen
burner and wooden splints, take appropriate
Applications
safety precautions. Extinguish burning splints
5. An automobile engine requires a carburetor
by immersing them in water. Be aware of the
or fuel injector to mix the fuel with air. The
Bunsen burner flame. Make sure that long hair
fuel and air must be mixed in a particular
is tied back and loose clothing is confined.
ratio to achieve maximum efficiency in the
10. Immediately after the reaction in the test tube combustion of the fuel. What might happen
occurs, use the medicine dropper to add about if the fuel and air mixture is too rich (if there
1 mL of limewater to the test tube. Stopper is too much fuel)?
the test tube and shake it. CAUTION The
6. What does the limewater test indicate?
mouth of the test tube may be hot.
Write the balanced chemical equation for
11. Record your observations of the gas when it the limewater test. Hint: Limewater is a dilute
was ignited. Record your observations of what solution of calcium hydroxide. A carbonate
happened when you added the limewater. forms.
Describe any residue left on the test tube.
586 MHR • Unit 5 Hydrocarbons and Energy
In this section, you were introduced to the complete and incomplete com-
bustion of hydrocarbons. You learned that the complete combustion of a
hydrocarbon produces water and carbon dioxide. You also learned that
the incomplete combustion of a hydrocarbon produces additional prod-
ucts, such as unburned carbon and dangerous carbon monoxide. In the
investigation, you had the chance to make and combust a hydrocarbon.
In the next section, you will learn about an important factor of
combustion reactions: energy. The combustion of hydrocarbons produces
a large amount of energy. This is why they are so useful as fuels. How can
you include energy as part of a combustion or other equation? How can
you calculate the energy released by fossil fuels? You will learn the
answers to these questions in the rest of this chapter.
Section Review
1 K/U What is the difference between incomplete and complete
hydrocarbon combustion reactions?
2 K/U Explain why you would usually write (g) for the state of the
product water in these combustion reactions. When might you identify
the state of water as liquid?
3 (a) K/U Write the balanced equation for the complete combustion
of heptane, C H .
7 16
(b) K/U Write a balanced equation for the incomplete combustion
of 1-pentene, C H .
5 10
4 K/U Natural gas is mainly methane gas. If you have a natural gas
furnace, stove, or water heater in your home, you must ensure that
these appliances are always running at peak efficiency. In other words,
the methane gas should undergo complete combustion so that carbon
monoxide is not produced. Write a balanced chemical equation
to show the complete combustion of methane gas. Write a second
balanced equation to show the incomplete combustion of methane gas.
5 C All hydrocarbons have the chemical property of combustion in
the presence of oxygen. How do the complete combustion reactions
of methane, ethane, and propane differ? How are they similar?
Hint: Compare the balanced equations for the complete combustion
of each.
6 I The complete combustion of ethane is given by the following
unbalanced equation:
C H +O → CO +H O
2 6(g) 2(g) 2(g) 2 (g)
(a) Balance this equation.
(b) If one mole of ethane is combusted, how many grams of water
vapour are produced?
(c) Assume that air contains 20% oxygen gas. What volume of air at
STP is needed for the complete combustion of one mole of ethane?
Chapter 14 Energy Trapped in Hydrocarbons • MHR 587
14.2 Thermochemical Equations
Section Preview/ In the last section, you learned about acetylene, an important fuel in our
Specific Expectations society (Figure 14.6). You balanced the equation for the complete combus-
tion of acetylene. You then produced acetylene in an investigation. What
In this section, you will
you did not consider, however, was the most useful product that our soci-
(cid:2) writethermochemical
ety gets from acetylene: heat energy. How can you represent the heat that
equations
is released during combustion as part of a chemical equation?
(cid:2) relatebond breaking and
For now, you will use the word “energy” to represent the heat in an
bond making to endothermic
and exothermic energy equation. In the next section, you will calculate numerical values for this
changes energy and use these energy values in chemical equations.
(cid:2) communicateyour under- In previous science courses, you studied reactions that involve a
standing of the following change in energy. Figure 14.7 reviews some important terms.
terms: exothermic,
thermochemical equation,
endothermic, bond energy physical or temperature of surroundings
chemical change increases
heat lost
EXOTHERMIC
by a process
heat gained
ENDOTHERMIC
by a process
physical or temperature of surroundings
chemical change decreases
Figure 14.7
An exothermic reaction gives off heat. Combustion reactions are
exothermic reactions because they produce heat. Since the energy is a
product of the reaction, it is shown on the product side of the equation.
The combustion of acetylene is a good example of an exothermic
reaction:
2C H +5O → 4CO +2H O +energy
2 2(g) 2(g) 2(g) 2 (g)
When the energy is written as part of the chemical equation, the equation
is called a thermochemical equation.
An endothermic reaction absorbs heat energy. Energy must be added
to the reactants for an endothermic reaction to occur. Since the energy is
needed as a reactant, it is shown on the reactant side of the equation.
Figure 14.6 The combustion Have you ever noticed that perfume or rubbing alcohol feels cool on
of acetylene (ethyne) in an your skin as it evaporates? The physical process of evaporation is
oxyacetylene torch produces
endothermic. Energy is taken away from the surface of your skin, so you
the highest temperature (about
feel cool. The energy is added to the liquid alcohol or perfume solvent to
3300°C) of any known mixture
make it a gas. The following equation shows the endothermic evaporation
of combustible gases. Metal
workers can use the heat from of isopropanol (a type of rubbing alcohol) from a liquid to a gas:
this combustion to cut through energy+CH 3 CHOHCH 3((cid:2)) → CH 3 CHOHCH 3(g)
most metal alloys.
How can you tell that this process is not a chemical reaction?
588 MHR • Unit 5 Hydrocarbons and Energy
Bond Breaking and Bond Making
The formation of acetylene (ethyne) gas from its elements is an endother-
mic reaction. The combustion of acetylene, however, is exothermic. In (a)Use a molecular model kit
to model the formation of
fact, it releases enough heat energy to cut steel! How can you explain
butane from its elements:
the formation and combustion of acetylene in terms of bonds being
4C +5H → CH
broken and made? The answer to this question is fundamental to your (s) 2(g) 4 10(g)
Compare the bonds you
understanding of the energy changes that occur in chemical reactions.
break with the bonds
you form.
(b)Using Table 14.1, estimate
the energy needed to
bond breaking
eenneerrggyy break the bonds of
5 mol of hydrogen gas.
endothermic
Compare this energy
with the energy produced
molecule separate atoms by making the bonds of
1 mol of butane gas.
Predict whether the
formation of butane
is exothermic or
endothermic.
bond making
eenneerrggyy (c)Look up “heat of
formation” in a reference
exothermic
book such as The CRC
Handbook of Chemistry
and Physicsto find the
separate atoms molecule
actual energy of this
reaction. Is it exothermic
Figure 14.8 This illustration shows bonds being broken and made during a chemical (negative) or endothermic
reaction. If the bonds are strong, there is a large change in energy. If the bonds are (positive)?
weak, there is a small change in energy.
Note:Since bond energies
are only a way of estimating
A chemical bond is caused by the attraction between the electrons and the energy produced by the
nuclei of two atoms. Energy is needed to break a chemical bond, just like formation of a compound, your
energy is needed to break a link in a chain. On the other hand, making a answer will not agree with the
recognized value. Look at the
chemical bond releases energy. The strength of a bond depends on how
Thinking Critically question in
much energy is needed to break the bond. (see Figure 14.8.)
the Section Review to find out
A specific amount of energy is needed to break each type of bond.
how to estimate the energy of
When the same type of bond is formed, the same specific amount of
a formation reaction more
energy is released. The energy that is absorbed or released when breaking accurately.
or making a bond is called the bond energy. Bond energy is usually
measured in kilojoules (kJ). Table 14.1 shows some average bond energies.
From the table, you can see that 347 kJ of energy is needed to break
Table 14.1 Average Bond Energies
one mole of C—C bonds in a sample of propane or any other carbon.
Similarly, 347 kJ of energy is released if one mole of C—C bonds forms in Average energy
Type of bond (kJ/mol)
a sample of butane.
Every chemical reaction involves both bond breaking (reactant bonds H H 432
are broken) and bond making (product bonds are formed). Since there are C C 347
different types of bonds inside the reactant and product molecules, the C C 614
bond breaking and bond making energies are different. This results in a C C 839
net amount of energy for each reaction. C H 413
The next sample problem compares bond breaking and bond making C O 358
in a combustion reaction.
C O 745
O H 467
O O (in O ) 498
2
Chapter 14 Energy Trapped in Hydrocarbons • MHR 589
Sample Problem
The Combustion of Acetylene
Problem
Consider bond breaking and bond making to explain why the
combustion of acetylene is exothermic. Then write a thermochemical
equation for the reaction, using the following balanced equation:
2C H +5O → 4CO +2H O
2 2(g) 2(g) 2(g) 2 (g)
What Is Required?
You need to describe what happens when the reactant bonds are
broken and what happens when the product bonds are formed. You
need to compare the energy that is absorbed when the reactant bonds
are broken with the energy that is released when the product bonds
are formed. Then you need to write a thermochemical equation,
using the word “energy.”
What Is Given?
You know that energy is absorbed when bonds are broken and
energy is released when bonds are formed. You also know that the
equation is exothermic. (Overall, energy is released in this reaction.)
Plan Your Strategy
PROBLEM TIP
Step 1 Describe what happens when the reactant bonds are broken.
• If the energy that is need-
Step 2 Describe what happens when the product bonds are formed.
ed to break the reactant
bonds is greater than the Step 3 Compare the energy that is absorbed when the reactant bonds
energy that is released are broken with the energy that is released when the product
when the product bonds
bonds are formed.
form, the reaction is
endothermic. Step 4 Write the thermochemical equation, using the word “energy.”
• If the energy that is need-
ed to break the reactant Act on Your Strategy
bonds is less than the
Step 1 The reactant bonds are broken. This process absorbs enough
energy that is released
energy to split the reactants into separate atoms.
when the product bonds
form, the reaction is
exothermic.
bond
• I
e
f
n
t
d
h
o
e
t h
re
e
a
rm
ct
i
i
c
o
,
n
t h
is
e energy
eenneerrggyy
1 + 2 C 2 H 2 + 5 O 2 4 C + 4 H + 10 O
breaking
is on the left side of the
equation.
• If the reaction is exother-
mic, the energy is on the
right side of the equation.
separate
molecules atoms
Continued ...
590 MHR • Unit 5 Hydrocarbons and Energy
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 590
Step 2 The product bonds are made. This process releases energy as
the product molecules are formed.
bond eenneerrggyy
4 C + 4 H + 10 O 4 CO 2 + 2 H 2 O +
2
making
separate
molecules
atoms
Step 3 The combustion of acetylene is exothermic. Therefore, the
energy that is used when the reactant bonds are broken must
be less than the energy that is released when the product
bonds are formed.
eenneerrggyy
eenneerrggyy
1
2
Step 4 The thermochemical equation is
2C H +5O → 4CO +2H O +energy
2 2(g) 2(g) 2(g) 2 (g)
Check Your Solution
The equation is exothermic, so the energy is on the product side of
the equation.
Practice Problems
PROBLEM TIP
Remember that different types
6. The formation of propane from its elements is an exothermic
of bonds have different bond
reaction. The combustion of propane is also exothermic.
energies. The bonds that are
(a) Write the balanced thermochemical equation for the formation broken in the reactants are dif-
of propane. ferent from the bonds that are
formed in the products. The net
(b) Write the balanced thermochemical equation for the
energy for the entire reaction
combustion of propane. (The balanced equation is on
is the difference between
page 580.) energy and energy .
1 2
(c) Consider the combustion of propane. Compare the energies
of bond breaking and bond making to explain why the reaction
is exothermic.
7.(a) Explain why the formation of ethene, C H , from its elements
2 4(g)
is endothermic, while its combustion is exothermic.
(b) Write the balanced thermochemical equations for the formation
and the combustion of ethene.
Chapter 14 Energy Trapped in Hydrocarbons • MHR 591
So far, you have been using the word “energy” in thermochemical
equations to represent the net energy. It is preferable to have a numerical
value for the amount of energy when talking about endothermic and
exothermic processes. In the next section, you will see how the net
energy in a process can be measured. You will even measure some energy
values yourself!
Section Review
1 K/U Choose the correct term in each box to describe the given
thermochemical equation. Name the organic compounds.
(a)
endothermic/exothermic
energy+2C +H C H
(s) 2(g) 2 2(g)
net energy is absorbed/released
(b)
endothermic/exothermic
CH +2O CO +2H O +energy
4(g) 2(g) 2(g) 2 (g)
net energy is absorbed/released
2 K/U If an overall reaction is endothermic, which process involves
more energy: breaking the reactant bonds or making the product
bonds?
3 (a) C When energy is absorbed in a reaction to break the bonds in the
reactants, where does the energy go?
(b) C When energy is released to form the bonds in the products,
where does the energy go?
4 MC Flour, sugar, eggs, and milk are combined and baked to produce
cookies.
(a) Is this reaction exothermic or endothermic? Explain.
(b) Write a word equation that includes the word “energy” to describe
this reaction.
5 K/U In the MindStretch on page 589, you used bond energies to
estimate the energy of a reaction. Your estimated value was very
different from the actual value, however. This is because solid carbon
must become gaseous before reacting to form a hydrocarbon. The
change of state takes additional energy.
C +715kJ → C
(s) (g)
Use the information above, along with the bond energies in Table 14.1,
to estimate the energy needed to form acetylene, C H , from its
2 2(g)
elements.
2C +H → C H
(s) 2(g) 2 2(g)
Remember to consider the breaking of the H—H bonds, and the
forming of the C—H and C———C bonds. Compare your answer with the
recognized value, 226.7 kJ/mol.
592 MHR • Unit 5 Hydrocarbons and Energy
Measuring Energy Changes 14.3
You have probably had plenty of experience with heating and cooling Section Preview/
materials around you. You know how to cool yourself by taking a cold Specific Expectations
shower. You know how to heat hot chocolate on a stove. However, have
In this section, you will
you ever stopped to think about what energy changes are occuring?
(cid:2) explainhow mass, specific
Where does the energy come from, and where does it go?
heat capacity, and change in
temperature of an object
determine how much heat
the object gains or loses
(cid:2) solveproblems using the
equation Q = mc∆T
(cid:2) communicateyour under-
standing of the following
terms: thermal energy, heat,
temperature, ∆T, specific
heat capacity
Figure 14.9 Suppose that you are very thirsty, but the tap water is not cold enough.
How can you get the water as cold as you want it to be? Your experience tells you to add
ice to the water. How does the ice cool the water?
Any time that something is cooled or heated, a change in thermal energy
occurs. Thermal energy is the kinetic energy of particles of matter. In a
glass of tap water with ice (as shown in Figure 14.9), the water started out
warmer than the ice. Energy was transferred from the water to the ice. As
the ice absorbed the energy, the ice melted. As the water lost energy, the
water cooled.
These examples involve heat. Heat is the transfer of thermal energy
between objects with different temperatures. In this section, you will
What other forms of energy
study how to measure the quantity of thermal energy that is transferred
can you think of? Make a list,
during a process involving an energy change.
starting with thermal energy.
Important Factors in Energy Measurement
How can you measure the change in energy when you add ice to water?
Temperature is a measure of the average kinetic energy of a system. You
have already had experience using a thermometer to measure temperature.
How does drinking hot
By placing a thermometer in the water, you can monitor the drop in
chocolate warm you? Describe
temperature when the ice is added. Temperature is an important factor the energy transfer that takes
in heat energy changes. What other factors are important? Work through place.
the following ThoughtLab to find out.
Chapter 14 Energy Trapped in Hydrocarbons • MHR 593
ThoughtLab Factors in Heat Transfer
Two students performed an experiment to
determine what factors need to be considered
when determining the quantity of thermal energy
lost or gained by a substance undergoing an
energy change. They set up their experiment
as follows.
Part A
The students placed two different masses of
water, at the same initial temperature, in separate
Different Liquids
beakers. They placed an equal mass of ice (from
the same freezer) in each beaker. Then they Beaker 1 (canola oil) 2 (water)
monitored the temperature of each beaker. Mass of liquid (g) 60.0 60.0
Their results are listed in the table below.
Initial temperature of liquid (˚C) 35.0 35.0
Mass of ice added (g) 10.0 10.0
Final temperature of mixture (˚C) 5.2 16.9
Temperature change (˚C) 29.8 18.1
Procedure
1. For each part of the experiment, identify
(a) the variable that was changed by the
students (the manipulated variable)
(b) the variable that changed as a result of
Different Masses of Water
changing the manipulated variable (the
Beaker 1 2
responding variable)
Mass of water (g) 60.0 120.0 (c) the variables that were kept constant to
Initial temperature of water (˚C) 26.5 26.5 ensure a fair test (the controlled variables)
Mass of ice added (g) 10.0 10.0 2. Interpret the students’ results by answering
the following questions.
Final temperature of mixture (˚C) 9.7 17.4
(a) If ice is added to two different masses of
Temperature change (˚C) 16.8 9.1
water, how does the temperature change?
(b) If ice is added to two different liquids, how
Part B does the temperature change?
The students placed equal masses of canola oil
Analysis
and water, at the same initial temperature, in sep-
arate beakers. They placed equal masses of ice Think about your interpretation of the students’
(from the same freezer) in the two beakers. Then experiment and the discussion prior to this
they monitored the temperature of each beaker. ThoughtLab. What are three important factors to
Their results are listed in the following table. consider when measuring the thermal energy
change of a substance?
The ThoughtLab gave you some insight into the factors that are important
when measuring energy changes. How can you use these factors to calcu-
late the quantity of heat that is transferred? First you must examine each
factor and determine its relationship to heat transfer. You will begin with
the most obvious factor: temperature. Then you will look at how the mass
of a substance affects the quantity of thermal energy it can store. Finally,
you will look at the type of substance and how it affects heat transfer.
594 MHR • Unit 5 Hydrocarbons and Energy
Temperature
In the summer, your body temperature is fairly close to
the temperature of your surroundings. You do not need
to wear extra clothing to keep warm. When winter hits
with fierce winds and cold temperatures, however, dressing
warmly becomes a necessity. The temperature of your sur-
roundings is now much colder than your body temperature.
Heat is transferred from your body to your surroundings,
making you feel cold. The extra clothing helps to minimize
heat loss from your body. (See Figure 14.10.)
Temperature is directly related to heat transfer. A large
change in temperature indicates a large energy change.
Figure 14.10 How do you con-
A small change in temperature indicates a small energy
trol the temperature of your body?
change. Therefore, temperature is an important factor when
calculating heat transfer. The temperature variable that is
used is the change in temperature. This is symbolized by ∆T.
Mass of Substance
Did you know that 70% of Earth’s surface is covered with water? This
enormous mass of water absorbs and releases tremendous amounts of
heat energy. Water makes our climate more moderate by absorbing heat
in hot weather and releasing heat in cold weather. The greater the mass
of the water, the greater the amount of heat it can absorb and release.
(Areas without much water, such as deserts, experience huge variations
in temperature.) Therefore, mass is directly related to heat transfer. Mass
is a variable in the calculation of heat energy. It is symbolized by a
lower-case m.
Type of Substance
Table 14.2 Specific Heat
In the ThoughtLab on page 594, you probably noticed that Capacities of Various Substances
the quantity of heat being transferred depends on the type
Specific heat capacity
of substance. When you added equal masses of ice to the Substance (J/g·˚C at 25˚C)
same mass of oil and water, the temperature change of the
Elements
oil was almost double the temperature change of the water.
aluminum 0.900
“Type of substance” cannot be used as a variable, however,
carbon (graphite) 0.711
when calculating energy changes. Instead, we use a
copper 0.385
variable that reflects the individual nature of different sub-
gold 0.129
stances: specific heat capacity. The specific heat capacity
hydrogen 14.267
of a substance is the quantity of energy, in joules (J), that is
required to change one gram (g) of the substance by one iron 0.444
degree Celsius (˚C). The specific heat capacity of a sub- Compounds
stance reflects how well the substance can store energy. ammonia (liquid) 4.70
A substance with a large specific heat capacity can absorb ethanol 2.46
and release more energy than a substance with a smaller water (solid) 2.01
specific heat capacity. The symbol that is used for specific water (liquid) 4.184
heat capacity is a lower-case c. The units are J/g·˚C.
water (gas) 2.01
The specific heat capacity of water is relatively large:
Other materials
4.184 J/g·˚C. This value helps to explain how water can
air 1.02
absorb and release enough energy to moderate Earth’s tem-
concrete 0.88
perature. Examine the values in Table 14.2. Notice that the
glass 0.84
specific heat capacities of most substances are much lower
granite 0.79
than the specific heat capacity of water.
wood 1.76
Chapter 14 Energy Trapped in Hydrocarbons • MHR 595
You have just considered three variables: change in temperature (∆T),
mass (m), and type of substance, which is characterized by specific heat
capacity (c). How can you combine these variables into a formula to
calculate heat transfer (Figure 14.11)?
heat energy mass change in temperature
(J) (g) (˚C or K)
specific heat capacity
(J/g. ˚C)
depends on
type of substance state of substance
Figure 14.11 Use this formula to calculate heat (Q) transfer.
How do you solve heat energy problems using Q = mc∆T? Go back to the
ThoughtLab. Some of the data in this ThoughtLab can be used to illustrate
the calculation of heat transfer, as shown below.
Sample Problem
Heat Transferred From Water to Ice
Problem
In the ThoughtLab on page 594, 10.0 g of ice was added to 60.0 g of
water. The initial temperature of the water was 26.5˚C. The final
temperature of the mixture was 9.7˚C. How much heat was lost by
the water?
What Is Required?
You need to calculate the quantity of heat (Q) that was lost by the
water.
What Is Given?
You know the mass of the water. You also know the initial and final
temperatures of the water.
Mass of water (m) = 60.0g
Initial temperature (T) = 26.5˚C
i
Final temperature (T) = 9.7˚C
f
Plan Your Strategy
Why does water have such a
You have enough information to solve this problem using Q = mc∆T.
high specific heat capacity?
Use the initial and final temperatures to calculate ∆T. You need the
Do some research to find out.
Hint: Water’s specific heat specific heat capacity (c) of liquid water. This is given in Table 14.2
capacity has something to do (4.184 J/g·˚C). Because you are only concerned with the water, you
with bonding. will not use the mass of the ice.
Continued ...
596 MHR • Unit 5 Hydrocarbons and Energy
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 596
Act on Your Strategy
Substitute the values into the following heat formula, and solve.
Remember that ∆T = T −T
f i
Q = mc∆T
= (60.0g)(4.184 J )(9.7˚C−26.5˚C)
g·˚C
= −4217.472(g)( J )(˚C)
g·˚C
= −4217.472J
= −4.22×103J(or −4.22kJ)
The water lost 4.22×103J of heat.
Check Your Solution
The water lost heat, so the heat value should be negative.
Heat is measured in joules or kilojoules. Make sure that the units
cancel out to give the appropriate unit for your answer.
Practice Problems
8. 100 g of ethanol at 25˚C is heated until it reaches 50˚C. How
much heat does the ethanol gain? Hint: Find the specific heat
capacity of ethanol in Table 14.2.
9. In Part A of the ThoughtLab on page 594, the students added ice
to 120.0 g of water in beaker 2. Calculate the heat lost by the
water. Use the information given for beaker 2, as well as specific
heat capacities in Table 14.2.
10. A beaker contains 50 g of liquid at room temperature. The beaker
is heated until the liquid gains 10˚C. A second beaker contains
100 g of the same liquid at room temperature. This beaker is also
heated until the liquid gains 10˚C. In which beaker does the
liquid gain the most thermal energy? Explain.
11. As the diagram on the next page illustrates, the sign of the heat
value tells you whether a substance has lost or gained heat ener-
gy. Consider the following descriptions. Write each heat value,
and give it the appropriate sign to indicate whether heat was lost
or gained.
(a) In Part A of the ThoughtLab on page 594, the ice gained the
heat that was lost by the water. When ice was added to 60.0 g
of water, it gained 4.22 kJ of energy. When ice was added to
120.0 g of water, it gained 4.6 kJ of energy.
Continued ...
Chapter 14 Energy Trapped in Hydrocarbons • MHR 597
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 597
heat lost
Math
LINK ∆T T − T
final initial
Heat values are often very
large. Therefore it is conven-
ient to use kilojoules (kJ) to heat gained
calculate heat. How does this
affect the units of the other
(b) When 2.0 L of water was heated over a campfire, the water
variables in the heat equation?
Does the specific heat capaci- gained 487 kJ of energy.
ty have to change? The follow- (c) A student baked a cherry pie and put it outside on a cold win-
ing diagram shows how units
ter day. There was a change of 290 kJ of heat energy in the pie.
must be modified in order to
end up with kilojoules.
In the Sample Problem, heat was lost by the water.
Q = m· c · (cid:2)T
Therefore the value of Q was negative. If the value
Units:→ k J = k g · 4.184 k J ˚C of Q is positive, this indicates that heat is gained
k g · ˚C
by a substance.
The heat equation Q = mc∆T can be rearranged
to solve for any of the variables. For example, in
mass-must be kg Specific heat capacity
• must have kJ (top) and kg (bottom) Part B of the ThoughtLab on page 594, ice was
• Since ”k“ is on top andbottom, the added to both canola oil and water. How can you
number stays the same use the information given in Part B to calculate
the specific heat capacity of the canola oil?
Sample Problem
Calculating Specific Heat Capacity
Problem
Calculate the specific heat capacity of canola oil, using the
information given in Part B of the ThoughtLab on page 594. Note
that the ice gained 4.0×103 J of energy when it came in contact
with the canola oil.
What Is Required?
You need to calculate the specific heat capacity (c) of the canola oil.
What Is Given?
From the ThoughtLab, you know the mass (m) and the initial and
final temperatures of the canola oil.
Mass of oil (m) = 60.0g
Initial temperature (T) = 35.0˚C
i
Final temperature (T) = 5.2˚C
f
Figure 14.12 Canola oil is
a vegetable oil that is used in
salads and cooking. Continued ...
598 MHR • Unit 5 Hydrocarbons and Energy
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 598
You also know the quantity of heat gained by the ice. This must be
the same as the heat lost by the oil.
Heat gained by the ice = Heat lost by the canola oil = 4.0×103 J
Plan Your Strategy
Rearrange the equation Q = mc∆T to solve for c. Then substitute the
values for Q, m, and ∆T (T −T) into the equation.
f i
Act on Your Strategy
c = Q
m∆T
=
−4.0×103J
(60.0g)(5.2˚C-35.0˚C)
= 2.2437 J
g·˚C
= 2.24 J
g·˚C
Check Your Solution
The specific heat capacity should be positive, and it is. It should
J
have the units .
g·˚C
Practice Problems
12. Solve the equation Q = mc∆T for the following quantities.
(a) m
(b) c
(c) ∆T
13. You know that ∆T = T −T . Combine this equation with the
f i
heat equation, Q = mc∆T, to solve for the following quantities.
(a) T (in terms of Q, m, c, and T )
i f
(b) T (in terms of Q, m, c, and T )
f i
14. How much heat is required to raise the temperature of 789 g
of liquid ammonia, from 25.0˚C to 82.7˚C?
15. A solid substance has a mass of 250.00 g. It is cooled by 25.00˚C
and loses 4937.50 J of heat. What is its specific heat capacity?
Look at Table 14.2 to identify the substance.
16. A piece of metal with a mass of 14.9 g is heated to 98.0˚C. When
the metal is placed in 75.0 g of water at 20.0˚C, the temperature
of the water rises by 28.5˚C. What is the specific heat capacity of
the metal?
17. A piece of gold (c = 0.129 J/g˚C) with mass of 45.5 g and a
temperature of 80.5˚C is dropped into 192 g of water at 15.0˚C.
What is the final temperature of the system? (Hint: Use the
equation Q = −Q .)
w g
Chapter 14 Energy Trapped in Hydrocarbons • MHR 599
In this section, you learned that temperature, mass, and type of substance
are all important factors to consider when measuring heat change. You
saw how these factors can be combined to produce the heat equation:
Q = mc∆T
In the next section, you will learn how to use a calorimeter to measure
heat change. You will perform a heat transfer investigation of your own.
Using the knowledge you have gained in this section, you will then calcu-
late the specific heat capacity. As well, you will see why the Procedure
that was used in the ThoughtLab could be improved.
Section Review
1 K/U Define the term “heat.”
2 I What are three important factors to consider when measuring
heat energy?
3 I In Part B of the ThoughtLab, 60.0 g of water was in beaker 2. The
initial temperature of the water was 35.0˚C, and the final temperature
was 16.9˚C.
(a) Calculate the heat that was lost by the water in beaker 2.
(b) Where did the heat go?
4 I When iron nails are hammered into wood, friction causes the nails
to heat up.
(a) Calculate the heat that is gained by a 5.2 g iron nail as it changes
from 22.0˚C to 38.5˚C. (See Table 14.2.)
(b) Calculate the heat that is gained by a 10.4 g iron nail as it changes
from 22.0˚C to 38.5˚C.
(c) Calculate the heat that is gained by the 5.2 g nail if its temperature
changes from 22.0˚C to 55.0˚C.
5 (a) I A 23.9 g silver spoon is put in a cup of hot chocolate. It takes
0.343 kJ of energy to change the temperature of the spoon from
24.5˚C to 85.0˚C. What is the specific heat capacity of solid silver?
(b) I The same amount of heat energy, 0.343 kJ, is gained by 23.9 g of
liquid water. What is the temperature change of the water?
6 C The specific heat capacity of aluminum is 0.902 J/g˚C. The specific
heat capacity of copper is 0.389 J/g˚C. The same amount of heat is
applied to equal masses of these two metals. Which metal increases
more in temperature? Explain.
7 K/U Explain why there is an energy difference between the following
reactions.
CH +2O → CO +2H O +802kJ
4(g) 2(g) 2(g) 2 (g)
CH 4(g) +2O 2(g) → CO 2(g) +2H 2 O ((cid:2)) +890kJ
600 MHR • Unit 5 Hydrocarbons and Energy
The Technology of Heat 14.4
Measurement
Section Preview/
Specific Expectations
In this section, you will
(cid:2) describesome of the
physical and chemical
properties of hydrocarbons
(cid:2) applycalorimetric tech-
niques to the calculation
of energy changes
(cid:2) gatherand interpret
experimental data, and solve
problems involving calorime-
try and the combustion of
hydrocarbons
Figure 14.13 How can you measure the energy in a substance?
(cid:2) communicateyour under-
standing of the following
In this unit, you have learned about the importance of hydrocarbons as terms: isolated system,
fuels. Hydrocarbons are useful because of the energy that is released when calorimeter, calorimetry,
they burn. It is often necessary, however, to know the amount of energy bomb calorimeter,
that is released. For example, engineers need to know how much energy thermal equilibrium, heat of
combustion, heat of solution,
is released from different fuels when they design an engine and choose an
heat capacity, Calorie,
appropriate fuel. Firefighters need to know how much heat can be given
potential energy
off by different materials so they can decide on the best way to fight a
specific fire. (See Figure 14.13.)
What about food—the fuel for your body? In order to choose an
appropriate and balanced diet, you need to know how much energy each
type of food releases when it is digested. Food energy is measured in
Calories. (You will learn more about Calories later in this section.)
How do you measure the quantity of energy that is produced? In this
section, you will focus on measuring heat changes. You will learn about
some technology and techniques to measure heat. You will then apply
what you have learned by performing your own heat experiments.
Calorimetry
In the ThoughtLab in section 14.3, two students used beakers with no lids
when they measured change in temperature. The students assumed that
energy was being exchanged only between the ice and the water. In fact,
energy was also being exchanged with the surroundings. As a result, the
data that the students obtained had a large experimental error. How could
the students have prevented this error?
Much of the technology in our lives is designed to stop the flow of
heat. Your home is insulated to prevent heat loss in the winter and heat
gain in the summer. If you take hot soup to school for your lunch, you
probably use a Thermos to prevent heat loss to the environment.
Whenever there is a temperature difference between two objects,
thermal energy flows from the hotter object to the colder object. When
you measure the heat being transferred in a reaction or other process,
you must minimize any heat that is exchanged with the surroundings.
Chapter 14 Energy Trapped in Hydrocarbons • MHR 601
To measure the heat flow in a process, you need an
isolated system, like a Thermos. An isolated system stops
matter and energy from flowing in or out of the system. You
thermometer
stirrer also need a known amount of a substance, usually water. The
water absorbs the heat that is produced by the process, or it
releases heat if the process is endothermic. To determine the
styrofoam heat flow, you can measure the temperature change of the
cups water. With its large specific heat capacity (4.184 J/ g·˚C) and
its broad temperature range (0˚C to 100˚C), liquid water can
absorb and release a lot of energy.
Water, a thermometer, and an isolated system are the
basic components of a calorimeter. A calorimeter is a device
water
sample that is used to measure changes in thermal energy. (Figures
being tested 14.14 and 14.15 show two types of calorimeters.) The techno-
logical process of measuring changes in thermal energy is
called calorimetry.
Figure 14.14 A polystyrene
(coffee cup) calorimeter usually How Calorimeters Work
consists of two nested poly-
In a polystyrene calorimeter, a known mass of water is inside the poly-
styrene cups with a polystyrene
styrene cup. The water surrounds, and is in direct contact with, the
lid, to provide insulation from the
surroundings. process that produces the energy change. The initial temperature of the
water is measured. Then the process takes place and the final temperature
of the water is measured. The water is stirred to maintain even energy
distribution, and the system is kept at a constant pressure. This type of
calorimeter can measure heat changes during processes such as dissolv-
ing, neutralization, heating, and cooling.
A bomb calorimeter is used for the measurement of heat
changes during combustion reactions at a constant volume.
stirrer
ignition It works on the same general principle as the polystyrene
terminals calorimeter. The reaction, however, takes place inside an inner
thermometer
metal chamber, called a “bomb.” This “bomb” contains pure
oxygen. The reactants are ignited using an electric coil. A
known quantity of water surrounds the bomb and absorbs the
energy that is released by the reaction. You will learn more
water about bomb calorimeters later in this section.
The law of conservation of energy states that energy can
be changed into different forms, but it cannot be created or
steel
destroyed. This law allows you to calculate the energy change
chamber insulated
holding container in a calorimetry experiment. However, you need to make the
oxygen and following assumptions:
the sample • The system is isolated. (No heat is exchanged with the
surroundings outside the calorimeter.)
• The amount of heat energy that is exchanged with the
Figure 14.15 A bomb calorime-
calorimeter itself is small enough to be ignored.
ter is more sophisticated than a
• If something dissolves or reacts in the calorimeter water, the
polystyrene calorimeter.
solution still retains the properties of water. (For example,
density and specific heat capacity remain the same.)
602 MHR • Unit 5 Hydrocarbons and Energy
Tools & Techniques
The First Ice Calorimeter calorimeter consisted of three concentric cham-
bers. The object to be tested was placed in the
A calorimeter measures the thermal energy that
innermost chamber. Broken chunks of ice were
is absorbed or released by a material. Today we
placed in the middle chamber. Ice was also
measure heat using joules (J) or calories (cal).
placed in the outer chamber to prevent any heat
Early scientists accepted one unit of heat as the
reaching the apparatus from outside. As the
amount of heat required to melt 1 kg of ice. Thus
object in the inner chamber released heat, the ice
two units of heat could melt 2 kg of ice.
in the middle chamber melted. Water was drawn
The earliest measurements of heat energy
from the middle chamber by a tube, and then
were taken around 1760, by a Scottish chemist
measured.
named Joseph Black. He hollowed out a chamber
Lavoisier made many important contributions
in a block of ice. Then he wiped the chamber dry
to the science of chemistry. Unfortunately his
and placed a piece of platinum, heated to 38˚C,
interest in political reform led to his arrest during
inside. He used another slab of ice as a lid. As the
the French Revolution. He was beheaded after a
platinum cooled, it gave up its heat to the ice. The
trial that lasted less than a day.
ice melted, and water collected in the chamber.
When the platinum reached the temperature of
the ice, Black removed the water and weighed it
to find out how much ice had melted. In this way,
he measured the quantity of heat that was
released by the platinum.
In 1780, two French scientists, Antoine
Lavoisier and Pierre Laplace, developed the first
apparatus formally called a calorimeter. Like
Black, they used the amount of melted ice to
measure the heat released by a material. Their
The original calorimeter used by Lavoisier and Laplace
When a process causes an energy change in a calorimeter, the change
in temperature is measured by a thermometer in the water. If you know
the mass of the water and its specific heat capacity, you can calculate the
change in thermal energy caused by the process. See Figures 14.16 and
14.17 for examples.
temperature of the temperature of the
water decreases water increases
water water
exothermic
endothermic
process
process
energy energy
Figure 14.16 An endothermic process, Figure 14.17 An exothermic process,
such as ice melting such as the combustion of propane
Chapter 14 Energy Trapped in Hydrocarbons • MHR 603
The energy change in a calorimetry experiment can be summarized
as follows:
Heat lost by the process = Heat gained by the water
or
Heat gained by the process = Heat lost by the water
In the next Sample Problem, you will use what you have just learned to
calculate the specific heat capacity of a metal. This problem is similar to
the calculation of the specific heat capacity of canola oil in section 14.3.
Here, however, a calorimeter is used to reduce the heat exchange to the
environment.
Sample Problem
Determining a Metal’s Specific Heat Capacity
Problem
A 70.0 g sample of a metal was heated to 95.0˚C in a hot water bath.
Then it was quickly transferred to a polystyrene calorimeter. The
calorimeter contained 100.0 g of water at an initial temperature of
19.8˚C. The final temperature of the contents of the calorimeter was
22.6˚C.
(a) How much heat did the metal lose? How much heat did the
water gain?
(b) What is the specific heat capacity of the metal?
What Is Required?
(a) You need to calculate the heat lost by the metal (Q ) and the
m
heat gained by the water (Q ).
w
(b) You need to calculate the specific heat capacity of the metal.
What Is Given?
You know the mass of the metal, and its initial and final
temperatures.
Mass of metal (m ) = 70.0g
m
Initial temperature of metal (T) = 95.0˚C
i
Final temperature of metal (T) = 22.6˚C
f
You also know the mass of the water, and its initial and final
temperatures.
Mass of water (m ) = 100.0g
w
Initial temperature of water (T) = 19.8˚C
i
Final temperature of water (T) = 22.6˚C
f
As well, you know the specific heat capacity of water: 4.184 J/g·˚C.
Continued ...
604 MHR • Unit 5 Hydrocarbons and Energy
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 604
Plan Your Strategy
(a) You have all the information that you need to find the heat gained
by the water. Use the heat equation Q = mc∆T. To find the heat
lost by the metal, assume that Q = −Q .
m w
(b) Calculate the specific heat capacity of the metal by rearranging
the heat equation and solving for c.
It is very important that you do not mix up the given information.
For example, when solving for the thermal energy change of the
water, Q , make sure that you only use variables for the water. You
w
must use the initial temperature of the water, 19.8˚C, not the initial
temperature of the metal, 95.0˚C. Also, remember that ∆T = T −T .
f i
Act on Your Strategy
(a) Solve for Q .
w
Q = m c ∆T
w w w w
= (100.0g)(4.184 J )(22.6˚C−19.8˚C)
g·˚C
= 1171.52(g)( J )(˚C)
g·˚C
= 1.2×103J
The water gained 1.2×103 J of thermal energy.
Solve for Q .
m
Q = −Q
m w
= −1.2×103J
The metal lost 1.2×103 J of thermal energy.
(b) Solve for c .
m
c = Q m
m m ∆T
m m
=
−1.2×103J
(70.0g)(22.6˚C−95.0˚C)
= 0.24J/g·˚C
The specific heat capacity of the metal is 0.24 J/g·˚C.
Check Your Solution
The heat gained by the water is a positive value. The heat lost by the
metal is a negative value. The heat is expressed in joules. (Kilojoules
are also acceptable.)
The specific heat capacity of the metal is positive, and it has the
correct units.
Notice that all the materials in the calorimeter in the Sample Problem had
the same final temperature. This is called thermal equilibrium.
Chapter 14 Energy Trapped in Hydrocarbons • MHR 605
Heat of Combustion
How much energy is needed for a natural gas water heater, like the one
shown in Figure 14.18, to heat the hot water in your home? It is probably
much more than you think! In the next Sample Problem, you will find
out. You will also calculate the heat of combustion of a hydrocarbon: the
heat that is released when combustion occurs.
Sample Problem
Calculating Thermal Energy
Problem
Many homes in North America use natural gas for general heating
and for water heating. Like calorimeters, natural gas water heaters
have an insulated container that is filled with water. A gas flame at
Figure 14.18 the bottom heats the water. A typical water heater might hold 151 L
of water.
(a) How much thermal energy is needed to raise the temperature of
151 L of water from 20.5˚C to 65.0˚C? Note: Make the same three
assumptions that you made for calorimeters.
(b) If it takes 506 g of methane to heat this water, what is the heat of
combustion of methane per gram?
What Is Required?
(a) You need to calculate the quantity of thermal energy (Q) needed
to heat 151 L of water.
(b) You need to calculate the heat released per gram of methane
burned.
What Is Given?
(a) You know the initial and final temperatures of the water. You also
know the volume of the water.
Initial temperature (T) = 20.5˚C
i
Final temperature (T) = 65.0˚C
f
Volume = 151 L
As well, you know the specific heat capacity of water (c):
4.184 J/g·˚C or 4.184 kJ/kg·˚C.
(b) You know the mass of the methane. Mass of methane (m) = 506g
Plan Your Strategy
(a) This problem involves thermal energy and a change in tempera-
ture. You can use the heat equation Q = mc∆T. First calculate the
mass of 151 L of water. (Remember that the density of water at
room temperature is 1 g/mL, or 1 kg/L.) If you express the mass of
the water in kilograms, you must also use the appropriate specific
heat capacity of water: 4.184 kJ/kg·˚C.
Note: To keep the calculation simple, assume that the density of
the water remains the same when it is heated. (This is not strictly
true.)
Continued ...
606 MHR • Unit 5 Hydrocarbons and Energy
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 606
(b) Use the concept of heat lost = heat gained. Since a loss of heat
gives a negative value, use the following equation.
Q = −Q
m w
To find the heat per gram, divide the amount of heat by the mass
of methane.
Act on Your Strategy
(a) Massofwater = Volume×Density
= (151L)(1kg/L)
= 151kg
Substitute into Q = mc∆T, and solve.
Q = mc∆T
= (151kg)(4.184kJ/kg·˚C)(65.0˚C−20.5˚C)
= 28114(kg)(kJ/kg·˚C)(˚C)
= 2.81×104kJ
Therefore, 2.81×104kJ, or 28.1 MJ (megajoules), of energy is needed
to heat the water. (This is a great deal of energy!)
(b) Q = −Q
m w
= −2.81×104kJ
Divide the amount of heat by the mass of methane to find the
heat per gram.
Q (pergram) = Q m
m m
m
=
−2.81×104kJ
506g
= −55.5kJ/g
This means that 55.5 kJ of thermal (heat) energy is released
for each gram of methane that burns.
Check Your Solution
(a) The water gains heat, so the heat value is positive.
Heat is expressed in kilojoules. (Joules are also acceptable.)
(b) The methane loses energy, so the heat value is negative. Since
this value is the heat per gram, the unit is kJ/g.
Practice Problems
18. A reaction lowers the temperature of 500.0 g of water in a
calorimeter by 1.10˚C. How much heat is absorbed by the
reaction?
19. Aluminum reacts with iron(III) oxide to yield aluminum oxide
and iron. The temperature of 1.00 kg of water in a calorimeter
increases by 3.00˚C during the reaction. Calculate the heat that
is released in the reaction.
Chapter 14 Energy Trapped in Hydrocarbons • MHR 607
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 607
20. 5.0 g of an unknown solid was dissolved in 100 g water in a
polystyrene calorimeter. The initial temperature of the water was
21.7˚C, and the final temperature of the solution was 29.6˚C
(a) Calculate the heat change caused by the solid dissolving.
(b) What is the heat of solution per gram of solid dissolved?
21. A 92.0 g sample of a substance, with a temperature of 55.0˚C, is
placed in a polystyrene calorimeter. The calorimeter contains 1.00
kg of water at 20.0˚C. The final temperature of the system is25.2˚C.
(a) How much heat did the substance lose? How much heat did the
water gain?
(b) What is the specific heat capacity of the substance?
Heat of Solution
In Practice Problem 20, you calculated the thermal energy change
as a solid dissolved in water. This value is called the heat of solution:
the energy change caused by a substance dissolving. The following
ExpressLab deals with the heat of solution of a solid.
ExpressLab The Energy of Dissolving
In this lab you will measure the heat of solution 4. Measure exactly 100 g of distilled water direct-
of two solids. ly into your calorimeter.
5. Measure the initial temperature of the water.
Safety Precautions
6. Pour one of the chemicals into the calorimeter.
Put the lid on the calorimeter.
• NaOH and KOH can burn skin. If you accidental-
7. Stir the solution. Record the temperature until
ly spill NaOH or KOH on your skin, wash
there is a maximum temperature change.
immediately with copious amounts of
8. Dispose of the chemical as directed by your
cold water.
teacher. Clean your apparatus.
Materials 9. Repeat steps 3 to 8, using the other chemical.
balance and beakers or weigh boats
Analysis
polystyrene calorimeter
thermometer and stirring rod 1. For each chemical you used, calculate the heat
distilled water change per gram and the heat change per
2 pairs of solid compounds: mole of substance dissolved.
• ammonium nitrate and potassium hydroxide 2. Which chemical dissolved endothermically?
• potassium nitrate and sodium hydroxide Which chemical dissolved exothermically?
3. One type of cold pack contains a compartment
Procedure
of powder and a compartment of water. When
1. Choose onepair of chemicals from the list. the barrier between the two compartments is
2. For each of the two chemicals, calculate broken, the solid dissolves in the water and
the mass required to make 100.0 mL of a causes an energy change. What chemical
1.00 mol/L aqueous solution. could be used in this type of cold pack? Why?
3. Measure the required mass of one of the
chemicals in a beaker or a weigh boat.
608 MHR • Unit 5 Hydrocarbons and Energy
A Closer Look at Bomb Calorimetry
Web
LINK
Polystyrene calorimeters are reasonably efficient for measuring heat
changes during physical processes, such as dissolving and phase changes.
www.school.mcgrawhill.ca/
They can also be used to measure heat changes during chemical process- resources
es, such as neutralization. A stronger and more precise type of calorimeter Why do some solids dissolve
is needed, however, to measure the heat of combustion of foods, fuels, and exothermically, while other
other materials. As you learned earlier, bomb calorimeters are used for solids dissolve endothermical-
ly? What factors may be
this purpose. (See Figure 14.19.)
involved? Research two
factors: lattice energies
and solvation energies. Go
to the web site above. Go to
Science Resources, then to
Chemistry 11to find out where
to go next. Report your results
to the class.
CHEM
Figure 14.19 Bomb calorimeters give more accurate measurements than FACT
polystyrene calorimeters.
Have you ever strained a
muscle or sprained a joint? You
A bomb calorimeter has many more parts than a polystyrene calorimeter.
may obtain temporary relief by
All of these parts can absorb or release small quantities of energy.
applying the right heat of solu-
Therefore, you cannot assume that the heat lost to the calorimeter is small tion. A hot pack or cold pack
enough to be negligible. To obtain precise heat measurements, you must consists of a thick outer pouch
know or find out the heat capacity of the bomb calorimeter. Heat capacity that contains water and a thin
is the ratio of the heat gained or lost by a system to the change in tempera- inner pouch that contains a
salt. A squeeze on the outer
ture caused by this heat. It is usually expressed in kJ/˚C. Unlike specific
pouch breaks the inner pouch,
heat capacity, which refers to a single substance, heat capacity refers to a
and the salt dissolves. Most
system. Thus, the heat capacity of a calorimeter takes into account the
hot packs use anhydrous
heat that all parts of the calorimeter can lose or gain. (See Figure 14.20.)
CaCl . Most cold packs use
2
NHNO . The change in tem-
4 3
C total = C water + C thermometer + C stirrer + C container perature can be quite large.
A cold pack, for instance, can
bring the solution from room
temperature down to 0˚C. The
usable time, however, is limited
to around half an hour.
heat
capacity
of
calorimeter Figure 14.20 Heat capacity is symbolized by an
upper-case C. It is usually expressed in the unit J/˚C.
Chapter 14 Energy Trapped in Hydrocarbons • MHR 609
A bomb calorimeter is calibrated for a constant mass of water. Since the
mass of the other parts remain constant, there is no need for mass units in
the heat capacity value. The manufacturer usually includes the heat
capacity value(s) in the instructions for the calorimeter.
Heat calculations must be done differently when the heat capacity of a
calorimeter is included. The next Sample Problem illustrates this.
Sample Problem
Calculating Heat Change in a Bomb Calorimeter
Problem
A laboratory decided to test the energy content of peanut butter. A
technician placed a 16.0 g sample of peanut butter in the steel bomb
of a calorimeter, along with sufficient oxygen to burn the sample
completely. She ignited the mixture and took heat measurements.
The heat capacity of the calorimeter was calibrated at 8.28 kJ/˚C.
During the experiment, the temperature increased by 50.5˚C.
(a) What was the thermal energy released by the sample of
peanut butter?
(b) What is the heat of combustion of the peanut butter per gram
of sample?
What Is Required?
(a) You need to calculate the heat (Q) lost by the peanut butter.
(b) You need to calculate the heat lost per gram of peanut butter.
What Is Given?
You know the mass of the peanut butter, the heat capacity of the
calorimeter, and the change in temperature of the system.
Mass of peanut butter (m) = 16.0g
Heat capacity of calorimeter (C) = 8.28kJ/˚C
Change in temperature (∆T) = 50.5˚C
Plan Your Strategy
(a) The heat capacity of the calorimeter takes into account the
specific heat capacities and masses of all the parts of the
calorimeter. Calculate the heat change of the calorimeter, Q ,
cal
using the equation
Q = C∆T
cal
Note: C is the heat capacity of the calorimeter in J/˚C or kJ/˚C.
It replaces the m and c in other calculations involving specific
heat capacity.
First calculate the heat gained by the calorimeter. When the
peanut butter burns, the heat lost by the peanut butter sample
equals the heat gained by the calorimeter.
Q = −Q
sample cal
Continued ...
610 MHR • Unit 5 Hydrocarbons and Energy
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 610
(b) To find the heat of combustion per gram, divide the heat by the
mass of the sample.
Act on Your Strategy
(a) Q = C∆T
cal
= (8.28kJ/˚C)(50.5˚C)
= 418.14(kJ/˚C)(˚C)
= 418kJ
The calorimeter gained 418 kJ of thermal energy.
Q = −Q
sample cal
= −418kJ
The sample of peanut butter released 418 kJ of thermal energy.
(b) Heatofcombustionpergram = Heatreleased
Massofsample
=
−418kJ
16.0g
= −26.2kJ/g
The heat of combustion per gram of peanut butter is −26.2kJ/g.
Check Your Solution
Heat was lost by the peanut butter, so the heat value is negative.
Practice Problems
22. Use the heat equation for a calibrated calorimeter, Q = C∆T.
cal
Recall that ∆T = T = T . Solve for the following quantities.
f i
(a) C
(b) ∆T
(c) T (in terms of C, ∆T, and T )
f i
(d) T (in terms of C, ∆T, and T )
i f
23. A lab technician places a 5.00 g food sample into a bomb
calorimeter that is calibrated at 9.23 kJ/˚C. The initial temperature
of the calorimeter system is 21.0˚C. After burning the food, the
final temperature of the system is 32.0˚C. What is the heat of
combustion of the food in kJ/g?
24. A scientist places a small block of ice in an uncalibrated bomb
calorimeter. The ice melts, gains 10.5 kJ (10.5×103 J) of heat and
undergoes a temperature change of 25.0˚C. The calorimeter under-
goes a temperature change of 1.2˚C.
(a) What mass of ice was added to the calorimeter? (Use the heat
capacity of liquid water.)
(b) What is the calibration of the bomb calorimeter in kJ/˚C?
Chapter 14 Energy Trapped in Hydrocarbons • MHR 611
Food as a Fuel
Food is the fuel for your body. It provides you with the energy you need
It takes one calorie (small c) to
heat 1 g of water by 1˚C. What to function every day. Unlike the peanut butter in the previous problem,
mass of water can one Calorie the food you digest is not burned. The process of digestion, however, is
(large C) heat by 1˚C? very similar to burning. In fact, people often talk about “burning off
Calories.” When food is digested, it undergoes slow combustion (without
flames!) as it reacts with the oxygen you breathe. Eventually this combus-
tion produces the materials that your body needs. It also releases carbon
dioxide and water vapour as waste.
Figure 14.21 Food contains
energy, which is usually
measured in Calories.
You have probably noticed that Calories are used more often than
kilojoules when discussing the energy in food (Figure 14.21). How are
these terms related?
For years, chemists used the calorie as a unit of energy. One calorie is
equal to 4.184 J. This is the amount of energy that is required to heat 1 g
of liquid water by 1˚C. The food Calorie (notice the upper-case C) is equal
to one thousand calories, or one kilocalorie. Therefore one food Calorie is
equal to 4.184 kJ.
You will recall that in the last sample problem, 16.0 g of peanut butter
released 418 kJ of energy. To translate a value in kilojoules into Calories,
1Cal
multiply it by the fraction . For the Sample Problem,
4.184kJ
418kJ× 1Cal = 100Cal
4.184kJ
Therefore, 16.0 g of peanut butter released 100 Cal of energy. Table 14.3
gives energy values in Calories for some foods.
Table 14.3 Energy Values for Some Common Foods
Food Quantity Energy (kJ) Energy (Cal)
almonds (shelled, whole) 75 g 1880 449
apple 100 g 283 68
beef (broiled) 90 g 1330 318
chicken (breast, broiled) 84 g 502 120
tuna (canned) 90 g 740 177
carrots (raw) 50 g 80 19
bread (white, enriched) 30 g 340 81
spaghetti (cooked) 148 g 690 165
olive oil 232 g (1 cup) 8580 2051
caramels (plain) 30 g (3 caramels) 480 115
612 MHR • Unit 5 Hydrocarbons and Energy
When you take in food energy, your body stores
excess food energy in the form of fat. If your body
needs energy later, it will use up some of this fat. This
is the secret behind hibernation. Why is excess energy
in your body stored as fat? Why is it not stored as
protein or carbohydrates? The next ThoughtLab will
examine these questions. You will do calculations to
find out which substance releases the most heat when
burned.
Figure 14.22 Many mammals in the animal kingdom rely on fat
that is stored in their bodies. By surviving on fat reserves that are
stored during the autumn, bears can hibernate throughout the
winter without eating.
ThoughtLab Energy Content in Fat and Carbohydrates
By comparing the thermal energy that is released Procedure
when fats, proteins, and carbohydrates are
1. For each substance, calculate the heat energy
burned in a bomb calorimeter, you can compare
released per gram of substance burned.
the energy that is stored in these compounds.
2. For each substance, calculate the heat of
Natural fats are made up of various types of
combustion per mole of substance burned.
fatty acids. Fatty acids are long chain organic
acids. The most common fatty acid in nature is
Analysis
oleic acid.
1. Based on your calculations, which substance
Glucose is a common sugar in the body. Most
stores more energy? How do you know?
sugars that you ingest are broken down into glu-
cose before they are digested further. Collagen is
Application
one of the most common proteins in your body.
2. Investigate why fat produces more energy
Which compound releases more energy per
than sugar when combusted. You may want
gram: a fat (assume oleic acid, C 17 H 33 COOH ((cid:2)) ),
to research and compare the bond structures
a carbohydrate such as sugar (assume glucose,
of glucose and oleic acid.
C H O ), or a protein (assume collagen, molar
6 12 6(s)
mass 300 000 g/mol)?
A sample of glucose is placed in a bomb
calorimeter, along with oxygen. The glucose is
completely burned. The process is repeated with
a sample of oleic acid and a sample of collagen.
The following results are recorded:
sugar fat protein
Compound (glucose) (oleic acid) (collagen)
mass of compound (g) 1.35 1.23 1.31
initial temperature (˚C) 25.20 25.00 25.10
final temperature (˚C) 27.65 30.56 28.74
heat capacity of 8.28 8.28 8.28
calorimeter (kJ/˚C)
Chapter 14 Energy Trapped in Hydrocarbons • MHR 613
Comparing Fats and Hydrocarbons
One of the substances that you considered in the last ThoughtLab was
oleic acid. Oleic acid has a long hydrocarbon chain in each molecule.
This hydrocarbon chain is similar to the hydrocarbon chains of fossil
fuels, such as octane. (See Figure 14.23.)
oleic acid
CH CCHH CCHH CCHH CCHH CCHH CCHH CCHH CCHH CH CCHH CH CH CH CH CH CH COOH
3 22 22 22 22 22 22 22 22 2 2 2 2 2 2
hydrocarbon chain
CH CH CH CH CH CH CH CH
3 2 2 2 2 2 2 3
octane
Figure 14.23 By comparing octane and oleic acid, you can see that the heat of
combustion of fossil fuels must be similar to the heat of combustion of fats.
What is the relationship between the chemical bonds in a compound and
the amount of energy that the compound can store? You already know
that the net energy of a reaction equals the difference between the energy
Which stores more energy:
absorbed when the reactant bonds are broken and the energy released
saturated fat or unsaturated
when the product bonds are formed. The size of the difference reflects
fat? Do research to find out.
Then compare the structures the strength of the bonds in the reactant molecules compared with the
of these two types of fat to strength of the bonds in the product molecules.
explain why. Figure 14.24 shows an exothermic reaction: the combustion of
methane. The stored energy of the products is less than the stored energy
of the reactants. Therefore, a net amount of energy is released by the
reaction. In an endothermic reaction, the stored energy of the products
is greater than the stored energy of the reactants.
Reactants Products
H
H C H + O O O C O + O + net energy
H H H
more stored energy less stored energy
less stable weaker bonds more stable stronger bonds
reactants
difference = net energy
stored energy products
Figure 14.24 Energy stored in bonds
614 MHR • Unit 5 Hydrocarbons and Energy
Most of the energy change in a reaction is due to a change in the
potential energy (stored energy) of the bonds. All hydrocarbon fuels are
made of the same elements: carbon and hydrogen. They react to give the
same combustion products. As a result, the difference in the quantity of
heat energy that is released by any two hydrocarbons is directly related to
the stored energy in the bonds of these compounds. The next ThoughtLab
compares the heat energy that is released by the combustion of two fuels:
propane and butane.
ThoughtLab Heat Combustion of Propane and Butane
Propane and butane are very common hydrocar- Procedure
bon fuels. As successive members of the alkane
1. Predict which compound will release the
family, they are closely related, but have a differ-
greater quantity of energy per mole of gas.
ent number of bonds. Does this difference in
2. Calculate the heat of combustion per mole for
the number of bonds affect the quantity of heat
each substance.
released during combustion?
Samples of propane and butane were 3.(a) Which substance has the higher heat of
completely burned in a bomb calorimeter. The combustion per mole?
calorimeter was calibrated with a heat capacity (b) Draw complete structural diagrams of
of 8.28 kJ/˚C. The observations are given in the propane and butane. Use these diagrams
table below. to explain your answer to part (a).
Mass of Initial Final Analysis
Substance sample (g) temperature (˚C) temperature (˚C)
1. Was your prediction correct?
propane 1.50 25.00 34.03
2. Find and compare the boiling points of
butane 1.50 25.00 33.87
propane and butane. Which fuel would be
better for winter camping? Why?
The Combustion of Candles
So far in this chapter, you have focussed on gaseous hydrocarbons, such
as methane and acetylene. You have examined their heats of combustion
and various processes in which they are used. In your everyday life, you
may have encountered another type of hydrocarbon: paraffins. Paraffins
are long chain hydrocarbons. They are semisolid or solid at room
temperature. One type of paraffin has been a household item for cen-
turies—paraffin wax, C H , better known as candle wax. (See Figure
25 52(s)
14.25.)
Like other hydrocarbons, the paraffin wax in candles undergoes com-
bustion when burned. It releases thermal energy in the process. In the fol-
lowing investigation, you will measure this thermal energy.
Figure 14.25 Paraffin wax can-
dles have been an important light
source for hundreds of years.
Chapter 14 Energy Trapped in Hydrocarbons • MHR 615
S K I L L F O C U S
Predicting
Performing and recording
Analyzing and interpreting
The Heat of Combustion
of a Candle
You have probably gazed into the flame of a 2. Set up the apparatus as shown in the diagram,
candle without thinking about chemistry! Now, but do not include the large can yet. Adjust
however, you will use the combustion of candle the ring stand so that the small can is about
wax to gain insight into the measurement of heat 5 cm above the wick of the candle. The tip of
changes. You will also evaluate the design of the flame should just touch the bottom of the
this investigation and make suggestions for small can.
improvement.
3. Measure the mass of the candle and the lid.
4. Measure the mass of the small can and the
Question
hanger.
What is the heat of combustion of candle wax?
5. Place the candle inside the large can on the
retort stand.
Prediction
6. Fill the small can about two-thirds full of cold
Will the heat of combustion of candle wax be
water (10˚C to 15˚C). You will measure the
greater or less than the heat of combustion of
mass of the water later.
other fuels, such as propane and butane? Record
your prediction, and give reasons.
clothes retort stand
hanger
Safety Precautions wire
• Tie back long hair and confine any loose small can
clothing. Before you light the candle, check (such as a canned ring
vegetable can) clamp
that there are no flammable solvents near by.
Materials
balance
calorimeter apparatus (see the diagram to
the right)
large can
thermometer (such as
stirring rod juice can)
matches
water candle
candle
Procedure
1. Burn the candle to melt some wax. Use the
wax to attach the candle to the smaller can
lid. Blow out the candle. small can lid
air holes
616 MHR • Unit 5 Hydrocarbons and Energy
7. Stir the water in the can. Measure the this investigation. Consider the apparatus,
temperature of the water. the combustion, and anything else you can
think of. Make suggestions for possible
8. Light the candle. Quickly place the small can
improvements.
in position over the candle. CAUTION Be care-
ful of the open flame. 6. What if soot (unburned carbon) accumulated
on the bottom of the small can? Would this
9. Continue stirring. Monitor the temperature of
produce a greater or a lower heat value than
the water until it has reached 10˚C to 15˚C
the value you expected? Explain.
above room temperature.
10. Blow out the candle. Continue to stir. Monitor
the temperature until you observe no further
change.
11. Record the final temperature of the water.
Examine the bottom of the small can, and
record your observations.
12. Measure the mass of the small can and the
water.
13. Measure the mass of the candle, lid, and any
drops of candle wax.
Analysis
1.(a) Calculate the mass of the water.
(b) Calculate the mass of candle wax that
burned.
2. Calculate the thermal energy that was
absorbed by the water.
3. Calculate the heat of combustion of the candle
wax per gram.
4.(a) Assume that the candle wax is pure
paraffin wax, C H . Calculate the heat
25 52(s)
of combustion per mole of paraffin wax.
(b) Write a balanced thermochemical equation
for the complete combustion of paraffin
wax. Hint: You calculated the heat of com-
bustion per mole of paraffin wax in part (a).
The chemical equation is balanced for one
mole of C H . Therefore, you can use an
25 52(s)
actual value for the energy in the equation.
Conclusions
5.(a) List some possible sources of error that may
have affected the results you obtained.
(b) Evaluate the design and the procedure of
Chapter 14 Energy Trapped in Hydrocarbons • MHR 617
In this section, you considered the importance of fossil fuels in our socie-
ty, based on the energy that we can obtain from fuel combustion. You
Go to a library, or access have seen how thermal energy can be measured. You now know how
the Internet. Complete a much energy can be extracted from molecules that stored solar energy
brief research report on how millions of years ago. Can our society continue to depend on this energy
“no-drip” candles are made. source without harming the environment? What risks result from our use
How does the composition
of fossil fuels? You will explore these questions in the next section.
of these candles affect the
combustion of the paraffin?
Section Review
1 K/U What is the difference between specific heat capacity and
heat capacity?
2 I List two characteristics of a calorimeter that are necessary for
successful heat measurement.
3 I A calorimeter is calibrated at 7.61 kJ/˚C. When a sample of coal is
burned in the calorimeter, the temperature increases by 5.23˚C. How
much heat was lost by the coal?
4 I A reaction in a calorimeter causes 150 g of water to decrease in
temperature by 5.0˚C. What is the thermal energy change of the water?
5 I A company claims that its new Calorie-reduced dessert has less
than 10 Cal per serving. To test this claim, a technician at the depart-
ment of Consumer and Corporate Affairs completely burns a serving of
the dessert in a bomb calorimeter. The temperature change is 4.86˚C.
The heat capacity of the calorimeter is 8.28 kJ/˚C. Is the company’s
claim correct?
6 (a) C In Chapter 13, you compared the boiling points, a physical
property, of some hydrocarbons. In this section, you compared the
heats of combustion, a chemical property, of propane, butane, and
paraffin. Use a reference book, such as The CRC Handbook of
Chemistry and Physics. Look up the following hydrocarbons:
methane, ethane, propane, butane, pentane, and hexane. Compare
their densities, melting points, boiling points, and heats of combus-
tion. Record your findings in charts and/or graphs. What patterns
do you observe? Which properties are physical, and which are
chemical? Explain.
(b) C Use your findings to estimate the heat of combustion of heptane.
7 MC At a comfortable indoor temperature of 22˚C, your body is at a
higher temperature than its surroundings. Therefore, it is constantly
radiating heat to the environment. It needs, however, to maintain an
internal temperature of 37˚C. How does it replace the heat that it is
constantly losing to the environment?
8 K/U A heat pack can be used to supply heat to injuries. One type of
heat pack is re-usable. It contains a supersaturated solution of a salt
and a disc of metal. When the metal disc is bent, the solute begins to
crystallize and releases heat. The pack can be reset by heating it in
boiling water, which causes the salt to dissolve again. How can you
account for the heat that is released by this kind of pack?
618 MHR • Unit 5 Hydrocarbons and Energy
The Impact of 14.5
Petroleum Products
Products made from petrochemicals (which are obtained from petroleum Section Preview/
and natural gas) have profoundly influenced your life. Because of petro- Specific Expectations
chemicals, you can use numerous products that did not exist 50 years
In this section, you will
ago (See Figures 14.26, 14.27, and 14.28). For example, one of the most
(cid:2) assesssome risks and
common materials around you—plastic—is made from petrochemicals.
benefits of hydrocarbon
The large numbers of petrochemicals that are used in manufacturing, use in our society
however, are insignificant when compared with the vast quantities of
(cid:2) communicateyour
hydrocarbons that are consumed each year as fossil fuels. As you learned understanding of the
in Chapter 13, almost 95% of all petroleum that is extracted from the following terms: risk, benefit,
ground is used as fuels and lubricants for vehicles. risk-benefit analysis,
Is there a cost for all that we obtain from hydrocarbons? Do these greenhouse gases, global
warming, sustainable
amazing products carry any drawbacks? In this section, you will examine
development
some pros and cons of our society’s reliance on hydrocarbons. You will
begin to assess the benefits and the risks of materials that you take for
granted and use every day.
Figure 14.26 Materials such as
Gore-Tex® fabric (made from a
polymer of ethene) are important
in the outdoor activities industry.
Figure 14.27 Polystyrene foam insulation, such as Styrofoam™, prevents
heat flow and does not absorb water.
Figure 14.28 Artificial hip joints allow
people who are disabled by arthritis to
walk again.
Chapter 14 Energy Trapped in Hydrocarbons • MHR 619
Risks and Benefits
A risk is a chance of possible negative or dangerous results. Riding a
Hydrocarbons, such as fossil
fuels, carry both risks and bicycle carries the risk of falling off. Driving a car carries the risk of an
benefits. In a group, brainstorm accident. Almost everything you do has some kind of risk attached.
to identify some risks and Fortunately most risks are relatively small, and they may never happen.
benefits. Many of the activities that carry risks also carry benefits. A benefit is an
advantage, or positive result. For example, riding a bicycle provides the
benefits of exercise, transportation, and enjoyment. When deciding to do
an activity, it may be a good idea to compare the risks and benefits
involved. (See Figure 14.29.)
Risk-Benefit Analysis
Knowing more about an issue helps you assess its risks and benefits
more accurately. How can you make the most informed decision possible?
Follow these steps to do your own assessment of risks and benefits, called
a risk-benefit analysis.
Step 1 Identify possible risks and benefits of the activity. Decide how to
research these risks and benefits.
Step 2 Research the risks and benefits. You need information from reliable
sources to make an accurate analysis.
Step 3 Weigh the effects of the risks and benefits. You may find that the
risks are too great and decide not to do the activity. On the other
hand, you may find that the benefits are greater than the risks.
Step 4 Compare your method for doing the activity with other possible
Figure 14.29 Would you like to methods. Do you use the safest method to do the activity? One
have a coal-burning power plant method may be much safer than another.
near your home? Some people
In the next Sample Problem, you will see how a risk-benefit analysis can
might be upset by this idea
help you make informed decisions.
because there is a health risk
caused by pollution from the
plant. Other people might think
that a coal-burning power plant Sample Problem
poses no threat at all. Who is
right? How do you decide? Smoking
Problem
Many of your friends smoke, including some people you respect.
Lately you have been thinking about taking up smoking too. Should
you smoke? Perform a risk-benefit analysis to help you decide.
What Is Required?
You need to perform a risk-benefit analysis of smoking. This includes
identifying, researching, and weighing the risks and
benefits of smoking. It also includes looking at different methods
of smoking, which might reduce the risk.
What Is Given?
The problem mentions that many of your friends smoke. This indi-
cates a possible benefit of smoking—you will be imitating people
Continued ...
620 MHR • Unit 5 Hydrocarbons and Energy
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 620
you like and respect. You need to do some research to identify more
benefits and risks.
Plan Your Strategy
Use these four steps to identify and assess the risks and benefits
of smoking.
Step 1 Identify possible risks and benefits.
Step 2 Research the risks and benefits. Use the Internet, reference
books such as encyclopedias, and other sources to help you.
It is important to choose reliable sources from which to
obtain information.
Step 3 Weigh the risks and benefits.
Step 4 Compare different methods of smoking. Is one method less
risky than another?
Act on Your Strategy
Step 1 Identify possible risks and benefits.
Possible risks Possible benefits
Smoking is hazardous to your health. Your friends smoke.
Smoking may help you relax.
At this point, the benefits appear to outweigh the risks.
You need to do more research, however, to make an
informed decision.
Step 2 Research the risks and benefits.
Further research on the Internet provides more information
on smoking risks:
Risks Benefits
The tobacco smoke inhaled when smoking Your friends smoke.
contains many toxic substances, such as
carbon monoxide and ammonia gas.
Smoking is the number one cause of lung Smoking may help
cancer, heart disease, and emphysema. you relax.
Smoking is addictive.
About 50% of smokers end up dying from
a tobacco-related disease.
Second-hand smoke harms the people
around you.
Step 3 Weigh the risks and benefits of smoking.
The risks of smoking heavily outweigh the benefits.
Step 4 Compare different methods of smoking. Is one method
less risky?
Smoking only one cigarette a day is less risky than smoking a
pack a day. You cannot count on this method, however. Any
kind of smoking is risky.
Continued ...
Chapter 14 Energy Trapped in Hydrocarbons • MHR 621
Continued ...
FROM PAGE 621
Practice Problems
Web
LINK
25. Your town is considering dumping its plastic waste in a nearby
www.school.mcgrawhill.ca/ lake. Identify possible risks and benefits for this plan. Explain
resources where you could find more information to help your town make
To access more information a decision.
on solar panels, natural gas
26. Earth’s reservoir of fossil fuels, including natural gas, will not
heating, and the environmental
last forever. As well, burning fossil fuels releases carbon dioxide
effects of burning fossil fuels,
(a greenhouse gas) and other pollutants that can cause acid rain.
go to the web site above. Go
to Science Resources, then to On the other hand, alternate energy sources, such as solar panels,
Chemistry 11to find out where are more expensive. They can also be less reliable than using
to go next. Use this information fossil fuels. Perform a risk-benefit analysis to decide if you should
to help you answer Practice heat your home using natural gas or solar panels. You will need to
Problem 26.
do more research to make an informed decision. (See the Internet
Link on this page.)
Hydrocarbons: A Risky Business?
How do hydrocarbons benefit our society? How do they affect the environ-
ment? What are the benefits and risks of using hydrocarbon fuels and
petrochemicals? These are important questions for our global community.
See Figure 14.30 for some ideas.
Figure 14.30
Risks?
fossil fuels petrochemicals
Benefits?
622 MHR • Unit 5 Hydrocarbons and Energy
Hydrocarbon fuels have changed the way we live. Our dependence on
Web
LINK
them, however, has affected the world around us. The greenhouse effect,
global warming, acid rain, and pollution are familiar topics on the news
www.school.mcgrawhill.ca/
today. Our use of petroleum products, such as oil and gasoline, is linked
resources/
directly to these problems. To learn more about green-
house gases, global warming,
The Greenhouse Effect and Global Warming and acid rain, go to the web
Roads, expressways, service stations, and parking lots occupy almost 40% site above. Go to Science
Resources, then to Chemistry
of Toronto. They are the result of our demand for fast and efficient trans-
11to find out where to go next.
portation. Every day, Toronto’s vehicles produce nearly 16 000 t of carbon
dioxide by the combustion of fossil fuels. Carbon dioxide is an important
greenhouse gas. Greenhouse gases trap heat in Earth’s atmosphere and
prevent the heat from escaping into outer space. Scientists think that a
build-up of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere may lead to an increase in
global temperature, known as global warming. The diagram below shows
how these concepts are connected to fossil fuels.
Concept Organizer Hydrocarbons and the Enviroment
Petroleum used to
Disposal of petroleum products
produce products
can leak oil into water systems;
such as lubricants
plastics accumulate in dumps
and plastics
Fossil fuels obtained from
Fuels are Fossil fuels are burned
deposits under the ground Oxides such
transported (e.g. gasoline, diesel fuel,
•natural gas
around the natural gas furnaces and
as SO
2
and
•coal
world stoves
NO
2
emitted
•petroleum
Oil spills from ships Carbon dioxide gas emitted Combine with water
harm marine life in the atmosphere
to produce acid rain
and snow
Builds up and traps excess
heat in Earth's atmosphere;
may lead to global warming
Acid Rain
The combustion of fossil fuels releases sulfur and nitrogen oxides. These
oxides react with water vapour in the atmosphere to produce acid rain.
Some lakes in northern Canada are “dead” because acid rain has killed
the plants, algae, and fish that used to live in them. Forests in Québec
and other parts of Canada have also suffered from acid rain.
Oil Spill Pollution
Our society demands a regular supply of fossil fuels. Petroleum is trans-
ported from oil-rich countries to the rest of the world. If an oil tanker
carrying petroleum has an accident, the resulting oil spill can be
disastrous to the environment.
Chapter 14 Energy Trapped in Hydrocarbons • MHR 623
Careers in Chemistry
Oil Spill Advisor Two main chemical strategies are also used
to clean up oil spills. In the first strategy, gelling
Developed nations, such as Canada, depend
agentsare added to react with the oil. The reac-
heavily on petroleum. Our dependence affects
tion results in a bulky product that is easier to
the environment in many ways. Oil spills are a
collect using mechanical methods. In the second
dramatic example of environmental harm caused
strategy, dispersing agentsbreak up oil into small
by petrochemicals. In the news, you may have
droplets that mix with the water. This prevents
seen oceans on fire and wildlife choked with tar.
the oil from reaching nearby shorelines.
What can we do?
Dispersing agents work in much the same way
as a bar of soap!
The scientific advisor for an oil spill response
unit assesses a spill and determines the appropri-
ate clean-up methods. She or he acts as part of
a team of advisors. Most advisors have an M.Sc.
or Ph.D. in an area of expertise such as organic
chemistry, physical chemistry, environmental
chemistry, biology, oceanography, computer
modelling, or chemical engineering.
Oil spill response is handled by private and
public organizations. All these organizations look
for people with a background in chemistry. In
Obviously the best thing to do is to prevent oil
fact, much of what you are learning about
spills from taking place. Stricter regulations and
hydrocarbons can be related to oil spill response.
periodic inspections of oil storage companies
Hydrocarbon chemistry can lead you directly
help to prevent oil leakage. Once an oil spill has
to an important career, helping to protect the
occurred, however, biological, mechanical, and
environment.
chemicaltechnologies can help to minimize
harm to the environment.
Make Career Connections
Biological methods involve helpful micro-
organisms that break down, or biodegrade, Create a technology scrapbook. Go through the
the excess oil. Mechanical methods depend on business and employment sections in a newspa-
machines that physically separate spilled oil per. Cut out articles about clean-up technologies.
from the environment. For example, barriers What kinds of companies are doing this work?
and booms are used to contain an oil spill and What can you learn about jobs in this field? What
prevent it from spreading. Materials such as qualifications does a candidate need to apply for
sawdust are sprinkled on a spill to soak up the oil. this type of job?
Web
LINK
Everyday Oil Pollution
The biggest source of oil pollution comes from the everyday use of oil by
www.school.mcgrawhill.ca/
ordinary people. Oil that is dumped into water in urban areas adds to oil
resources/
Go to the web site above to pollution from ships and tankers. In total, three million tonnes of oil reach
learn about the famous oil spill the ocean each year. This is equivalent to having an oil spill disaster
caused by the Exxon Valdez. every day!
Go to Science Resources, A student from Thornhill, Ontario, did a home experiment to discover
then to Chemistry 11to find out
how much oil remains in “empty” motor oil containers that are thrown
where to go next. When and
out. He collected 100 empty oil containers from a local gas station. Then
where did this oil spill occur?
he measured the amount of oil that was left in each container. He found
How did it affect the environ-
ment? What was done to clean an average of 36 mL per container. Over 130 million oil containers are
it up? sold and thrown out in Canada each year. Using these figures, he
624 MHR • Unit 5 Hydrocarbons and Energy
calculated that nearly five million litres of oil are dumped into landfill
sites every year, just in “empty” oil containers!
Once oil reaches the environment, it is almost impossible to clean up.
Oil leaking from a landfill site can contaminate drinking water in the area.
Because oil can dissolve similar substances, pollutants such as chlorine
and pesticides, and other organic toxins, mix with the oil. They are
carried with it into the water system, increasing the problem.
Solutions to Environmental Problems
All of the problems described above hinge on our use of fossil fuels. Thus, Economy
cutting back on our use of fossil fuels will help to reduce environmental
damage. Cutting back on fossil fuels, however, depends on the consumers Sustainable
who buy petrochemicals and use fossil fuels. In other words, it depends Development
on you and the people you know. Environment Welfare
Corporations that are looking for profit have little incentive to change of Society
their use of fossil fuels. For example, the technology is available to build Figure 14.31 Canada and other
cars that can drive about 32 km on a single litre of fuel. Because this tech- members of the United Nations
nology is not financially profitable, cars are still being produced that drive endorse the principle of sustain-
able development. This principle
about 8 km per litre of fuel. If consumers demand and purchase more
states that the world must find
fuel-efficient cars, however, car manufacturers will have an incentive to
ways to meet our current needs,
produce such cars. Tougher government standards may also help to push
without compromising the needs
the vehicle industry towards greater fuel efficiency. of future generations.
Governments can also bring about change by endorsing the principle
of sustainable development. This principle was introduced at the 1992
Earth Summit Conference. Sustainable development takes into account
the environment, the economy, and the health and needs of society.
(See Figure 14.31.)
Hydrocarbon fuels and products can benefit our society if they are
managed well. They can cause great environmental damage, however,
if they are managed irresponsibly. With enough knowledge, you can
learn to make informed decisions on these important issues. Here are
some suggestions of ways you can reduce your consumption of petroleum
products. Why not choose one or more methods to practice? Or, brain-
storm with your classmates to think of other ways to reduce consumption.
• Contact your local government and local power companies. Suggest
using alternative fuels, such as solar energy and wind power.
• Ride a bicycle or walk more.
• Express your concerns by writing letters to the government or
to newspapers.
• Become more informed by researching issues that concern you.
• Fix oil leaks in vehicles, and avoid dumping oil down the sink.
• If you are cold at home, put on an extra sweater instead of
turning up the heat.
• Recycle and re-use petrochemical products, such as plastic
shopping bags.
• Repair a broken item rather than buying a new one.
Chapter 14 Energy Trapped in Hydrocarbons • MHR 625
Section Wrap-up
In this section, you learned about some of the risks and benefits resulting
from our use of fossil fuels. We obtain gasoline, heating oil, jet fuel, diesel
fuel, fertilizers, and plastics from the oil and petroleum industry. Burning
fossil fuels, however, produces carbon dioxide (a greenhouse gas) and
other pollutants that lead to acid rain. Transporting oil also carries the
risk of oil spills. Do the benefits of fossil fuels outweigh the risks?
Complete these Section Review questions to help you decide.
Section Review
1 K/U You are about to try water-skiing for the first time. Should you try
it? Will your activity affect the environment? How will you make your
decision?
(a) Describe the steps you would follow to do a risk-benefit analysis.
(b) What are some possible risks and benefits?
(c) Where might you find the information you need to make a decision?
2 C Identify three benefits and three risks associated with the use of
petroleum products and petrochemicals.
3 C Identify some steps that you can take to reduce your dependence
on petroleum.
4 MC A construction company is planning to level a forest near your
home to build a strip mall with a large parking lot. Many people enjoy
walking in the forest, and many children play there. You have also
observed wildlife, such as rabbits, snakes, frogs, and many kinds of
birds living in the forest. In a group, brainstorm ways that the company
could consider the environment and human welfare, as well as the
economy. (Think of the economy as the owner of the property and the
stores that will be built.)
5 MC Perform a risk-benefit analysis of the petroleum industry. Use
the information in this section to help you identify possible risks and
benefits. Use the Internet, or reference books to do more research on
these risks and benefits.
6 MC Impure coal and gasoline contain nitrogen and sulfur compounds
(NO and S ). The combustion of nitrogen and sulfur produces oxides
(g) (s)
that lead to acid rain.
(a) Balance the following six equations.
S +O → SO
8(s) 2(g) 2(g)
S +O → SO
8(s) 2(g) 3(g)
NO +O → NO
(g) 2(g) 2(g)
SO 2(g) +H 2 O ((cid:2)) → H 2 SO 3(aq)
SO 3(g) +H 2 O ((cid:2)) → H 2 SO 4(aq)
NO 2(g) +H 2 O ((cid:2)) → HNO 3(aq) +HNO 2(aq)
(b) Suggest possible sources for the reactants O 2(g) and H 2 O ((cid:2)) .
(c) Explain how these equations show the production of acid rain.
626 MHR • Unit 5 Hydrocarbons and Energy
Review
Reflecting on Chapter 14 (b) How can you tell, by looking at a flame, that
incomplete combustion is taking place?
Summarize this chapter in the format of your
choice. Here are a few ideas to use as guidelines: 3. Indicate whether each process is endothermic
• Describe how fossil fuels are an important or exothermic.
(a) water evaporating
source of energy in our society.
• Describe how to write combustion equations, (b) a piece of paper burning
(c) rubbing your hands together
and how to measure the heat changes caused by
(d) clouds forming
physical processes such as dissolving.
• Describe the importance of isolating a system to 4. How can a balanced thermochemical equation
reduce heat flow when measuring heat. tell you whether a chemical reaction is exother-
• Describe society’s use of fossil fuels, and the mic or endothermic?
resulting effects on the environment. 5. Describe the relationship between the amount
• Explain how to weigh the risks and benefits of of thermal energy that is released by water and
an activity, and perform a risk-benefit analysis. (a) the mass of water
This skill will help you make more informed (b) the temperature change of the water
decisions on issues that affect society, the
6. Why is energy needed to sustain an
economy, and the environment.
endothermic reaction?
Reviewing Key Terms 7.(a) The combustion of paraffin, C 25 H 52(s) , is
exothermic. Explain why by comparing the
For each of the following terms, write a sentence
energy changes observed when chemical
that shows your understanding of its meaning.
bonds are broken and formed.
benefit bomb calorimeter
(b) The formation of 1-pentyne, C 5 H 8((cid:2)) , is
bond energy Calorie
endothermic. Explain why by comparing the
calorimeter calorimetry
energy changes observed when chemical
∆T combustion
bonds are broken and formed.
complete combustion endothermic
8. Hydrogen is used as a fuel for the space shuttle
exothermic fossil fuels
because it provides more energy per gram than
global warming greenhouse gases
many other fuels. The combustion of hydrogen
heat heat capacity
is described by the following equation.
heat of combustion incomplete combustion
2H +O → 2H O +484kJ
2(g) 2(g) 2 (g)
isolated system potential energy
(a) Is this reaction exothermic or endothermic?
risk risk-benefit analysis
(b) How much energy does the complete
specific heat capacity sustainable development
combustion of 1 g of hydrogen provide?
temperature thermal energy
9. Write a balanced chemical equation for each
thermal equilibrium thermochemical
reaction.
equation
(a) complete combustion of 4-methyl-1-pentene,
Knowledge/Understanding C 6 H 12((cid:2))
1.(a) What are the products of the complete (b) incomplete combustion of benzene, C 6 H 6((cid:2))
(c) incomplete combustion of propene, C H
combustion of a hydrocarbon? 3 6(g)
(d) complete combustion of 3-ethyhexane,
(b) What products form if the combustion is
incomplete? C 8 H 18((cid:2))
10. List three assumptions that you make when
2.(a) Why can incomplete combustion be
using a polystyrene calorimeter.
dangerous if it occurs in your home?
Chapter 14 Energy Trapped in Hydrocarbons • MHR 627
11. The same amount of heat is added to can you account for the difference between
aluminum (c = 0.900J/g·˚C) and nickel the two values?
Al
(c = 0.444J/g·˚C). Which metal will have
Ni 19. In Chapters 13 and 14, you have examined
a greater temperature increase? Explain.
many properties of hydrocarbons. Describe one
12. Does propane burning in an outdoor barbecue physical property and one chemical property of
have a negative or positive heat of combustion? hydrocarbons. Explain how these two proper-
Explain. ties vary from one hydrocarbon to another.
Describe how you might measure each property
Inquiry in a lab.
13. To make four cups of tea, 1.00 kg of water 20. A reaction in a calorimeter causes 250.0 g of
is heated from 22.0˚C to 99.0˚C. How much water to decrease in temperature by 2.40˚C.
energy is needed? How much heat did the reaction absorb?
14. Two different foods are burned in a calorimeter. 21. A chemist wants to calibrate a new bomb
Sample 1 has a mass of 6.0 g and releases calorimeter. He completely burns a mass
25 Cal of heat. Sample 2 has a mass of 2.1 g of 0.930 g of carbon in a calorimeter. The
and releases 9.0 Cal of heat. Which food temperature of the calorimeter changes from
releases more heat per gram? 25.00˚C to 28.15˚C. If the thermal energy
15. A 3.00 g sample of a new snack food is burned change is 32.8 kJ/g of carbon burned, what
in a calorimeter. The 2.00 kg of surrounding is the heat capacity of the new calorimeter?
water change in temperature from 25.0˚C to What evidence shows that the reaction was
32.4˚C. What is the food value in Calories exothermic?
per gram? 22. 200 g of iron at 350˚C is added to 225 g of
16. A substance is burned completely in a bomb water at 10.0˚C. What is the final temperature
calorimeter. The temperature of the 2000 g of of the iron-water mixture?
water in the calorimeter rises from 25.0˚C to 23. In this chapter, you learned that fats have
43.9˚C. How much energy is released? long hydrocarbon sections in their molecular
17. A horseshoe can be shaped from an iron bar structure. Therefore, they have many C—C
when the iron is heated to temperatures near and C—H bonds. Sugars have fewer C—C and
1500˚C. The hot iron is then dropped into a C—H bonds but more C—O bonds. Use Table
bucket of water and cooled. An iron bar is 14.1 in this chapters. Explain why you can
heated from 1500˚C and then cooled in 1000 g obtain more energy from burning a fat than
of water that was initially at 20.0˚C. How much from burning a sugar.
heat energy does the water absorb if its final 24. 2,2,4-trimethylpentane, an isomer of C H , is a
8 18
temperature is 65.0˚C? major component of gasoline.
18. A group of students decide to measure the (a) Write the balanced thermochemical
energy content of certain foods. They heat equation, using the word “energy,” for the
50.0 g of water in an aluminum can by burning complete combustion of this compound. Use
a sample of the food beneath the can. When C 8 H 18((cid:2)) as the formula for the compound.
they use 1.00 g of popcorn as their test food, (b) What is the ideal ratio of fuel to air for
the temperature of the water rises by 24˚C. this fuel?
(a) Calculate the heat energy that is released by (c) In the previous unit, you learned how to
the popcorn. Express your answer in both solve problems involving gases. Calculate
kilojoules and Calories per gram of popcorn. the volume of carbon dioxide, at 20.0˚C and
(b) Another student tells the group that she has 105 kPa, that is produced from the combus-
read the label on the popcorn bag. The label tion of 1.00 L of C 8 H 18((cid:2)) . Note: The density
states that 30 g of popcorn yields 110 Cal. of C 8 H 18((cid:2)) is 0.69 g/mL.
What is this value in Calories per gram? How
628 MHR • Unit 5 Hydrocarbons and Energy
25. 100 g of calcium carbide is used to produce 34. On an episode of The Nature of Things, Dr.
acetylene in a laboratory, as you did in David Suzuki made the following comment:
Investigation 14-A. “As a society and as individuals, we’re hooked
(a) What volume of water (density 1.00 g/mL) is on it [oil].” Discuss his comment. Explain how
needed to react completely with the calcium our society has benefitted from hydrocarbons.
carbide? Describe some of the problems that are
(b) What volume of acetylene gas will be associated with the use of hydrocarbons.
produced at STP when the calcium carbide Also describe some possible alternatives for
and water are mixed? the future.
Answers to Practice Problems and
Communication
Short Section Review Questions:
26. Earlier in the chapter, you learned that Practice Problems 1.(a)complete 2.(a)C 5 H 12 +8O 2 →
poisonous carbon monoxide can form during
5Co
2
+6H
2
O (b)2C
8
H
18
+25O
2
→ 16CO
2
+18H
2
O
incomplete hydrocarbon combustion. The use
(c)6C
2
H
6
+15O
2
→ 4CO
2
+4CO+4C+18H
2
O,
3C H +6O → CO +CO+4C+9H O,
2 6 2 2 2
of carbon monoxide detectors in homes and 3.(a)C
4
H
10
+4O
2
→ CO
2
+CO+2C+5H
2
O
businesses has reduced the number of deaths (b)2C
4
H
10
+13O
2
→ 8CO
2
+10H
2
O
due to carbon monoxide poisoning. Are all 4.C
25
H52+38O
2
→ 25CO
2
+26H
2
O
carbon monoxide detectors the same? 5.(a)C
13
H
28
+9O
2
→ CO
2
+2CO+10C+14H
2
O,
Telephone your local fire department, go to a C 13 H 28 +10O 2 → 2CO 2 +2CO+8C+14H 2 O
library, or search the Internet to find out about
(c)incomplete 6.(a)3C
(s)
+4H
2(g)
→ C
3
H
8(g)
+ energy
carbon monoxide detectors.
(b)C
3
H
8(g)
+5O
2(g)
→ 3CO
2(g)
+4H
2
O
(g)
+energy
7.(b)energy+2C
(s)
+2H
2(g)
→
27. Design a poster or a brochure to explain the C H ,C H +3O → 2CO +2H O +energy
2 4(g) 2 4(g) 2(g) 2(g) 2 (g)
concept of sustainable development to a 8.6.2×103J 9. −4.6×103J 11.(a) +4.22 kJ, +4.6 kJ
student in a much younger grade. 12.(a)m = Q/c(cid:3)T (b)c = Q/m(cid:3)T (c) (cid:3)T = Q/mc
28. Prepare a concept map to illustrate the effects
13.(a)T
I
= T
f
−Q/mc (b)T
f
= T
I
+Q/mc 14.2.14×105J
15.0.7900 J/g•˚C, granite 16.12.1 J/g•˚C 17.15.5•˚C
of hydrocarbons on our society and the 18. −2.30×103 J 19.1.26×104 J 20.661 J/g
environment. 21.(a) −2.2×104 J, 2.2×104 J (b)8.0 J/g•˚C
22.(a)C = Q/(cid:3)T (b) (cid:3)T = Q/C (c)T f = T I +Q/C
Making Connections (d)T i = T f −Q/C 23. −20.3 kJ/g 24.(a)100 g (b)8.75 kJ/˚C
29. When energy is wasted during an industrial
Section Review:14.1: 3.(a)C
7
H
16
+11O
2
→ 7CO
2
+8H
2
O
process, what actually happens to this energy?
(b)C
5
H
10
+6O
2
→ 3CO
2
+CO+C+5H
2
O
4.CH
4
+2O
2
→ CO
2
+2H
2
O, 4CH
4
+6O
2
→
30. Look at Table 14.3. Compare caramels with CO
2
+2CO+C+8H
2
O 6.(a)2C
2
H
6
+7O
2
→
raw carrots. Which food gives more Calories 4CO
2
+6H
2
O (b)54 g (c)392 L 14.2: 1.(a)endothermic,
per gram? net energy is absorbed, formation of ethyne (acetylene)
(b)exothermic, net energy is released, combustion of
31. Petrochemical products, such as plastics, have
methane 4.(a)endothermic 5.197 kJ/mol
affected your life. Identify one benefit and one 14.3: 3.(a) −4.54×103 J 4.(a)38.1 J (b)76.2 J (c)76.2 J
possible risk associated with the use of petro- 5.(a)0.237 J/g•˚C (b)3.43˚C 6.copper 14.4: 3. −39.8 kJ
chemical products. 4. −3.1×103 J 5.9.63 Cal, yes
32. Define sustainable development. Suggest a 14.5: 6.(a)S 8 +8O 2 → 8SO 2 , S 8 +12O 2 → 8SO 3 ,
2NO+O → 2NO , SO +H2O → H SO ,
condition that you feel society must agree 2 2 2 2 3
SO +H O → H SO , 2NO +H O → HNO +HNO
on to achieve sustainable development. 3 2 2 4 2 2 3 2
33. The Hibernia Oil Field is located off the Grand
Banks of Newfoundland, on Canada’s east
coast. It started oil production in the fall of
1997. Research and write a report on some of
the risks and benefits of this massive oil opera-
tion. Consider ecological, economic, and social
issues.
Chapter 14 Energy Trapped in Hydrocarbons • MHR 629
Project
UNIT 5
Consumer Chemistry Your project should include as many of these parts
as possible. Alternatively, assign one part to each team
working on a common product.
A A creative and visually pleasing format (Use origi-
Background
nal artwork/graphics, and/or images taken from
As a consumer, you are continually being exposed to web sites, CD ROMS, or reference books.)
new products. Some of these products can be contro-
B A description of all the ingredients in the product
versial. For example, foods such as tomatoes and
(Give the common or IUPAC names, molecular or
soybeans are genetically modified organisms (GMOs).
ionic formulae, and structural diagrams for each
As a citizen of the world, it is your responsibility to
ingredient.)
become informed. You should know what is in the
C A description of the packaging material (Give the
products you use. You should understand how to use
common or IUPAC names, molecular or ionic for-
them appropriately and safely, and how to dispose of
mulae, and structural diagrams for the packaging
them in a responsible manner.
materials. Include recycling information.)
D Any interesting historical information related to
the project
E Environmental or health/safety concerns related to
specific ingredients or components of the product
and/or packaging
F A description of how the product is manufactured
G A list of the references you used to obtain
information
Challenge
Choose a common consumer item from the food, drug,
or hardware department of a local supermarket. Your
teacher may suggest a range of suitable products. If
you choose an item that is not from one of these
departments, your teacher must approve your choice.
Your task is to communicate (using text and graphics)
the chemical nature of the consumer product, and its
container or packaging.
Materials
If you choose to make a poster or pamphlet, you will
need art supplies and construction paper. You may
need other materials if you choose a different presenta-
tion format.
Action Plan
Design Criteria
1 Decide whether you will work individually, or in a
Your project can take the form of a pamphlet, poster,
small group of two or three people.
multimedia presentation, or other format of your
choice.
630 MHR • Unit 5 Hydrocarbons and Energy
Assessment
After you complete this project,
(cid:2) Assess the success of your project based on how
well your project meets the design criteria.
(cid:2) Assess your project based on how clearly the
2 Decide which consumer product you would like to chemistry concepts are conveyed.
research. If you are not sure of the suitability of
(cid:2) Assess your project based on how interesting it is
your choice, check with your teacher.
to others in your class.
3 Prepare a brief design proposal to answer these
questions:
•Will you create a pamphlet, poster, or other
display?
•What information do you want to include?
•How large will your final product be?
4 If you are working in a group, outline the duties to
be performed. Assign duties to each group member.
5 Research your project. Look for chemical structures
of ingredients, recycling codes, safety and WHMIS
considerations, additives to foods, etc. You may
wish to research in any of these areas:
•The Internet, at
http://www.school.mcgrawhill.ca/resources/
(Go to this web site. Go to Science Resources,
then to Chemistry 11 to find out where to
go next.)
•Your local pharmacy (The pharmacist is a great
source of information on medicinal ingredients.)
•Your local library (Your librarian is a valuable
resource and can direct you to many sources of
information and reference materials.)
•The 1-800 number or web site address given on
the product’s packaging
6 Put your project together. Be creative in your lay-
out. Make sure that all the topics are covered in a
logical fashion. Be sure to include input from all
members of your group.
Evaluate
1 Is your project scientifically accurate?
Is it complete?
2 Did you include interesting or
unusual information?
3 Is your presentation colourful and
visually attractive?
4 Are your graphics clear and informative?
Did you pay close attention to detail?
5 Are all your references included in an
approved format?
Unit 5 Project • MHR 631
Review
Knowledge/Understanding used to break the reactant bonds.
(d) The energy that is used to break the product
Multiple Choice bonds is greater than the energy that is
released to form the reactant bonds.
In your notebook, write the letter beside the best
(e) The energy that is used to break the product
answer for each question.
bonds is less than the energy that is released
1. An alkane contains 5 carbon atoms. How many
to form the reactant bonds.
hydrogen atoms does it contain?
(a) 5 hydrogen atoms 6. Beaker A contains 500 mL of a liquid. Beaker B
(b) 8 hydrogen atoms contains 1000 mL of the same liquid. What
(c) 10 hydrogen atoms happens when 200 kJ of thermal energy is
(d) 12 hydrogen atoms added to the liquid in each beaker?
(e) 14 hydrogen atoms (a) The temperature of the liquid increases the
same amount in both beakers.
2. An alkyne contains 12 hydrogen atoms. What is
(b) The temperature of the liquid decreases the
its chemical formula?
same amount in both beakers.
(a) C H
5 12
(c) The temperature of the liquid remains the
(b) C H
6 12
same in both beakers.
(c) C H
7 12
(d) The temperature change of the liquid in
(d) C H
8 12
Beaker B is twice as large as the temperature
(e) C H
9 12
change of the liquid in Beaker A.
3. Which set of properties best describes a small
(e) The temperature change of the liquid in
alkane, such as ethane?
Beaker B is one half as large as the tempera-
(a) non-polar, high boiling point, insoluble in
ture change of the liquid in Beaker A.
water, extremely reactive
(b) non-polar, low boiling point, insoluble in Short Answer
water, not very reactive
7. Copy the table below into your notebook. Fill
(c) polar, low boiling point, soluble in water,
in the blanks.
not very reactive
(d) polar, high boiling point, insoluble in water,
Structural Molecular
not very reactive Name diagram formula Classification
(e) non-polar, low boiling point, soluble in ethane CH3 − CH3 C2H6 alkane
water, extremely reactive C3H4
4. Which equation shows the complete combus-
tion of propane?
(a) 2C H +7O → 4CO +6H O
2 6 2 2 2
(b) 2C H +5O → C+2CO+CO +6H O 1-ethyl-3-
2 6 2 2 2 methy-
(c) 2C 3 H 6 +9O 2 → 6CO 2 +6H 2 O cyclopentane
(d) C 3 H 8 +5O 2 → 3CO 2 +4H 2 O CH3 H
(e) 2C H +7O → 2C+2CO+2CO +8H O C C
3 8 2 2 2 CH3 CH2 CH2 CH3
5. Which situation describes an exothermic 1, 2-dimethyl-
cyclobutane
reaction?
(a) The energy that is released to form the CH3
CH3 CH2 C CH3
product bonds is greater than the energy that
CH3 CH CH2 CH3
is used to break the reactant bonds.
C4H6
(b) The energy that is released to form the (isomer 1)
product bonds is less than the energy that is C4H6
used to break the reactant bonds. (isomer 2)
(c) The energy that is released to form the
product bonds is equal to the energy that is
632 MHR • Unit 5 Hydrocarbons and Energy
Structural Molecular Homologous General Structural Saturated or
Name diagram formula Classification series formula diagram Name unsaturated
trans-4-ethyl- alkane
6-methyl-3-
alkene
heptene
alkyne
CH3 CH2
cylcoalkane
CH C CH CH2 CH3
11. Four fuels are listed in the table below. Equal
masses of these fuels are burned completely.
4-ethyl-3,6-
Heat of combustion
dimethyl-5-
Fuel at SATP (kJ/mol)
propyl-decane
octane, C8H18((cid:2)) 5513
8. Identify the error(s) in each structure.
(a) CH −CH −CH
methane, CH4(g) 890
3 3 3 ethanol, C2H5OH((cid:2)) 1367
(b)
hydrogen H2(g) 285
(a) Put the fuels in order, from greatest to least
(c) CH amount of energy provided.
3
(b) Write a balanced chemical equation for the
CH CH CH complete combustion of each fuel.
3 2 3
(c) Suggest one benefit and one risk of using
(d) H
hydrocarbon fuels.
C
12. You are given a 70 g sample of each of the fol-
CH CH CH CH
2 lowing metals, all at 25˚C. You heat each metal
C
under identical conditions. Which metal will
H be first to reach 30˚C? Which will be last?
9. Identify the error(s) in each name. Explain your reasoning.
(a) 2-ethene
Specific Heat
(b) 1,2,2-trimethylpropane
Metal Capacity (J/g•˚C)
(c) 3, 5-dimethyl-4-ethyl-4-hexene
Platinum 0.133
(d) 4-ethyl-2-pentene
Titanium 0.528
10. Copy the table below into your notebook.
Zinc 0.388
Complete it as follows:
• Write the general formulas for the
Inquiry
alkane, alkene, alkyne, and cycloalkane
13. Design an investigation to differentiate between
homologous series.
• Draw the structural diagram for the third these two compounds:
member of each homologous series. Hint: CH 3 (cid:2)CH 2 (cid:2)CH 2 (cid:2)CH 2 (cid:2)CH 2 (cid:2)CH 3 and
The first member of the alkene series is CH 3 (cid:2)CH(cid:3)CH(cid:2)CH 2 (cid:2)CH 2 (cid:2)CH 3
ethene, C 2 H 4 . 14. When kerosene, C 12 H 26((cid:2)) , is burned in a device
• Name the compound you drew. such a space heater, energy is released. Design
• Indicate whether the compound you drew is an investigation to determine the amount of
saturated or unsaturated. energy that is released, per gram of kerosene.
Discuss potential problems with using a
kerosene heater in a confined area, such as a
camper trailer, where the supply of air may be
limited. Support your discussion with balanced
chemical equations.
Unit 5 Review • MHR 633
15. A group of students tested two white,crystalline ence of large amounts of carbon dioxide indi-
solids, A and B, to determine their heats of cates more complete combustion.) The follow-
solution. The students dissolved 10.00 g ing results were recorded.
of each solid in 100.0 mL of water in a
polystyrene calorimeter and collected the Test tube Result of combustion Carbon dioxide test
temperature data. They obtained the following 1 no sound; smoke remained almost
and black solid clear, so very little
data:
formed CO2(g) present
2 small pop; less turned slightly
Time Temperature (A) Temperature (B) smoke; less black milky so some
0.0 15 25
solid CO2(g) present
3 loud pop; no turned very
0.5 20.1 18.8
smoke or black milky so alot of
1.0 25 16.7 solid CO2(g) present
1.5 29.8 15.8 4 small pop; no turned slightly
2.0 31.9 15.2 smoke or black milky so some
solid CO2(g) present
2.5 32.8 15
3.0 33 15 The gas may be methane, ethane, or propane.
3.5 33 15.2 (a) Write balanced chemical equations for the
4.0 32.8 15.5 complete combustion of methane, ethane,
4.5 32.5 15.8 and propane.
5.0 32.2 16.1 (b) Which test tube indicates the most complete
5.5 31.9 16.4 combustion? Why?
(c) Use your answer to question (b) and your
(a) Graph the data in the table above, placing balanced chemical equations to determine
time on the x-axis and temperature on the the most likely identity of the unknown gas.
y-axis. Use your graph to answer (b) to (d). Support your answer with a clear explana-
(b) Classify the heat of solution of each solid as tion.
exothermic or endothermic. (d) Write one possible balanced equation for the
(c) From the data given, calculate the heat of incomplete combustion of the gas you chose
solution for each solid. Your answer should in question (c).
be in kJ/g. (e) Both methane and propane are used in
(d) Is there any evidence from the data that the Canada to heat homes. Discuss the possible
students' calorimeter could have been more consequences if these gases are burned in
efficient? Explain your answer. furnaces or appliances that do not have
16. An unknown hydrocarbon gas was collected in adequate ventilation.
test tubes. It was mixed with pure oxygen gas
in the following ratios: Communication
17. Use a concept map to trace the path of a
Test tube % gas % oxygen
six-carbon hydrocarbon molecule as it goes
1 75 25
from its source in the ground, through process-
2 50 50
ing, into a can of paint. Describe each step in
3 33 67
its processing. Explain any changes that the
4 25 75 molecule undergoes.
A match was held up to the mouth of each test 18. What do “saturated” and “unsaturated” mean
tube to ignite the contents. Afterwards, limewa- when applied to hydrocarbons? Give an exam-
ter was added to each test tube to test for the ple of a saturated hydrocarbon and an example
presence of carbon dioxide. (Note: The pres- of an unsaturated hydrocarbon.
634 MHR • Unit 5 Hydrocarbons and Energy
19. Why do alkanes and alkynes, unlike alkenes, 29. As you learned in previous chapters, research
have no geometric isomers? has been focused on using hydrogen gas as a
20. Explain why carbon is able to form so many fuel. Hydrogen is being researched as a fuel. It
more compounds than any other element. burns according to the following equation:
21. Discuss how you can determine whether the 2H 2(g) +O 2(g) → 2H 2 O ((cid:2))
following compounds are alkanes, cycloalka- The heat of combustion for hydrogen is
nes, alkenes, or alkynes, without drawing their −141.5 kJ/g.
structural diagrams: C H , C H , C H , C H , (a) Calculate the energy produced by the
6 12 4 6 5 12 7 14
and C H . combustion of one litre (0.702 kg) of octane,
3 4
22. Describe the information that is included in the C 8 H 8((cid:2)) , in gasoline. The heat of combustion
of octane is −41.3 kJ/g.
following thermochemical equation:
(b) Calculate the volume of hydrogen gas at
N +3H → 2HN +92.2kJ
2(g) 2(g) 3(g) SATP that is required to produce the same
23. Define calorimetry. Describe two commonly amount of energy as the octane in part (a).
used calorimeters. (c) How could hydrogen gas be stored in order
24. When taking a calorimetric measurement, why to carry a practical amount in a passenger
do you need to know the heat capacity of the vehicle? What possible danger might
calorimeter? this create?
25. Describe two exothermic processes and two 30. Government leaders often use the perspectives
endothermic processes. of human health and well-being, the environ-
ment, and the economy to study the risks and
26. Compare the following terms: specific heat
benefits of various fuels and alternatives.
capacity and heat capacity.
Suppose you are a leader in a developing
(a) Write their symbols and their units.
country. You need to choose one of these
(b) Write a mathematical formula in which each
energy sources to meet your country's needs:
term would be used.
hydrocarbon fuels, hydroelectric power, or
Making Connections nuclear energy. Write a small report, analyzing
each energy source from the three perspectives
27. You will often see numbers on gas pumps that
given above. Which energy source would you
indicate how efficiently the fuel burns. A high-
choose? Why?
er number indicates a more efficient fuel. These
numbers refer to the “octane rating” of the fuel.
There is a direct relationship between the
octane rating and the degree of branching in
fuel hydrocarbons. The presence of branches
increases the efficiency of a fuel. Arrange the
following hydrocarbon compounds in order of
increasing octane rating: 2-methylhexane, COURSE
heptane, and 2,2,4-trimethylpentane. Explain. CHALLENGE
28. When walking briskly, you use about 20 kJ of Planet Unknown
energy per minute. One serving of a whole Consider the following as you continue to plan for
wheat cereal (37.5 g) provides about 126 Cal your Chemistry Course Challenge:
(food calories) of energy. Hint: 1 Cal = 4.184 kJ • How can you measure the energy content of a fossil
(a) How long could you walk after eating one fuel in the laboratory?
serving of cereal? • How can you calculate heat using mass, tempera-
(b) How far could you walk at 60 km/h? ture change, and specific heat capacity?
• What conditions are necessary in order for a large
amount of fungus to be converted into a fossil fuel?
Unit 5 Review • MHR 635
Assessment
C O U R S E C H A L L E N G E Before starting this performance task, work with your
class to design a rubric.
(cid:2) Assess yourself on your ability to transfer the con-
cepts you learned in this course to the new con-
text of this project.
(cid:2) Assess yourself on your ability to apply the skills
and strategies of scientific inquiry.
(cid:2) Assess yourself on how well you communicated
your results to your audience.
(cid:2) Assess your ability to propose practical solutions
to science- and technology-based problems.
Planet Unknown
I
t is the year 3000, and space travel is common- light. However, the planet has no ocean, no
place. Nearly one trillion human beings inhabit surface water, and no atmospheric water at all.
the Milky Way galaxy now. They reside on thou- There is evidence that plant life once existed
sands of planets that have been made habitable. on this planet. Without surface water, however,
You are part of a scientific team that has been there are no plants living on the planet’s surface
sent to a newly discovered planet. Your team must at the present time. A small population of bacteria
analyse the resources present on the planet. You may be present.
will also decide on the technological processes One side of the planet contains a dry and
needed to make the planet a safe place to live. rocky desert, covered in part by a large crater.
This will involve removing dangerous toxins from A thick layer of rock covers the other side of the
the environment, and identifying possible sources planet. Under this rocky surface runs a wide net-
of fuel, oxygen, water, and food. work of lava-tube tunnels. Scientists hypothesize
The newly discovered planet has an insulating that a very large meteor may have struck the
atmosphere and temperature range similar to planet at one time. The meteor knocked off a
Earth’s. Each day on the planet is 25 Earth hours chunk of the planet. This chunk now orbits the
long. Every day contains 8 hours of bright sun- planet as a moon.
636 MHR • Course Challenge
Choose a name for the planet
you will explore.
Scientists believe that the enormous heat of This challenge comprises five parts, each
this collision decomposed all surface water into featuring a unique challenge of its own. Each
hydrogen and oxygen gases. This explains the lack part reflects the content of a unit from the
of surface water on the planet. The heat also trig- Chemistry 11 course you have completed. As
gered massive volcanic eruptions. These eruptions you work through the parts, you will apply your
resulted in the rocky surface and lava tunnels that knowledge from this chemistry course to make
cover half the planet. this planet habitable. CAUTION In any hands-on
Fortunately, organic dirt deposits still exist investigation, carefully consider and carry out
underground, in pockets beneath the lava rock. all necessary safety precautions.
These dirt deposits would be useful for growing
food. A sufficient air supply, plant nutrients, and
light will also be necessary in order to grow food.
Planet Unknown • MHR 637
Part 1: Trends in Elements
Your science team has discovered some elemental metals on the planet.
Preview
After testing each element, you have obtained the information given in the
In Part 1, you will use the skills
data chart below. You have not yet been able to obtain the atomic masses.
and content you learned
In addition, these are preliminary tests, so the degree of accuracy is not
in Unit 1, Matter and Chemical
high. However, you now have enough information to analyse the periodic
Bonding. In particular, you will
be applying your knowledge of trends of these new elements.
elements and the periodic table.
Ionization
Atomic Electronegativity energy Melting
radius (nm) Observations (Pauling) (kJ/mol) point (K)
A 0.164 silvery white; turns 1.37 632 1801
yellow or pinkish in air
B 0.180 lustrous, silver, metallic 1.20 614 1784
C 0.188 silvery white; can be 1.11 537 1188
cut with a knife
D 0.189 silver metal; radioactive 1.10 492 1330
E 0.183 soft, silver, malleable, 1.12 523 1211
and ductile; gives an
intense yellow colour
when used as a
component in glass
F 0.182 bright silver, metallic; 1.13 532 1295
gives a violet, wine red,
or grey colour when
used as a component
G 0.181 the salts of the metal 1.15 537 1321
glow pale blue or green
in the dark; radioactive
H 0.180 bright silver; stable in 1.17 545 1352
One of the geologists on your
air; absorbs infrared
team finds some fossilized
light when used as a
wood on the planet. She
component in glass
attempts to find the age of
the wood using carbon dating. I 0.199 silver metal 1.19 548 1099
In carbon dating, the relative J 0.180 silver metal 1.20 596 1580
amounts of carbon isotopes
are compared. Since carbon
isotopes decay at a regular Challenge
rate, this information can be
Analyse any periodic trends that appear in the data. Trends will be
used to find the age of carbon
compounds. However, the similar to those in Earth’s periodic table. (Hint: Part of the list belongs
isotopic ratios of carbon on to a group. Another part of the list belongs to a period.)
this planet are different from
1 I Explain the periodic trends seen in the chart. How does your
those on Earth. The isotopic
explanation correlate with Earth’s periodic table? Which trends
ratios of carbon on this planet
are 80.2 % 12C, 19.3% 13C, on Earth’s periodic table increase from left to right? Which trends
and 0.5% 14C. generally increase from top to bottom? Which data do not seem to
fit the trend? Can you suggest a possible explanation?
(a)What are the isotopic
ratios of carbon on Earth?
2 K/U Which metal is more reactive, A or C? Which metal is the least
(b)What is the average reactive, F or G? How do you know?
molar mass of carbon
on the unknown planet? 3 C Assume that these metals are also present on Earth. Use Earth’s
periodic table to identify a possible element on Earth that matches
each unknown element. Explain your reasoning.
638 MHR • Course Challenge
Part 2: Growing Food
In your explorations, your team discovers a particularly large under-
Preview
ground cavern. The cavern has a steady water source seeping out of phos-
In Part 2, you will apply the skills
phate rock. This trickling water picks up a weak concentration of phos-
you learned in Unit 2, Quantities
phate ions as it filters through the rock. There is plenty of soil in this cav-
in Chemical Reactions.
ern, although extra plant nutrients will need to be added on a regular
basis as crops are grown and harvested. This cavern may be an excellent
site for growing vegetables and other plants. A source of light will be
needed.
Challenge
To grow sufficient crops, you will need large amounts of calcium
phosphate fertilizer. You can make this compound by combining the
phosphate solution in the stream with calcium cations. Simulate this reac-
tion in the laboratory. Design a procedure to find the mass of dry calcium
phosphate precipitate. Mix 50 mL of a 0.10 mol/L aqueous solution of
sodium phosphate with sufficient calcium nitrate to obtain a precipitate.
Filter the precipitate, dry it, and determine its mass.
1 K/U Write the balanced chemical equation and net ionic equation for
the reaction described in the Challenge.
2 I Write up a procedure for your investigation, and have your teacher
approve it before you begin. Before starting, discuss appropriate safety
precautions with your teacher. Wear eye protection. Wash your hands
after any contact with chemicals.
3 C Prepare a detailed report to share your findings. Include all of your
observations and answers to the questions in Part 2.
4 I In your report, compare the theoretical yield with the actual yield
of the product. Identify possible sources of error in your procedure.
5 I If time permits, modify your procedure to improve your results.
Keep a detailed record of the changes you made to the procedure, the
observed benefits, and the new percent yields obtained.
Think and Research
1 I Using the reactant amounts from your experiment, what mass of
sodium nitrate would you expect to get from the reaction? How could
you collect this product to test your calculations?
2 I Show the calculations you used to find the amount of calcium
nitrate necessary to react with the phosphate solution.
3 I If 600 L of 0.10 mol/L solution of sodium phosphate were reacted
with 10 kg of calcium nitrate, what would the limiting reagent be?
Extension
4 MC What other modifications will you need to make the cavern
suitable for growing plants? For example, would you need to add other
nutrients as fertilizer? Do sources of these nutrients exist on the planet
already? Write the chemical equations for the reactions.
Planet Unknown • MHR 639
Part 3: What’s in the Water?
Life as we know it is impossible without water. Thus it is essential to
Preview
establish a good water source. Although there is no surface water of
This part will call upon what you
any kind, the planet does have water—underground! Since this water
learned in Unit 3, Solutions and
is constantly filtered through underground rocks and soil, it contains
Solubility. In particular, you will
many dissolved substances. Some of these substances may be dangerous
review solutions, titrations, and
acid-base chemistry. to human health. These materials will have to be removed in order to
obtain clean water. How can you find out what substances are present
in the water?
Challenge
Your teacher will give you a sample of water representing the planet’s
underground water. Analyse the chemical composition of the water sam-
ple. (Note that the sample you have may not be the same as the samples of
your classmates.)
There are several methods you can use to analyse specific components
of your sample. These may involve:
• titration
• precipitation
• acid-base tests
• evaporation
• distillation
1 I Choose one or more methods to analyse your sample. Your teacher
will give you further guidance on the methods that are most useful for
your specific sample.
2 I Write up a procedure for your investigation, and have your teacher
approve it before you begin. Before starting, discuss appropriate safety
precautions with your teacher. Wear eye protection, gloves, and an
apron.
3 C After you have analysed your sample, prepare a detailed report.
Think and Research
1 I What else might you need to know about your water sample?
How could you find out?
2 C Write a brief report that lists the different methods used to clean
water on Earth. Explain how each method works. Remember to include
diagrams and any relevant balanced chemical equations.
Extension
3 I A large river of clean, fresh water flows through the largest lava
tunnel. At point B, a small river flows into the larger river. This
−
smaller river contains dangerous levels of toxic nitrite ions (NO ).
2
To prevent the smaller river from contaminating the larger one, you
have decided to limit the flow of the small river. Safety standards per-
mit a maximum of 3.2 mg of nitrite per litre of water. The flow of the
At point A, the river is clean. larger river is 1.2×104 L/s. The concentration of nitrite in the smaller
At point C, however, the river river is 51.2 ppm. What amount of water (in L/s) can be allowed to
is contaminated with the toxic enter the larger river from the smaller river?
nitrite ion. How can you contain
the pollution at point B?
640 MHR • Course Challenge
Part 4: Planetary Gases
The atmosphere of the planet is composed of the following gases:
Preview
argon (49.2%) carbon dioxide (1.3%)
In this part, you will use the skills
oxygen (30.8%) ammonia (0.9%)
you learned in Unit 4, Gases and
nitrogen (14.6%) dinitrogen oxide (0.5%) Atmospheric Chemistry.
hydrogen cyanide (2.3%) hydrogen sulfide (0.4%)
Although the atmosphere contains oxygen, it also contains gases that are
toxic to humans. Eventually, you hope to build a settlement inside a huge
synthetic bubble with its own safe atmospheric mixture of gases. First, During cellular respiration,
your team must find an alternate source of oxygen gas. On Earth, plants plant cells use oxygen to break
supply oxygen through the process of photosynthesis. This may be the down food into energy. Thus,
best method of providing a constant supply of breathable air for the settle- plants take in oxygen and give
off carbon dioxide. When in the
ment bubble on the new planet. But do plants give off pure oxygen, or a
presence of light, plants also
mixture of gases? How much oxygen does a certain mass of plants give off?
take in carbon dioxide and
give off oxygen during photo-
Challenge synthesis. Does cellular respi-
ration use up the same amount
Design an investigation to collect the gas given off by a certain mass of
of oxygen that is given off by
Rotela water plants. Find the mass and volume of the gas. Use this data to
photosynthesis? Do plants give
calculate the molar mass and molar volume of the gas. (Note: This experi-
off a net amount of oxygen,
ment will take several days to do correctly. If possible, do multiple trials.) carbon dioxide, or a combina-
1 K/U Write the balanced equations for photosynthesis and for cellular tion of the two? Do research
to find out.
respiration.
2 I Write up a procedure for your investigation, and have your teacher
approve it before you begin. Before starting, discuss appropriate safety
precautions with your teacher. Wash your hands after handling the
Rotela plants.
3 I Carry out your procedure. Use the volume and the mass of the gas,
along with the temperature of the water and pressure of the room, to
calculate the average molar mass and the molar volume of the gas.
4 C Prepare a detailed report to share your findings. In your report,
compare the molar mass of the gas you calculated to the molar mass of
oxygen. Explain the difference between these values. Identify possible
sources of error in your procedure.
Think and Research PROBLEM TIP
1 I Your team sends a balloon 50 m up into the atmosphere of the (a)Photosynthesis only
planet. The balloon contains 20.3 mol of helium gas. At a temperature occurs during the hours
of 313 K, the balloon has a volume of 614 L. Assume that the universal of sunlight. At night, only
respiration is taking
gas constant, R, has the same value as it would on Earth. What is the
place. How might this
atmospheric pressure on this planet at 313 K? What is it at 0˚C?
affect your investigation?
2 I Use the pressure at 0˚C from the previous question. What is the (b)Remember to include the
partial pressure of each of the components of the atmosphere? vapour pressure of water
in your calculations.
3 I What volume will 1.44 kg of oxygen gas occupy at the planet’s
(c)Did the temperature or
atmospheric pressure? (Assume a temperature of 0˚C.)
pressure change over the
4 I Rearrange the ideal gas equation to calculate the molar volume for course of the experi-
ment? Design your inves-
any ideal gas on this planet at 0˚C.
tigation to include some
checks on this data.
Planet Unknown • MHR 641
Part 5: Finding Fuel
While exploring the lava tunnels, your team discovers a coal-like
Preview
substance. This substance may have originated as a fungus growing in
This part draws upon the skills
underground caves. When the meteor hit the planet, the caves collapsed.
and concepts you learned in
Over millions of years, the pressure of the rock converted the organic
Unit 5. Your main focus will be
material into a fossil fuel.
hydrocarbon fuels and the heat
equation.
Challenge
Your teacher will give you a sample of the coal-like substance discovered
on the planet. Design a calorimeter to measure the heat of combustion of
this substance. Decide whether this substance will be useful as a fuel.
1 I Write up a procedure for your investigation, and have your teacher
approve it before you begin. Before starting, discuss appropriate safety
precautions with your teacher. Wear eye protection, and use care with
hot surfaces.
2 I Carry out your procedure. Calculate the heat of combustion per
gram of your sample.
3 C Prepare a detailed report to share your findings.
Think and Research
Your team has also discovered large pools of hydrocarbon oils on the
surface of the planet. The hydrocarbons seem similar to hydrocarbons on
Earth, and may have been formed in the same way. When analysed, the
oil proves to be composed entirely of compounds with the molecular
formula C H .
7 16
1 K/U How might these hydrocarbon oils have originated?
2 K/U Draw and name all the possible isomers that have this
molecular formula.
3 MC What might be done with the open pools of oil? Give two
or three possibilities.
4 I On another area of the planet, your team discovers a vent with
gas seeping from it. The gas is found to be 81.7% carbon and 18.3%
hydrogen by mass. The molecular mass of the gas is 44.11 g/mol.
What is the formula of the compound? Name the gas. Draw the struc-
tural formula of the compound.
5 MC Suppose you decide to use the coal-like substance and the
pools of oil as fuel. How might your use of these fuels affect the
environment on the planet? What precautions will you take to prevent
environmental damage?
642 MHR • Course Challenge
Part 6: Final Presentation
What other challenges might humans face while developing this planet?
You may want to investigate a different problem. For example:
Unit 1
• Suppose matter on the new planet were not composed of electrons,
protons, and neutrons. Devise a new atomic theory of your own. Explain
how it works in “real life” on the planet. Make up a small, functional
periodic table with new, imaginary elements.
• Develop rules that explain the bonding between your new atoms.
How do these rules affect the reactivity of your elements and structure
of your compounds?
Unit 2
• Suggest reactions that may make life easier on the planet. Research and
perform these reactions in the laboratory. Write balanced equations, and
calculate percent yields in moles and in grams. Explain the purpose of
these reactions in the settlers lives.
Unit 3
• Suggest one or more substances that may already be dissolved in the
water on the newly-discovered planet. Test the solubility of the sub-
stance and plot solubility curves for the solute in water. Explain why
the substance is in the water, and how the substance will affect the life
of the settlers. For example, is it safe to drink? How can it be removed
Web
from the water? Once extracted, can it be used for anything else? LINK
Unit 4
If you have time, work as
• Choose a reaction producing a gas that may be useful to settlers on the a class to create a web
new planet. Research the reaction, then carry it out in the laboratory. site based on this Course
Collect the gas produced and determine its molar volume. Challenge. Create a virtual
tour of your planet’s resources,
Unit 5 projected living spaces, and
• Choose three of these compounds: NaOH, anhydrous CaCl , LiBr, HCl, scientific adaptations. Share
2
your findings with other grade
anhydrous Na SO , AgNO , KI, NH NO , Na CO ·10H O, and KMnO .
2 4 3 4 3 2 3 2 4
eleven classes in your
Design an investigation to measure and compare the heats of solution
province over the Internet.
per mole of these chemicals. Choose one chemical based on its heat of
solution, and its safety for everyday use. Come up with a plan or device
that uses the heating or cooling effect produced by this process to help
the planet’s settlers remain comfortable.
Your presentation After preparing lab reports on one or more sections
of this Course Challenge, you will share your results in a class presenta-
tion. Assume this presentation is being made to the Canadian Minister
of Emigration, the Canadian Minister of the Economy, and a group of
business people who may wish to invest in the development of the planet.
• Provide your audience with solutions to the different scenarios and
problems you investigated. Be prepared to respond to other possible
questions and problems your audience (your class and teacher)
may raise.
• To enhance your presentation, try to include two or more of the
following: posters, brochures, drama, music, lab demonstrations, video
or audio clips, charts or graphs, surveys, models, multimedia, or web
pages with links.
Planet Unknown • MHR 643
Appendix A
Answers to Numerical Chapter and Unit Review Questions
Chapter 1 (c) 8.93×10−2mol (d) 4.83×10−1mol
5.(a) 4.0×102mL; 10.0 mL; 1.0×102mL (e) 2.69 mol (f) 9.27×10−4mol
(b) 1.7×102mL 15. NH : 17.0, 8.77×1023, 1.46, 5.84; H O: 18.0, 1.58,
3 2
6.(a) 1.0×104g (b) 2.23×10−1m 8.77×10−2, 2.63×10−1; Mn 2 O 3 : 158, 1.05×101,
(c) 52cm3 (d) 1.0×103cm3 4.00×1022, 6.64×10−2; K 2 CrO 4 : 246, 2.37×1021,
3.92×10−3, 2.75×10−2; C H O : 152, 2.00×103,
7.(a) 1 (b) 4 (c) 1 (d) 2 8 8 3
1.31×101, 2.49×102; Al(OH) : 78.0, 6.66×104,
(e) 5 (f) 4 (g) 5 3
5.14×1026, 5.98×103
8.(b) 5.7×103km (c) 5.700×103km
16.(a) 355 (b) 74.1
9.(a) 8.73 mL (b) 1.1×105m2
(c) 142 (d) 252
(c) 2.2×102kg/L (d) 0.7
(e) 310 (f) 183
(e) 1.225×104L (f) 1.8×101g/mL
17.(a) 6.66×103 (b) 3.35×102
10.(a) 6.21×104 (b) 3×101 (c) 3.75×103 (d) 1.45
(c) 6×102 (d) 1.72×101 (e) 5.74×101 (f) 2.05×10−2
11. 1.9×104cm3 18. 2.11×1024
12.(a) 2.4×101˚C 19. 1.3×1024
(b) the tenths digit, to the right of the decimal
20.(a) 131 (b) 131
Chapter 2 (c) 2.18×10−22 (d) 7.89×1025
6.(a) 7 (b) 7 (c) 10 (d) 3− (e) 6.02×1023
(e) 79Se2− (f) 2− (g) Cr (h) 24 21. 3.01×1024
34
(i) 28 (j) 21 (k) 3+ (l) 19 22. 6.57×1024
(m)9 (n) 9 (o) 9 (p) 0
23. 4.53×1023
7. 32 neutrons; 27 electrons
24. 192 g
8.(a) 2.40×106 (b) 2.13×106 25. Br-79, 55.0 % ; Br-81, 45.0 %
Chapter 3 26.(a) 1.00 (b) 84.9
2.(a) 1.79 (b) 1.35 (c) 1.28 (d) 0.40 27.(a) 14 (b) 16
(c) 4.2×10−3
14.(a) 1.55; 1.49; 2.43
(b) 2.41; 1.59; 1.39 32.(a) 2.65×10−4 (b) 1.19×10−1
(c) 1.62; 1.33; 1.26; 1.23; 1.30 33. 101 mg
16.(a) Ag, 1; Cl, 1 (b) Mn, 2; P, 3
Chapter 6
(c) P, 5; Cl, 1 (d) C, 4; H, 1
(e) Ti, 4; O, 2 (f) Hg, 2; F, 1 5. 2.64 g
(g) Ca, 2; O, 2 (h) Fe, 2; S, 2 6.(a) 9.9 % C; 58.6 % Cl; 31.4 % F
(b) 80.1 % Pb; 16.5 % O; 0.3 % H; 3.1 % C
Unit 1
7.(a) 6.86 g (b) 1.74 g
42.(a) 21.5 (b) 58cm3 8.(a) 63.5% (b) 127 kg
(c) 19.3kg/dm3 (d) 17.5 g
9. 26.9 g
(e) 298˚C
10. 168 g
44. 7, 7, 10, 32S2−, 16, 4He, 2, 4, 2, 38Ca, 18
11. C H O
4 8 4
Chapter 5 12. C H O Cl
12 4 2 4
9. 40 13.(b) C H
3 8
10. 69.8 u 14. C H O
21 30 2
11. 72.71 u 15. Na Cr O
2 2 7
12. K-39, 95.0 % ; K-40, 5.0 % 16. HgSO
4
13.(a) 2.84×10−3mol (b) 5.17×10−1mol 17.(a) Ca P O (b) Ca (PO )
(c) 8.16×10−5mol (d) 4.38 mol 3 2 8 3 4 2
18.(a) C H O N (b) C H O N
(e) 0.126 mol 18 26 3 18 26 3
14.(a) 7.09×10−3mol (b) 1.23 mol 19. V
644 MHR • Appendix A
20. C H O 19.(a) 0.381 mol/L (b) 0.25 mol/L
3 6
21. 7 20. 25.0 g
22.(a) 37.5 % C; 4.2 % H; 58.3 % O 23.(b) approximately 90 g (c) approximately 145 g
(b) C H O (c) C H O (d) approximately 76˚C
6 8 7 6 8 7
23. CO , 1.37 g; H O, 1.13 g 24. approximately 380 g
2 2
28.(a) 0.87 g (b) 0.56 g 25. 40˚C
29.(b) 60.3 % (c) 1.0×102kg 29. 0.25 ppm; 250 ppb
30.(b) C H O
9 8 4 Chapter 9
Chapter 7 13. 1.5×10−2mol/L
6. 9.60 g 14.(a) 2.69×10−3mol/L (b) 1.88×10−2mol/L
7. 8.0×1022 (c) 0.999 mol/L
8. 292 g 15. 0.104 mol/L
9.(b) 8.94 g (c) 0.407 g S 16. K+ = 6.67×10−2 mol/L; Ca2+ = 6.67×10−2 mol/L;
NO − = 0.200mol/L
10. 36.1 g 3
17. iron(III) chloride
11. 2.04 g
18.(a) Ca2+ = 4.5×10−2mol/L; Mg2+ = 2.4×10−2mol/L
12. 22.6 g (b) Ca2+ = 1.8×103ppm; Mg2+ = 5.8×102ppm
13. 1.65 g 19. 1.4×10−2mol
14. 2.58 g
20. 12.2 g
15.(a) 7.32 g (b) 34.2 %
22.(b) 0.01057 mol (c) 120.4 g/mol
(c) 7.23 g
16. 53.7 % 24.(b) 0.09600 %
17.(a) 15.1 g (b) 0.414 g Chapter 10
(c) 14.2 g (d) 94.3 % 10.(b) half
19.(a) 3.24 g (b) 270 g 13.(a) 1.0×103g (b) 55 mol
23. 5.9×105Lair or 7.1×105g air 14. 0.800 mol/L
24.(d) 7×10−2 15. 0.020 mol/L
16. 1.0×10−5mol
Unit 2
18.(a) 2.399 mol/L (b) no (because 9.317 % )
29.(a) 6.02×1023 molecules; 1.21×1024 atoms
(b) 3.0×1024 ions (c) 2.3×1024 atoms Unit 3
33.(a) 0.167 mol (b) 1.00×1023 mol 22. 3.6×10−3g
(c) 3.01×1023 atoms
23. 1.25×10−5g
34. 1.94×1023
35. 1.20×1022 Chapter 11
37. 68.1 % C; 13.7 % H; 18.1 % O 16. 0.50 L
38. 2.84 g 17. 37.5 atm
42.(a) 0.015 mm (b) 2.7 nm 18. 1.31×103torr
19. 21 L
Chapter 8
20. 2.8 L
11. 6.25 g
21. − 233
12.(a) 25 g (b) 225 g
22.(a) 16.2 L (b) 138cm3
(c) 2.50 mol/L
(c) 109 mL
13. 96 mL
23. 2.2 L
14. 1.2 ppm
24. 50.2 kPa
15. 5.67 mol/L
25. 3.7×102˚C
16. 0.427 mol/L
26. 62.5 kPa
17.(a) 9.89 g (b) 83 g
27. 273˚C
18.(a) 1.7 mol/L (b) 1.44 mol/L
Appendix A • MHR 645
28. 262 kPa 19. 202.6 mL
29. 68 days 20. 56.8 atm
30. −68˚C 21. 368 kPa
31. 24 atm 22. 374dm3
32. 2.3×103L 23. 49.3˚C
33. 21 mL 24. 1.5
34. 752 mm 25. 4.6; 6.2×102; 1.03×103; − 15.8; 15.1; 88
35.(a) 1.5×102 (b) 1.017×103 26. 54.7 mL
(c) 750
27. 7.5×102kPa, 4.8×102kPa, 1.10×103kPa,
36. 1.666×101, 1.066×101 2.4×102kPa
37.(a) 87.5 (b) − 148 28. 2.5×102L
29. 78 kPa
Chapter 12
12.(a) 22.4 L (b) 2.80×102L 30. 22.4˚C
(c) 5.60×102L 31. 16 kg
13. 6.72×1024 32. 7.5 L, 5.0 L
14. 50.4 L 33. 0.34 L
15. 3.28×10−1 34. 29.5 g
16. 9.68×102kPa 35. 0.69 L
17. 1.80×103g 36. C 4 H 10 O
18.(a) 1.69 g/L (b) 1.66 g/L 37. C 10 O 2 H 20
19.(a) 2.40 g (b) 1.75 g 38.(a) 9.7×1021molecules
(b) 2.6×1021molecules
20.(a) 20 g/mol
(c) 1.2×1020molecules
21.(a) 7.46 mol (b) 628 kPa (d) 3.7×1018molecules
(c) 210 kPa
39. 1.94×1011mol
22. 12˚C
Chapter 14
23. C H O; C H O
2 6 4 12 2
24. C H 8.(b) 121 kJ
8 18
25. CH Cl 13. 322 kJ
3
26.(b) 10 L (c) 14.3 g 14. Sample 2
27. 4.35 g 15. 4.93 Cal/g
28. 3.00 L 16. 158 kJ
29. 7.33 L 17. 188 kJ
30. 1.28×103L 18.(a) 5.0 kJ/g, 1.2 Cal/g (b) 3.6 Cal/g
31. 1.70 L 20. 2.51 kJ
32.(b) 0.206 g; 0.736 g 21. 9.68kJ/˚C
35.(a) 8.314 kPa•L/mol•K 22. 39.3˚C
(b) 0.08206 atm•L/mol•K 24. 1.1×103L
(c) 62.36 torr•L/mol•K 25.(a) 56.2 mL (b) 34.9 L
36.(a) 68 L (b) 3.4 L; 3.4 L
(c) 2.5 mL Unit 5
15.(c) −0.75kJ/g, 0.42 kJ/g
Unit 4
28.(a) 26 min (b) 2.6 km
16. 0˚C
29.(a) 2.90×104kJ (b) 2.52×103L
17. 0.5000 mol
18. 2.0 L
646 MHR • Appendix A
Appendix B
Supplemental Practice Problems
UNIT 1 10. Using only a periodic table (not the values for
atomic radius), rank the following sets of atoms in
Chapter 1
order of increasing size.
1. A student measures the mass of five different ingots (a) W, Cr, Mo (b) As, Ca, K
of aluminum to be 28.6 g, 28.72 g, 28.5 g, 29.0 g, (c) I, Cl, F, Br (d) Cl, P, Mg
28.6 g. What is the average mass of these ingots? (e) Zn, Cd, Hg
2. Label each as either a physical or a chemical 11. Using only a periodic table (not the values for
property. ionization energy), rank the following sets of atoms
(a) The boiling point of water is 100˚C. in order of increasing ionization energy.
(b) Chlorine gas reacts violently with sodium metal. (a) Ar, Xe, Ne (b) P, Al, Cl
(c) Bromine has a brown colour. (c) Rb, Li, K (d) Mg, Be, Ca
(d) Sulfuric acid causes burns when it comes in
contact with skin. Chapter 3
3. The population of Canada is about 30 million. 12. Predict whether each of the following bonds has a
Express this amount to the correct number of primarily ionic or covalent character.
significant digits. (a) B − F (b) C − H
(c) Na − Cl (d) Si − O
4. How many significant digits are in the following
quantities? 13. Draw Lewis structures representing the following
(a) 624 students ionic compounds.
(b) 22.40 mL of water (a) KBr (b) CaO
(c) 0.00786 g of platinum (c) MgCl 2 (d) Mg 3 N 2
5. Round off the following measured quantities to the 14. Draw Lewis structures to represent the following
number of significant digits specified. covalent compounds.
(a) 9.276×103m (2 significant digits) (a) F 2 (b) CH 4
(b) 87.45 g (3 significant digits) (c) CO 2 (d) CO
(c) 93.951 kg (3 significant digits) (e) NO (f) N 2
6. The masses of several samples of titanium were 15. For the previous problem, indicate any polar
measured to be: 193.67g; 28.9g; 78g;4.946×10−1kg. covalent bonds with a partial negative or positive
These samples were all put into an overflow can charge on the appropriate atom.
together. The water displaced had a volume of 16. Name each of the following ionic compounds.
176.1 mL. What is the average density of the (a) MgCl (b) Na O
2 2
titanium pieces? (c) FeCl (d) CuO
3
7. Characterize each of the following occurrences as a (e) AlBr 3
physical or as a chemical change. 17. Write the chemical formula for each of the following
(a) sugar is heated over a flame and caramelises compounds.
(turns black) (a) aluminum bromide
(b) blood clots (b) magnesium oxide
(c) a rubber band is stretched until it snaps (c) sodium sulfide
(d) a match burns (d) iron(II) oxide
(e) a grape is crushed (e) copper(II) chloride
(f) salt is put on the roads in the winter, melting
18. Write the formula for each of the following.
the ice.
(a) sodium hydrogen carbonate
Chapter 2 (b) potassium dichromate
(c) sodium hypochlorite
8. Draw Lewis structures to represent each of the
(d) lithium hydroxide
following atoms.
(e) potassium permanganate
(a) Mg (b) K (c) Ne
(d) B (e) C (f) Al 19. Name each of the following compounds.
(a) K CrO (b) NH NO
9. Draw Lewis structures to represent each of the 2 4 4 3
(c) Na SO (d) KH PO
following ions. 2 4 2 4
(e) Sr (PO )
(a) H+ (b) K+ (c) F− 3 4 2
(d) S2− (e) Al3+ (f) Br−
Appendix B • MHR 647
20. Name each of the following covalent compounds. (b) 96Mo+4He → 100Tc+
42 2 43
(a) Cl 2 O 7 (b) H 2 O (c) +1H → 29Si+0?
(c) BF (d) N O 1 14 0
3 2 4 (d) 209Bi+ → 210Po+1n
(e) N O 83 84 0
2
21. Write the formula for each of the following
UNIT 2
compounds.
(a) tetraphosphorus decoxide Chapter 5
(b) nitrogen trichloride 29. Gallium exists as two isotopes, Ga-69 and Ga-71.
(c) sulfur tetrafluoride (a) How many protons and neutrons are in each
(d) xenon hexafluoride isotope?
(b) If Ga-69 exists in 60.0 % relative abundance, esti-
Chapter 4
mate the average atomic mass of gallium using the
22.Balance each of the following skeleton equations.
mass numbers of the isotopes.
Classify each chemical reaction.
(a) Fe+Cl → FeCl 30. Rubidium exists as two isotopes: Rb-85 has a mass of
2 2
(b) FeCl +Cl → FeCl 84.9117 u and Rb-87 has a mass of 86.9085 u. If the
2 2 3
(c) C H O+O → CO +H O average atomic mass of rubidium is 85.4678, deter-
4 10 2 2 2
(d) Al+H SO → Al (SO ) +H mine the relative abundance of each isotope.
2 4 2 4 3 2
(e) N 2 O 5 +H 2 O → HNO 3 31. You have 10 mL of isotopically labelled water, 3H 2 O.
(f) (NH ) CO → NH +CO +H O That is, the water is made with the radioactive
4 2 3 3 2 2
isotope of hydrogen, tritium, 3H. You pour the
23. Write the product(s) of each of the following
10 mL of tritium-labelled water into an ocean and
chemical reactions. Also, identify the reaction type.
allow it to thoroughly mix with all the bodies of
In the case of no reaction, state NR.
(a) MgCO → water on the earth. After the tritium-labelled water
3(s)
mixes thoroughly with the earth’s ocean water, you
(The magnesium carbonate is heated.)
(b) Ca +Cl → remove 100 mL of ocean water. Estimate how many
(c) NH (s) CO 2(g) +KOH → molecules of 3H 2 O will be in this 100 mL sample.
4 3(aq) (aq)
(Assume that the average depth of the ocean is
(Group I ions, hydrogen ions, and ammonium
5 km. The earth’s surface is covered roughly two-
ions always form soluble ionic compounds.)
(d) I +KBr → thirds with water. The radius of the earth is about
2(aq) (aq)
(e) Na CO +MgCl → 6400 km.)
2 3(aq) 2(aq)
(Carbonate compounds form precipitates except 32. Calculate the molar mass of each of the following
when they contain ions from Group I, hydrogen, compounds.
or ammonium. Group I ions form soluble ionic (a) Al 2 (CrO 4 ) 3
compounds.) (b) C 4 H 9 SiCl 3 (n-butyltrichlorosilane, an intermediate
(f) K +O → in the synthesis of silicones)
(s) 2(g)
(c) Cd(ClO ) ·2H O (cadmium chlorate dihydrate,
24. Balance the following chemical equation. 3 2 2
BiCl +NH +H O → Bi(OH) +NH Cl an oxidizing agent)
3 3 2 3 4
33. How many atoms are contained in 3.49 moles of
25. Balance the equation.
NiSO +NH +H O → Ni(NH ) (OH) +(NH ) SO manganese?
4 3 2 3 6 2 4 2 4
34. How many atoms are there in 8.56 g of sodium?
26. Complete and balance if necessary, each of the
following nuclear equations. 35. What is the mass of 5.67×1023 molecules of
(a) 23 9 7 2 U → − 0 1 e+ pentane, C 5 H 12 ?
(b) 231Th → 231Pa + 36. Consider a 23.9 g sample of ammonium carbonate,
90 91 (NH ) CO .
(c) 215Po → 4He + 4 2 3
84 2 (a) How many moles are in this sample?
27. Write a balanced nuclear equation for each of the (b) How many formula units are in this sample?
following. (c) How many atoms are in this sample?
(a) Radon-233 decays with the emission of an alpha
Chapter 6
particle.
(b) Actinium-228 decays with the emission of a beta 37. Pyridine, C 5 H 5 N, is a slightly yellow liquid with a
particle. nauseating odour. It is flammable and toxic by
ingestion and inhalation. Pyridine is used in the
28. Complete and balance each of the following nuclear
synthesis of vitamins and drugs, and has many
equations.
other uses in industrial chemistry. Determine the
(a) 23Na+ → 23Mg+1n
11 12 0 percentage composition of pyridine.
648 MHR • Appendix B
38. Bromine azide is an explosive compound that is (a) What mass of propane, C H , reacting with excess
3 8
composed of bromine and nitrogen. A sample of oxygen, is required to produce 26.7 g of carbon
bromine azide was found to contain 2.35 g Br and dioxide gas?
1.24 g N. (b) How many oxygen molecules are required to react
(a) Calculate the percentage by mass of Br and N in with 26.7 g of propane?
bromine azide. 48. Metal hydrides, such as strontium hydride, SrH ,
2
(b) Calculate the empirical formula of bromine azide. react with water to form hydrogen gas and the corre-
(c) The molar mass of bromine azide is 122 g/mol. sponding metal hydroxide.
Determine its molecular formula.
SrH +2H O → Sr(OH) +2H
2(s) 2 (l) 2(s) 2(g)
39. Progesterone is a female hormone. It is 80.2% C,
9.62 % H and 10.2 % O by mass. (a) When 2.50 g of SrH 2 is reacted with 8.03×1022
molecules of water, what is the limiting reagent?
(a) Determine the empirical formula of progesterone.
(b) What mass of strontium hydroxide will be
(b) From the given data, is it possible to determine
produced?
the molecular formula of progesterone? Explain
your answer. 49. Consider the following successive reactions.
reaction (1): A → B
40. Potassium tartrate is a colourless, crystalline solid. It
% % % % reaction (2): B → C
is 34.6 K, 21.1 C, 1.78 H, 42.4 O by mass. %
If reaction (1) proceeds with a 45 yield and
(a) Calculate the empirical formula of potassium %
reaction (2) has a 70 yield, what is the overall
tartrate.
yield for the reactions that convert A to C?
(b) If the molar mass of potassium tartrate is
226 g/mol, what is the molecular formula of 50. Disposable cigarette lighters contain liquid butane,
potassium tartrate? C 4 H 10 . Butane undergoes complete combustion to
carbon dioxide gas and water vapour according to
41. Menthol is a compound that contains C, H and O. It
the skeleton equation below:
is derived from peppermint oil and is used in cough
drops and chest rubs. When 0.2393 g of menthol is C 4 H 10(l) +O 2(g) → CO 2(g) +H 2 O (l)
subjected to carbon-hydrogen combustion analysis, A particular lighter contains 5.00 mL of butane,
0.6735 g of CO 2 and 0.2760g of H 2 O are obtained. which has a density of 0.579 g/mL.
(a) Determine the empirical formula of menthol. (a) How many grams of O 2 are required to combust
(b) If each menthol molecule contains one oxygen all of the butane?
atom, what is the molecular formula of menthol? (b) How many molecules of water will be produced?
(c) Air contains 21.0 % O by volume. What mass of
42. Glycerol, C H O , also known as glycerin, is used 2
3 8 3 air is required to combust 5.00 mL of butane?
in products that claim to protect and soften skin.
Glycerol can be purchased at the drug store. If 51. If the following reaction proceeds with a 75 % yield,
0.784 g of glycerol is placed in a carbon-hydrogen how much diborane, B 2 H 6 , will be produced when
combustion analyzer, what mass of CO 2 and H 2 O 23.5 g of sodium borohydride, NaBH 4 reacts with
will be expected? 50.0 g of boron trifluoride, BF 3 ?
43. Calculate the percentage by mass of water in NaBH 4(s) +BF 3(g) → B 2 H 6(g) +NaBH 4(s)
potassium sulfite dihydrate, K SO ·2H O.
2 3 2
UNIT 3
44. What mass of water is present in 24.7 g of cobaltous
nitrate hexahydrate, Co(NO 3 ) 2 ·6H 2 O? Chapter 8
45. A chemist requires 1.28 g of sodium hypochlorite, 52. What is the molar concentration of the solution
NaOCl, to carry out an experiment, but only has made by dissolving 1.00 g of solid sodium nitrate,
sodium hypochlorite pentahydrate, NaOCl·5H 2 O in NaNO 3 , in enough water to make 315 mL of
the lab. How many grams of the hydrate should the solution?
chemist use? 53. What volume of 4.00×10−2mol/L calcium nitrate
solution, Ca(NO ) will contain 5.0×10−2 mol of
Chapter 7 3 2(aq)
nitrate ions?
46. Consider the equation corresponding to the
54. By the addition of water, 80.0 mL of 4.00 mol/L
decomposition of mercuric oxide.
sulfuric acid, H SO , is diluted to 400.0 mL. What is
2HgO → 2Hg +O 2 4
(s) (l) 2(g) the molar concentration of the sulfuric acid after
What mass of liquid mercury is produced when dilution?
5.79 g of mercuric oxide decomposes?
55. How many moles of NaOH are in 100.0 mL of
47. Examine the following equation. 0.00100 mol/L NaOH solution?
C H +5O → 3CO +4H O
3 8(g) 2(g) 2(g) 2 (g)
Appendix B • MHR 649
56. If a burette delivers 20 drops of solution per 1.0 mL, 67. A sample of lemon juice was found to have a pH of
how many moles of HCl are in one drop of a 0.20 2.50. What is the concentration of hydronium ions in
(aq)
mol/L HCl solution? the lemon juice?
57. What is the mass percent concentration of nicotine 68. How many millilitres of sodium hydroxide solution
in the body of a 70 kg person smokes a pack of are required to neutralize 20 mL of 1.0 mol/L acetic
cigarettes (20 cigarettes) in one day? Assume that acid if 32 mL of the same sodium hydroxide solution
there is 1.0 mg of nicotine per cigarette, and that all neutralized 20 mL of 1.0 mol/L hydrochloric acid?
the nicotine is absorbed into the person’s body. 69. What are the concentrations of hydrogen ions and
58. The blood of an average adult contains about 2.0 L hydroxide ions in a solution that has a pH of 5?
of red blood cells. The hemoglobin present in these 70. What is the pH of a 1.0×10−5 mol/L Ca(OH)
% 2
cells contains approximately 0.33 iron by mass. (calcium hydroxide) solution?
Make a reasonable guess about the density of red
71. How many moles of calcium hydroxide will be neu-
blood cells, and use this value to estimate the mass
tralized by one mole of hydrochloric acid, according
of iron present in the red blood cells of an average
to the following equation?
adult.
Ca(OH) +2HCl → CaCl +2H O(l)
2(s) (aq) 2(aq) 2
59. Ozone is a highly irritating gas that reduces the
72. In an experiment, 50.0 mL of 0.0800 mol/L NaOH is
lung capability of healthy people in concentrations
titrated by the addition of 0.0500 mol/L HNO . What
as low as 0.12 ppm. Older photocopy machines 3
is the hydroxide ion concentration after 30.0 mL of
could generate ozone gas and they were often
HNO solution has been added?
placed in closed rooms with little air circulation. 3
Calculate the volume of ozone gas that would result 73. A100 mL volume of 0.200 mol/L HCl was placed in
in a concentration of 0.12 ppm in a room with a flask. What volume of 0.400 mol/L NaOH solution
dimensions of 5.0m×4.0m×3.0m. must be added to bring the solution to a pH of 7.0?
60. Human blood serum contains about 3.4 g/L of 74. What is the pH of a solution in which 2.0×10−4 mol
sodium ions. What is the molar concentration of Na+ of HCl is dissolved in enough distilled water to
in blood serum? make 300 mL of solution?
75. What is the pH of a solution containing 2.5 g of
Chapter 9
NaOH dissolved in 100 mL of water?
61. Write the net ionic equation for the reaction between
76. For each of the following reactions, identify the acid,
aqueous solutions of barium chloride and sodium
the base, the conjugate base, and the conjugate acid:
sulfate. Be sure to include the state of each reactant (a) HF +NH → NH4+ +F−
(aq) 3(aq) (aq) (aq)
and product.
(b) Fe(H O) 3+ +H O → Fe(H O) (OH) + +
2 6 (aq) 2 (l) 2 5 2 (aq)
62. Write the net ionic equation for the reaction between H O+
3 (aq)
aqueous sodium hydroxide and aqueous nitric acid.
(c) NH + +CN− → HCN +NH
Be sure to include the state of each reactant and 4 (aq) (aq) (aq) 3(aq)
product. (d) (CH 3 ) 3 N (aq) +H 2 O (l) → (CH 3 ) 3 NH+ (aq) +OH− (aq)
63. What are the spectator ions when solutions of 77. A solution was prepared by mixing 70.0 mL of
Na 2 SO 4 and Pb(NO 3 ) 2 are mixed? 4.00 mo/L HCl (aq) and 30.0 mL of 8.00 mol/L
HNO . Water was then added until the final
64. Iron(II) sulfate reacts with potassium hydroxide in 3(aq)
volume was 500 mL. Calculate [H+] and find the pH
aqueous solution to form a precipitate.
of the solution.
(a) What is the net ionic equation for this reaction?
(b) Which ions are spectator ions?
UNIT 4
65. Write the balanced molecular and net-ionic equa-
tions for the following reactions: Chapter 11
(a) Na 3 PO 4(aq) +Ca(OH) 2(aq) → NaOH (aq) + 78. The gas in a large balloon occupies 30.0 L at a
Ca 3 (PO 4 ) 2(s) pressure of 300 kPa. If the temperature is kept
(b) Zn (s) +Fe 2 (SO 4 ) 3(aq) → ZnSO 4(aq) +Fe (s) constant at 300 K, what volume will the balloon
Chapter 10 be at a pressure of 1200 kPa?
66. Name each of the following acids. Indicate whether 79. A gas occupies a 2.0 L container at 25˚C and
each one is a strong or weak acid. 300 kPa pressure. If the gas is transferred to a 3.0 L
(a) H SO (b) HNO container at the same temperature, what will be the
2 4(aq) 3(aq)
(c) HBr (d) HCl new pressure?
(aq) (aq)
(e) HF (aq) 80. If the volume of a given amount of gas is tripled
while the temperature remains constant, what will
be the new pressure of the gas, relative to the initial
pressure?
650 MHR • Appendix B
81. To what temperature must an ideal gas at 27˚C be 94. When a spark ignites a mixture of hydrogen gas and
cooled to reduce its volume by one third? In other oxygen gas, water vapour is formed. What mass of
words, the new volume will be 2 the original oxygen gas would be required to react completely
3
volume. with 1.00 g of hydrogen?
82. If 2.0 L of gas in a piston at 400 K is expanded to 95. Drinking a solution of baking soda (sodium
3.0 L while keeping the pressure constant, what is hydrogen carbonate, NaHCO 3 ) can neutralize excess
the final temperature of the gas in kelvins? hydrochloric acid in the stomach in water. A student
83. If a certain mass of gas occupies 55cm3at 303 K stirred 5.0 g of baking soda in water and drank the
solution, then calculated the size of “burp” expected
and 780 mm Hg, what is its volume in L at SATP?
from the carbon dioxide generated in the following
84. If 1.00 L of helium gas at 20˚C and 100 kPa is forced
reaction.
into a 250 mL container and subjected to a pressure
NaHCO +HCl → NaCl +H O +CO
of 400.0 kPa, what will be the new temperature of 3(aq) (aq) (aq) 2 (l) 2(g)
the gas? Assuming the gas will be at a pressure of 101 kPa,
and body temperature is 37˚C, what volume of
85. A mixture of gases contains equal masses of H , O
2 2
carbon dioxide will be generated?
and CH . If the partial pressure of CH is 80 kPa,
4 4
what is the partial pressure of H ? 96. Rutherford proved that alpha particles were helium
2
nuclei. In an experiment 1.82×1017 alpha particles
86. The volume of an automobile tire does not change
were counted by use of a Geiger counter. The result-
appreciably when the car is driven. Before starting
ing helium gas occupied a volume of 7.34×10−3 mL
on a journey, a tire contains air at 220 kPa and 20˚C.
at 19˚C and 99.3 kPa. Use this information to
After being driven for an hour, the tire and the air
calculate Avogadro’s number.
in it become warmer and the pressure increases to
240 kPa. What is the temperature of the air inside 97. A compound was found to contain 54.5 % carbon,
% %
the tire? 9.10 hydrogen, and 36.4 oxygen. The vapour
from 0.082 g of the compound occupied 21.8 mL
87. The gases inside a balloon exerted a total pressure
at 104 kPa and 20˚C.
of 150.0 kPa on the walls of the balloon. Seventy-five
(a) Calculate the empirical formula of the compound.
percent of the gas was nitrogen and twelve
(b) Calculate the molecular mass of the compound.
percent was oxygen. There was also some water
(c) Calculate the molecular formula of the compound.
vapour, which exerted a pressure of 2.4 kPa and
some carbon dioxide. Calculate the pressure exerted 98. A student collected 375 mL of oxygen gas from the
by the CO gas. decomposition of hydrogen peroxide. The gas was
2
collected over water at 19˚C and 100.2 kPa. What
Chapter 12
mass of oxygen was collected? The vapour pressure
88. A container holds one mole of gaseous neon at of water at 19˚C is 2.2 kPa.
a certain temperature and pressure. A second,
99. Examine the reaction below and answer the
identical container holds gaseous nitrogen at three
following questions.
times the pressure and twice the temperature (in C H +11O → 7CO +8H O
7 16(g) 2(g) 2(g) 2 (g)
kelvins). How many moles of neon are in the
(a) if 10.0 L of C H are burned, what volume of
second container? 7 16(g)
oxygen gas, measured at the same temperature
89. If the mass of a gas is tripled and the pressure is
and pressure, is required?
quadrupled while the temperature is constant, by
(b) if 200 g of CO are formed, what mass of C H
2 7 16(g)
what factor will the volume of the gas change?
was burned?
90. A cylinder with a volume of 25.0 L contains carbon (c) if 200 L of CO are formed, measured at STP,
2
dioxide at a pressure of 120 kPa and a temperature what mass of oxygen was consumed?
of 25˚C. How much carbon dioxide is in the
cylinder? UNIT 5
91. A closed vessel contains the following gases: 6.0 g
Chapter 13
of hydrogen, 14 g of nitrogen, and 44 g of carbon
100. Name each of the following hydrocarbons.
dioxide. If the total pressure in the vessel is 400 kPa,
what is the partial pressure (in kPa) exerted by the (a) CH 3 CH CH 2 CH 2 CH 3
nitrogen in the mixture?
CH
3
92. One litre of a certain gas has a mass of 2.05 g at
SATP. What is the molar mass of this gas?
93. What amount of gas is contained in a 10.0 L flask at
a pressure of 180 kPa and a temperature of 300 K?
Appendix B • MHR 651
(b) (b) 3-ethyl-5-methyl-hexane
CH
3
(c) 2-methyl-4-ethyl-hexane
CH CH CH CH CH CH CH (d) 2,5-dimethylheptane
3 2 2 2 2 2
(e) 3,6-dimethylheptane
CH 3 (f) 2,3,4-trimethylpentane
104. Draw and name three structural isomers of C H .
(c) 6 14
CH
2 105. Name the following alkenes and alkynes.
CH CH
2 2 (a) CH CCHH CCHH
2 3
CH CH
2 2 (b) CH C C CH
3 2
CH
CH
3
CH
3
(c)
CH
2
(d) CH 3 CH CH 2
CH CH
3 2
CH CH
CH CH CH C CH CH CH CH CH
3 2 2 2 2 2 3 CH CH
2 3
CH
3
(d) CH CH CH CH CH C C CH
3 2 2 3
(e) CH
3 (e)
CH
2
CH 3 CH CH 2 CH 2
CH
CH
3
CH CH C C CH CH CH
3 2 2 3
(f)
CH
3 (f) CH CH CH C CH
3 2
CCHH CH
33 CH
3
CH
2
(g) CH CH
− −
CH H 2 C CH CH 2 CH 3
CH CH
2 2
CH CH
2 2
(h) CH CH CH CH C CH CH
3 2 2 3
CH CH
2 2
CH CH
3
CH2
CH
3
101. Draw condensed structural diagrams for each of the
following compounds. 106. Examine the following compounds. Correct any
(a) 2-ethyl-1-pentene flaws that you see in the structural diagrams.
(b) 2,6-octadien-4-yne (a) Is this compound 4-ethyl-2-methylpentane?
(c) 2,5-dimethyl-3-hexyne CH
3
(d) 2-methyl-3-butene
(e) 2-butyl-3-ethyl-1-cyclobutene CH 2
(f) 1,4-dimethylcycloheptane
CH CH CH CH CH CH
3 2 2 3
102. Write IUPAC names for each of the following
compounds. CH
3
(a) C H (b) C H (c) C H
3 6 5 8 5 10
(d) C H (e) C H (f) C H
5 12 6 14 6 12
103. Draw condensed structural diagrams for the
following compounds:
(a) 2,5-dimethylhexane
652 MHR • Appendix B
(b) Is this compound 4,5-dimethylhexane? Chapter 14
CH 107. 100 g of ethanol at 25˚C is heated until it reaches
2
75˚C. How much thermal energy did the ethanol
CH CH
2 2 gain? Hint: Use the information in Table 14.2.
108. An unknown material with a mass of 18 g was
CH CH 2 heated from 22˚C until it reached 232˚C. During this
CH CH process, the material gained 751 J of energy. What is
3
the heat capacity of the unknown material per gram?
CH 3 109. A beaker containing 25 g of liquid at room
temperature is heated until it gains 5˚C. A second
beaker containing 50 g of the same liquid at room
(c) Is this compound 2-methyl-3-ethylpentane?
temperature is heated until it also gains 5˚C. Which
CH 3 beaker has gained the most thermal energy? Explain.
CH 110. An unknown solid was dissolved in the water of a
2
polystyrene calorimeter in order to find its heat of
CH 3 CH CH CH 2 CH 3 solution. The following data was recorded:
=
mass of solid (g) 5.5
CH 2 mass of calorimeter water (g) = 120.0
=
CH initial temperature of water (˚C) 21.7
3 =
final temperature of solution (˚C) 32.6
(a) Calculate the heat change of the water.
(d) Is this compound 1-methyl-3-cyclobutene?
(b) Calculate the heat change caused by the solid
CH CH
dissolving.
(c) What is the heat of solution per gram of solid
CH CCHH CCHH
2 3
dissolved.
111. A 100 -g sample of food is placed in a bomb
calorimeter calibrated at 7.23kJ/˚C. When the food
is burned, the calorimeter gains 512 kJ of heat. If
the initial temperature of the calorimeter was 19˚C,
what is the final temperature of the calorimeter and
its contents?
Appendix B • MHR 653
Appendix C
MAIN-GROUP Periodic Table of the Elements
ELEMENTS
1
Atomic number 6 12.01 Average atomic mass*
(IA) Electronegativity 2.5 2+ Common ion charge
First ionization energy (kJ/mol) 1086 4+ Other ion charges
1 1.01 C
Melting point (K) 4765
2.20 1+ Boiling point (K) 4098
1 1 1 3 3 1 .8 2 1 H 1- 2 carbon
20.28
(IIA)
hydrogen metals (main group)
3 6.94 4 9.01 metals (transition)
0.98 1+ 1.57 2+ Gases metals (inner transition)
520 899
2 453.7 Li 1560Be Liquids metalloids
1615 2744 Synthetics nonmetals
lithium beryllium
11 22.99 12 24.31 TRANSITION ELEMENTS
0.93 1+ 1.31 2+
496 738
3 371 Na 923.2Mg 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
1156 1363
(IIIB) (IVB) (VB) (VIB) (VIIB) (VIIIB)
sodium magnesium
19 39.10 20 40.08 21 44.96 22 47.87 23 50.94 24 52.00 25 54.94 26 55.85 27 58.93
0.82 1+ 1.00 2+ 1.36 3+ 1.54 4+ 1.63 5+ 1.66 3+ 1.55 4+ 1.83 3+ 1.88 2+
419 590 631 658 2+ 650 2+ 653 2+ 717 2+ 759 2+ 760 3+
4 336.7 K 1115Ca 1814Sc 1941 Ti 3+ 2183 V 3+ 2180 Cr 6+ 1519Mn 3+ 1811Fe 1768Co
1032 1757 3109 3560 3680 4+ 2944 2334 7+ 3134 3200
potassium calcium scandium titanium vanadium chromium manganese iron cobalt
37 85.47 38 87.62 39 88.91 40 91.22 41 92.91 42 95.94 43 (98) 44 101.07 45 102.91
0.82 1+ 0.95 2+ 1.22 3+ 1.33 4+ 1.6 5+ 2.16 6+ 2.10 7+ 2.2 3+ 2.28 3+
403 549 616 660 664 3+ 685 702 4+ 711 720
5 312.5Rb 1050 Sr 1795 Y 2128 Zr 2750Nb 2896Mo 2430 Tc 6+ 2607Ru 2237Rh
941.2 1655 3618 4682 5017 4912 4538 4423 3968
rubidium strontium yttrium zirconium niobium molybdenum technetium ruthenium rhodium
55 132.91 56 137.33 57 138.91 72 178.49 73 180.95 74 183.84 75 186.21 76 190.23 77 192.22
0.79 1+ 0.89 2+ 1.10 3+ 1.3 4+ 1.5 5+ 1.7 6+ 1.9 4+ 2.2 4+ 2.2 4+
6 376 503 538 642 761 770 760 6+ 840 3+ 880 3+
301.7Cs 1000Ba 1191La 2506Hf 3290 Ta 3695 W 3459Re 7+ 3306Os 2719 Ir
944 2170 3737 4876 5731 5828 5869 5285 4701
cesium barium lanthanum hafnium tantalum tungsten rhenium osmium iridium
87 (223) 88 (226) 89 (227) 104 (261) 105 (262) 106 (266) 107 (264) 108 (265) 109 (268)
0.7 1+ 0.9 2+ 1.1 3+ – 4+ – – – – – – – – – –
7 ~375 509 499 – – – – – –
300.2Fr 973.2Ra 1324Ac – Rf – Db – Sg – Bh – Hs – Mt
– – 3471 – – – – – –
francium radium actinium rutherfordium dubnium seaborgium bohrium hassium meitnerium
INNER TRANSITION ELEMENTS
58 140.12 59 140.91 60 144.24 61 (145) 62 150.36 63 151.96 64 157.25
1.12 3+ 1.13 3+ 1.14 3+ – 3+ 1.17 3+ – 3+ 1.20 3+
6 Lanthanoids 5 1 2 0 7 71Ce 4+ 5 1 2 2 3 04 Pr 5 1 3 2 0 94Nd 5 1 3 3 6 15Pm 5 1 4 3 3 47Sm 2+ 5 1 4 0 7 95Eu 2+ 5 1 9 5 3 86Gd
3716 3793 3347 3273 2067 1802 3546
cerium praseodymium neodymium promethium samarium europium gadolinium
90 232.04 91 231.04 92 238.03 93 237.05 94 (244) 95 (243) 96 (247)
1.3 4+ 1.5 5+ 1.7 6+ 1.3 5+ 1.3 4+ – 3+ – 3+
7 Actinoids 587 568 4+ 584 3+ 597 3+ 585 3+ 578 4+ 581
2023Th 1845Pa 1408 U 4+ 917 Np 4+ 913.2Pu 5+ 1449Am 5+ 1618Cm
5061 – 4404 5+ – 6+ 3501 6+ 2284 6+ 3373
thorium protactinium uranium neptunium plutonium americium curium
*Average atomic mass data in brackets indicate atomic mass of most stable isotope of the element.
Data obtained from The CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics, 81st Edition
654 MHR • Appendix C
MAIN-GROUP
ELEMENTS
18
(VIIIA)
2 4.00
– –
2372
13 14 15 16 17 5.19 He
5.02
(IIIA) (IVA) (VA) (VIA) (VIIA)
helium
5 10.81 6 12.01 7 14.01 8 16.00 9 19.00 10 20.18
2.04 – 2.55 – 3.04 3– 3.44 2– 3.98 1– – –
800 1086 1402 1314 1681 2080
2348 B 4765 C 63.15 N 54.36 O 53.48 F 24.56Ne
4273 4098 77.36 90.2 84.88 27.07
boron carbon nitrogen oxygen fluorine neon
13 26.98 14 28.09 15 30.97 16 32.07 17 35.45 18 39.95
1.61 3+ 1.90 – 2.19 – 2.58 2– 3.16 1– – –
577 786 1012 999 1256 1520
10 11 12 933.5Al 1687 Si 317.3 P 392.8 S 171.7Cl 83.8 Ar
2792 3538 553.7 717.8 239.1 87.3
(IB) (IIB) aluminum silicon phosphorus sulfur chlorine argon
28 58.69 29 63.55 30 65.39 31 69.72 32 72.61 33 74.92 34 78.96 35 79.90 36 83.80
1.91 2+ 1.90 2+ 1.65 2+ 1.81 3+ 2.01 – 2.18 – 2.55 2– 2.96 1– – –
737 3+ 745 1+ 906 579 761 947 941 1143 1351
1728Ni 1358Cu 692.7Zn 302.9Ga 1211Ge 1090As 493.7Se 266 Br 115.8Kr
3186 2835 1180 2477 3106 876.2 958.2 332 119.9
nickel copper zinc gallium germanium arsenic selenium bromine krypton
46 106.42 47 107.87 48 112.41 49 114.82 50 118.71 51 121.76 52 127.60 53 126.90 54 131.29
2.20 2+ 1.93 1+ 1.69 2+ 1.78 3+ 1.96 4+ 2.05 – 2.1 – 2.66 1– – –
805 3+ 731 868 558 708 2+ 834 869 1009 1170
1828Pd 1235Ag 594.2Cd 429.8In 505 Sn 903.8Sb 722.7Te 386.9 I 161.4Xe
3236 2435 1040 3345 2875 1860 1261 457.4 165
palladium silver cadmium indium tin antimony tellurium iodine xenon
78 195.08 79 196.97 80 200.59 81 204.38 82 207.20 83 208.98 84 (209) 85 (210) 86 (222)
2.2 4+ 2.4 3+ 1.9 2+ 1.8 1+ 1.8 2+ 1.9 3+ 2.0 4+ 2.2 1– – –
870 2+ 890 1+ 1107 1+ 589 3+ 715 4+ 703 5+ 813 2+ (926) 1037
2042 Pt 1337Au 234.3Hg 577.2Tl 600.6Pb 544.6Bi 527.2Po 575 At 202.2Rn
4098 3129 629.9 1746 2022 1837 1235 – 211.5
platinum gold mercury thallium lead bismuth polonium astatine radon
110 (269) 111 (272) 112 (277) 114 (285) 116 (289) 118 (293)
– – – – – – – – – – – –
– – – – – –
– Uun – Uuu – Uub – Uuq – Uuh – Uuo
– – – – – –
ununnilium unununium ununbium ununquadium ununhexium ununoctium
65 158.93 66 162.50 67 164.93 68 167.26 69 168.93 70 173.04 71 174.97
– 3+ 1.22 3+ 1.23 3+ 1.24 3+ 1.25 3+ – 3+ 1.0 3+
565 572 581 589 597 603 2+ 524
1629Tb 1685Dy 1747Ho 1802 Er 1818Tm 1092Yb 1936Lu
3503 2840 2973 3141 2223 1469 3675
terbium dysprosium holmium erbium thulium ytterbium lutetium
97 (247) 98 (251) 99 (252) 100 (257) 101 (258) 102 (259) 103 (262)
– 3+ – 3+ – 3+ – 3+ – 3+ – 3+ – 3+
601 4+ 608 619 627 635 2+ 642 2+ –
1323Bk 1173 Cf 1133Es 1800Fm 1100Md 1100No 1900 Lr
– – – – – – –
berkelium californium einsteinium fermium mendelevium nobelium lawrencium
Periodic Table • MHR 655
Appendix D
Expanding the Bohr’s Model of the Atom
In 1913, the Danish physicist Niels Bohr developed a
Model of the Atom
model of the atom that explained the hydrogen emission
spectrum. In Bohr’s model, electrons orbit the nucleus
in the same way that Earth orbits the Sun, as shown in
In science, theoretical models and experimental evi-
Figure D.2. The following three points of Bohr’s theory
dence are always linked. For example, early scientists
help to explain hydrogen’s emission spectrum.
believed that rotting meat generated maggots. This
seemed reasonable, since exposed meat becomes infest- 1. In Bohr’s model, atoms have specific allowable
ed with maggots. Experiments proved, however, that if energy levels. He called these energy levels
the meat was protected from flies, no maggots appeared. stationary states. Each of these levels corresponds
Thus, rotting meat didn’t generate maggots; flies did. to a fixed, circular orbit around the nucleus.
When a model fails to explain experimental evidence, 2. An atom does not give off energy when its electrons
scientists must discard or modify that model. The are in a stationary state.
model of the atom is no exception.
3. An atom changes stationary states by giving off or
absorbing a quantity of light energy exactly equal to
Emission Spectra
the difference in energy between the two stationary
In Chapter 2, you used a diffraction grating to observe states.
the spectra of various elements. These elements were
sealed in gas discharge tubes. The spectra resulted from
e– e–
electrons in atoms moving from higher energy levels to
lower energy levels and releasing energy as light.
Each wavelength of visible light is associated e–
with a colour. When white light is shone through a gas
discharge tube, it produces a line spectrum. A line
spectrum is a series of narrow lines having specific Figure D.2 In Bohr’s atomic model, electrons move around
colours (energy), separated by colourless spaces. Each the nucleus with fixed, circular orbits.
element produces a different and characteristic emission
spectrum. You can see several examples of these spectra Bohr’s model was revolutionary, because he proposed
in Figure D.1. Scientists who were thinking about how that the energy absorbed or emitted by an atom needed
to describe the atom needed to take the emission spectra to have specific values. The energy change was
into account. quantized, rather than continuous. When something
is quantized, it means that it is limited to discrete
400 nm 500 nm 600 nm 700 nm
amounts or multiples of discrete amounts. Two great
scientists paved the way for this surprising idea.
German physicist Max Planck had already suggested
that energy in general was quantized, meaning that it
exists in “packets.” Building on this idea, Einstein
H proposed that light could behave as particles, which
he called photons.
The energy associated with the light in a line
Hg
spectrum corresponds with the change in energy of an
electron as it moves up or down an energy level. For
example, when electrons in hydrogen atoms that have
Ne
been excited to the third energy level subsequently drop
to the second energy level, they emit light that has a
400 nm 500 nm 600 nm 700 nm
specific energy. They emit photons of red light that have
a wavelength of 656.3 nm. These photons cause the red
Figure D.1 The top spectrum is the continuous spectrum
line on the line spectrum for hydrogen, which you can
of white light. The others are emission spectra for hydrogen,
see in Figure D.1.
mercury, and neon. Each element has its own distinct
spectrum, which is like a “fingerprint” for that element.
Why a New Model?
So what was the problem? Bohr’s model worked
beautifully, correctly predicting the line spectrum for
656 MHR • Appendix D
hydrogen. It also worked fine for ions with one electron, Visualizing the New Model
such as He+, Li2+, Be3+, etc. The model failed, however,
But where do you find the electrons in this new model?
when it was applied to the emission spectra of atoms
How are the sublevels oriented in space? Several
that had more than one electron. Bohr’s model needed
theories enabled scientists to describe what the newly
to be modified, because it was too simple to explain the
conceived atom “looked like.”
experimental evidence.
Particles with Wave-Like Properties
Sublevels
In 1924, Louis de Broglie, a young physics student,
The spectra of many-electron atoms suggested that a
suggested that all matter had wave-like properties. This
more complex structure was needed. Notice in Figure
seemed to follow from Planck and Einstein’s idea that
D.1 that spectra for these more complex atoms have
electromagnetic radiation has matter-like properties.
groups of lines close together. The groups are separated
De Broglie developed an equation that allowed him to
by spaces. The large spaces represent the energy differ-
calculate the wavelength of the matter wave associated
ences between energy levels, while the smaller spaces
with any object, from a bowling ball to an electron.
represent energy differences within the levels.
Objects that we can see and can interact with have
If the electrons are changing energy within the
calculated wavelengths that are smaller than electrons.
levels, this suggests that there are sublevelswithin each
Their wavelengths are so tiny compared to their size
level, each with its own slightly different energy. The
that they do not have any measurable effect on the
idea of energy levels 1, 2, 3, 4, etc. remains, but each
motion of the objects.
energy level is split up into sublevels called s, p, d,
For very tiny moving particles, however, such as
and f. Examine Table D.1 to see how electrons are
electrons, the wavelength becomes very significant.
arranged in sublevels for energy levels 1 to 4.
In fact, an electron moving at an average speed has a
Table D.1 Distribution of wavelength even larger than the size of the entire
Electrons in Energy Levels and Sublevels hydrogen atom!
De Broglie’s theory was proven by experiment
when streams of electrons produced diffraction patterns
similar to those produced by electromagnetic radiation,
which was already known to travel in waves.
Orbitals
In 1926, Erwin Schrödinger used de Broglie’s idea that
matter has wavelike properties. Schrödinger proposed
what is now known as the quantum mechanical model
of the atom. In this new model, he abandoned the
notion of the electron as a small particle orbiting the
nucleus. Instead, he took into account the particle’s
wavelike properties, and described the behaviour of
electrons in terms of wave functions.
The imprecise nature of Schrödinger’s model was
Each sublevel has its own energy. Examine Figure D.3 to supported shortly afterwards by a principle proposed by
see the relative energies of the levels and sublevels. Werner Heisenberg, in 1927. Heisenberg demonstrated
that it is impossible to know both an electron’s path-
Energy
Level way and its exact location.Heisenberg’s uncertainty
3d principleis a mathematical relationship that shows that
3 you can never know both the position and the momen-
3p
3s tum of an object beyond a certain measure of precision.
2p 2
2s
1
1s
Figure D.3 This figure shows the relative energies of
sublevels in energy levels 1, 2, and 3.
Expanding the Model of the Atom • MHR 657
ygrenE
Energy Number of electrons Number of electrons
level in energy level Sublevel in sublevel
1 2 1s 2
2 8 2s 2
2p 6
3 18 3s 2
3p 6
3d 10
4 32 4s 2
4p 6
4d 10
4f 14
CHEM
FACT
The momentum of an object is its mass multiplied by its
velocity. An object’s momentum is directly related to the
amount of energy it has.
Heisenberg also showed that if you could know either Shapes of Orbitals
velocity or position precisely, then the other property The shapes of the probability graphs from Schrödinger’s
would be uncertain. Therefore, when talking about wave functions are the shapes of the orbitals in which
where electrons are found in an atom, you cannot talk electrons reside in atoms. You can visualize orbitals as
in terms of certainties, but only in terms of probabilities. electron clouds. The shape of each cloud is based on
Schrödinger used a mathematical wave equation probability—it tells you where the electron spends
to define the probability of finding an electron within an most of its time.
atom. There are multiple solutions to this wave Examine Figure D.5. The sorbitals are spherical in
equation and Schrödinger called these solutions wave shape, as described above. Each of these spherical shells
functions, or orbitals. Each solution provides informa- contains two electrons. There are three porbitals for
tion about the energy and location of an electron within each sublevel, each with a capacity for two electrons.
an atom. Each orbital has a specific energy associated Each orbital is shaped something like a dumbbell. For
with it, and each contains information about where, each sublevel, the porbitals are oriented along the x, y,
inside the atom, the electrons would spend most of and zaxes. Therefore, the three porbitals in each sub-
their time. The actual paths of the moving electrons level are sometimes designated with subscripts to show
cannot be determined. However, the solutions can be this. For example, the 2porbitals may be designated
used to show where, for each orbital, there is a high 2p , 2p , 2p .
x y z
probability of finding an electron.
Imagine you were able to take many exact measure- z z
ments of the position of an electron in the 1ssublevel
at fixed intervals. At each second, you would mark the y y
electron’s position on a graph. After a while, your graph
might look something like the first diagram in Figure x x
D.4. If someone tried to use your graph to determine
where the electron was, they would not be able to state
its position exactly. They would, however, be able to
see that the probability of finding the electron would be 2s 2p
x
greater near the nucleus and would decrease farther
z z
away from the nucleus.
The probability graph is “fuzzy,” because the proba-
y y
bility of finding an electron anywhere in a 1ssublevel
is never zero. The probability becomes extremely small
x x
when it is far away from the nucleus, but it never quite
reaches zero. Therefore, to obtain an exact shape for
an orbital, you need to choose a level of probability.
For example, drawing a contour that encompasses
95 percent of the probability graph results in a spherical 2p y 2p z
shape, like the third diagram in Figure D.4. In other
Figure D.5 This figure shows the shapes of the 2sand 2p
words, at any time, there is a 95 percent chance of
orbitals.
finding the electron within the spherical contour.
The dand forbitals are quite complex in shape. Each d
sublevel contains five dorbitals, while each fsublevel
contains seven forbitals.
1 1 1
Filling the Orbitals
Why is it that each orbital can contain only two
electrons? A hypothesis suggests that electrons spin
Figure D.4 These three figures represent the probability around their own axes as they move around the nucle-
of finding an electron at any point in a hydrogen atom. us, generating magnetic fields. They can spin either in
The two-dimensional drawing on the left shows that the a positive direction or in a negative direction. In 1925,
electron spends most of its time fairly close to the nucleus. Wolfgang Pauli proposed that only two electrons of
The circle around the cloud in the centre encompasses opposite spin could occupy an orbital. This idea became
95 percent of the two-dimensional cloud. The diagram on known as the Pauli exclusion principle.
the right shows the 95 percent probability contour in three
dimensions.
658 MHR • Appendix D
How do electrons fill orbitals within atoms? They do Practice Problems
so in such a way as to minimize the potential energy of
the atom. 1. Write the electron configurations for the following
1. They will fill orbitals with the lowest energy first. atoms:
(a) carbon (d) sodium
The 1sorbital will fill before the 2sorbital, which
(b) oxygen (e) silicon
will fill before the 2porbitals.
(c) fluorine (f) hydrogen
2. When occupying two or more orbitals with the same
2. Explain why the ionization energy of the following
energy (for example, any of the three 2porbitals),
elements is less than the element that precedes it,
electrons will half fill each orbital until all are half
even though its nucleus has a greater positive
filled before adding a second electron to each one.
charge.
This is called Hund’s rule.
(a) oxygen has a lower ionization energy than
You can show how electrons fill orbitals, using
nitrogen
superscripts. For example, a boron atom contains
(b) boron has a lower ionization energy than
five electrons. Here’s how you show the electron
beryllium
configuration:
(c) sulfur has a lower ionization energy than
1s,2 2s2, 2p 1
x phosphorus
How would you show the electron configuration of a
nitrogen atom? Remember Hund’s rule:
1s2, 2s2, 2p 1, 2p 1, 2p 1 x y z
Using the Model
The quantum mechanical model of the atom is useful
for explaining phenomena in addition to emission
spectra. For example, in Chapter 2, you learned about
trends in ionization energy. You learned that, in general,
ionization energy increases across a period. Figure D.6
shows the ionization energy as a function of atomic
number for the first 18 elements. In most cases, the
ionization energy follows the trend. There are some
3. Explain why Bohr’s model of the atom explained
exceptions, however, such as oxygen, boron, and sulfur.
emission spectra for one-electron atoms, but failed
You can use the quantum model of the atom to explain
to explain emission spectra for many-electron atoms.
these discrepancies.
First Ionization Energy versus Atomic Number
3000
2500
He
Ne
2000
F Ar
N
1500
H Be O P Cl
1000 C
Mg S
B Si
500
Li Na Al
0
2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18
Atomic number
Figure D.6 This graph shows the relationship between
first ionization energy and atomic number for the first
18 elements.
Expanding the Model of the Atom • MHR 659
)lom/Jk(
ygrenE
noitazinoI
tsriF
PROBLEM TIP
Keep in mind two things when answering question 2:
(a)A completely filled sublevel is favourable in terms
of energy.
(b)When removing electrons from the same sublevel,
it is easier to remove an electron from a filled orbital
than from a half-filled orbital. In spite of their
opposite spins, the negative charges of electrons
together in a filled orbital repel each other more
than those in half-filled orbitals.
Appendix E
Math and Chemistry Once you have numbers in scientific notation, calcula-
tions become much simpler. To find the mass of one
mole of H O, you can multiply (6.02×1023/mol) ×
2
In chemistry, quantities and values are often very, very (2.99×10−23 g). To do this without a calculator, you
large or very, very small. One mole of H O contains a
2 first multiply.
huge number (602 214 199 000 000 000 000 000) of
6.02×2.99 = 17.9998 → 18.0 (rounded up to three
molecules. The mass of each molecule is minuscule
significant digits)
(0.000 000 000 000 000 000 000 029 9 g). To calculate
the mass of one mole of H O using the above data, you When multiplying, exponents are added to find the new
2
multiply the number of molecules in a mole by the mass exponent: −23+23 = 0.
of an individual molecule. Imagine doing this by hand: This gives 18.0×100 g/mol. In scientific notation,
however, there must be only one digit before the deci-
602214199000000000000000
mal place. Here the decimal place must be moved one
× 0.0000000000000000000000299g place to the left: 1.80×101 g/mol.
18.0062045501g Figure E.3 shows how to do this calculation with a
There is another problem with writing all these zeros: scientific calculator. When you enter an exponent on a
It implies that they are all significant digits. Yet the non- scientific calculator, you do not have to enter ( × 10) at
final zeros to the right of the decimal point in the mass any time.
of an H O molecule are used as placeholders. They are
2
not significant digits. There are only three Keystrokes Display
significant digits in 6.02¨23 6.02 23
0.000 000 000 000 000 000 000 029 9g ≠2.99¨23— 2.99 −23
=
17.998
Scientific Notation
To simplify reporting large numbers and doing calcula- Round to three significant
tions, you can use scientific notation. As you learned in digits and express in scientific
an earlier mathematics course, scientific notation works notation:1.80×101g/mol
by using powers of 10as multipliers.
The number of particles in one mole of a substance Figure E.3 On some scientific calculators, the ¨key
(the Avogadro constant) is often rounded down to is labelled ´. Key in negative exponents by entering the
602 000 000 000 000 000 000 000. When performing exponent, then striking the —key.
calculations, however, this number is still too unwieldy.
To simplify it, you can express it as a number between
1 and 10, multiplied by factors of 10. To do this, move Rules for Scientific Notation
the decimal point behind the left-most non-zero digit, •
When multiplying, exponents are added algebraically.
counting the number of places that the decimal point
(2.37×104g)×(1.89×10 −1g)
moves. The number of places moved is the exponent for
= (2.37×1.89)×10(4+(−1))
the base 10.
= 4.4793×103g → 4.48×103g
6.02 000 000 000 000 000 000 000. • When dividing, exponents are subtracted
algebraically.
23 21 18 15 12 9 6 3
(9.23×106L)÷(4.11×104L)
6.02×1023
= (9.23÷4.11)×10(6−4)
Figure E.1 The decimal point moves to the left. = 2.245742×102L → 2.25×102L
•
When adding or subtracting numbers in scientific
Numbers less than 1 are converted into scientific
notation, the numbers must be converted to the same
notation by moving the decimal point to the right of the
power of 10 as the measurement with the greatest
left-most non-zero digit. The exponent is expressed as a
power of 10. Once the numbers are all expressed to
negative power of 10.
the same power of 10, the power of 10 is neither
0.000 000 000 000 000 000 000 02.9 9 g added nor subtracted in the calculation.
(8.22×104cm)+(5.66×103cm)
3 6 9 12 15 18 21 = (8.22×104cm)+(.566×104cm)
2.99×10−23 = 8.786×104cm → 8.79×104cm
Figure E.2 The decimal point moves to the right.
660 MHR • Appendix E
(9.73×101dm3)−(8.11×10 −1dm3) key. If you round the answer in the display, you will
= (9.73×101dm3)−(.0811×101dm3) get 6.
= 9.6489×101dm3 → 9.65×101dm3 Find the log of 8 and the log of 4. You know
that 8÷4 = 2. Subtract the log of 4 from the log of
Practice Problems 8: 0.9031−0.6021 = 0.3010. This answer is the log
of 2: 100.9031÷100.6021 = 100.3010 = 2. Evaluate 100.3010
Scientific Notation on your calculator by typing in 0.3010 and using the
1. Convert each number into scientific notation. 10x key.
(a) 0.000 945 (d) 879×105
(b) 39 230 000 000 000 (e) 0.00142×103 Technology
LINK
(c) 0.000 000 000 000 003 497 (f) 31271×10−6
2. Add, subtract, multiply, or divide. Round your Logarithms were used for 350 years to do many complex
answer, and express it in scientific notation to the calculations. Even today, calculators are programmed to
correct number of significant digits. do mathematical manipulations with logarithms. So, indi-
(a) (3.00×103)+(8.50×101) rectly, we are still using John Napier’s invention.
(b) (6.99×103)+(8.13×102)
(c) (1.01×101)−(9.34×10−2)
Table E.1 Some Numbers and Their Logarithms
(d) (12.01×106)×(8.32×107)
(e) (4.75×10−3)÷(3.21×10−2) Number Scientific notation As a power of 10 Logarithim
1 000 000 1 × 106 106 6
Logarithms 7 895 900 7.8590 × 105 105.8954 5.8954
Calculators have made multiplication and division as 1 1 × 100 100 0
easy as adding and subtracting. Before calculators were 0.000 001 1 × 10−6 10−6 −6
invented, however, what did people do? In 1614, John
0.004 276 4.276 × 10−3 10−2.3690 −2.3690
Napier (1550–1617) invented logarithmsto help people
multiply and divide large numbers. Notice that numbers above 1 correspond to logarithms
Why do logarithms make multiplication and whose value is positive; numbers below 1 correspond
division easier? Recall, from the power laws, how you to logarithms whose value is negative. Over the years,
multiply and divide powers. To multiply powers with scientists have found logarithms convenient for more
the same base, you add the exponents. To divide powers than calculations. Logarithms can be used to express
with the same base, you subtract the exponents. values that span a range of powers of 10, such as pH.
Logarithms are exponents. Therefore, to multiply In Chapter 10, section 10.2, concentrations of acids
large numbers using logarithms, you simply add the are discussed. The pH of an acid solution is defined
logarithms. To divide large numbers using logarithms, as –log[H O+]. (The square brackets mean “concentra-
3
you subtract the logarithms. tion.”) For example, suppose that the hydronium
Find the log (for “logarithm”) key on your calcula- ion concentration in a solution is 0.0001 mol/L
tor. Enter 1000 or 103 into your calculator, then press (10−4mol/L). The pH is –log(0.0001). To calculate this,
the log key. The number 3 will be in the display. Now enter 0.0001 into your calculator. Then press the log
enter 10 000 or any other power of 10. Press the log key. Since the logarithm is negative, press the —key.
key. What is displayed for the log of the number? The answer in the display is 4. Therefore the pH of
(The logarithm of any power of 10 is just the exponent.) the solution is 4.
How do you multiply one million by one billion, As stated above, there are logarithms for all
or 106×109, using logarithms? You add the exponents, numbers, not just whole multiples of 10. What is the pH
or logarithms, of these two numbers: 6+9 = 15. The of a solution if [H O+] = 0.00476 mol/L? Enter 0.00476.
3
answer is 1015, a power of 10. This power is called the Press the log key and then the —key. The answer is
antilogarithmof the logarithm 15. 2.322. Remember that the concentration was expressed
Logarithms may not seem like a major discovery, to three significant digits. The pH to three significant
but John Napier also evaluated logarithms for numbers digits is 2.32.
such as 2, 3, 5, and 764. (Table E.1 has more examples What if you want to find the [H O+] from the pH?
3
of logarithms.) Enter 2 into your calculator, and press You would need to find 10−pH. For example, what is the
the log key. The display will show 0.3010, to four [H O+] if the pH is 5.78? Enter 5.78, and press the —
3
significant digits. This means that 100.3010 = 2. Repeat key. Then use the 10x function. The answer is 10−5.78.
to find the log of 3. The display will show 0.4771. This Therefore, the [H O+] is 1.66×10−6 mol/L.
3
means that 100.4771 = 3. Remember that the pH scale is a negative log scale.
You know that 2×3 = 6. If you add 0.3010 to Thus, a decrease in pH from pH 7 to pH 4 is an increase
0.4771, you get 0.7781. What is 100.7781? Enter 0.7781 of 103, or 1000, in the acidity of a solution. An increase
into your calculator. Find the 10x key. (Usually it is from pH 3 to pH 6 is a decrease of 103, or 1000, in
above the log key, as a second function.) Press the 10x acidity.
Math and Chemistry • MHR 661
along the x-axis until you reach the value of 1 (such as
P
0.01). Then go up from this point to the corresponding
value of V(50.0). After you have plotted all the points,
draw the line of best fit through the points. (See Figures
E.4A and E.4B).
Finding a Point on a Graph
Logarithms
1. Calculate the logarithm of each number. Note the
trend in your answers.
(a) 1 (f) 500 (j) 50 000
(b) 5 (g) 1000 (k) 100 000
(c) 10 (h) 5000 (l) 500 000
(d) 50 (i) 10 000 (m) 1 000 000
(e) 100
2. Calculate the antilogarithm for each number.
(a) 0 (c) −1 (e) −2 (g) −3
(b) 1 (d) 2 (f) 3
3.(a) How are your answers for question 2, parts (b)
Drawing a Line of Best Fit
and (c) related?
y
(b) How are your answers for question 2, parts (d) 50
and (e) related?
(c) How are your answers for question 2, parts (f) and 40
(g) related?
30
(d) Calculate the antilogarithm of 3.5.
(e) Calculate the antilogarithm of −3.5.
20
(f) Take the reciprocal of your answer for part (d).
(g) How are your answers for parts (e) and (f) related? 10
4.(a) Calculate log 76 and log 55. x
(b) Add your answers for part (a). 0 0.001 0.002 0.003 0.004 0.005 0.006 0.007 0.008 0.009 0.01
(c) Find the antilogarithm of your answer for part (b). 1 (kPa−1)
P
(d) Multiply 76 and 55.
(e) How are your answers in parts (c) and (d) related? Figure E.4B
Linear Graphs Examine the graph in Figure E.4B. You can see that the
Suppose that you conduct a Boyle’s law experiment. points form a straight line that goes through the origin,
(See Chapter 11, section 11.2.) You obtain data that are (0,0). You can also see that there is a linear relationship
similar to the data in Table E.2. between the volume and the inverse pressure.
Mathematically, this means that the volume is
Table E.2 Boyle’s Law Data directly proportional to the inverse pressure, or V ∝ 1.
P
To remove the proportionality sign and replace it with
an equal sign, Vmust be multiplied by a proportionality
constant, k.
∴V = k( 1 )
P
V = k
P
PV = k
How can you determine the proportionality constant?
Looking at the data does not tell you much about the Recall, from mathematics courses, that the equation of
relationship between the two variables: the volume (V) a straight line that goes through the origin is given by
and the inverse pressure (1). What if you graph the y = mx, where mis the slope of the line. Also recall the
P
data? Put 1 (the independent variable) on the x-axis. equation for the slope of a straight line.
P
f P o u r t 1 V s ( h th o e u l d d e g p o e n fr d o e m nt 0 v a to ri a a t b l l e e ) a s o t n 0 t . h 01 e . y T -a h x e i s s . c T al h e e f o sc r a V le Slope = R R i u s n e
P
should go from 0 to at least 50.0. To plot each point, go This equation is illustrated in Figure E.4C.
)Lm(
V
50
40
30
20
10
0 0.001 0.002 0.003 0.004 0.005 0.006 0.007 0.008 0.009 0.01
Figure E.4A
)Lm(
V
CHEM
FACT
You may be familiar with two other logarithmic scales:
the decibel scale for sound, and the Richter scale for
earthquake strength.
y
Practice Problems
x
1 (kPa−1)
P
1/Pressure (kPa−1) Volume (mL)
1.00 × 10−2 50.0
8.93 × 10−3 44.6
7.87 × 10−3 39.4
7.04 × 10−3 35.2
6.13 × 10−3 30.7
662 MHR • Appendix E
Finding the Rise and Run on a Graph These data are plotted, as shown in Figure E.5, with
the volume on the x-axis and the mass on the y-axis.
The equation of this line is in the form y = mx+b,
where mis the slope of the line and bis the y-intercept.
(The y-intercept is the value of ywhere the line crosses
the y-axis. This value occurs when x = 0.) Thus, the
relationship here is m = kV +b, where the kis the slope
of the line. As before,
k = (y 2 −y 1 ) (x −x ) 2 1
=
(97.2−63.8)g
(80−30)mL
= 0.668g/mL
Therefore, the equation of the line is m = 0.668V +b.
m =
∆y If there is no liquid, both the mass and the volume of
∆x the liquid are zero. Notice, however, that there is still a
= (y 2 −y 1 ) value for mass on the graph. This is the value of b, the
(x 2 −x 1 ) y-intercept, which is 43.8 g. It represents the mass of
For this graph, the change in the yvalues corresponds the container. Therefore, the final equation is
to a change in V, from 30.0 mL to 10.0 mL. The change m = 0.668V +43.8.
in the xvalues corresponds to a change in 1, from Consider one more example. Two different sets of
0.0060kPa −1to 0.0020kPa−1. P data for Charles’ law experiments are given in Table E.4.
m= (y 2 −y 1 ) Table E.4 Charles’ Law Data
(x −x )
2 1 Set 1 Set 2
=
(30.0−10.0)mL
(0.006−0.002)kPa −1 Temperature (˚C) Volume (mL) Temperature (˚C) Volume (mL)
=5000(kPamL)
20 150 15 240
The equation of the line is therefore V =5.0×
103
. 34 157 26 249
P
What happens if the data do not give a line that goes 42 161 38 259
through the origin? The data in Table E.3 came from
55 168 51 270
an experiment to determine the density of an unknown
68 175 80 294
liquid. The student forgot to measure the mass of the
container that was used to hold the various volumes The linear graphs of both sets of data are given in
of the liquid. Figure E.6, on the same pair of axes. Since two different
Table E.3 Mass and Volume of a Liquid samples of gas were used, there are two different lines
in the form y = mx+b. Notice that the lines intersect at
−
273˚C, or 0 K, the theoretical lowest temperature possi-
ble. (The linear graphs for the temperature and volume
of all gases go through this point.) If the y-axis was
moved to this point and a new origin was established
here, then the equations for the lines would be in the
form y = mx. This is what happens when you convert
temperatures to the Kelvin scale.
Graph of Mass and Volume of a Liquid Charles’ Law Graph
V (mL)
110
100 250
90
80 200
70
60 150
50
40 100
30
20 50
10 −273
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 T (˚C) −250 −200 −150 −100 −50 0 50 100
T (K) 0 +73 +173 +273 +323 +373
Figure E.5 Figure E.6
)g(
ssaM
y
50
40
30
20
10
x
0 0.001 0.002 0.003 0.004 0.005 0.006 0.007 0.008 0.009 0.01
1 (kPa−1)
P
Figure E.4C
Volume of liquid (mL) Mass of liquid and container (g)
22 58.4
41 71.7
65 87.2
83 99.2
100 110.6
y
rise
run
y-intercept
x
V (mL)
)Lm(
V
rise run
Math and Chemistry • MHR 663
Steps for Solving Problems
Practice Problems
Using Unit Analysis
Linear Graphs Step 1 Determine which data you have and which con-
1. A spring, 20 cm long, has hooks on each end. One version factors you need to use. (A conversion
end is attached to the ceiling. The other has small, factor is usually a ratio of two numbers with
metal blocks, with hooks hanging from it. The units, such as 1000 g/1 kg. You multiply the given
following data are generated. data by the conversion factor to get the desired
units in the answer.) It is often convenient to
Mass attached (g) Spring length (cm)
use the following three categories to set up your
50 20.1
solution: Have, Need, and Conversion Factors.
200 20.4
Step 2 Arrange the data and conversion factors so that
300 20.7 you can cross out the undesired units. Decide
500 21.0 whether you need any additional conversion fac-
600 21.3 tors to get the desired units in the answer.
Step 3 Multiply all the numbers on the top of the ratio.
(a) Which variable is the independent variable?
Then multiply all the numbers on the bottom of
(b) Which variable is the dependent variable?
the ratio. Divide the top result by the bottom
(c) Graph these data. Is the graph linear?
result.
(d) Determine the slope and the y-intercept for your
graph. Do not forget to use appropriate units. Step 4 Check that the units have cancelled correctly.
(e) Write an equation to represent your graph. Also check that the answer seems reasonable,
and that the significant digits are correct.
2. An object is dropped off the roof of a building that
is 100 m high. Its position at various times is given
below. Sample Problem
Active ASA
Time (s) Distance fallen (m)
0 0
Problem
0.5 1.3
In the past, pharmacists measured the active ingre-
1 4.9
dients in many medications in a unit called grains
1.5 11 (gr). A grain is equal to 64.8 mg. If one headache
2 20 tablet contains 5.0 gr of active acetylsalicylic acid
(ASA), how many grams of ASA are in two tablets?
(a) Which variable is the independent variable?
(b) Which variable is the dependent variable?
What Is Required?
(c) Graph these data. Is the graph linear?
You need to find the mass in grams of ASA in
(d) Try graphing di√stanceversus some function of
time(such as 1 time or time2) until a linear two tablets.
graph appears to be generated.
What Is Given?
(e) Write an equation from your linear graph in part
There are 5.0 gr of ASA in one tablet. A conver-
(d).
sion factor for grains to milligrams is given.
(f) How long will it take for the object to reach the
ground? Plan Your Strategy
Multiply the given quantity by conversion factors
The Unit Analysis
until all the unwanted units cancel out and only
Method of Problem Solving
the desired units remain.
The unit analysis method of problem solving is
Have Need Conversion factors
extremely versatile. You can use it to convert between
units or to solve simple formula problems. If you forget 5.0 gr ? g 64.8 mg/1 gr and 1 g/1000 mg
a formula during a test, you may still be able to solve
the problem using unit analysis. Act on Your Strategy
The unit analysis method involves analyzing the
units and setting up conversion factors. You match and 1
5
t
.
a
0
b
g
le
r
t
× 64
1
.8
g
m
r
g ×
100
1
0
g
mg
×2tablets
arrange the units so that they divide out to give the
=
5.0×64.8×1×2g
desired unit in the answer. Then you multiply and 1000
divide the numbers that correspond with the units. = 0.648g
= 0.65g
Continued ...
664 MHR • Appendix E
Continued ... Continued ...
There are 0.65 g of active ASA in two headache Find the number of moles of potassium chlorate.
(cid:2) (cid:3)
tablets. molKClO = 5.0g× 1mol
3 122.55gKClO
Check Your Solution = 0.0408mol 3
There are two significant digits in the answer. Find the number of moles of oxygen produced.
This is the least number of significant digits in the molO 2 = 3molO 2
given data. 0.0408molKClO 2molKClO
3 3
Notice how conversion factors are multiplied
molO = 0.0408molKClO × 3molO 2
until all the unwanted units are cancelled out, 2 3 2molKClO
3
leaving only the desired unit in the answer. = 0.0612mol
Convert this value to grams.
massO = 0.0612mol× 32.00g
The next Sample Problem will show you how to solve a 2 1molO
2
simple stoichiometric problem. = 1.96g
= 2.0g
Sample Problem
Therefore, 2.0 g of oxygen are produced by the
Stoichiometry and Unit Analysis
decomposition of 5.0 g of potassium chlorate.
As you become more familiar with this type of
Problem question, you will be able to complete more than
What mass of oxygen, O , can be obtained by the one step at once. Below, you can see how the con-
2
decomposition of 5.0 g of potassium chlorate, version factors we used in each step above can be
KClO ? The balanced equation is given below. combined. Set these conversion ratios so that the
3
2KClO 3 → 2KCl+3O 2 units cancel out correctly (cid:2) . (cid:3)
massO = 5.0gKClO × 1mol ×
What Is Required? 2 3 122.6gKClO
3
(cid:2) (cid:3) (cid:2) (cid:3)
You need to calculate the amount of oxygen, in 3molO 2 × 32.0g
2molKClO 1molO
grams, that is produced by the decomposition of 3 2
= 1.96g
5.0 g of potassium chlorate.
= 2.0g
What Is Given?
Check Your Solution
You know the mass of potassium chlorate that
decomposes. The oxygen makes up only part of the potassium
Mass = 5.0 g chlorate. Thus, we would expect less than 5.0 g
of oxygen, as was calculated.
From the balanced equation, you can obtain the
The smallest number of significant digits in
molar ratio of the reactant and the product.
the question is two. Thus, the answer must also
3molO
2 have two significant digits.
2molKClO
3
Plan Your Strategy
Calculate the molar masses of potassium chlorate
and oxygen. Use the molar mass of potassium
chlorate to find the number of moles in the Practice Problems
sample.
Use the molar ratio to find the number of moles of Unit Analysis
oxygen produced. Use the molar mass of oxygen to Use the unit analysis method to solve each problem.
convert this value to grams.
1. The molecular mass of nitric acid is 63.02 g/mol.
What is the mass, in g, of 7.00 mol of nitric acid?
Act on Your Strategy
2. To make a salt solution, 0.50 mol of NaCl are
The molar mass of potassium chlorate is
1×M = 39.10 dissolved in 750 mL of water. What is the
K
1×M = 35.45 concentration, in g/L, of the salt solution?
Cl
3×M = 48.00 3. The density of solid sulfur is 2.07 g/cm3. What is the
O
122.55g/mol mass, in kg, of a 345 cm3 sample?
The molar mass of oxygen is 4. How many grams of dissolved potassium iodide are
2×M = 36.00 g/mol in 550 mL of a 1.10 mol/L solution?
O
Math and Chemistry • MHR 665
Chemistry Data Tables
Table F.1 Ionic Charges of Representative Elements Table F.4 Common Polyatomic Ions
Table F.2 Charges of Some Transition Metal Ions
Table F.3 Common Metal Ions
with More Than One Ionic Charge Table F.5 Solubility of Compounds at SATP
munimula muinomma muirab muiclac )II(reppoc )II(nori )III(nori muihtil muisengam muissatop
revlis
muidos muitnorts
cniz
Appendix F
IA IIA IIIA IVA VA VIA VIIA VIIIA Formula Name Formula Name
1 2 13 14 15 16 17 18 PO 3− phosphate CN− cyanide
4
H+ H− noble PO 3− phosphite OH− hydroxide
3
Li+ Be2+ N3− O2− F− gases SO 2− sulfate MnO − permanganate
4 4
Na+ Mg2+ Al3+ P3− S2− Cl− do not SO 2− sulfite C O 2− oxalate
3 2 4
K+ Ca2+ Se2− Br− ionize CO 2− carbonate SiO 2− silicate
3 3
Rb+ Sr2+ I−
NO − nitrate NH + ammonium
3 4
Cs+ Ba2+
NO − nitrite HPO 2− hydrogen phosphate
2 4
ClO − perchlorate or biphosphate
4 ClO − chlorate H 2 PO 4 − dihydrogen
1+ 2+ 3+
ClO
3
− chlorite
phosphate
silver, Ag+ c n a ic d k m e i l u , N m i , 2 C + d2+ scandium, Sc3+ ClO 2 − hypochlorite H H P P O O 3 2 − − d h i y h d y r d o r g o e g n e p n hosphite
zinc, Zn2+ CrO 4 2− chromate 2 3 phosphite
Cr 2 O 7 2− dichromate HSO 4 − hydrogen sulfate
C 2 H 3 O 2 − acetate HSO 3 − hydrogen sulfite
or ethanoate
HCO − hydrogen carbonate
3
or bicarbonate
Formula Stock Name Classical Name
Cu+ copper(I) ion cuprous ion
Cu2+ copper(II) ion cupric ion
Fe2+ iron(II) ion ferrous ion
acetate S S S S S S S S S S ss S S S
Fe3+ iron(III) ion ferric ion
bromide S S S S S S S S S S I S S S
Hg 2+(Hg+) mercury(I) ion mercurous ion
2 carbonate – S I I – I – ss I S I S I I
Hg2+ mercury(II) ion mercuric ion chlorate S S S S S S S S S S S S S S
Pb2+ lead(II) ion plumbous ion chloride S S S S S S S S S S I S S S
Pb4+ lead(IV) ion plumbic ion chromate I S I S I – I S S S I S ss S
Sn2+ tin(II) ion stannous ion hydroxide I S S S I I I S I S – S S I
Sn4+ tin(IV) ion stannic ion iodide S S S S S S S S S S I S S S
Cr2+ chromium(II) ion chromous ion nitrate S S S S S S S S S S S S S S
oxide I – ss ss I I I S I S I S S I
Cr3+ chromium(III) ion chromic ion
perchlorate S S S S S S S S S S S S S S
Mn2+ manganese(II) ion
phosphate I S I I I I I ss I S I S I I
Mn3+ manganese(III) ion
sulfate S S I ss S S ss S S S ss S I S
Mn4+ manganese(IV) ion sulfide d S d I I I d S d S I S I I
Co2+ cobalt(II) ion cobaltous ion
Legend
Co3+ cobalt(III) ion cobaltic ion
S = soluble − = no compound
ss = slightly soluble d = decomposes in water
I = insoluble
666 MHR • Appendix F
Table F.6 Chemicals in Everyday Life
Common Chemical formula and name Physical
name (other names) properties Safety concerns Comments
acetone CH COCH clear; evaporates flammable; toxic solvent; contained in some nail polish
3 3
2-propanone quickly by ingestion and removers
inhalation
acetylene C H smells sweet highly explosive burns very hot, with oxygen, in
2 2
ethyne oxyacetylene welding torches; used to
produce a wide range of synthetic
products
ASA CH COOC H COOH white crystals excessive use may used in Aspirin and related medicines
3 6 4
o-acetoxy benzoic acid with a slightly cause hearing loss for pain, fever, and inflammation
(acetylsalicylic acid) bitter taste or Reye’s
syndrome,
especially in
young people
baking NaHCO tiny white crystals none used for baking and cleaning, as an
3
soda sodium hydrogen antacid and mouthwash, and in fire
carbonate extinguishers
(sodium bicarbonate)
battery H SO clear and corrosive used in lead-acid storage batteries
2 4
acid sulfuric acid odourless (automobile batteries)
bleach NaOCl yellowish toxic, strong household chlorine bleach; used for
(aq)
sodium hypochlorite solution with a oxidizing agent bleaching clothes and for cleaning
solution chlorine smell
bluestone CuSO ·5H O blue crystals or toxic by ingestion; used in agriculture and industry, as a
4 2
copper(II) sulfate blue crystalline strong irritant germicide, and for wood preservation
pentahydrate (cupric granules
sulfate pentahydrate)
borax Na B O ·10H O white crystals none main source is mining; used in the glass
2 4 7 2
sodium borate decahydrate and ceramics industries; used for making
Silly Putty and for washing clothes
carborundum SiC hard, black solid none used as an abrasive
silicon carbide
citric acid (HOOCCH ) C(OH)(COOH) translucent none used in foods and soft drinks as an
22
2-hydroxy-1,2,3-propane crystals with a acidifying agent and an antioxidant
(tricarboxylic acid) strongly acidic
taste
CFCs CCl F , CCl F, CClF colourless, CFCs are now in the past, were used as refrigerants and
2 2 3 3
chlorofluorocarbons odourless gas banned by the aerosols
(freons, Freon-12) Montréal Protocol
charcoal/ C soft grey or black none used as pencil “lead”and artists’ charcoal,
(s)
graphite pure carbon, in a less solid that rubs as a de-colourizing and filtering agent, in
structured form than easily onto other gunpowder, and for barbeque briquettes
diamond substances
cream of HOOC (CHOH) COOK white, crystalline none used as a leavening agent in baking
2
tartar potassium hydrogen solid powder
tartrate
Chemistry Data Tables • MHR 667
dry ice CO cold white solid damaging to skin used as a refrigerant in laboratories when
2
solid carbon dioxide that sublimates and tissue after cold temperatures (as low as −79˚C) are
prolonged required
exposure
Epsom MgSO ·7H O colourless crystals can cause used as a bath salt and in cosmetics and
4 2
salts magnesium sulfate abdominal cramps dietary supplements; has industrial uses
heptahydrate and diarrhea
ethylene C H colourless gas flammable used to accelerate fruit ripening and to
2 4
ethene with sweet odour synthesize polymers such as polystyrene;
and taste occurs naturally in plants
ethylene CH OHCH OH clear, colourless, toxic by ingestion used in antifreeze and cosmetics, and as a
2 2
glycol glycol syrupy liquid and inhalation de-icing fluid for airport runways
Glauber’s Na SO ·10H O large, transparent none a laxative; used for paper and glass
2 4 2
salt sodium sulfate crystals, needles, making, and in solar heat storage and air
decahydrate or granular conditioning; energy storage capacity
powder more than seven times that of water
glucose C H O white crystals none source of energy for most organisms
6 12 6
dextrose, grape sugar, with a sweet taste
corn sugar
grain C H OH clear, volatile flammable beverage alcohol, antiseptic, laboratory/
2 5
alcohol ethanol liquid with industrial solvent; produced by the
(ethyl alcohol) distinctive odour fermentation of grains or fruits
gyp rock CaSO ·2H O hard, beige none used in plaster of Paris and as a core
4 2
gypsum mineral for drywall
hydrogen H O clear, colourless damaging to skin sold as 3% solution in drugstores;
2 2
peroxide liquid in high non-chlorine bleach often 6% H O
2 2
concentrations
ibuprofen C H O white crystals can conflict with ingredient in over-the-counter pain
13 18 2
p-isobutyl-hydratropic acid other medications relievers
laughing N O colourless, mainly prolonged used as a dental anesthetic, an aerosol
2
gas nitrous oxide, dinitrogen odourless, soluble exposure causes propellant, and to increase fuel
oxide gas brain damage and performance in racing cars
infertility
lime CaO white powder reacts with water used to make cement and to clean and
calcium oxide to produce caustic nullify odours in stables
(hydrated lime, hydraulic calcium
lime, quicklime) hydroxide,
Ca(OH) , with
2
liberation of heat
limestone CaCO soft white mineral none used for making lime and for building;
3
calcium carbonate has industrial uses
lye NaOH white solid, found corrosive, strong produced by the electrolysis of brine or
sodium hydroxide mainly in form of irritant the reaction of calcium hydroxide and
(caustic soda) beads or pellets; sodium carbonate; has many laboratory
quickly absorbs and industrial uses; used to manufacture
water and CO chemicals and make soap
2
from the air
malachite CuCO ·Cu(OH) clear, hard, bright none ornamental and gem stone; copper found
3 2
basic copper(II) carbonate green mineral in the ore
668 MHR • Appendix F
milk of Mg(OH) white powder harmless if used antacid, laxative
2
magnesia magnesium hydroxide in small amounts
(magnesia magma)
moth C H white, volatile toxic by ingestion used to repel insects in homes and
10 8
balls naphthalene solid with an and inhalation gardens, and to make synthetic resins;
unpleasant odour obtained from crude oil
MSG COOH(CH ) CH(NH )- white, crystalline may cause flavour enhancer for foods in
22 2
COONa monosodium powder headaches in concentrations of about 0.3%
glutamate some people
muriatic HCl colourless or toxic by ingestion has many industrial and laboratory uses;
(aq)
acid hydrochloric acid slightly yellow and inhalation; used for processing food, cleaning, and
aqueous solution strong irritant pickling
natural about 85% methane, CH , odourless, flammable and used for heating, energy, and cooking;
4
gas 10% ethane, C H , and colourless gas explosive; a about 3% is used as a feedstock for the
2 6
some propane, C H , warning odour is chemical industry
3 8
butane, C H , and added to
4 10
pentane, C H household gas as
5 12
a safety
precaution
oxalic HO CCO H strongly flavoured toxic by occurs naturally in rhubarb, wood sorrel,
2 2
acid ethanedoic acid acid; white inhalation and and spinach; used as wood and textile
crystals ingestion; strong bleach, rust remover, and deck cleaner;
irritant in high has many industrial and laboratory uses
concentrations
Pepto- bismuth subsalicylate pink solid or may cause relieves digestive difficulties by coating
Bismol calcium carbonate solution stomach upset if the digestive tract and reducing acidity
taken in excess of
recommended dose
PCBs polychlorinated colourless liquids highly toxic, used as coolants in electrical transformers
biphenyls: class of unreactive, and
compounds with two persistent; cause
benzene rings and two or ecological damage
more substituted chlorine
atoms
potash K CO white, granular, solutions laboratory and industrial uses; used in
2 3
potassium carbonate translucent irritating to tissue special glasses, in soaps, and as a
powder dehydrating agent
PVCs (C H Cl) tough, white, none used extensively as a building material
2 3 n
polyvinyl chloride, unreactive solid
polychloroethene
road salt CaCl white crystalline none by-product of the Solvay process
2
calcium chloride compound
rotten-egg H S colourless gas highly flammable, obtained from sour gas during natural gas
2
gas hydrogen sulfide with an offensive therefore high fire production
odour risk; explosive;
toxic by
inhalation; strong
irritant to eyes
and mucous
membranes
Chemistry Data Tables • MHR 669
rubbing (CH ) CHOH colourless liquid flammable, has industrial and medical uses
32
alcohol isopropanol with a pleasant therefore high fire
(isopropyl alcohol) odour risk; explosive;
toxic by
inhalation and
ingestion
salicylic HOC H COOH white crystalline damages skin in can be used in different amounts in foods
6 4
acid 2-hydroxybenzoic acid solid high and dyes, and in wart treatment
concentrations
sand SiO large, glassy cubic toxic by occurs widely in nature as sand, quartz,
2
silica crystals inhalation; flint, and diatomite
chronic exposure
to dust may cause
silicosis
slaked Ca(OH) white powder that none used to neutralize acidity in soils and to
2
lime calcium hydroxide is insoluble in make whitewash, bleaching powder, and
water glass
soda ash Na CO white powdery none used to manufacture glass, soaps, and
2 3
sodium carbonate crystals detergents
sugar C H O cubic white none used in foods as a sweetener; source of
12 22 11
sucrose crystals metabolic energy
(cane or beet sugar)
table salt NaCl cubic white none produced by the evaporation of natural
sodium chloride crystals brines and by the solar evaporation of sea
(rock salt, halite) water; also mined from underground
sources; used in foods and for de-icing
roads
Tylenol™ CH CONHC H OH colourless, can be toxic if an pain reliever (analgesic)
3 6 4
N-acetyl-p-aminophenol slightly bitter overdose is taken
(acetaminophen, APAP) crystals
TSP Na PO white crystals toxic by ingestion; used as a water softener and cleaner (for
3 4
trisodium phosphate irritant to tissue; example, to clean metals and to clean
(sodium phosphate, pH of 1% solution walls before painting); has many
sodium orthophosphate) is 11.8 to 12 industrial uses
vinegar 5% acetic acid, clear solution none used for cooking and household cleaning
CH COOH, in water with a distinctive
3
smell
vitamin C C H O white crystals or none required in diet to prevent scurvy; found
6 8 6
ascorbic acid powder with a in citrus fruits, tomatoes, potatoes, and
tart, acidic taste green leafy vegetables
washing Na CO ·H O white powdery may be irritating used for cleaning and photography, and as
2 3 2
soda sodium carbonate crystals to skin a food additive; has many industrial and
monohydrate (soda ash) laboratory uses
wood CH OH clear, colourless flammable; toxic has many industrial and household uses;
3
alcohol methanol liquid with faint by ingestion, skin used in gasoline antifreeze and as a
(methyl alcohol) alcoholic odour absorption, and thinner for shellac and paint; can be
inhalation; causes mixed with vegetable oil and lye to make
blindness and diesel
death
670 MHR • Appendix F
Appendix G
Alphabetical List of Elements
Element Symbol Atomic Number Element Symbol Atomic Number
Actinium Ac 89 Neodymium Nd 60
Aluminum Al 13 Neon Ne 10
Americium Am 95 Neptunium Np 93
Antimony Sb 51 Nickel Ni 28
Argon Ar 18 Niobium Nb 41
Arsenic As 33 Nitrogen N 7
Astatine At 85 Nobelium No 102
Barium Ba 56 Osmium Os 76
Berkelium Bk 97 Oxygen O 8
Beryllium Be 4 Palladium Pd 46
Bismuth Bi 83 Phosphorus P 15
Bohrium Bh 107 Platinum Pt 78
Boron B 5 Plutonium Pu 94
Bromine Br 35 Polonium Po 84
Cadmium Cd 48 Potassium K 19
Calcium Ca 20 Praseodymium Pr 59
Californium Cf 98 Promethium Pm 61
Carbon C 6 Protactinium Pa 91
Cerium Ce 58 Radium Ra 88
Cesium Cs 55 Radon Rn 86
Chlorine Cl 17 Rhenium Re 75
Chromium Cr 24 Rhodium Rh 45
Cobalt Co 27 Rubidium Rb 37
Copper Cu 29 Ruthenium Ru 44
Curium Cm 96 Rutherfordium Rf 104
Dubnium Db 105 Samarium Sm 62
Dysprosium Dy 66 Scandium Sc 21
Einsteinium Es 99 Seaborgium Sg 106
Erbium Er 68 Selenium Se 34
Europium Eu 63 Silicon Si 14
Fermium Fm 100 Silver Ag 47
Fluorine F 9 Sodium Na 11
Francium Fr 87 Strontium Sr 38
Gadolinium Gd 64 Sulfur S 16
Gallium Ga 31 Tantalum Ta 73
Germanium Ge 32 Technetium Tc 43
Gold Au 79 Tellurium Te 52
Hafnium Hf 72 Terbium Tb 65
Hassium Hs 108 Thallium Tl 81
Helium He 2 Thorium Th 90
Holmium Ho 67 Thulium Tm 69
Hydrogen H 1 Tin Sn 50
Indium In 49 Titanium Ti 22
Iodine I 53 Tungsten W 74
Iridium Ir 77 Ununbium Uub 112
Iron Fe 26 Ununhexium Uuh 116
Krypton Kr 36 Ununnilium Uun 110**
Lanthanum La 57 Ununoctium Uuo 118
Lawrencium Lr 103 Ununquadium Uuq 114
Lead Pb 82 Unununium Uuu 111
Lithium Li 3 Uranium U 92
Lutetium Lu 71 Vanadium V 23
Magnesium Mg 12 Xenon Xe 54
Manganese Mn 25 Ytterbium Yb 70
Meitnerium Mt 109 Yttrium Y 39
Mendelevium Md 101 Zinc Zn 30
Mercury Hg 80 Zirconium Zr 40
Molybdenum Mo 42
**The names and symbols for elements 110 through 118 have not yet been chosen
Appendix G • MHR 671
Glossary
Section numbers are provided in parentheses. average atomic mass:the average of the masses of all
the isotopes of an element; given in atomic mass
units (u) (5.1)
A
Avogadro constant (N ):the experimentally-determined
A
accuracy:the closeness of a measurement to an
number of particles in 1 mol of a substance; the
accepted value (1.2) currently accepted value is 6.02214199×1023 (5.2)
acid:a substance that produces hydrogen ions in
Avogadro’s hypothesis:equal volumes of gases, at the
aqueous solutions (10.1)
same temperature and pressure, contain the same
acid-base indicator:a substance, usually a weak number of particles (12.1)
monoprotic acid, that changes colour in acidic and
basic solutions (10.3)
B
activity series:a ranking of the relative reactivity of
balanced chemical equation:a statement that uses
metals or halogens in aqueous reactions (4.3)
chemical formulas and coefficients to show the
actual yield:the measured quantity of product obtained
identity and quantity of the reactants and products
in a chemical reaction (7.3)
involved in a chemical reaction (4.1)
aliphatic hydrocarbons:hydrocarbons that consist of
base:a substance that produces hydroxide ions in
chains or non-aromatic rings; the carbon atoms are
aqueous solutions (10.1)
bonded to the maximum number of hydrogen or
benefit:a desirable result of an action (14.4)
carbon atoms (13.3)
beta decay:a nuclear reaction that results in the
alkanes:hydrocarbons that contain only carbon-carbon
single bonds; general formula C n H 2n+2 (13.3) emission of a beta (β) particle (electron) from a
nucleus (4.4)
alkenes:hydrocarbons that contain one or more carbon-
carbon double bond; general formula C H (13.3) binary acid:an acid that is composed of two elements:
n 2n
hydrogen and a non-metal (10.2)
alkynes:hydrocarbons that contain one or more carbon-
carbon triple bond; general formula C n H 2n−2 (13.3) binary compound:a compound that is composed of two
elements (3.4)
alloys:solid metallic solutions (8.1)
bomb calorimeter:a device that combusts a substance
alpha particle emission:a radioactive process that
in pure oxygen in order to measure the heat of
involves the loss of one alpha (∝) particle (a helium
combustion of that substance (14.4)
nucleus, 4He); also called alpha decay (4.4)
2
bond energy:the amount of energy that is produced or
anhydrous:a term used to describe a compound that
absorbed when a specific bond in a molecule is
does not have any water molecules bonded to it;
broken or formed; measured in kJ/mol (14.2)
applies to compounds that can be hydrated (6.4)
Boyle’s law:the law stating that the volume of a given
aqueous solution:a solution in which water is the
amount of gas varies inversely with the applied
solvent (8.1) pressure, if the temperature is constant: V ∝ 1
P
Arrhenius theory of acids and bases:the theory stating (11.2)
that an acid is a substance that produces hydrogen
branched-chain alkane:an alkane with one or more
ions in water and a base is a substance that produces
side-chains that branch off the parent chain (13.3)
hydroxide ions in water (10.1)
Brønsted-Lowry theory of acids and bases:the theory
atmosphere (atm):a unit of pressure; equal to 101.325
defining an acid as a substance from which a
kPa (11.2)
hydrogen ion can be removed and a base as a
atom:the basic unit of an element, which still retains substance that can remove a hydrogen ion from an
the element’s properties (2.1) acid (10.1)
atomic mass unit (u):a unit of mass that is 1/12 of the
mass of a carbon-12 atom; equal to 1.66×10−24g C
(2.1)
calorie:the amount of energy that is needed to raise the
atomic number (Z):the unique number of protons in
temperature of 1 g of liquid water by 1˚C; equal to
the nucleus of a particular element (2.1)
4.184 J (14.4)
atomic symbol:a one- or two-letter abbreviation of the
Calorie:a unit of energy equal to one thousand calories
name of an element; also called element symbol (2.1)
(1 kcal = 1000 cal) or 4.184 kJ (14.4)
672 MHR • Glossary
calorimeter:a device that burns compounds containing volume of a given amount of gas are inversely
carbon, hydrogen, and other elements in a stream of proportional, and directly proportional to the kelvin
oxygen, O , to determine their composition (14.4) temperature of the gas: V ∝ T (11.4)
2 P
calorimetry:the process of measuring changes in combustion:the reaction of a substance with oxygen,
thermal energy (14.4) producing oxides, heat, and light; burning (14)
carbon-hydrogen combustion analyzer:a device that common name:a name for a compound that does not
uses the combustion-enabling properties of O to necessarily suggest anything about the chemical
2
determine the composition of compounds containing composition of the compound (e.g., water, baking
carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen (6.4) soda); also called the trivial name (3.4)
cation:a positively charged ion (2.3) competing reaction:a reaction that occurs at the same
Charles’ law:the law stating that the volume of a fixed time as a principal reaction and consumes the
mass of gas is directly proportional to its kelvin reactants and/or products of the principal reaction
temperature, if the pressure remains constant: V ∝ T (7.3)
(11.3) complete combustion:combustion in which a
chemical bond:the force that holds atoms together in hydrocarbon fuel is completely reacted in the
compounds (3.1) presence of sufficient oxygen, producing only carbon
dioxide gas and water vapour (14.1)
chemical change:the type of change that occurs when
elements and/or compounds interact with each other complete combustion reaction:a synthesis reaction in
to form different substances with different properties; which a compound burns in the presence of oxygen
involves the rearrangement of atoms (1.3) gas, forming the most common oxides of the
elements in the compound (4.2)
chemical equation:a statement of what occurs in a
chemical reaction; can be a word equation, a skeleton complete structural diagram:a symbolic representation
equation, or a balanced chemical equation (4.1) of all the atoms in a molecule, showing how they are
bonded (13.2)
chemical formula:a representation, in atomic symbols
and numerical subscripts, of the type and number of compound:a pure substance that is composed of two or
atoms that are present in a compound (3.4) more elements chemically combined in fixed
proportions (1.3)
chemical nomenclature:the system that is used to name
chemical compounds (3.4) concentration:the ratio of the amount of solute per
quantity of solvent (8)
chemical property:a property of a substance that can
only be observed as the substance changes into condensation:a physical change from the gaseous state
another substance (1.2) to the liquid state (11.1)
chemical reaction:a process in which a substance (or condensed structural diagram: a symbolic
substances) changes, forming one or more different representation of a compound, showing most atoms
substances (4.1) present, and the bonds between carbon atoms (13.2)
chemistry:the study of matter, its composition, and its conjugate acid:the particle that results when a base
interactions (1.1) receives a proton (10.1)
chlorofluorocarbon (CFC):a compound containing conjugate acid-base pair:two molecules or ions that are
carbon, fluorine, and chlorine atoms that is linked by the transfer of a proton (10.1)
chemically inert in the troposphere, but that is conjugate base:the particle that remains when a proton
broken down by solar radiation in the stratosphere is removed from an acid (10.1)
(12.4) covalent bond:a chemical bond in which two electrons
cis-trans isomers:compounds that have the same are shared by two atoms (3.1)
formula but different arrangements of atoms around a cracking:the use of heat or catalysts, in the absence of
fixed carbon-carbon double bond; also called air, to break down or rearrange large hydrocarbon
geometric isomers (13.3) molecules (13.4)
closed system:a system in which the total amount of cyclic hydrocarbon:a hydrocarbon that consists of one
matter remains constant; matter can neither enter nor or more rings; can be a cycloalkane, a cycloalkene, or
leave this system (11.2) a cycloalkyne (13.3)
coefficient:in a balanced chemical equation, a positive
number that is placed in front of a formula to show
D
how many units of the substance are involved (4.1)
Dalton’s law of partial pressures:the law stating that
combined gas law:a combination of Boyle’s law and
the total pressure of a mixture of gases is the sum of
Charles’ law, which states that the pressure and
the pressures of each of the individual gases (11.4)
Glossary • MHR 673
decomposition reaction:a chemical reaction in which a stoichiometrically equal to the number of moles of
compound breaks down into elements or simpler standard solution (10.3)
compounds (4.2)
exothermic process:a process that produces thermal
∆T:a symbol used to indicate change in temperature energy (14.2)
(14.3)
expanded molecular formula:a symbolic representation
diatomic element:an atom of this element tends to that shows the arrangement of atoms in a molecule
bond with another atom of the same element, (e.g., CH CH CH for propane, C H ) (13.2)
3 2 3 3 8
forming a molecule that contains two atoms (3.2)
diffraction grating:a device that separates light into a F
spectrum (2.2)
forensic scientist:a scientist who uses specialized
dipole: dipole moment; a distribution of molecular
knowledge to analyze evidence in legal cases (6.3)
charge consisting of two opposite charges that are
fossil fuel:a fuel that is formed over geologic time by
separated by a short distance (8.2)
the action of pressure and heat on organic materials
dipole-dipole attraction:the intermolecular force
(e.g., petroleum, coal) (14)
between oppositely charged ends of two polar
fractional distillation:a process that uses the specific
molecules (molecules with dipoles) (8.2)
boiling points of substances to refine a mixture into
diprotic acid:an acid that contains two hydrogen ions
separate components (13.4)
that can dissociate (10.2)
fraction:one component of a substance that has been
double bond:a covalent bond in which two atoms share
refined by fractional distillation (13.4)
two pairs of electrons (3.2)
fuel cell:a technology that produces energy by the
double displacement reaction:a chemical reaction in
reaction of hydrogen and oxygen, leaving water as a
which the cations of two ionic compounds exchange
by-product (11.5)
places, resulting in the formation of two new
fusible plug:a safety device that melts at a high
compounds (4.3)
temperature to relieve gas pressure inside a container
(11.3)
E
elastomer:a polymer that can be bent or twisted by an G
outside force; it will return to its previous shape
gamma radiation:a type of high-energy electromagnetic
once the force is removed (13.3)
radiation in which gamma (γ) photons are emitted
electrolyte:a solute that conducts a current in an
from a nucleus (4.4)
aqueous solution (8.2)
Gay-Lussac’s law:the law stating that the pressure of a
electron:a negatively charged subatomic particle that
fixed amount of gas is directly proportional to its
occupies the space around the nucleus of an atom Kelvin temperature, if the volume is constant: P ∝ T
(2.1)
(11.3)
electron affinity:the change in energy that accompanies
general solubility guidelines:a set of guidelines that
the addition of an electron to an atom in the gaseous
characterize the solubility of substances in water
state (2.3)
(9.1)
electronegativity:a relative measure of an atom’s ability
geometric isomers:compounds that have the same
to attract shared electrons in a chemical bond (3.1)
formula but different arrangements of atoms around a
element:a pure substance that cannot be broken down fixed carbon-carbon double bond; also called cis-
into smaller particles and retain the same properties trans isomers (13.3)
(1.3)
global warming:a gradual increase in the average
empirical formula:shows the lowest whole number temperature of Earth’s atmosphere (14.5)
ratio of atoms of each element in a compound (6.2)
greenhouse gas:a gas that prevents some of the heat
endothermic process:a process that absorbs thermal produced by solar radiation from leaving the
energy (14.2) atmosphere (e.g., carbon dioxide) (14.5)
end-point:the point in a titration when the acid-base
indicator changes colour (10.3) H
energy level:fixed, three-dimensional volume in which
hard water:water with a high concentration of
electrons travel around the nucleus (2.2)
dissolved ions (9.4)
equivalence point:the point in a titration when the
heat:the transfer of thermal energy between objects
number of moles of added solution is
with different temperatures (14.3)
674 MHR • Glossary
heat capacity:the amount of energy that is needed to the mole; from the French Système international
change the temperature of a particular substance or d’unités (1.2)
system by 1˚C; measured in kJ/˚C (14.4)
intramolecular forces:the forces that bond atoms
heat of combustion:the heat that is released by a together within a molecule (e.g., covalent bonds)
combustion reaction; usually measured in kJ/mol (3.2)
(14.4)
ion:a positively or negatively charged particle that
heat of solution:the change in the thermal energy when results from a neutral atom or group of atoms giving
a solute dissolves in a solvent (14.4) up or gaining electrons (2.2)
heterogeneous mixture:a mixture in which the different ion-dipole attractions:the intermolecular forces
components can be distinctly seen (1.3) between ions and polar molecules (8.2)
homogeneous mixture:a mixture in which the different ion exchange:a process for softening water by
components are mixed so that they appear to be a exchanging one type of ion with another (9.4)
single substance; a solution (1.3)
ionic bond:a bond between oppositely charged ions
homologous series:a series of molecules in which each that arises from electron transfer; usually involves a
member differs from the next by an additional metal atom and a non-metal atom (3.1)
specific structural unit (e.g. −CH −) (13.3)
2 ionization energy:the energy that is needed to remove
hydrate:a compound that has a specific number of an electron from a neutral atom (2.3)
water molecules bonded to each formula unit (6.4)
isolated system:a system in which the total amount of
hydrated:a term used to describe ions in aqueous matter and energy remains constant (14.4)
solutions, surrounded by and attached to water
isomers:compounds that have the same chemical
molecules (8.2)
formula but different molecular arrangements and
hydrocarbon:a molecular compound that contains only properties (13.2)
hydrogen and carbon atoms (13)
isotopes:atoms of an element that are chemically
hydrogen bonding:the strong intermolecular attraction similar but have different numbers of neutrons and
between molecules containing a hydrogen atom thus, different mass numbers (2.1)
bonded to an atom of a highly electronegative
isotopic abundance:the relative amount of an isotope of
element, especially oxygen (8.2)
an element; expressed as a percent or a decimal
hydronium ion:a proton that is bonded to a water fraction (5.1)
molecule; chemical formula H O+ (10.1)
3 IUPAC:the acronym for International Union of Pure
and Applied Chemistry, an organization that specifies
I rules for chemical names and symbols (3.4)
ideal gas:a hypothetical gas with particles that have
K
mass but no volume or attractive forces between
them (11.1)
Kelvin scale:a temperature scale that begins at the
ideal gas law:the law stating that the pressure times the theoretical point of absolute zero kinetic energy
volume of a gas equals the number of moles of the (0K = −273.15˚C); each unit (a kelvin) is equal to
gas times the universal gas constant and the 1˚C (11.3)
temperature of the gas; PV = nRT (12.1)
kilopascal:a unit of pressure equal to 1000 Pa (11.2)
immiscible:a term used to describe substances that are
kinetic molecular theory:the theory explaining gas
not able to combine with each other in a solution
behaviour in terms of the random motion of particles
(8.1)
with negligible volume and negligible intermolecular
incomplete combustion:combustion in which forces (11.1)
insufficient oxygen prevents a hydrocarbon fuel from
reacting completely, leaving products other than
L
carbon dioxide gas and water vapour (4.2, 14.1)
law of combining volumes:the law stating that when
insoluble:a term used to describe a substance that has a
gases react, the volumes of the gaseous reactants and
solubility of less than 0.1 g per 100 mL in a
products, at constant temperatures and pressures, are
particular solvent (8.1)
always in whole number ratios (12.1)
intermolecular forces:the forces that exist between
law of conservation of mass:the law stating that matter
molecules (3.2)
can be neither created nor destroyed; in any chemical
International System of Units (SI):the international
reaction, the mass of the products is always equal to
system of measurement units, including units,
the mass of the reactants (4.1)
including units such as the metre, the kilogram, and
Glossary • MHR 675
law of definite proportions:the law stating that the molar volume:the amount of space that is occupied by
elements in a chemical compound are always present 1 mol of a substance; equal to 22.4 L for a gas at
in the same proportions by mass (6.1) standard temperature and pressure (STP) (12.1)
law of multiple proportions:the law stating that the molecular compound:a non-conducting compound
masses of two or more elements that combine to form whose intramolecular bonds are not broken when the
a compound can be expressed in small whole compound changes state (3.2)
number ratios (12.1)
molecular formula: a formula that gives the actual
Lewis structure:a symbolic representation of the number of atoms of each element in a molecule or
arrangement of the valence electrons of an element formula unit (6.2)
(2.2)
mole (mol):the SI base unit for amount of substance;
limiting reactant:the reactant that is completely contains the same number of atoms, molecules, or
consumed during a chemical reaction, limiting the formula units as exactly 12 g of carbon-12 (5.2)
amount of product produced (7.2)
mole ratio:a ratio that compares the number of moles of
line structural diagram:a graphical representation of different substances in a balanced chemical equation
the bonds between carbon atoms in a hydrocarbon (7.1)
(13.2)
monomer:a small, repeating molecular unit in a
lone pairs: pairs of electrons in an atom’s outer valence polymer chain (13.1)
shell that are not involved in covalent bonding (3.3)
monoprotic acid:an acid that contains only one
hydrogen ion that can dissociate (10.2)
M Montréal Protocol:an international agreement that
limits the global use of CFCs and other ozone-
mass/mass percent:the mass of a solute divided by the
destroying chemicals (12.4)
mass of the solution, expressed as a percent (8.3)
mass number (A):the sum of the protons and neutrons
N
in the nucleus of one atom of a particular element
(2.1)
net ionic equation:a representation of a chemical
mass percent:the mass of an element in a compound, reaction in a solution that shows only the ions
expressed as a percent of the compound’s total mass involved in the chemical change (9.2)
(6.1)
neutralization reaction:a double displacement reaction
mass spectrometer:an instrument that uses magnetic in which an acid and a base combine to form water
fields to separate the isotopes of an element and and a salt (4.3, 10.3)
measure the mass and abundance of each isotope
neutron:an uncharged subatomic particle in the
(5.1)
nucleus of an atom (2.1)
mass/volume percent:the mass of a solute divided by
non-electrolyte:a solute that does not conduct a current
the volume of the solution, expressed as a percent
in an aqueous solution (8.2)
(8.3)
non-polar molecule:a covalently bonded molecule that
matter:anything that has mass and occupies space (1.2)
does not possess a dipole moment, because of the
metathesis reaction:a double displacement reaction arrangement of its molecules (3.3)
(9.2)
nuclear equation:a symbolic representation of a nuclear
millimetre of mercury (mm Hg):a unit of pressure that reaction, showing how a nucleus gains or loses
is based on the height of a column of mercury in a subatomic particles (4.4)
barometer or manometer; equal to 1 torr (11.2)
nuclear fission:the process in which an unstable, heavy
miscible:a term used to describe substances that are isotope splits into smaller, lighter nuclei (4.4)
able to combine with each other in any proportion
nuclear fusion:the process by which a nucleus absorbs
(8.1)
lighter, accelerated nuclei (4.4)
mixture:a combination of two or more kinds of matter,
nuclear reaction:a reaction that involves changes in the
in which each component retains its own
nuclei of atoms (4.4)
characteristics (1.3)
nucleus:the central core of an atom, composed of
molar concentration (C):a unit of concentration
protons and neutrons (2.1)
expressed as the number of moles of solute present
in one litre of solution; also called molarity (8.3)
O
molar mass (M):the mass of 1 mol of a substance,
numerically equal to the element’s average atomic octet:an arrangement of eight electrons in the valence
mass; expressed in g/mol (5.2) shell of an atom (2.2)
676 MHR • Glossary
octet rule:the rule stating that atoms bond in such a polymer:a very long molecule that is formed by the
way as to attain eight electrons in their valence shells covalent bonding of many smaller, identical
(3.2) molecular units (monomers) (13.1)
organic compound:a molecular compound based on potential energy:stored energy; the energy of an object
carbon, almost always containing carbon-carbon and due to its position (14.4)
carbon-hydrogen bonds (13.1)
precipitate:an insoluble solid that is formed by a
oxoacid:an acid formed from a polyatomic ion that chemical reaction between two soluble compounds
contains oxygen, hydrogen, and one other acid (10.2) (4.3) (9.1)
precipitation reaction:a double displacement reaction
P that forms a precipitate (9.2)
precision:the closeness of a measurement to other
parts per million/parts per billion:units of
measurements of the same object or phenomena (1.2)
concentration used to express very small quantities
of solute (8.3) pressure:the force that is exerted on an object, per unit
pascal:the SI unit of pressure; equal to 1N/m2 (11.2) of surface area (11.2)
pressure relief valve:a device that regulates the
percentage composition:the relative mass of each
pressure of a gas inside a container (11.3)
element in a compound (6.1)
product:a substance that is formed by a chemical
percentage purity:the percent of a sample that is
reaction (4.1)
composed of a specific compound or element (7.3)
property:a characteristic that distinguishes different
percentage yield:the actual yield of a reaction,
types of matter; (e.g., colour, melting or boiling point,
expressed as a percent of the theoretical yield (7.3)
conductivity, density) (1.2)
periodic table:a system for organizing the elements by
proton:a positively charged subatomic particle in the
atomic number into groups (columns) and periods
nucleus of an atom (2.1)
(rows), so that elements with similar properties are in
the same column (2.2) pure covalent bond:a chemical bond between two
atoms with identical or nearly identical
periodic trend:a pattern that is evident when elements
electronegativities (3.2)
are organized by their atomic numbers (2.2)
pure substance:a material that is composed of only one
petrochemical:a product that is derived from petroleum
type of particle (e.g., iron, water, sodium chloride)
(13.4)
(1.3)
petroleum:a complex mixture of solid, liquid, and
gaseous hydrocarbons (13.1)
Q
pH:the negative logarithm of the concentration of
hydronium ions, − log [H O+], measured in mol/L qualitative analysis:the process of separating and
3
(10.2) identifying ions in an aqueous solution (9.2)
pH scale:a mathematical scale that is used to express qualitative property: a property of matter that can be
the concentration of hydronium ions in a solution as observed but cannot be precisely measured or
a number from 0 to 14 (10.2) expressed numerically (e.g., colour, odour) (1.2)
physical change:a change, such as change of state, that quantitative property:a property of matter that can be
does not alter the composition of matter (1.3) measured and expressed numerically (e.g., density,
physical property:a property of a substance that can be boiling point) (1.2)
observed without the substance changing into or
interacting with another substance (1.2) R
polar covalent bond:a covalent bond between atoms
radioactivity:the process in which unstable nuclei
that have significantly different electronegativities, in
spontaneously decay, releasing energy and subatomic
which the electron pair is unevenly shared (3.3)
particles (2.1)
polar molecule:a molecule that has an uneven
radioisotope:an unstable isotope of an element, which
distribution of charge; one end has a partial positive
undergoes radioactive decay (2.1)
charge and one end has a partial negative charge (3.3)
rate of dissolving:the speed at which a solute dissolves
polyatomic ion:an ion that is made up of two or more
in a solvent (8.2)
atoms; it has a positive or negative charge (3.4)
reactant:a substance that undergoes a chemical change
polymerization:a process, common in the plastics
in a chemical reaction (4.1)
industry, in which polymers are formed by reacting
monomers (13.3)
Glossary • MHR 677
reforming:the use of heat, pressure, and catalysts to stable octet:an arrangement of eight electrons in the
convert a large hydrocarbon molecule into other valence shell of an atom (2.2)
compounds (13.4)
standard ambient temperature and pressure (SATP):
risk:a potential danger; a chance of an undesirable 25˚C and 100 kPa (11.4)
consequence (14.4)
standard atmospheric pressure:101.325 kPa at sea level
risk-benefit analysis:a thoughtful assessment of both and 0˚C; the pressure that supports a column of
the positive and negative results that may be caused mercury exactly 760 mm in height (11.2)
by a particular course of action (14.4)
standard solution:a solution of known concentration
rotational motion:the motion of particles around other (8.4)
particles; characteristic of liquids (11.1) standard temperature:0˚C, the freezing point of water
(11.4)
S standard temperature and pressure (STP):0˚C and
101.325 kPa (11.4)
salt:any ionic compound that is formed in a
neutralization reaction from the anion of an acid and Stock system:the current system for naming
the cation of a base (10.3) compounds that have elements that can have more
than one valence; the valence of the first element
saturated hydrocarbon:a hydrocarbon that consists of
name (usually a metal) in roman numerals in
chains or non-aromatic rings, whose carbon atoms
parentheses (e.g., copper(II)) (3.4)
are bonded to the maximum number of hydrogen or
carbon atoms (13.3) stoichiometric amount:the exact molar amounts of a
reactant or a product, as predicted by a balanced
saturated solution:a solution in which no more of a
chemical equation (7.2)
particular solute can be dissolved at a specific
temperature (8.1) stoichiometric coefficient:a number that is placed in
front of the formula of the formula of a product or a
SI:the international system of measurement units,
reactant of a chemical equation to indicate how many
including units such as the metre, the kilogram, and
moles are involved in the reaction (7.2)
the mole; from the French Système international
d’unités) (1.2) stoichiometry:the study of the mass-mole-number
relationships in chemical reactions and formulas
significant digits:the number of meaningful digits,
(7.1)
including a final uncertain digit, that is obtained by
measurement or used in calculations (1.2) straight-chain alkane:a hydrocarbon whose carbon
atoms form a continuous chain of single carbon-
single displacement reaction:a chemical reaction in
carbon bonds (13.3)
which one element in a compound is replaced
(displaced) by another element (4.3) strong acid:an acid that completely dissociates into
ions in aqueous solutions (10.2)
skeleton equation:an equation that identifies the
reactants and products in a chemical reaction by strong base:a base that completely dissociates into ions
their chemical formulas but does not quantify them in aqueous solutions (10.2)
(4.1) structural diagram:a two-dimensional representation of
soft water:water with a low concentration of dissolved the structure of a compound; can be a complete
ions (9.4) diagram, a condensed diagram, or a line diagram
(13.2)
solubility:the amount of solute that dissolves in a given
quantity of solvent at a specific temperature (8.1) structural model:a three-dimensional representation of
the structure of a compound (13.2)
soluble:a term used to describe a substance that has a
solubility greater than 1 g per 100 mL of a particular STSE:an abbreviation for the interactions between
solvent (8.1) science, technology, society, and the environment
(1.1)
solute:a substance that is dissolved in a solution (8.1)
subatomic particle:one of the small particles (protons,
solution:a homogeneous mixture of a solvent and one
neutrons, and electrons) that make up an atom (2.1)
or more solutes (8.1)
sustainable development:the use of resources in a way
solvent:a substance that has other substances dissolved
that meets our current needs, without jeopardizing
in it (8.1)
the ability of other people, or future generations, to
specific heat capacity (c):the amount of energy (in J)
meet their needs (14.5)
required to change the temperature of 1 g of a
synthesis reaction:a chemical reaction in which two or
substance by 1˚C; measured in J/g•˚C (14.3)
more reactants combine to produce a single, different
spectator ions:ions that are present in a solution but are
substance (4.2)
not involved in the chemical reaction (9.2)
678 MHR • Glossary
systematic name:a name that is based on the IUPAC V
rules for naming compounds (13.3)
valence:a number, positive or negative, that describes
the bonding capacity of an element or ion (3.4)
T
valence electron:an electron that occupies the
temperature:a measure of the average kinetic energy of outermost energy level of an atom (2.2)
a substance or a system (14.3)
variable composition:a term used to describe a
theoretical yield:the amount of product that is solution; capable of having different ratios of solutes
produced by a chemical reaction as predicted by the to solvent (8.1)
stoichiometry of the chemical equation (7.3)
vibrational motion:the motion of particles that are fixed
thermal energy:the kinetic energy of particles; the in position; a characteristic of solids (11.1)
energy possessed by vibrating particles (14.3)
volumetric flask:a flat-bottomed, tapered glass vessel
thermal equilibrium:the state that is achieved when all that is used to prepare standard solutions; accurate to
the substances in a system have the same final ±0.1mL (8.4)
temperature (14.4)
volume/volume percent:the volume of a liquid solute
thermochemical equation:an equation that shows the divided by the volume of the solution, expressed as a
energy produced or absorbed in a reaction (14.2) percent (8.3)
titration:a laboratory process that is used to determine
the concentration of a acidic or basic solution by W
reacting it with a solution of known concentration
waste-water treatment:the cleaning of used water by
(10.3)
physical, chemical, and biological processes (9.4)
torr:a unit of pressure; equal to 1 mm of mercury in the
water treatment:the process of removing chemical,
column of a barometer or manometer (11.2)
biological, and physical contaminants to make water
total ionic equation:a form of chemical equation that
suitable for consumption (9.4)
shows dissociated ions of soluble ionic compounds
weak acid:an acid that only slightly dissociates into
(9.2)
ions in aqueous solutions (10.2)
translational motion:the independent motion of
weak base:a base that only slightly dissociates into ions
particles from one point in space to another;
in aqueous solutions (10.2)
characteristic of gases (11.1)
weighted average:an average that takes into account the
triple bond:a covalent bond in which two atoms share
abundance or importance of each value (5.3)
three pairs of electrons (3.2)
word equation:an equation that identifies the reactants
trivial name:a name for a compound that does not
and products of a chemical reaction by name, but
necessarily suggest anything about the chemical
does not specify their amounts (4.1)
composition of the compound (e.g., water, baking
soda); also called the common name (3.4)
Z
troposphere:the layer of the atmosphere that is closest
to the surface of Earth (12.4) zero sum rule:the rule stating that for chemical
formulas of neutral compounds involving ions, the
U sum of positive valences and negative valences must
equal zero (3.4)
universal gas constant (R):a proportionality constant
that relates pressure, temperature, volume, and
amount of gas; equal to 8.31 kPa·L/mol·K (12.1)
unsaturated hydrocarbon:a hydrocarbon that contains
carbon-carbon double or triple bonds; the carbon
atoms can potentially bond to additional atoms
(13.3)
unsaturated solution:a solution in which more of a
particular solute can be dissolved at a specific
temperature (8.1)
Glossary • MHR 679
Index
The page numbers in boldfacetype inidcate the pages where the terms are defined. Terms that occur
in Sample Problems (SP), Investigations (inv), ExpressLabs (EL), and ThoughtLabs (TL) are also indicated.
2,2,4-trimethylpentane, 549 compound solubility, 330 minimum volume to precipitate,
incomplete combustion, 582–584SP Alkaline earth metals, 41 351–352
2,2-dimethylbutane, 543 bases, 383 qualitative analysis, 345–346inv
2,3-dimethylbutane, 543 Alkanes, 544 reactions in, 337
2-ethyl-1-butene, 556–557 aliphatic compounds, 547–550 solubility, 330
2-methylpentane, 547 boiling points, 545–546 stoichiometry, 348–355
branched-chain, 547 water quality, 357–364
3-ethyl-2,2-dimethylpentane, 549 drawing, 550–551, 565 Argon, average atomic mass, 180
3-ethyl-2,4-dimethylpentane, 549 naming, 546–549, 565 Ariya, Dr. Parisa, 520
3-methylpentane, 543 properties of, 545 Aromatic compounds, 571
reactivity, 554–555inv Arrhenius theory of acids and
Abiogenic theory, 537 rules for naming, 547–550 bases, 374
Absolute zero, 440 side-chain, 547 limitations of, 374–375
Academies, 471 solubility, 552 Arrhenius, Svanté, 373, 374
Accuracy, 18 straight chain, 546 Arson, 222
Acetic acid, 161, 370 structural diagrams, 550–551 Aspirin™, 533, 534
concentration, 402–403inv Alkenes, 552 Atmosphere, 485
empirical formula, 215 chemical reactivity, 553 formation of, 458
Acetylsalicylic acid, 533, 534 drawing, 557–558, 565 Atmospheres (atm), 428
Acetylene, 207, 560, 580 naming, 556–557, 565 Atmospheric reactions, 515–520
combustion, 581–582SP, properties of, 553 Atomic mass
585–586inv, 590–591SP reactivity, 554–555inv average. SeeAverage atomic mass
chemical formula, 207, 216 solubility, 553 isotopes, 37
thermochemical equation, Alkynes, 560, 580 Atomic mass unit (u), 35
590–591SP drawing, 560, 565 Atomic number (Z), 36, 37
Acid rain, 5, 358, 623 naming, 560, 565 Atomic symbol, 36
Acid-base indicator, 395 Alloys, 83, 130, 286 Atomic theory of matter, 34, 35, 38
Acidity, 280 composition, 306 Atoms, 34, 35
Acids, 369 Alpha particle emission, 142 bonding, 70
Arrhenius theory, 373 Alumina, 102 chemical equations, 112, 235
Brønsted-Lowry theory, 375, 376 Aluminum, specific heat capacity, 595 electron affinity, 57
binary, 384 Aluminum oxide, 102 electronegativity, 70
cleaners, 373EL Amalgam, 286, 306 electrons, 38, 40–47
diluting, 324 Ammonia, 235–236, 280, 370, 539 energy levels, 49–55
diprotic, 383 empirical formula, 207 ionization energy, 53–55
monoprotic, 382 molecular formula, 207 moles, 176SP
pH, 390–391inv polar molecule, 91 nucleus of, 36
properties of, 370 specific heat capacity, 595 periodic trends, 49–55
strength, 385 Ammonium chloride, 101, 104 radius, 49, 50–51inv, 52
strong, 381 solubility, 334 valence electrons, 70
triprotic, 383 Ammonium cyanate, 534 Average atomic mass, 162, 164,
weak, 381 Ammonium nitrate, 104 167SP, 189–190SP
Activity series, 127 Analytical chemistry argon, 180
Activity series for halogens, 131 applications of, 216 Avogadro constant, 171
Actual yield, 260 doping control laboratory, 216 hydrogen, 180
percentage yield, 263–264SP Anhydrous, 223 isotopes, 162, 163, 164, 165
Aerial fluids, 114 Aniline, 207 oxygen, 180
Agitation and rate of dissolving, 290 Anion, 53, 54 periodic table, 165
Air bags, 506 Apollo 11, 233 sodium, 180
Air pollution and gases, 515–520 Aqueous solutions, 286, 329, 344 Avogadro constant, 36, 172, 173,
Aliphatic hydrocarbons, 544 colour of, 344 177, 178
alkanes, 547–550 flame test, 344 average atomic mass, 171
properties, 564inv identifying ions in, 344 conversion, 175
structures, 564inv ions in, 344 magnitude, 175
Alkali, 370 limiting reactant problems, mole, 171
Alkali metals, 41, 383 353–354 using, 174SP
bases, 383 Avogadro’s hypothesis, 473, 474
680 MHR • Index
Avogadro’s law, 474, 478, Bronze, 83, 306 naming, 101
479–482SP, 484 Brooks, Harriet, 145 trivial names, 101
Avogadro, Amadeo, 178, 472, 473 Burette, 401 Chemical engineer, 265
Ayotte, Dr. Christiane, 216 Burning. SeeCombustion Chemical equations, 112, 235EL
Butane atoms, 235
Baking soda, 102, 161, 370, 394, 534 heat combustion, 615 balanced, 114, 234, 235EL, 236–249
Balanced chemical equation, 114 molecular formula, 546 balancing, 116–118SP
Ball-and-stick model, 87, 540 coefficients, 115
Barium chloride, solubility, 334 Calcium carbonate, 102, 188, 360, 539 mass, 241
Barium hydroxide, 383 Calcium chlorate, solubility, 334 molecules, 235
hydrate, 224–225 Calcium chloride, 307 moles, 237–238
octahydrate, 223 dihydrate, 223 reactants, 239
solubility, 334 Calcium gluconate, 188 yield, 260
Barium oxide, solubility, 334 Calcium hydroxide, 383 Chemical formula, 95
Barium sulfate, 175 Calcium oxide, 102 calculating percentage
Barometer, 426 Calcium phosphate, 181 composition, 202
Bartlett, Neil, 244 Calcium sulfate, dihydrate, 223 Lewis structure, 95
Bases, 369 Calories, 603, 612 octet rule, 95
alkali metals, 383 Calorimeter, 602, 603, 604–605SP percentage composition, 203–204SP
alkaline earth metals, 383 heat capacity, 610–611SP representation, 96
Arrhenius theory, 373 Calorimetry, 601, 602 valence, 98–100
cleaners, 373EL Candle wax, 615 Chemical nomenclature, 101
properties of, 370 Carbides, 534 Chemical properties, 12
strength, 385 Carbohydrates, 217, 534 periodic table, 40
Bayer, Frederick, 534 energy, 613 Chemical proportions in
Beauchamp, Dr. Stephen, 246 Carbon compounds, 197
Bends, 466 bonding, 539 Chemical reactions, 112
Benefit, 620 bonding electrons, 538 classification of, 111, 119
Benzene, 199, 207 geometrical structures of, 538 law of conservation of mass, 113
empirical formula, 207 properties of, 538 Chemistry, 6
molecular formula, 216 radioactive isotope, 144 matter, 6–16
Beryllium oxide, 181 specific heat capacity, 595 technology, 7, 8
Berzelius, Jons Jakob, 534 structures, 539 Chlorine, 280
Beta particle, 143 Carbon dioxide, 6, 69, 184, 199, 200, Chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), 516,
Beta particle emission, 143 420, 491 517–519
Beta radiation, 143 conductivity, 69 Chlorophyll, 309
Big Bang theory, 458 melting point, 69 Cholesterol, 539, 561
Binary acid, 384 molecular shape, 88 Cinnabar, 203
Binary compounds, 102, 105 non-polar molecule, 91 Cinnamaldehyde, 203
Biogenic theory, 537 Carbon monoxide, 199, 200 Cis-trans isomer, 558
Black, Joseph, 603 Carbon tetrafluoride as non-polar Citric acid, 370
Blanketing, 465 molecule, 91 Closed system, 424
Bohr-Rutherford diagram, 44, 46 Carbon-12, 167 Coal, 537
Boiling point, 12 Carbon-14, 164 Cobalt(II) chloride, 189
Bomb calorimeter, 602, 610 Carbon-hydrogen combustion Cochineal, 361
Bond/Bonding, 70, 589 analyzer, 219 Codeine, 158, 218
ionic and covalent, 70 calculations, 220–221SP Coefficients, 115
Lewis structure, 96 Carbonates, 534 Combined gas law, 453, 453–454SP,
octet rule, 96 Carbonic acid, 370 455–457SP, 484
stable octet, 96 Cation, 53, 54 Combustibility, 12
valence, 96 Cellulose, 536 Combustion, 577
Bond energy, 539, 589, 590–591SP Celsius, 14 acetylene, 581–582SP, 585–586inv,
Bonding pairs, 88 Centimetres, 14 590–591SP
Boron, 169 Charles’ law, 440, 441, 442–443SP, candles, 615
Boyle’s law, 432, 433–435SP, 453, 489 444–446SP, 453 complete, 580
Boyle, Robert, 429, 432, 452 Charles, Jacques, 436, 440, 452 heat of, 606
Brass, 306 Chemical bonds, 70, 589 incomplete, 580
Brittleness, 12 Chemical changes, 25 oxygen, 464
Brønsted, Johannes, 375 Chemical compounds propane, 580
Brønsted-Lowry theory of acids and classifying, 66 Combustion equations, 580–581
bases, 375,376 common names, 101 Combustion reactions, 123, 578
Index • MHR 681
Competing reaction, 260 hydrate and hydrated, 226–227inv Dispersing agent, 624
Complete combustion, 580 Cortisol, 221 Distillation, 284
Complete structural diagram, 541 Covalent bonds, 70 Double bond, 82
Composition of alloys, 306 conductivity, 82 Double displacement reaction,
Compounds, 26, 67EL double bond, 82 132–133, 337
binary, 105 electronegativity, 81 copper, 138–139inv
chemical proportions in, 197 Lewis structure, 81, 82 gas producing, 340
covalent, 67, 294 multiple, 82 gases, 134
empirical formula of, 208 octet rule, 75 neutralization reaction, 135
hydrogen, 104 polar, 86 observing, 136–137inv
ideal gas law, 498–500SP pure, 81 precipitate, 132–133
ionic, 67 triple bond, 82 sulfur dioxide gas, 340
molar mass, 181SP, 197, Covalent compound, 67, 68, 69 water producing, 341
198–205, 216 conductivity, 67 Double replacement reaction.
molecular formula of, 215–218 melting point, 67 SeeDouble displacement reaction
percentage composition of, 200 miscible, 294 Dry ice. SeeCarbon dioxide
polyatomic ions, 104 solubility, 67, 294 Ductility, 12
solubility, 330, 331, 332–333inv Cracking, 570 Duralumin, 306
tertiary, 104 Crosslinked, 559
Compressed gases, 450 Crude oil, 537 Elastin, 559
Concentration, 302 Cryogenics, 437 Elastomer, 559
acetic acid, 402–403inv Cryosurgery, 465 Electrical conductivity, 12
finding, 396–397SP Crystal lattice/shape, 12, 418 Electrolyte, 293
mass volume, 304–305SP Cupronickel, 306 Electron affinity, 57
mass/volume percent, 302 Curie, Marie, 143, 145 Electron energy levels, 71
mass/mass percent, 306 Cyanides, 534 Electronegativity, 70
parts per billion, 311 Cyclic hydrocarbons, 561 atomic size, 71
parts per million, 311 drawing/naming, 562–563 bond type, 72
solution, 283, 302–318, 317inv, Cycloalkanes, drawing/naming, 566 covalent bonds, 81
322–323inv Cycloalkenes, 562 range of differences, 73
vinegar, 402–403inv drawing/naming, 566 solubility, 293
volume/volume percent, 309 Cycloalkynes, drawing, 566 table of, 71
Condensation, 419 Cyclohexane, 219, 562 trend for, 71
Condensed structural diagram, 541 Czyzewska, Dr. Eva, 361 Electrons, 35, 43EL, 46
Conductivity in atoms, 38, 40–47
carbon dioxide, 69 d-limonene, 313 energy levels, 43
covalent bonds/compounds, 67, 82 Dalton’s law of partial pressures, 459, periodic table, 42
ionic compound, 67, 78–79 460–461SP, 507 spectra of, 43EL
sodium chloride, 69, 78–79 Dalton, John, 34, 38, 207, 459, transferring multiple, 76
solubility, 70 472, 473 valence, 45, 46
Conjugate acid, 376 Davy, Sir Humphrey, 121 Electrostatic attraction, 419
Conjugate acid-base pair, 376, Decaffeination, 300 Element symbol, 36
377–379SP Decane, molecular formula, 546 Elements, 26, 34
Conjugate base, 376 Decomposition, 12 compounds, 199, 200
Copper Decomposition reaction, 119, 122 specific heat capacity, 595
decomposition reaction, copper, 138–139inv synthesis reactions, 120
138–139inv Degrees, 14 Empirical formula, 207
double displacement reaction, Density, 12, 14 determining by experiment, 211
138–139inv gases, 490, 491, 492–493SP experiments, 219–228
single displacement reaction, ideal gas law, 489, 490 finding by experiment, 219–228
138–139inv Diatomic elements, 81 magnesium oxide, 212–213inv
specific heat capacity, 595 Dickson, Alison, 77 molar mass, 208, 216
synthesis reaction, 138–139inv Diffraction grating, 43EL percentage composition, 208,
Copper oxide, 211 Dihydrogen monoxide. SeeWater 210–211SP
Copper(II) carbonate, 198 Dinitrogen monoxide, 102 solving problems using, 209–211
Copper(II) chloride, 255inv Dinitrogen tetroxide, 233 End-point, 399
anhydrous, 223 Diphosphorus pentoxide, 105 Endothermic, 588, 603
dihydrate, 223 Dipole-dipole, 420 Energy, 14, 577
Copper(II) nitrate, 117 Dipole-dipole attraction, 292 carbohydrates, 613
Copper(II) sulfate, 322–323inv Dipoles, 91, 292, 420 fat, 613
anhydrous, 226–227inv Diprotic acids, 383 fatty acids, 613
682 MHR • Index
foods, 613 Fuel cell, 464 Haber Process, 236
glucose, 613 Fusible plugs, 451 Halogens, 41
measurement factors, 593 Fusion. SeeNuclear fusion single displacement reaction, 131
Energy levels, 43, 44–47 Hard water, 360
atoms, 49–55 Galactose, formula, 217 testing, 363
electron arrangements, 45 Galilei, Galileo, 426 Hardness, 12
electrons, 43 Gamma radiation, 145 Heat, 593
full, 47 Gas chromatography, 222 transfer, factors in, 594
ionization energy, 53, 54 Gases Heat capacity, 609, 610
Lewis structures, 46 air pollution, 515–520 calorimeter, 610–611SP
patterns, 45 behaviour of, 417 Heat combustion
valence electrons, 45 boiling point, 461 butane, 615
Energy shells. SeeEnergy levels combined laws, 452–453 propane, 615
Environmental problems with compressed, 450, 451 Heat measurement, technology of, 601
fossil fuels, 625 density, 490, 491, 492–493SP Heat of combustion, 606
Enzymes, 534 produced in double displacement candle, 616–617inv
ripening, 552 reactions, 134 Heat of formation, 589
Epsom salts, 223 hydrogen, production of, Heat of solution, 608
Equivalence point, 399 512–513inv measuring, 608EL
Erlenmeyer flask, 401 inert, 244 Heat transfer, 594
Erlenmeyer, Richard E.A.C., 123 kinetic molecular theory, 418 mass, 595
Estrone, 561 mass, 422EL water, 596–597SP
Ethane, molecular formula, 546 molar mass, 490, 494–495SP, Heptane
Ethanoic acid, 544 496–497inv combustion, 124
Ethanol, 420, 535, 539 molar volume, 474–477SP, 478, molecular formula, 546
combustion, 123 479–482SP, 480–482SP, 490 Heroin, 158
solubility, 294 molecular mass, 490 Heterogenous mixture, 26
specific heat capacity, 595 moles, 482SP Hexane, 543
Ethene, 553, 568 noble, 244 chemical formula, 539
Ethyne, 207, 560, 580 particle theory, 419 molecular formula, 539, 546
empirical/molecular formula, 207 pressure, 424, 430–431inv, 432–435 High pressure injectors, 427
Ettinger, Robert C.W., 437 pressure, volume, and temperature, High-performance liquid
Eutrophication, 8 447–450 chromatography (HPLC), 188
Exact numbers and measurement, solubility, 298 Higson, Dr. Robert, 427
15, 17 temperature, 298, 436, 438–439inv, Homogeneous mixtures, 26, 283, 284
Excess reactant, 252, 255inv 440–441, 444–446 Homologous series, 544
Exothermic, 588, 603 using, 462 Humidity, 459
reaction, 324 volume, 422EL, 424, 430–431inv, Hydrate, 223
Expanded molecular formula, 539 432–435, 436, 438–439inv, 440–441 barium hydroxide, 224–225
Gasoline, 579 determining the formula of,
Fahrenheit degrees, 26 Gay-Lussac’s law, 447, 448–449SP, 453 224–225
Fats, 534 Gay-Lussac, Joseph Louis, 440, 447, molecular formula, 225,
energy, 613 452, 472, 473, 501 226–227inv
Fatty acids and energy, 613 Gelling agent, 624 naming, 103
Fermi problems, 175 General solubility guidelines, 334 Hydrated, 293
Fermi, Enrico, 175 Geometric isomer, 558 Hydrazine, 233
First ionization energy, 54 Gesner, Abraham, 579 Hydrides, 340
Fission. SeeNuclear fission Global warming, 623 Hydrobromic acid, 381, 382
Fixed air, 121 Glucose, 207, 536 Hydrocarbons, 533, 577, 578–586
Flammability. SeeCombustibility empirical formula, 207, 217 classifying, 544–566
Flotation, 77 energy, 613 compounds, representation of,
Food chemist, 114 molecular formula, 217 538–543
Fool’s gold, 66 Gold, 65 cyclic, 561
Forensic scientists, 215, 222 specific heat capacity, 595 modelling, 542inv
Formula, calculating percentage Grams, 14 origins of, 536
composition, 202 Greenhouse effect, 5, 458, 517, 623 refining, 568
Fossil fuels, 537, 577, 578–586 Greenhouse gases, 623 risk, 622–623
environmental problems, 625 Ground water, 360 sources of, 537
Fractional distillation, 569 Gypsum, 223 structural diagrams/model,
Freon, 517 540, 541
Fructose, formula, 217 unsaturated, 553
Index • MHR 683
using, 568 Ion size, solubility, 331 gases, 418
Hydrochloric acid, 102, 235EL, 381, Ion-dipole attraction, 293 states of matter, 418
382, 384 Ionic bonding, 419 Kirumira, Dr. Abdullah, 463
boiling point, 70 Ionic bonds, 70 Kwolek, Stephanie, 572
electronegativity, difference of more than two ions, 77
bond 73 octet rule, 75
melting point, 70 Ionic compound, 67, 68, 69 Lactic acid, 370
polar molecule, 91 conductivity, 67, 78–79 empirical formula, 215
Hydrodynamics, 428 double displacement reactions, Lamp oil, 579
Hydrofluoric acid, 382, 384 132–133 Landfill leachates, 358
Hydrogen insoluble, 293 Laplace, Pierre, 603
average atomic mass, 180 magnetism, 67 Laughing gas, 102, 486–488
compounds, 104 melting point, 67 Lavoisier, Antoine, 472, 484, 603
double displacement reaction, 340 neutralization reaction, 394–396 Law of combining volumes, 472
molar mass, 180 polar solvent, 293 Law of conservation of energy, 602
specific heat capacity, 595 solubility, 67, 293, 330, 332–333inv Law of conservation of mass, 35, 113,
Hydrogen bonding, 292 Ionic crystal, preparing, 80inv 115, 241
Hydrogen chloride. SeeHydrochloric Ionic equation, 337 Law of definite composition, 35
acid Ionization energy, 54 Law of definite proportions, 198
Hydrogen gas, production of, atoms, 53–55 Law of multiple proportions, 473
512–513inv energy levels, 53, 54 Lead(II) nitrate, 337
Hydroiodic acid, 381, 382 trends, 55 solubility, 338
Hydronium ion, 374 Ions, 53 Lemieux, Dr. Raymond, 536
Hydrophobic, 77 concentration of, calculation of, Lewis structure, 46, 76, 87, 88–89, 449
Hydrosulfuric acid, 384 348–349 bond, 96
Hyperbaric oxygen chamber, 462 flame test, 344 chemical formula, 95
Hypo, 102 mass percent of, 350–351 covalent bonds, 81, 82
Hypospray, 427 polyatomic, 97 Lime, 102
Iron, specific heat capacity, 595 Limestone, 102, 360
Iron oxide, 67, 201 Limiting reactant, 252
Isoelectric, 75 identifying, 253–254SP
Ideal gas, 421 Isolated system, 602 stoichiometry, 256–257SP
Ideal gas law, 472, 484 Isomers, 539, 540, 543, 558 Line structural diagram, 541
application of, 489–500 cis-trans, 558 Liquids, 418
density, 489, 490 geometric, 558 Lithium, 165
kelvins, 484 modelling, 542inv Lithium chloride tetrahydrate, 223
kilopascals, 484 Isopropanol, 124, 309 Lithium hydride, 340
molar mass, 489, 490 Isotopes, 37, 38, 168EL Lithium hydroxide, 242, 243–244SP
molar volume, 485–486SP, 490 abundance, 163, 165, 169SP, 170 Litre, 14
molecular mass, 490 atomic mass/number, 37 Lone pairs, 88
moles, 484 average atomic mass, 162, 163, Lowry, Thomas, 375
product, 509 164, 165 Lunar module, 233
production of hydrogen gas, Isotopic abundance, 163 Lye, 102
512–513inv
reactant, 509
stoichiometry, 501–507 Jet injectors, 427 Magma, 458, 491
Immiscible, 286 Joules, 14, 603 Magnesium hydroxide, 102, 383
Incomplete combustion, 124, 580 specific heat capacity, 595 Magnesium oxide, 383
2,2,4-trimethylpentane, 582–584SP empirical formula, 212–213inv
Inert gases, 244, 465 Magnesium sulfate
Inner transition elements, 41 Kelvin scale, 440, 441TL heptahydrate, 223
Intermolecular forces, 83, 420 Kelvin, Lord, 440 hydrate, 223
solubility, 292 Kelvins, 14, 484 Magnetism of ionic compound, 67
International System of Units (SI), 14, ideal gas law, 484 Main-group elements, 41
178 Kerosene, 568, 579 electron affinity, 57
International Union of Pure and Kevlar, 572 Malleability, 12
Applied Chemistry (IUPAC), Kilojoule (kJ), 54 Mannose, formula, 217
102, 544 Kilopascal (kPa), 424, 484 Marble, 102
Intramolecular forces, 83 ideal gas law, 484 Mariotte, Edmé, 433
Ion charge, solubility, 330 Kinetic energy, 421 Mass
Ion exchange, 361 Kinetic molecular theory, 421, 483 chemical equations, 241
684 MHR • Index
gases, 422EL Methane, 420, 535, 539, 544 molecules, 178SP
heat transfer, 595 combustion, 123 periodic table, 184
law of conservation of, 113 identification of, 498–500SP Molina, Mario, 518
matter, 14 molecular formula, 546 Monoprotic acids, 382
molar concentration, 315–316SP Methanol, solubility, 294 Montréal Protocol, 519
mole, 180 Midgley, Thomas, 517 Morphine, 158
molecules, 190–191SP Milk of magnesia, 102 Mount St. Helens, 458
moles, 185, 186, 187SP, 189 Millilitre, 14 Muriatic acid, 102
percentage composition, Minerals, 188
200–201SP Miscible, 286
precipitate, 353–354SP covalent compound, 294 Naphtha, 571
products, 245–246SP Mixture, 26, 27 Natural gas, 537
reactants, 243–244SP, 245–246SP analyzing, 274–275inv Net ionic equation, 341, 342
significant digits, 21–22SP mm Hg, 428 writing, 342–343SP
stoichiometry, 241, 247–248SP Molar concentration, 313 Neutralization reaction, 135, 341, 394
subatomic particles, 35 calculating, 314SP calculations, 396
Mass number, 36, 37 mass, 315–316SP ionic compound, 394–396
Mass percent, 199 Molar mass, 180 Neutrons, 35
Mass spectrometer, 164, 166, 216, 344 compound, 181SP, 197, Nickel sulfate, 104
Mass/mass percent, 306 198–205, 216 Nitric acid, 381
concentration, 306 empirical formula, 208, 216 Nitrogen, uses for, 465
solving for, 307–308SP finding, 53, 181 Nitrogen narcosis, 465
Mass/volume percent, 302 gases, 490, 494–495SP, 496–497inv Nitroglycerine, 123
solving for, 303–304SP ideal gas law, 489, 490 Noble gases, 41, 47, 244
Material Safety Data Sheets, 451 mole, 182–183inv, 185 Non-electrolyte, 294
Matter, 5, 11 percentage composition, 202 Non-metals, 41
atomic theory of, 34, 35 periodic table, 184 Non-polar molecules/compounds, 91,
chemical changes, 25 Molar volume 291, 553
chemistry, 6–16 calculating, 485–486SP alkanes, 545
classification of, 25, 26 gases, 474–477SP, 478, properties of, 93
describing, 11 479–482SP, 490 Nonane, molecular formula, 546
mass, 14 ideal gas law, 485–486SP, 490 Nuclear equation, 142, 143–147
measurement, 14 Mole ratios, 237 Nuclear fission, 145, 146
measuring, 11 reactants, 239–240SP Nuclear fusion, 145, 146
physical changes, 25 Molecular compounds, 82 Nuclear reactions, 111, 142
properties, 11 Molecular formula, 201, 203
states of, 418 compounds, 215–218
temperature, 14 decane, 546 Octane, 199, 614
volume, 14 determining, 215, 217–218SP molecular formula, 546
Measurement, 13inv, 14 expanded, 539 Octet, 47
exact numbers, 15, 17 experiments, 219–228 Octet rule, 75
matter, 14 finding by experiment, 219–228 bonding, 96
significant digits, 17 Molecular mass chemical formula, 95
uncertainty, 15, 17 gases, 490 covalent bonds, 75
Melting point, 12 ideal gas law, 490 ionic bonds, 75
covalent and ionic compounds, 67 Molecular models, comparing, 87 Odour, 12
Mendeleev, Dmitri, 40, 42 Molecule size, solubility, 295 Oehlschlager, Dr. Cam, 361
Mercury(II) sulfide, 202, 203, 353–354 Molecules Oil spill, 623
Metal, 41, 65, 67EL, 286 chemical equations, 235 advisor, 624
alloys, 286 mass, 190–191SP Old Faithful, 458
bond, 83 modelling, 85, 92inv Oleic acid, 614
electron affinity, 57 moles, 178SP Opium, 158
precious, 66 Moles, 14, 54, 161, 172, 173, 484 Order of magnitude, 176
Metal activity series atoms, 176SP Organic compound, 533, 534
creating, 128–129inv Avogadro constant, 171 modelling, 542inv
single displacement reaction, chemical equations, 237–238 natural, 534
126–127, 130–131 conversion, 177 origins of, 536
Metal ions, flame test, 344 gases, 482SP synthetic, 534
Metallic bond, 83 ideal gas law, 484 Oxoacid, 384
Metalloids, 41 mass, 180, 185, 186, 187SP, 189 Oxyacetylene, 580
Metathesis reactions, 337 molar mass, 182–183inv, 185 Oxyacids, 384
Index • MHR 685
Oxygen Physical changes, 25 ideal gas law, 509
average atomic mass, 180 Physical property, 12 mass, 245–246SP
combustion, 464 periodic table, 40 Product development chemist, 313
electronegativity, 73 Pipette, 399–401 Propane
molar mass, 180 Plasma, 418 chemical formula, 539
uses of, 462–464 Plastics, 535 combustion, 580
Ozin, Dr. Geoffrey, 89 Polar bonds, 90 heat of combustion, 615
Ozone cycle, 516 Polar covalent bonds, 86 molecular formula, 539, 546
Ozone depletion, 515–520 Polar molecules, 91, 420, 421 Propene, 553, 568
properties of, 93 Property, 11
water, 90 aliphatic compounds, 564inv
Paraffin, 568, 615 Polar solvent, 293 chemical, 12
Particle, stoichiometry, 247–248SP Polar substance, 291 physical, 12
Parts per billion (ppb), 311, Pollution, 5, 515–520, 623, 624 qualitative, 12
311–312SP pesticides, 408–409inv quantitative, 12
Parts per million (ppm), 311 phosphate, 8 Propyne, 560
Pascal (Pa), 424 water quality, 358 Proteins, 534
Pascal, Blaise, 428 Polonium, 143 Proton acceptors, 376
Pentane, 420 Polanyi, Dr. John Charles, 9 Proton donors, 376
combustion, 124 Polyatomic ions, 97 Protons, 35
molecular formula, 546 compounds, 104 Proust, Joseph Louis, 198
Percentage composition, 200 Polyisobutylene, 559 Pure covalent bonds, 81
calculating from chemical formula, Polymer, 559 Pure substance, 26, 27
202, 203–204SP Polymer chemist, 572 Purity, 268
empirical formula, 208, 210–211SP Polymerization, 553 percentage yield, 265
mass, 200–201SP Polymers, 535 Puskas, Dr. Judit, 559
molar mass, 202 Polystyrene, 535 Pyrite, 66
using, 205 Polywater, 329
Percentage purity, 268 Potassium aluminum sulfate
finding, 268–269SP dodecahydrate, 223 Qualitative analysis, 274–275inv, 344
Percentage yield, 260, 261 Potassium fluoride, aqueous solutions, 345–346inv
actual yield, 263–264SP electronegativity, 72 Quality control (QC), 188
application of, 264 Potassium hydroxide, 117, 383, 392 Quantitative analysis, 274–275inv
calculating, 261–262SP Potassium iodide, 337 Quartz, 102
determining, 266–267inv solubility, 338
purity, 265 Potassium nitrate, 204
Perchloric acid, 381 products of decomposition, 204 Radioactive isotope of carbon, 144
Periodic law, 44 Potential energy, 615 Radioactivity, 38, 142–147
Periodic table, 38, 40 Precious metal, 66 Radioisotopes, 38
annotated, 59 Precipitates, 132, 332 Radium, 143
average atomic mass, 165 double displacement reactions, Radon, 143
chemical properties, 40 132–133 Rare metals, 56
electrons, 42 mass, 353–354SP, 354–355 Rate of dissolving, 290
molar mass, 184 predicting formation of, 338–339 Reactants, 112
mole, 184 silver chromate, 354–355 chemical equations, 239
physical properties, 40 solubility, 332–333inv excess, 252, 255inv
Periodic trends, 44, 49–55 Precipitation reaction, 338 ideal gas law, 509
Pesticides and pollution, 408–409inv solubility, 338 limiting, 251–253, 253–254SP,
Petrochemicals, 568 Precision, 18 255inv
Petroleum, 537, 568 Pressure, 424 mass, 243–244SSP, 245–246SP
Petroleum age, 579 atmosphere, 427EL, 428 mole ratios, 239–240SP
Petroleum products, 619–626 atmospheric, 425 Reactivity, 12
Pewter, 306 gases, 424, 430–431inv, 432–435 Recommended Nutrient Intake, 188
pH, 385, 386, 387–388 solubility, 299 Reforming, 571
acid, 390–391inv standard atmospheric, 428 Respiration, 111
calculating, 389SP torr, 428 Richter, Jeremias Benjamin, 242
Phenolphthalein, 395 units of, 428 Ripening and enzymes, 552
Phosgene, 492 volume, 428, 430–431inv Risk, 620
Phosphates, 8 Pressure relief valve, 450 hydrocarbons, 622–623
Phosphoric acid, 383 Priestly, Joseph, 472 Risk-benefit analysis, 620
Phosphorus tribromide, 105 Product, 112 smoking, 620–622SP
686 MHR • Index
Rotational motion, 418 Sodium tripolyphosphate, 8 Stable octet, 47
Rowland, F. Sherwood, 518 Soft water, 360 bond, 96
Rutherford, Ernest, 145 testing, 363 Standard ambient temperature and
Soil erosion, 5 pressure (SATP), 452, 485
Solids, 418 Standard atmospheric pressure, 428
Sal ammoniac, 101 Solubility, 12, 286 Standard solution, 319, 399
Salt, 394 alkanes, 552 diluting, 320–321SP
Saturated fat, 614 alkenes, 553 Standard temperature, 452
Saturated hydrocarbons, 544 aqueous solutions, 330 Standard temperature and pressure
Saturated solution, 286 compounds, 330, 331, 332–333inv (STP), 452
Saturation of solution, 286 covalent compound, 67, 294 Starches, 534
Science societies, 471 curves, plotting, 296–297inv Steroid, 561
Science, technology, society and electronegativity, 293 Stock system, 102, 103
the environment (STSE), 8 factors affecting, 290–301 Stock, Alfred, 102
Second ionization energy, 54 gases, 298 Stoichiometric amounts, 251
Sewage, 362 general guidelines, 334 Stoichiometric coefficients, 251
Shells. SeeEnergy levels insoluble, 287 Stoichiometry, 234, 242, 501–514
SI units, 428 intermolecular forces, 292 aqueous solutions, 348–355
Seealso International System of ion charge, 330 ideal gas law, 511–507
Units ion size, 331 limiting reactant, 256–257SP
Significant digits, 17, 19EL ionic compound, 67, 293, 330, mass, 241, 247–248SP
calculating with, 20 332–333inv mass to volume, 504–507
mass, 21–22SP making predictions, 331 particle, 247–248SP
measurement, 17 molecule size, 295 process for solving problems, 247
rounding, 20 particle attraction, 291 using, 274–275inv
rules for, 17 precipitates, 332–333inv volume to volume, 501–503
volume, 20–21SP precipitation reaction, 338 water vapour pressure, 507–509
Silicic acid, 329 predicting, 293 Strong acid, 381
Silicon dioxide, 102 pressure, 299 Strong base, 383
Silver chloride, 341 slightly soluble, 287 Strontium hydroxide, 383
Silver chromate solution, 286 Structural diagrams, 87, 541
precipitates, 354–355 sparingly soluble, 287 alkanes, 550–551
solubility, 354–355 temperature, 290, 295, 298EL Structural model, 540
Single displacement reaction, 126 Solute, 284, 288 Structures of aliphatic compounds,
copper, 138–139inv Solution, 284 564inv
halogens, 131 concentration, 283, 302–318, Subatomic particles, 35
metal activity series, 126–127, 317inv, 322–323inv Sucrose, 536
130–131 diluting, 320 solubility, 294
Skeleton equation, 113 gases, 298EL Sugars, 534
Slag, 77 heat of, 608 Sulfur dioxide, 420
Smog, 516 measuring heat of, 608EL double displacement reaction, 340
Smoking, risk-benefit analysis, preparing, 319–324 Sulfuric acid, 381
620–622SP saturation, 286 Superconductors, 437
Sniffers, 222 solubility, 286 Superfluid, 442
Soap, 360, 369 standard, 319 Surface water, 360
Sodium bicarbonate, 136, 394 type of, 284–286 Sustainable development, 625
Sodium carbonate, 102, 370 Solvent, 284 Swiss Water Process, 300
decahydrate, 223, 361 coffee, 300 Symposium, 473
Sodium chloride, 66, 69, 101, 102 identifying, 287 Synthesis reactions, 119, 120
bonding, 75 solute, 288 compounds, 120, 121
conductivity, 69, 78–79 Sørensen, Søren, 386 copper, 138–139inv
electronegativity, 75 Sour gas, 580 elements, 120
melting point, 69 Space-filling model, 87, 540 Synthesized, 533
solubility, 69, 334 Specific heat capacity, 595, 610 Systematic names, 544
Sodium hydrogen carbonate, 102, calculating, 598–599SP
235EL, 370, 394, 534 compounds, 595
Sodium hydroxide, 102, 369, 370, 383 determining, 604–605SP Table salt, 69, 101, 102
Sodium stearate, 360 elements, 595 Technology and chemistry, 7, 8
Sodium sulfate, 104 joules, 595 Temperature, 593
Sodium sulfite, 340 water, 595 change in, 594–595
Sodium thiosulfate, 102 Spectator ions, 341
Index • MHR 687
gases, 298, 436, 438–439inv, pressure, 428, 430–431inv
440–441, 444–446 significant digits, 20–21SP
matter, 14 temperature, 438–439inv
rate of dissolving, 290 Volume/volume percent, 309
solubility, 290, 295, 298EL concentration, 309
volume, 438–439inv solving for, 309–310SP
Tertiary compounds, 104 Volumetric flask, 319
Testosterone, 561
Theoretical yield, 260
Thermal conductivity, 12 Washing soda, 102, 361, 370
Thermal energy, 593 Waste water, 362
calculating, 606–607SP Water, 199, 207
Thermal equilibrium, 605 double displacement reactions, 341
Thermochemical equation, 588 chemical formula, 207
acetylene, 590–591SP heat transfer, 596–597SP
Third ionization energy, 54 molecular shape, 88
Titration, 399 polar bonds, 90
step-by-step, 399–401 polar molecule, 90
Torr, 428 solubility, 330
conversion, 485 solutions, 329
Torricelli, Evangelista, 426, 428 specific heat capacity, 595
Total ionic equation, 341 Water cycle, 357
Toxicity, 12 Water quality
Transition elements, 41 aqueous solutions, 357–364
Translational motion, 419 health concerns, 358, 364
Triple bond, 82 pollution, 358
Triprotic acids, 383 Water softener, 361
Troposphere, 516 Water treatment, 359
Typhoid, 364 Weak acid, 381
Weak base, 383
Weak dispersion forces, 420
Ultraviolet radiation, 516, 519 Weighted average, 165
Uncertainty in measurement, 15, 17 Wet chemical techniques, 344
Universal gas constant, 484, 485 WHMIS, 451
Unsaturated fat, 614 Wohler, Friedrich, 534
Unsaturated hydrocarbons, 553 Word equation, 112
Unsaturated solution, 286 Wu, Dr. Jiangning, 363
Urea, 534
X-ray fluorescence, 58
Valence, 96
bond, 96 Zero sum rule, 98
chemical formula, 98–100
polyatomic, 97, 98
Valence electrons, 45
atoms, 70
Van der Waals equation, 483
van Helmont, Jan Baptista, 114
Vanillin, 200
Variable composition, 284
Vibrational motion, 418
Vinegar, 369, 544
concentration, 402–403inv
Vital force, 534
Vitamins, 188
Volcanoes, 458
Volume
finding, 397–398SP
gases, 422EL, 424, 430–431inv,
432–435, 436, 438–439inv, 440–441
matter, 14
688 MHR • Index
Photo Credits
2-3(background), © R. Kord/Firstlight.ca; 2-3(background), Artbase Inc.; 2-3(background), Ludek Pesek/Science Photo
Library/Photo Researchers Inc; 4(background), NASA/NSSCD; 4(bottom right), Artbase Inc.; 5(bottom left), Artbase Inc.; 6
(bottom right), © Ron Sherman/Stone; 6(centre right), © Ron Fehling/Masterfile; 7(centre left), Artbase Inc.; 7(centre right),
© Tom Stewart/The Stock Market/Firstlight.ca; 9(centre left), © Sun Media Corporation; 16(bottom centre), from Chemistry:
The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, Second Edition, by Martin S. Silberberg © 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies
Inc.; 23(top left), Artbase Inc.; 32(background), Darius Kochli/Firstlight.ca; 32(bottom left), Armstong Roberts/Comstock; 32
(background), Artbase Inc.; 40(bottom), © Stephen Frish Photography; 42(top), from Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of
Matter and Change, Second Edition, by Martin S. Silberberg © 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies Inc.; 56(top left), ©
Patrick Bennett/Corbis/Magma; 58(top left), © Magma Photo News; 64(background), © Underwood &
Underwood/Corbis/Magma; 64(top right), Anthony Howard/Masterfile; 65(bottom left), © Catherine Ursillo/Photo
Researchers Inc.; 66(centre left), © George Bernard/Science Photo Library/Photo Researchers, Inc.; 66(centre right), © Geoff
Tompkinson/Science Photo Library/Photo Researchers, Inc.; 69(top right), © Larry Stepanowicz/Visuals Unlimited, Inc.; 69
(centre left), © Gary Griffen/Animals Animals/Earth Scenes; 69(bottom right), Artbase Inc.; 70(top left), © Dick Hemingway;
72(top right), from Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, Second Edition, by Martin S. Silberberg © 2000,
The McGraw-Hill Companies Inc.; 83(bottom right), from Chemistry: Concepts and Applications© 2000, The McGraw-Hill
Companies Inc.; 85(centre left), © Jean Marc Barey/Agence Vandystadt/Photo Researchers, Inc.; 85(centre left), Artbase Inc.;
90(centre right), © Stephen Dalton/Photo Researchers, Inc.; 93(background), Artbase Inc.; 110(background), © Mike
Timo/STONE; 110(bottom left), © Mike & Carol Werner/Stock, Boston Inc./PictureQuest; 111(bottom left), Trevor
Bonderud/Firstlight.ca; 114(top left), Artbase Inc.; 119(bottom left), Artbase Inc.; 119(bottom right), © Dale Sarver/Animals
Animals; 120(centre right), Bill Ivy/Ivy Images; 121(centre left), © Bruce Forster/STONE; 123(top right), © Charles D.
Winters/Photo Researchers; 127(top right), from Sciencepower 10© 2000, McGraw-Hill Ryerson Limited; 127(centre left),
from Chemistry: Concepts and Applications© 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies Inc.; 141(centre right), © Dave G.
Houser/Corbis/Magma; 142(centre left), © David Joel/STONE; 143(centre left), VU/National Archives/Visuals Unlimited; 145
(top left), Notman Photographic Archives, McCord Museum of Canadian History, Montreal; 147(top right), © AFP/COR-
BIS/MAGMA; 148-149(background), © Notts/Firstlight.ca; 152(centre left), COMSTOCK IMAGES/B. Pizaro; 152(bottom left), ©
Russell D. Curtis/Photo Researchers, Inc.; 172(centre right), from Chemistry: Concepts and Applications© 2000, The
McGraw-Hill Companies Inc.; 173(bottom left), from Chemistry: Concepts and Applications© 2000, The McGraw-Hill
Companies Inc.; 174(centre left), © Walter Schmid/Stone Images; 177(bottom right), Artbase Inc; 192(top left), © Nino
Mascardi/Image Bank; 196(background), Inga Spence/Index Stock Imagery; 196(bottom right), Jackson Vereen/Food Pix; 198
(bottom right), Index Stock Imagery; 198(bottom left), © Larry Williams/Masterfile; 198(bottom right), Didier Givois/Allsport
USA; 205(centre), from Sciencepower 8© 2000, McGraw-Hill Ryerson Limited; 211(centre right), © Will & Deni
McIntyre/Photo Researchers, Inc.; 216(top left), Chris Mikula/The Ottawa Citizen; 222(centre left), © Mark
Stephenson/Firstlight.ca; 223(centre right), Angle Wynn/Native Stock; 232(bottom left), NASA/Science Photo Library/Photo
Researchers; 233(bottom left), NASA; 236(top right), © Thomas Dressler/First Light Associated Photographers; 242(centre
right), NASA; 244(centre left), Neil Bartlett/B. C. Jennings Photographer; 248(centre left), © Crown/Health & Safety
Laboratory/Science Photo Library/Photo Researchers, Inc.; 252(top left), © Nancy Richmond/Ivy Images; 260(centre right),
Artbase Inc; 265(top left), V.C.L/Spencer Rowell/FPG International; 268(top left), © Ed Gifford/Masterfile; 274(centre left), ©
1991, Richard T. Nowitz/Photo Researchers, Inc.; 280-281(background), © Carolyn A. McKeone/Photo Researchers, Inc.; 282
(background), © C. Dass/Firstlight.ca; 282(bottom centre), © Chris Vincent/Firstlight.ca; 283(bottom left), © Christian
Michaels/FPG International; 285(top left), © Larry Stepanowicz/Visuals Unlimited, Inc.; 285(top left), © Larry
Stepanowicz/Visuals Unlimited, Inc.; 285(top centre), © Chris Vincent/Firstlight.ca; 285(top centre), © David Burch/Index
Stock; 285(top right), Dick Hemingway Photographs; 285(background), © NMR/Firstlight.ca; 285(top right), © IPS/Index
Stock; 286(bottom left), © Sovfoto/Eastfoto/PictureQuest; 290(bottom left), © Lawrence Migdale/Science Source/Photo
Researchers, Inc.; 298(top left), © Terry C. Hazen/Visuals Unlimited, Inc.; 299(top right), Dick Hemingway Photographs; 300
(bottom left), © Minden/Firstlight.ca; 307(top left), Artbase Inc; 307(top right), Artbase Inc; 309(top right), © Charles D.
Winters/Photo Researchers, Inc.; 310(centre left), Dick Hemingway Photographs; 313(centre right), © Matthias
Kulka/Firstlight.ca; 319(centre right), © Larry Stepanowicz/VISUALS UNLIMITED, INC.; 324(top left), Artbase Inc.; 328(back-
ground), Artbase Inc.; 328(bottom left), Artbase Inc.; 350(centre right), © Hans Reinhard/Okapia/Photo Researchers, Inc.; 358
(bottom right), © Geoff Tompkinson/Science Photo Library/Photo Researchers, Inc.; 360(bottom right), © Andrew
Syred/Science Photo Library/Photo Researchers, Inc.; 368(bottom right), © McGraw Hill Higher Education/Stephen Frisch,
Photographer; 368(bottom right), © McGraw Hill Higher Education/Stephen Frisch, Photographer; 369(bottom left), Kathleen
Campbell/Stone; 373(bottom right), © E.F. Smith Collection University of Pennsylania Library; 375(bottom left), © Science
Photo Library/Photo Researchers, Inc.; 375(bottom centre), © E.F. Smith Collection University of Pennsylania Library; 385
(top left), © VU/Jeff Greenberg/MR/Visuals Unlimited; 408(centre left), © Garry Black/Masterfile; 408(top right), © Brian
Sytnyk/Masterfile; 408(centre right), © Gilbert&Brant/Photo Researchers, Inc.; 408(top right), Artbase Inc.; 416(background),
© Pat Morrow/Firstlight.ca; 416(bottom right), Comstock Photofile Limited; 417(bottom left), © Firstlight.ca; 425(centre left),
© John Lemker/Earth Scenes; 427(bottom left), © Damien Lovegrove/Science Photo Library/Photo Researchers, Inc.; 428(cen-
tre right), Westerkov/Earth Scenes; 436(bottom centre), © Bruce Davidson/Earth Scenes; 436(bottom left), © Bruce
Davidson/Earth Scenes; 436(bottom right), © Bruce Davidson/Earth Scenes; 437(top right), © Roy Ooms/Masterfile; 450(bot-
tom left), Artbase Inc.; 451(top right), Michelle Del Guercio/Photo Researchers Inc.; 452(centre left), Paul Rocheleau/Index
Stock; 458(centre left), Science Photo Library/Photo Researchers; 458(bottom left), D&J Heaton/Stock Boston; 462(bottom
Credits • MHR 689
left), © James King-Holmes/Science Photo Library/Photo Researchers, Inc.; 462(bottom right), Artbase Inc.; 463(centre left), ©
Michael Creagen Photography; 464(bottom left), © Bob Peterson/FPG International; 464(bottom right), Artbase Inc.; 465(bot-
tom right), © Kevin Aitken/Firstlight; 468(background), © Benelux Press/Masterfile; 468(bottom left), North Wind Picture
Archives; 469(bottom left), COMSTOCK IMAGES; 470(centre left), © Science Photo Library/Photo Researchers, Inc.; 470(cen-
tre), © Science Photo Library/Photo Researchers, Inc.; 470(centre right), © Science Photo Library/Photo Researchers, Inc.; 487
(centre left), © Bart Vallecoccia/Masterfile; 488(bottom left), © Jeff Perkell/Masterfile; 489(centre left), © David & Peter
Turnley/CORBIS/MAGMA; 490(top right), © Ralph Reinhold/Earth Scenes; 492(top right), © E.R. Degginger/Earth Scenes; 496
(top left), © Charles D. Winters/Science Photo Library/Photo Researchers, Inc.; 504(top left), Samuel Ashfield/FPG
International; 505(top right), © Charles D. Winters/Science Photo Library/Photo Researchers, Inc.; 507(bottom right), Visuals
Unlimited, Inc.; 513(centre left), © Ned Therrien/Visuals Unlimited, Inc.; 514(bottom left), © Peter Christopher/Masterfile; 515
(centre right), Artbase Inc.;516(top left), © Charles D. Winters/Science Photo Library/Photo Researchers, Inc.; 517(top right),
© NOAA/Science Photo Library/Photo Researchers, Inc.; 518(top left), P.A. Ariya; 526(bottom left), Comstock Images; 526(top
right), VU/© Bernd Wittich/Visuals Unlimited, Inc.; 532Richard Dunoff/First Light Associates; 532(background), © Richard
Dunoff/Firstlight.ca; 533(bottom left), Artbase Inc.; 536(bottom left), © University of Alberta Imaging Centre 1999; 538(top
right), © 2000, Rosemary Weller/Stone; 561(centre left), © David Hall/Masterfile; 568(centre right), © Mike Dobel, MCMX-
CI/Masterfile; 572(top left), © Michael Branscom Photography; 572(centre right), © K9 Storm Inc.; 576(background), Artbase
Inc.; 576(bottom right), Artbase Inc.; 578(bottom right), © Peter Christopher/Masterfile; 578(centre right), © Firstlight.ca; 578
(centre left), © Marilyn "Angel" Wynn/Native Stock; 580(top left), © Lowell Georgia/Photo Researchers, Inc.; 580(bottom
right), © Phil Degginger/Color-Pic, Inc.; 580(bottom left), © Alan Marsh/First Light; 588(bottom left), © Charles D.
Winters/Photo Researchers, Inc.; 595(top right), Artbase Inc.; 601(top left), Artbase Inc.; 603(centre right), Holton
Getty/Designed by Laplace and Lavoisier; 606(top left), Comstock Photofile Limited; 609(centre left), © Stephen Frish/Stock,
Boston/PictureQuest; 612(centre), from Chemistry: Concepts and Applications© 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies Inc.; 613
(top left), © Eastcott/Momatiuk/Animals Animals; 613(bottom left), © Stephen Frish/Stock, Boston/PictureQuest; 615(bottom
right), Artbase Inc.; 619(centre right), Image Courtesy GORE-TEX; 619(centre left), © 1988, Michael Ventura/Bruce Coleman,
Inc.; 619(bottom left), Artbase Inc.; 619(bottom right), Artbase Inc.; 620(top left), Artbase Inc.; 622(bottom left), © Richard
Berenholtz/Firstlight.ca; 622(centre left), © S.L.I.D.E./Phototake; 622(centre right), © Tim Davis/Photo Researchers, Inc.; 624
(top left), © Vanessa Vick/Photo Researchers, Inc.; 629(top right), © George Hunter/Comstock; 630(centre left), © SIU/Visuals
Unlimited; 639(centre right), COMSTOCK IMAGES/Grant Heilman Photography; 640(centre left), © Ken Lax/Photo
Researchers, Inc.; 641(centre right), Holt Studios International (Nigel Cattlin)/Photo Researchers Inc.; 641(centre right), Bernd
Wittich/Visuals Unlimited; 642(centre left), © Jonathan Blair/CORBIS/MAGMA; 643(bottom right), COMSTOCK IMAGES
Illustration Credits
16(centre), from Chemistry: Concepts and Applications© 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies Inc.; 29(centre right), from
Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, Second Edition, by Martin S. Silberberg © 2000, The McGraw-Hill
Companies Inc.; 35(bottom right), from Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, Second Edition, by Martin
S. Silberberg © 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies Inc.; 54(top left), 42(top), from Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of
Matter and Change, Second Edition, by Martin S. Silberberg © 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies Inc.; 54(centre right), 42
(top), from Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, Second Edition, by Martin S. Silberberg © 2000, The
McGraw-Hill Companies Inc.; 57(bottom left), from Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, Second
Edition, by Martin S. Silberberg © 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies Inc.; 141(bottom), from Chemistry: The Molecular
Nature of Matter and Change, Second Edition, by Martin S. Silberberg © 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies Inc.; 166(bot-
tom), from Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, Second Edition, by Martin S. Silberberg © 2000, The
McGraw-Hill Companies Inc.; 215(centre), from Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, Second Edition, by
Martin S. Silberberg © 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies Inc.;219(bottom), from Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of
Matter and Change, Second Edition, by Martin S. Silberberg © 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies Inc.; 294(centre right),
from Chemistry: Concepts and Applications© 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies Inc.; 301(centre right), from Chemistry:
Concepts and Applications© 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies Inc.; 344(bottom centre), from Chemistry: The Molecular
Nature of Matter and Change, Second Edition, by Martin S. Silberberg © 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies Inc.; 359(cen-
tre), from Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, Second Edition, by Martin S. Silberberg © 2000, The
McGraw-Hill Companies Inc.; 418(centre left), from Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, Second
Edition, by Martin S. Silberberg © 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies Inc.; 419(top right), from Chemistry: The Molecular
Nature of Matter and Change, Second Edition, by Martin S. Silberberg © 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies Inc.; 419(centre
right), from Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, Second Edition, by Martin S. Silberberg © 2000, The
McGraw-Hill Companies Inc.; 432(centre right), from Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, Second
Edition, by Martin S. Silberberg © 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies Inc.; 442(top), from Chemistry: The Molecular Nature
of Matter and Change, Second Edition, by Martin S. Silberberg © 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies Inc.; 476(bottom cen-
tre), from Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, Second Edition, by Martin S. Silberberg © 2000, The
McGraw-Hill Companies Inc.; 480(bottom left), from Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change, Second
Edition, by Martin S. Silberberg © 2000, The McGraw-Hill Companies Inc.
Text Credits
634–635A portion of this material adapted from Essential Chemistryby Raymond Chang © 1996, McGraw-Hill
690 MHR • Credits
